


OCR Output








408 . TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK V.


tion towers*, galleries-l-, mantaletsj, and all the otherengines used in sieges? After we have bestowed somuch labour, and brought our works to such perfec­tion; say, do you think it would be prudent to aban­don them now, that we may go the same round ofsweat and labour to replace them at the opening ofthe summer campaign? Is it not much more easy todefend the works already constructed, to push on thesiege with vigour and firmness, till we accomplish. ourdesigns? It cannot be a matter of long standing, ifwe go on without interruption, and do not ourselvesfrustrate our hopes, by our own delays and remissness.I only speak of the labour we must undergo, and thetime we must lose. But this is not all. By protractingthe war, we expose ourselves to a much a greater dar*-ger. Do we sit down without the least concern, whilstthe states of Etruria meet so frequently, to deliberateon sending aid to Veii? As matters now stand, theyare disgusted with the Vejentes, they hate them, andwill not interpose for their relief. Nay, for them, wemay take" Veii when we can; but, who can.divine,"ifwe intermit our operations, that they will be of thesame mind some time hence? Only give them a littlerespite, and you will see how their embassies will bereiterated and redoubled. The circumstance of esta­blishing monarchy at Veii, which alone gives umbrageto the Etrurians, may change in an instant, either bythe general consent of the state, to reinstate them intofavour with the Etrurians, or by a voluntary resigna­tion in the king himself, who may not be willing thathis sovereignty should interfere with the good of hiscountry. Only consider seriously, the train "of evils
* They were made of wood, to move on four, or more wheels,placed within them so as not to be seen. They consisted of ten ormore stories, as occasion required, and ctosety floored. They con­tained the cranes, scaling-ladders, t*'c. and brought them up tothe walls.
•)• These were made of rafters, and were eight feet high, sevenbroad, and sixteen tong. They were roofed with ptanks,inii hur­dles ; their sides were wickered v. hii twigs, and covered with rawbides. They moved on secret wheels, like the towers.
t They moved also on secret wheels, but theirroofs and frontswere eloped; they were used io digging or fitling up trenches, le­vetting and bringing up the battering rams to the walls.







OCR Output








CHAP. 63. ROMAN HISTORY. 197


stop to his design. What increased their wonder, wasthe sudden calm and serenity that ensued, the momenthe sounded the retreat: For they imagined, some deityhad interposed to save the camp, and their religiousscruples prevented them from making a second attempt;wherefore, all their fury was discharged upon the coun­try, which they plundered without opposition. Theother consul /Emilius, conducted the war against the Sa-bines, who confmed themselves within their walls: forthat reason, he laid waste their country, burning not onlythe farm-houses, but also large and populous villages.This forced the Sabines out of iheir strong-holds, who,meeting with a foraging party, had an engagement withthem; hut victory declaring for neither party; whenthey retired from the field, they marched oifnext day toa place of greater security. This the consul consideredas a sufficient victory in his favour; and upon their re­treat, returned home, leaving the war unfinished.


D.


CHAP. LXIII.War with the Volsci and jEqui.


"URING these wars abroad, and civil commotionsat home, T. Numicius Priscus and A. Yirginius werechosen consuls. The commons seemed now resolved toadmit of no evasions with respect to the Agrarian law,anci were accordingly preparing to set every engine towork, when the flight of the country people, and thesmoke of the houses, all in flames, informed them, thatthe-Volsci were at hand. This invasion suppressed thesedition, which was now ripe, and on the point of break­ing out. .
The senate obliged the consuls to march immediatelyagainst the enemy; and when the youth had once quit­ted the city, the rest of the people made no more noise.But the Volsci contented themselves with the pleasure ofhaving put the Romans in a needless fright, and withoutattempting any thing further, made all the haste theyeould out of their territories. Numicius pursued themto. Antium, and Virginius marched against the /Lqui.There the army fell into an ambush, and. narrowly escap­ed being cut to pieces.







OCR Output








CHAP. 44. ROMAN HISTORY. 79


widows were taxed in 2000 asses* yearly. All theseburthens were taken off the poor, and laid on the rich;upon whom, to balance the account, was conferred anaddition of honours: For they did not now vote by poll,as instituted by Romulus, and followed by his successors,nor were their suffrages of equal weight; but a subor­dination was established, by which none seemed to bedeprived of the right of voting, and at the same time, thebalance of power lay entirely on the side of the principal
The knights were first called, then the eighty centu-i of 4he first class. If they happened to differ, whichwas rarely the case, the second class was called; and itAvas seldom known, that they ever came so low as thelast class. It needs be no matter of wonder, that thepresent regulation, since the increase of the tribes tothirty-five, should differ from the number of centuries ofyoung and aged citizens, instituted by Servius Tullius,since they are now double the number of what they wereat that time. For, having divided the city into four parts,according to the quarters and hills which were then in­habited, he called these divisions tribes, I fancy, from thetribute they paid; for, he made out a scheme for levy­ing the taxes, according to the valuation of estates, sothat these tribes had not the least relation to the numberand division of the centuries.
CHAI
Enlarges the Pomarium and adds several hills to the city.
J. HE Census being thus completed, which the dread oftin: fine enacted against those who should neglect to en­rol themselves in the censor's books, had greatly acce­lerated, he published an edict, requiring all the Romancitizens, horse and foot, ranged according to their re­spective centuries, to appear in the^Campus Martius, bybreak of day, under the pain of imprisonment and death.Then, having drawn up his whole army, he purified then







OCR Output








CHAP, 58. ROMAN HISTORY. 395


bius Vibulanus, and C. Servilius Ahala. The last wasrewarded by being contmued in his office, both in regardof his other virtues, and the favour lie had lately acquir­ed by his singular moderation.
CHAP. LV1II.
The people refuse their assent to a war with the Vejentcs.
J. HAT year, the truce with the Vejentes being ex­pired, heralds and commissioners were dispatched to de­mand satisfaction for injuries sustained. These heraldswere met on the way, as they were approaching themarches, by an embassy from Veii. The embassy re­quested that they would proceed no farther, till theyhad an audience from the senate of Rome. The min­isters of the Vejentes obtained from the senate, that sincetheir state laboured under all the calamities of civil dis­sensions, that satisfaction should'be demanded of them..So far were they from taking advantage of the misfor­tunes of others to promote (heir own interest.
At this time the Romans met with a disaster in thecountry of the Volsci, in the loss of their garrison-at Ver-rugo, Where a little time was of such consequence, thatthe garrison who were besieged by the Volsci, and hadimplored assistance, might have been"relieved, had theybeen reinforced in time. The army sent for this purpose.came only in time to retaliate on the enemy just as.they had put the Roman garrison to the sword, and dis­persed themselves with a design to plunder. The senatewas more to blame in not hastening the troops, than thetribunes, because they were told that the garrison madea vigorous defence; never reflecting, that no couragewhatever, can .exceed the bounds of human force. Thesebrave fellows 'sold their lives dear; and after their fallwere severely revenged.
The following year had for military tribunes, the twoCornelii Cossi, P. and Cn.'Numerius, Fabius Ambustusand L. Valerius Potitus, when a motion was made tochastise the Vejentes for the insolence of their senate inordering the Roman ambassadors to be told, when theywere demanding restitution, that if they Hid not imine­







OCR Output








S76 TITUS L1VIUS' BOOK IV.


immediately sent to Lavicum, who returned with ambi­guous answers, such as, that the people of Lavicum badvot yet begun to make preparations for war, but did notseem as if they would be long at peace. The Tusculanswere charged to keep a strict eye on Lavicum, that DOJMJW commotions might arise there.
Soon after the military tribunes with consular power,viz. L. Sergius Fidenas, M. Papirius Mugillanus, andC. Servilius, the son of Priscus, who had been dictatorwhen Fidense was taken, were chosen for the next year,and had entered upon their office; advices came by en­voys from Tusculum, ' That the Lavicans had taken up'arms, joined the troops of the JEqui, ravaged the coun-'try about Tusculum, and encamped at the Algidus.'War was then declared against the Lavicans, and the se­nate enacted, that two.of the military tribunes shouldmarch against the enemy, and the third remain at Rome,for the government of the city. This occasioned highwords among the military tribunes, each of them pre­tending, that he was most capable of commanding thearmy, and expressing his contempt of the civil govern­ment of the city, as a mean and disagreeable office.The senators observing, with no small wonder, a misun­derstanding so indecent among them, Q. Servilius toldthem, ' since you have no respect either for the senate,or for the commonwealth, paternal authority shall putan end to the dispute. My son, without casting lots,shall take upon him the care of the city. I wish thosewho are so fond of war, may discover more prudenceand unanimity in conducting it, than they seem to dodo in desiring it.'
CHAP. XLVI.
Misunderstanding and miscarriage of the Tribunes.A Dictator chosen.
X\S it was judged improper to raise recruits indiscri­minately from among all the people, ten tribes. weredrawn by lot; and the two tribunes having enlisted tlieyoung men belonging to them, led them out to the field.The misunderstanding which began to appear between







OCR Output








186 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


tins, was sent from Rome against the Volsci, at the headof an army; because, as 1 imagine, they did not chooseit should become a precedent for the allies to carry onwar, upon their own footing only, without a Romangeneral at their head, and an army to support them.The Volsci were harassed with all the calamities of war,.and loaded with the most bitter reproaches; but neithercould induce them to risk an engagement.
CHAP. LlV.
A new check to the Tribunitian power.
.L.j. Furius and C. Manlius succeeded to the consulate.The Vejentes fell to Manlius as his province; but thewar did not continue. At their request a truce for fortyyears was granted them, on condition of paying a yearlytribute, and a certain quantity of corn.
Peace abroad only served to revive their contests athome. Spirited up by the tribunes, the people ragedabout the^. Agrarian law. The consuls, neither intimi­dated by the fate of Menenius, nor the danger of Ser-vilius, were equally keen in the opposition. As theywere retiring from office, they were even impeached byGenucius the tribune.
In the consulate, they were succeeded by L. jEmilius,and Opiter Virginius, though some authors mentionVopiscus Julius instead of Virginius. But however thatbe, it is certain that Furius and Manlius were impeachedthat year, and went about in a miserable plight supplicat­ing the people; nor them only, for they were equallyassiduous and importunate with the younger senators,advising them by all means, " From thenceforth to re­nounce the honours and government of the state; andlook upon the fasces of the consuls, the praetexta, andcurule chair, as neither less nor more than the pompof their funerals; and that they were only adorned -with these ensigns of dignity, to be destined as victimsfor the altar. That supposing the consulship hadcharms to attract their attention, they ought to reflect,that it was now no .more than a name, the power ofthe tribunes having swallowed up and enervated its


t­







OCR Output








172 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


to their scandalous behaviour 'last war was terrible;especially when they considered that they might be inthe same predicament, to have the terror of two armiesupon them at the same time. Wherefore, to'avoid adanger which tlirea-'ened them within, as well as with­out, thev kept within their camp, hoping that time,and a little delay, would soften their resentment againstthe senate, and bring them to reason. This promptedthe confederates to act with still greater assurance. Theychallenged them tri turn on*. They rode .up before thecamp and insulted them. At last when they found nei­ther the consuls, nor the army, in ihe least affected bytheir rodomontade, they cried out, " That they onlypretended to have differences among themselves, toserve for a cloak to their cowardice; and that it wasnot the fidelity, but the courage of the soldiers, whichthe consuls suspected.—That silence and quietnessamong men in arms was a species of sedition neverheard of before;"Besides these reproaches, they upbraided .them withthe obscurity of their origin and novelty of their fami­lies; in some respects true, and others not. These in­vectives thrown out under their noses, at the foot of therampart and'gates of the camp, gave the consuls no con­cern, but stung the soldiers, unaccustomed to such lan­guage, with shame and indignation, at the satiietime thattheir domestic quarrels were quite forgot. That the ene­my should pa-s unpunished, they could by no meanssubscribe to; but then they could not bear that the fa­thers, or consuls, should have the glory "of a Victory.Thus were they agitated between two violent impulsesof mind, with respect to their foreign and domestic ene­mies. At length their indignation against the formerprevailed, unable to bear their outrageous insults anylonger: They came in crowds to the consuls tents, in­sisting that they should be led on to battle, and the sig­nal given. The consuls seemed to confer together aboutthe part they should act, and drew out their conferenceto a great length. They wished for nothing more thanto engage; but it was necessary to conceal it, in order toquicken the resentment of the soldiers, by a seeming de­lay and opposition. They therefore returned for an­







OCR Output








CHAP. 47. ROMAN HISTORY. S3


The'savage Tullia was prodigiously fretted, ibat shecould find in her husband no spark of spirit or ambition;i'or which reason, she was all in raptures with Lucius;him she admired; it was he that deserved the name of a,uau :•—he was indeed of the blood royal. Her sister shedespised, who, though she was matched with a man ofspirit, had not the resolution of a woman. A similitudeof tempers soon produced an intimacy between them;for the wicked are the fittest company for each other.
However, this ambitious woman laid the foundation ofall the tragical scenes that ensued. She had been in useto have private conversations with her sister's husband,when she threw out the bitterest invectives against herhusband to his brother, and against her sister to her hus­band j and insisted that it were better they were bothfree, than so improperly matched, to be obliged to lan­guish in obscurity, owing to the deadness of those withwhom they were respectively connected. If the godshad given her the husband she merited, she would soonhave seen the sovereign power in he'r own family, whichshe now sees in her father's.
JJy such insinuations, the young man quickly imbibedall the venom of her malignant soul. Aruns Tarquinius'and the younger Tullia, were buried almost at the sametime, to make way for a new connection, which accord­ingly happened, rather without opposition from Servius,than with his consent.
CHAP. XLVII.
Tarquin usurps the throne,
.T.ROM this period Tullius's old age became every daymore burthensome, and his throne more uneasy. For,alter one <rime, this fury immediately set about contriv­ing another, fseiiher night nor day did she sutFer herhusband to rest, lest the parricides they had committedshould lc*e their intended eflect. "What!" said she,"do you think I wanted a man merely to be my hus-"band, with whom I might live a slave in obscurity?"Na; give me a man. who thinks he is not unworthy of







OCR Output








CONTENTS. 489


Chap.v. Relieved by Quinctius. Great slaughter
of the .Equi .............................. 208
vi. A pestilence at Rome ........................ 210
vii. Ill success of the Hernici. The plague
rages. Recourse to devotion ......... 212
viii. The plague abates. Great slaughter of the
Volsci ........... , ........................ 213
ix. A law proposed to retrench the power of the
consuls, and opposed by Q. Fabius, 214-x. Lucretius is appointed a triumph. Prodi­
gies. Tribunitian contests ............ 216
xi. Struggles of the young Patricians with thetribunes. Impetuosity of Caeso, whois appointed a day ........... . ......... 213
xii. Caeso deprecates the wrath of the people, 220xiii. He is arrested, finds bail, and banishes
himself ................ 221
xiv. Tbe young nobility, by their complaisance,
get the better of the tribunes ......... 223
xv. Herdonius's attempt upon Rome ............ 224
xvi. Obstruction of the tribunes .................. 225
'xvii. Animated speech of Valerius. Obstinacy
of the tribunes... ........................ 226
xviii. Kindness of the Tusculans. The capitol
relieved, but Valerius killed ......... 228
xix. The tribunes over-ruled by the noble ef­
forts of Cincinnatns ..... . ............... 230
• xx. Tbe senate encouraged, and the people
depressed ................ 232
xxi. "A compromise — the tribunes re-elected ... 233xxii. The Volsci defeated ..: ........................ 235
xxiii. The jfequi beat at Tusculum ........ . ......... 236
xxiv. Volscius impeached for perjury: the cen­
sus finished ................. .... ......... 237
xxv. New disturbance from the jEqui ............ 239
xxvi. Minucius besieged in his camp. Cincin-
natus created dictator .................. 240
xxvii. The dictator marches to the consul's relief, 242xxviii. The consul relieved, the JEqui beat, and
• obliged to pass under the yoke ...... 243
xxix. Cincinnatus triumphs. Minucius degraded, 214xxx. Five added to the college of tribunes. The
Sabines defeated ........................ 240







OCR Output








384 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV.


'How!" cried the soldiers, ' shall this monopolist, who< cheated us of our -spoils, dare to threaten us also?'Wherefore, as these reflections were made openly, theQosestor Sextius, to quell (lie sedition, believed it neces­sary to employ the same violent methods as had givenoccasion for them, and sent a lictor to one of the soldiers,whom he heard exclaiming: but this only served to in­crease the tumult; and the Qusestor being struck with astoue, was obliged to retire out of the crowd ; the personwho hail done it insulting him at the same time, by cal­ling out, That the Quaxtor had got no more than what thegeneral had threatened to give the soldiers. When Post-huraius himself was called to quell the mutiny, he exas­perated the troops more than ever by the strictness of hisenquiries, and the cruelty of his punishments. At last,wlien lie set no bounds to his fury, the cries of thosewhom he had condemned to be drowned under a hurdle,having drawn together a number of the soldiers, andraised a tumult, he burst like a fury from his tribunal,and thrust among the crowd, who were endeavouring toprevent the executing of his sentence. The lictors andcenturions, in clearing the way, dealt about them tooroughly among the crowd, which exasperated them tothat extraordinary degree, that the military tribune wasstoned to death by his own army.
When thenews of this tragical event reached the city,and the military tribunes, with the concurrence of thesenate, decreed that a ^recognition should he taken,relative to the murder of their colleague, the tribunes ofthe people interposed. This contest depended upon an­other. The conscript fathers were in the utmost concern,lest the people, for fear of the intended inquiry, should,in the heat of their passion, create military tribunes outof their own order; for which reason they exerted them­selves to the utmost to get consuls elected. But the tri­bunes of the people would suffer no act to be passed bytlie senate, nor a comitia- to be held for the election ofconsuls, ?o that the Republic fell into an iuter-regnum.The fathers afterwards prevailed.







OCR Output








3+0 TITUS L1VIUS' BOOK IV.


the best part of that day's solemnity. The dictator, byorder of the people, presented to Jupiter Capitoiinus, acrown of gold, of a pound weight, at .the public ex-pence.
I have followed the universal opinion of authors whowrote before me, in making A. Cornelius Cossus, onlya legionary tribune, at the time he brought the secondOpitna Spoiia into the temple of Jupiter Feretrius. Butbesides, that those only, properly speaking, are OpimaSpoiia, which one general takes from another, and nonecan be considered as a general, but he who has the solemanagement of the war; the very inscription of these.spoils, proves against both them and me, that he wasconsul when he took them. Therefore, when I heardthat Augustus Caesar, who either built or repaired allthe Roman temples, had visited that of Jupiter Feretrius,which he had rebuilt, after it had fallen to ruins by theravages of time, and that he himself had read the in­scription upon the linen breast-plate of Tolumnius, Ithought it a pity to deprive Cossus of the testimony ofhis own spoils, and of Casar also, who rebuilt the temple.The reader may, however, judge for himself, where themistake lies in that matter, because annals so ancient,and the linen register of magistrate* kept in the templeof Moneta, so often quoted by Liciifius Macer, takes no• notice of Cossus's consulship, till nine years after, whenTitus Quinctius Pennus was his colleague. Add to thisalso, that so famous a battle can never correspond to thatyear, because for almost three years before and after theconsulate of A. Cornelius, there was no war, owing to apestilential disiemper and a famine; insomuch that someannals, mourning, as it were, for the dead, mention no­thing with respect 19 these years, but the names of theconsuls. The third year after he was consul, he wasipade military tribune with consular |*nwer; and beforeit expired, master of horse, in which capacity, he foughtanother memorable battle at the head of the cavalry.
Still we may judge of this matter as we please;" bat,in my opinion, we may conclude any dispute about thematter ridiculous, since he who commanded in this ac­tion, when the spoils were fresh and deposited in (hetemple, near Jupiter.himself, to whom they were devoted


 







OCR Output








CHAP. 56. , ROMAN HISTORY. 97 -


aud though he made use of the public money, to de­fray i he expence, in the laborious part, he made thepeople the drudges. Though this was a considerableaddition to their military servitude, yet the considera­tion, that they were building a temple to the gods withtheir own hands, induced them to assist in carrying iton with more cheerfulness than usual. This servitudewas afterwards extended to works less honourable, butstill more laborious, as the construction of galleries inthe circus, and of a large drain under ground, for re­ceiving and carrying off the refuse of the city; worksso very considerable, that even the magnificence of thepresent ago can scarce pretend to equal them.
Whilst the people were engaged in the execution ofthese designs, because he thought numbers, for whom hecould not find employment, were a burden to the city,that the frontiers of his dominions might be better in­habited, he sent colonies to Circeii* and Sigma, f whichproved a defence to the city, in succeeding ages, bothby sea and land.
Whilst he was engaged in these matters, a terribleprodigy appeared. A serpent jumping out of a woodenpillar, spread such terror among-all who saw it, thatthey ran directly to the palace. The king was not somuch concerned for fear of danger, as he was solicitousabout what might fojlow. Therefore, though upon otheroccasions, the Etrurian diviners were thought sufficientiyet this phenomenon having impressed him with un­usual anxiety for his domestic concerns, he resolved tosend to the oracle at Delphi,}; the most famous at thattime in the world.
And not daring to trust the oracle's answer to any• other, he dispatched two of his sons into Greece, [A. R.243.] through tracts of land, §at that time, very little,and seas still less known. Titus and Aruns set out, Lu­cia* Junius Brutus, Tarquin's nephew, by a sister Tar-quinia, a young man of a very different turn of mindfrom. what he choosed it should appear to be, was oftheir retinue.
•
* Monte Circello. f A city in Latium.
J A city in Greece, r.o-,v Delfo, Sabona, and Castri.







OCR Output








CHAP. 38. ROMAN HISTORY. 365


upon the defensive than the offensive, whilst the Volsciadvanced their standards, pressed hard upon the Romanranks and saw many more of. them fail than fly. ,
CHAP. XXXVIIt.
Tlie gallantry of Sertus Tempawus. , .
.DY this time they began- to give way everywhere,arid it was in vain for the consul to employ'either exhor­tations or reproaches: his authority and the majesty ofhis person were equally disregarded: and they wouldimmediately have turned their backs upon the enemy,had not Sextus Tempanlus, a decurio of the horse, by alucky thought and spirited execution, prevented a total.defeat. He cried out with a loud voice to the horse todismount, if they would save the commonwealth. Thewhole squadrons obeyed him to a man, as if the consulhimself had given the orders: ' Unless,' says he, ' thisarmed body of ours check the enemy's ardour, the Ro­man power is no more. Follow my lance instead ofan ensign, and show both the Romans and the Volsci,that on foot as well as on horseback you are irresisti­ble.' All joined in a shout to express their approba­tion, and he advanced at their head, carrying his spearaloft; wherever they appeared they cleared their way;- and covering themselves with their shields, charged theenemy. Where the Romans were most pressed, wherethey once attacked, they were sure to reinstate the for--tune of the day; nor is there the least question, that iftheir number could have admitted them to shew them­selves everywhere, but they would have obliged the ene­my to fly.
CHAP. XXXIX.
A drawn battle.
JC\S their impetuosity was everywhere irresistible, thegeneral of the Volsci ordered his troops to open a pas­sage for the new battalion with the round bucklers, tilltheir impetuosity should hurry them too far tor rejoining







OCR Output








CHAP. 2£ ROMAN HISTORY. 49


land they are powerful, and mighty by sea. Re­member, that the very moment the signal of battleshall be given, they will become spectators, and willnot fail to attack the conquerors and conquered,equally weakened and exhausted by fighting againsteach other. Wherefore, if we are not destined todestruction, since not satisfied with the liberty weenjoy, we will run the hazard of empire or slavery;let us adopt a plan for ascertaining this point, with­out much loss of blood, or .prejudice to either." Theproposal was not disliked by Tullus, though his nativecourage and hopes of victory, inclined him more to abattle. Whilst they were deliberating on the methodto be taken, chance pointed out a way agreeable to both.
CHAP. XXIV.
Treaty relative to the Horatii and Curiatii.
JL HERE were, at that time, in each army, three twinwbrothers, differing very little, either in point of years orstrength. That the brothers on the one side, were calledthe Horatiii, and the other the Curiatii, is admitted byall; nor can antiquity produce an instance of gallantrymore noble. Yet in the history, celebrated as it is, thereis still a doubt to which side the names respectively be­longed. In this point, authors differ; but most are ofopinion, that the Horatii were Romans, which I am in­clinable to follow.
The generals on each side, propose to the brothersrespectively, to decide, by their swords, the fortune oftheir countries; and withal, to remember, that sovereign­ty was to be the certain consequent of victory. Bothaccepted with joy; and the time and place is fixed forthe combat; previous to which, it yvas confirmed bytreaty between the contending powers, that the nation towhom the victors belonged^ should command and governthe other, by just and equitable laws. Other treatiesmay have different clauses, but they are all expede inthe same uniform







OCR Output








CHAP. 33. ROMAN HISTORY. 359


• dations made on your country,'require this at your
• hands.'
The dictator's orders set the whole army in motion.Some of the torches that had been thrown, were re­covered, some were wrested by force from the enemy,so that on both sides they were armed with torches. Thegeneral of the horse too charged on a plan entirely new.He ordered the cavalry to draw tha bits out of the horsesmouths, and clapping spurs to his own, was the first todrive full speed into the middle of the flames, whitherhe was followed by the rest, driving at full gallop againstthe enemy. A mixture of smoke and dust, raised bythemselves, carried off the glancing of the light from theeyes both of the men and horses; nor had the appear­ance which had confounded the men, the least impres­sion on the horses: so that the cavalry, wherever theywent, beat down and trampled under foot aH beforethem. Then a new shout was raised, which surprisedand attracted the attention of both armies, till the dicta­tor cried out, « It is Quinctius, the lieutenant general,'who, with the troops under his command, has attacked
• the enemy's rear:' and then with great cries pushedthe attack with greater vigour than ever. Whilst twoarmies carrying on two different attacks, hemmed in andpressed the Etrurians, in -front and in rear, so that theycould neither retire into their camp, nor effectuate theirescape to the mountains, whence a new enemy had comedown upon them; and everywhere, the greatest part ofthe Vejentes fled with the utmost precipitation to theTiber, and all the Fidenates, who were yet left alive, totheir capital Fidenae.
Their flight and terror hurried them to certain death.Some of the Vejentes were cut off upon the banks ofthe river, others were pushed into the water, and car­ried down by the stream: even those who could swirn,sunk through weariness, wounds, and fear; so tfiat few,out of a great number, made the other side.—The otherpart of vhe confederates fled through the camp inio thecity, whither the Romans pursued them with great fury,especially Quinctius, and those who had come downwith him from the heights, being still fresh, as havingonly advanced towards the end of the battle.







OCR Output








, 3. ROMAN HISTORY. 207


The H«rnici got intelligence of these motions, andadvised the Romans accordingly, that the Ecetrans hadjoined in a confederacy with the /Equi. The colony ofAntium was likewise suspected, because, when thatcity was taken, many of the inhabitants had fled to thejEqui, and during the war, had signalized themselvesin their service. When after this, the M<\m were com­pelled to take refuge within their walls, these troopsretiring privately-, had retired to Antinrn, and encou­raged the colony, naturally averse to the Roman go­vernment, to shake off' the allegiance entire!y. Astheywere not yet in a condition to throw off the mask,when the senate was informed of their designs, they re­commended to the consuls to send for the principal menof the colony, and demand an explanation. They rea­dily obeyed the summons, and being, 'by the Consuls,introduced to the senate, returned such answers to vheirtjuestions, as rather confirmed than lessened the suspi­cions entertained of there.
After this, the war was looked on as certain. Sp.Furius, one of the 'consuls, whose province it was,marched against the .SLijui, and found them busy in lay­ing waste the territories of the Hernici. Unacquaintedwith their numbers, as they had never appeared hi abody, he rashly gave them battle, when his army wasmuch inferior; and consequently been routed at thefirst charge, fled back to his camp. Nor did the dan­ger stop here; for, all the succeeding night, and dayafter, his camp was so closely blocked up, and so fu­riously attacked, that to send intelligence to Rome of hissituation was quite impracticable.
The news, however, of the loss ofthe battle, and themanner in which the consul and the army were blockedup in the camp, were transmitted by the Hernici. Somuch was the senate alarmed at this intelligence, thatthey gave it in charge to the other consul, Posthumius,"To take care, that the republic suffered no detriment;"a clause, in acts of the senate, expressive of the utmostdanger. It was judged most prudent, that the consulhimself should remain at Rome, to enlist ail who wereable to bear arms, and to dispatch Titus Quinctius, in







OCR Output








32S TITUS L1VIUS' BOOK IV.


•
a very respectable light,) concluded, that they ought toexert themselves, that the remains of the infamous sen­tence, formerly passed in relalion to the Ardeatfts, mightbe buried in oblivion ; and for that purpose, prevailedon the senate to pass a decree, for sending a colony toArdea, to defend them against the Volsci, and repeop'.ethe city, much depopulated by the civil war. This waspublicly given out and recorded, that the people andtheir tribunes, might not discover the latent design of re­versing their sentence. For, it was concerted, that a fargreater part of the colony should consist of Rutuli thanof Romans; that no territory should be divided but thatwhich had produced the infamous sentence ; and that noRoman should have-a single acre of land, till all the Ru­tuli should be provided for.
Thus was the territority restored to the Ardeates.Three gentlemen were chosen to lead the colony toArdea, Agrippa Menenius. T. Clcelius Siculus, and Ebu-cius Elua, who by an unpopular discharge of their trust,in assigning the lands to the allies, which the Romanshad adjudged to themselves, fell into disgrace with thepeople, nor were they high in favour with the Pa­tricians, because they had shown no respect to persons.However, they avoided a prosecution, when the tribunesappointed them a day to answer for their conduct beforethe peop'e, by deserting the diet, an/1 incorporating them­selves with the colony, who had been witnesses of theintegrity and impartiality of their conduct. »


 


Be


CHAP. XII.A Famine. A Superintendent of Provisions chosen.


)OTH this year and the following, when Cains Furius
Pacilius and M. Papirius Crnssus were consuls, passed intranquillity bath at home and abroad. The games,which the decemvirs had vowed, and the senate enacted,daring the secession of the people from the fathers, werecelebrated this year. In vain did Petilius attempt toraise a sedition; wlio being made tribune of the peoplea second time, couid not, for all the blustering he miulvabout the Agrarian law, get the consuls to i»ov.c it once







OCR Output








37* TITUS LIVIUS- BOOK IV.


• brother, and both disregarded! There must infallibly-• ,have been some trick here, and Sempronius, in presid-'ing. at the comitia, has discovered more art than hones-
• ty. For which reason, they hail a right to con:plaio,'that their friends had been disappointed, by his uncan-
• did procedure.' As Atratinus himself was above theirreach, both on account of his known integrity, and thehigh station in which he served, they turned all theirfury against C. Sempronius, his relation; and, by the as­sistance of .M. Canuleius, their colleague, revived theprosecution against him, for the disgrace he had broughtupon the state, in the: war with the Volsci.
It was not long after that, till the tribunes proposed inthe senate, a division of the lands among the people; a•motion, which C. Sempronius had always most zealouslyopposed, with a view, as it turned out, to lessen his in­terest with the Patricians, should he appear more pas­sive, or expose himself to the resentment of the people,at the time of his trial, should he persist in his opposition.But, he raiher chose to be the butt of rheir malice, thanexpose his character by deserting the public cause,though at the hazard of his own; and, therefore, .con­tinued firm in his former opinion, ' That it would bebad policy to gratify three factious tribune's, who, infact, did not want to get land for the.people, but toraise the people's resentment against him. For his ownpart, he was determined to stand the storm, withoutflinching; and he saw no reason, why he, or any othercitizen of Rome, should be considered by the senate,jn such an important point of view, that in saving bim,the state should be exposed to any hardship.' Withthe same steadiness, on the day of his trial, he pleadedhis own cause: but when the senators had tried everymethod to soften the people in his favour, thev were stillinexorable, and condemned him in a fine of !5,OOO assesof brass.*
This. year too, Posthumia, a vestal virgin, was im­peached for incontinence. She was found innocent, as tothe crime; but she had paid too much attention to dress,3nd been too free in her behaviour for a vestal, which
* ,f+8 : 8 : 8.







OCR Output








159 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IL


pronius, corn was imported, in considerable quantities,from Sicilv, and there was a debate in the senate aboutthe price at which it should be retailed. Many wereof opinion that they had now a fair opportunity ofbumbling the commons, and recovering these rights,which by their secession and violence, they had extortedfrom the senate. Marcius Coriolanus, who was a de­clared enemy of the tribunitian power, insisted, " That"if they would have provisions on the old footing, it"were but just they restored the senate its ancient rights."Shall I, as if reduced to a state of slavery, and ransom-**, ed from robbers, tamely behold these Plebeian ma-"gistrates?'Why do I see a Sicinius over my head?*'* And must I bear these indignities longer than there is"any necessity? Must I, to whom the pride of a king"Tarquin'was so intolerable, put up with the insolence"of Sicinius? Let him secede now with the people at"his back, to the sacred mount, or'any other hill the"way lies open. Let them seize upon our corn in the"fields, as they did three years ago. Let them enjoy"now the fruits of their revolt. I can venture to affirm,"that this calamity has conveyed to them such salutary"instruction, that they would rather chuse to apply"themselves to agriculture, than to arms, by means of a"new secession to interrupt it." It is hard to say,whether his plan ought to have been adopted, though jtseems pretty evident, that the senate, by reducing theprice of provisions, might have ,rid themselves of theTribunitian power, and all other popular laws that hadbeen imposed on them.
... CHAP. XXXV.
Coriolanus condemned;—retires among the Volsci.
•J[ HIS speech was even considered by the senate astoo severe; and it so exasperated the commons, that theywere on the point of taking up arms. "We are now,"they -cried, " to be attacked with famine, like enemies;"we are to be deprived of every means of subsistence."The ibreign corn, the only resource that fortune offer-"ed us, and ,so unexpectedly too, is to be snatched from







OCR Output








M8 \ TITUS LIVIUS' Book II.


suls to death, by that means to evade their military oath;but being told that no religious engagement could bedissolved by a crime, by the advice of one Sicinius,without any orders from the consuls, they withdrew tothe sacred mountain, on the other side of the'Anio, threemiles from Rome.
This account meets with more credit than that of Piso,who makes it the Aventine hill. Here they fortifiedtheir camp with a moat and rampart, continued quiet forseveral days, though subject to no leader, neither gaveprovocation nor received it; and took nothing but whattheir subsistence barely required.
The city was now in the utmost consternation; andboth parties being mutually afraid of each other, couldcome to no resolution that was decisive. The commons,who had been left in the city by their party, dreadedthe exasperated fathers, who, on the other hand, uncer­tain of their sentiments as to staying or going, wereequally afraid of them. It was a common question.How long will the seceders remain quiet} What wouldbe the consequence, were any foreign war to break outin the mean time? They were now sensible, that therewere no other means of saving the state, but by re-unit­ing it; and that for this reason, the people must be re­conciled and made their friends at any rate.
Wherefore they agreed to send Menenius Agrippa,an excellent speaker, and very acceptable to the com­mons, being descended of a Plebeian family, as deputy tothe seceders. Being admitted into the camp, he is saidto have repeated the following fable, in the rough andunpolished manner of the times, without any other argu­ment. "Upon an occasion, (says he,) when members of"the human body were not on the same friendly foot-"ing as at present, and each member had a council and"language peculiar to itself, the other parts of the"body were in no small passion, that they should all-' sweat, toil, and labour for the belly, whilst it enjoyed"the pleasures provided for it in idleness and at ease."In consequence of all this, they conspired that the"hands should no longer carry food to the mouth, that"the mouth should not receive it, nor the teeth grind*' it. Whilst they were thus furiously intent upoh re-







OCR Output








CHAP. 61. ROMAN HISTORY. 195


good understanding that subsisted between the generaland the army, the jEqui were afraid to shew themselvesin the field, and suffered their country to be ravaged atpleasure, whence it followed, that the booty was moreconsiderable than they had taken from the ^Equi in anyformer war; and it was all given to the soldiers, and withit, the praises they merited, which gave them a pleasureno less sensible, than more substantial rewards.
The army returned to Rome, with the warmest sen­timents of regard to their general, and on his account,in a great measure, to the whole order of the Patricians,telling every body, that the senate had in their general,given them a father: but in Appius, to the other army, acruel master.
In the course of this year, there was various success inwar, and violent commotions at home and abroad. Itwas peculiarly memorable for the election of the tribunesby tribes, a circumstance which derived its importance,rather from-the victory gained over a violent opposition,than any real advantage that attended it: for the Comitiasuffered more in point of dignity by exctuding the fa-ihers from that assembly, than the power acquired bythe people, or lost by the senate, was really worth.
CHAP. LXI.
"Trial and death of Appius.
I ... VALERIUS and T. /Emilius were consuls the fol­lowing year, when the commotions ran higher than ever,both on account of the contests between the orders of thesenate, occasioned by the Agrarian law, and also on ac­count of the trial of Appius, for which M. Duilius and C.Sicinius appointed a day, because he opposed the law,and supported the pretensions of the possessors of thepublic lands, with the same violent and inflexible spirit,as if he had been chosen consul for the third time.
Never was a criminal cited before the people, moregenerally detested than he. To their tribunal he broughtwith him all the grievances charged against his father,as well as the crimes objected to himself; nor did thePatricians, on any former occasion, interest themselves







OCR Output








CHAP. 40. ROMAN HISTORY. 461


their country, they ought not to be a burthen upon thosewho were armed tor its preservation and might. soon bein want of provisions.


.1


CHAP. XL.
T7te deep distress which ensued from this battle. < ..
N this manner did these old men, destined to death,encourage and console each other. Then addressingthemselves to the young men, and following them all theway to the citadel and capitol, pathetically recommended'To their bravery, and youthful vigour, the fortune of'what yet remained of a city, that in all its wars had'been victorious, for three hundred and sixty years.'But when the moment came that was to separate thechampions of the captive city from 'those who were de­termined not to survive its ruin, deep was the distresswhich that scene exhibited; and it was rendered stillmore afferting by the weeping and lamentations of thewomen, distractedly running they knew not whither,from their husbands to their sons, and from their sons totheir husbands, asking now these, now those, • whose« fate they should share.' In short, never was humanmisery represented in more lively colours. A great partof the women, however, followed their friends into thecitadel, who, though they were not invited, met with naopposition; because, of whatever consequence it mighthave bsen to the besieged, to have been freed from anuseless multitude, it was quite inconsistent with humani­ty to shut them out. The remaining multitude, consist­ing chiefly of the populace, too numerous to be lodgedin a fortress that stood on so small a hill, or to be main­tained there in so great a scarcity, left the city in crowds,and took their way in a body towards the Janiculum.From thence, they dispersed themselves partly about thecountry, and partly among the neighbouring cities, hav­ing neither leader to conduct them, nor any concertedscheme to follow, each of them following his own hopesand particular views, the public interest being now givenup for lost.
In the mean time, the priests of Romulus, and the ves­tal-, dropping all concern about their private affairs, con-







OCR Output








CHAP. 7. ROMAN HISTORY. 411


• armies, to quit the colours, and leave the camp in a'boily, in our assemblies, are listened to with attention;'nay, whatever a tribune of the people is pleased to ad-'* ranee, were it to betray your country, and sink the com--
'monwealtli, hini you accustom yourselves to hear with
• patience. Infatuated with the charms of the power of'your tribunes, you suffer the grossest crimes to ly con-
• cealed under it. It only remains for them to carry'-the same spirit of revolt into the camp, which they are
• labouring to foment in your assemblies, and by their'seditious harangues, corrupt the army, and teach them'to be disobedient to their officers. For such now is the'complexion of liberty at Rome, that to disregard the
• senate, the magistrates, the laws, the customs of our an-.'cestors, the regulations of the fathers, and all military
• discipline whatever, passes for spirit'.'
CHAP. VII.
The works of Veii in flames ;— repaired by the Romans. —Extraordinary unanimity between the Orders.


was already a match for the tribunes in theirown assemblies, when the news of a loss at Veii, whichnobody could have dreamed, would have produced suchan effect, all at once turned the scale entirely in his fa­vour, cemented more strongly the orders of the state, andinspired them with new ardour for pushing the siegewith more vigour.than ever. .
For when they had raised a mount * near the townand had only to fix the galleries to the walls; as theRomans were more intent on carrying on their works byday, than guarding them in the night, a port was open­ed all of a sudden, whence multitudes sallied out armedwith lighted torches, and set fire to the works. In an in­stant, these works, which had taken so long a time in theconstruction, were all in flames; and numbers, who en­deavoured to extinguish them, lost their labour, and theirlives into the bargain, either by the fire, or the sword.
* The Agger was made of fascines, stones and earth, composedof balisteri crossing each other in form of a Lattice; its heightwas shun of the watls, as it had wooden towers upon it, overtop­pins them.







OCR Output








272 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK III..


"young woman's presence, with a riew to clear up"some points; and if he found that he had realty been"imposed on, he might then depart better satisfied in"his own mind." He was allowed that liberty, andaccordingly led his daughter and her nurse aside to thebooths, near the temple of Cloacina, now-called the newbooths, and their snatching a butcher's knife. "By this"the only means in my power, my dear child," said he"I preserve thy honour and liberty;" and then plung­ed it into her heart; turning instantly full upon Appius,crying out, " By this innocent blood, Appius, L devote"thy head to the infernal gods."
A clamour being raised on the commission of this a-trocious deed, the decemvir was dreadfully alarmed, andimmediately ordered Virginius to be seized ; but he open­ed a passage to himself with the knife, wherever he went;till by favour of the multitude, he reached the gates.Icilius and Numitorius, lifted up her breathless body, and -exposed it to the people, deploring the guilt of Appius,the fatal beauty of Virginia, and the cruel necessity towhich her father •vas reduced, of taking away her lifewith his own hand. The matrons following the corpse,cried out, "Is it for th-is purpose we bring children into"the world? Is this the reward of chastity >''—Addinga thousand other moving complaints, which grief, par­ticularly lively and tender in their sex, generally inspiresthem with on such occasions. The men, hut especiallyIcilius, complained only, that the people had been de­prived of their tribunes, and the right of appeal, andthat the grossest villanies were committed in the face of.the sun.
GHAP. XLIX.
Appiua' authority sinking.
HE multitude now were in the highest ferment, bothon account of the enormity of the crime, and the hopeof recovering their liberty. Sometimes Appius orderedIcilius to be cited, and sometimes to be carried to jailfor his obstinacy. At last, finding the officers could notget through the crowd, he came himself, attended by a -


 


 







OCR Output








422 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK V.


The duumvirs who had the care of performing thesacred rites, instituted the Lectisternium,* for the firsttime at Home, and continued the festival for eight day-,having spread three beds, with all the pomp and magni­ficence the simplicity of these times would admit, to ap­pease Apollo, Latona, and Diana, Hercules, Mercury,and Neptune, This ceremony was also celebrated byprivate families. Open house was kept throughout thewhole city, and every thing brought out to the street tobe used in common. Nay, it is said, that every one,known or unknown, and all strangers, were entertainedwith a hearty welcome. Persons at vartance, layingaside all animosity and disputes, conversed with freedomand affability. Prisoners were released from their chainsduring the days of the festival, and religion forbade thoseto be bound, when the ceremony was over, whom thegods had set free.
In the mean time, at Veii, the army had many object)of terror, three confederate armies being ready to fallupon them at once. For all on a sudden, the CapenatesaniFalisci, having come to the assistance of the Vejen-tes as before, invested the camp, so that the Romanswere obliged to front three different ways, to repel asmany different attacks.
The remembrance of Sergius and Virginius's fate,had a peculiar influence upon their behaviour. Thetroops in the grand camp, that in the former action hadbeen idle spectators, being instantly led round, fell uponthe rear of the Capenates^ who'had attacked the Roman.lines. The battle being thus begun in that quarter, quitedisconcerted the Falisci; and a sally very seasonablymade from the lesser camp during this consternation,made them fairly show their backs. The CapenatesLeing thus repulsed, the conquerors pursued them withprodigious slaughter. Nor was it long be?ore the troopswhich ravaged their country, accidentally fell io withthe scattered remains of this arm}-, and cut them all topieces. Many of the Vejentes, whilst they were re­treating to the city, were slain before their gates, whichwere shut against those who came last, to prevent theRomans from entering with them.
* From Lcctos sternere, to prepare teds.







OCR Output








CHAP. 38. ROMAN HISTORY. 25V


senate-house, at the same time that they well knew whata torrent of reproaches they had to encounter; they werenot ignorant, that the ravages of the country, and all themisfortunes that threatened the state, would be stated totheir account. They foresaw, that an attempt wouldthen be made, to wrest their authority from them, if thevdid not with united vigour oppose it, and make examplesof all who should presume to enter the lists against them.
When the voice of the herald was heard in the forum,summoning the senators to meet the decemvirs in the se­nate-house, the people were quite astonished, so great anovelty was it now to consult the senate, that customhaving been long discontinued. "What can be the mat-"ter now," said they, "that they revive a practice so"long out of date? We have our enemies and the war"to thank, for seeing the least vestige of our ancient li-"berty in the city." They looked round the forum inevery part for senators, but few or none appeared. Fromthence they repaired to the senate-house, where nothingappeared around the decemvirs, but empty space, whichthe usurpers themselves ascribed to an aversion at theirgovernment, and the people to a-contempt of their au­thority; who, as private persons, had no right to call asenate. This, they concluded was an opening for theadmission of liberty, provided the commons would gohand in hand with the senate, and mind the summons forenrolment, as little as the senators had done the pro- -clamation for holding a senate.
Such were the private sentiments of the Plebeians.There was scarce any of the senators to be seen in theforum, and very few in the city. Shocked at the pre­sent administration, they had retired into the country,where, since they could be of no service to the public,they might look after their private affairs; persuaded,that the farther they were. removed from the meetingsand assemblies of those tyrannical monsters, the morethey were out of harm's way. When they did not obeythe citation, officers were sent round to their dwelling-houses, to distrain their effects, and to enquire whetherthey had absented themselves on purpose. The officersreported that the senators were in the country, whichgave much more pleasure to the decemvirs, than if they •







OCR Output








CHAP. 49. ROMAN HISTORY.


or to ransom themselves as they best could; more espe­cially as the Gauls gave strong hints in their discourse,that (hey would raise the siege for an inconsiderable ran­som.
The senate met, and empowered the military tribunesto negociate an accommodation; which was concludedbetween Q. Sulpicius, the military tribune, and Bren-nus, general of the Gauls, and the ransom of a people,destined one day to command the universe, was fixed atone thousand pound weight of gold.* This capitulationwas too disgraceful to require any addition, but the Gaulsimproved upon the indignity. They brought falseweights, and when the tribune objected to them, the kinginsultingly added his sword, which he threw into the-scale, expressing himself in these words, ' Wo to the'conquered,' a phrase of all others the most shockingto a Roman ear.
• - -:
CHAP. XLIX.
Camillas changes thtface of affairs.
JjUT neither gods nor men would permit the Romansto live on the terms of a ransomed people. For fortunehad so ordered it, that before this infamous ransom wasall paid down, their wrangling having taken up sometime, the dictator made his appearance, and ordered themoney to be taken away, and the Gauls to be gone.When they objected, pleading the capitulation signedbetween them, he replied, that no treaty concluded with,a magistrate of inferior authority, without his participa­tion, from the moment he was declared dictator, couldbe valid, and then told them, they might prepare forbattle.
His own troops he ordered to throw their baggage in,a heap, and stand to their amis, for with steel, and notwith gold, were they now to redeem their country, fightring in view of the temples of their gods, in sight oftheir wives and children, and in their native soil, dis­figured as it was by the calamities of war, and in themidst of all that ought to be defended, recovered, or
* Forty-five thousand pounds sterting.







OCR Output








302 TITUS LIVIUS* BOOK III.


'of you return one denier the richer from these assem-'blies? What did you ever carry home to your wives« and children from these assemblies? Yes; I can tell« you. Haired, disgust, and animosity, public and pri-'vate; from the fatal effects of which, you have indeed'been preserved, not by your own integrity nor bravery,
* but by the assistance of others. Why, wben you
* fought in the field, under us consuls, and not in the
• forum under your tribunes; when your shouts in battle« terrified your enemies, and not the Roman Patrictans« in your assemblies; it was then you got booty, it was
* then you took lands from your enemies, it was then« you acquired riches and glory to yourselves and the
* state, and returned in triumph to your families and
• your gods. But now you sutler the enemy to retire en-« riched at your expence. Stick then to your assem-
* blies;—take up your abode in the forum. Fly as you.'will from the necessity of fighting, it will haunt you,« —it will still pursue you. Was it so hard a matter to
• march out against the /Equi and Volsci? The war is
• already at your gates;' if you do not drive it from
* thence, you will soon see it within your walls,—scal-4 ing the citadel and capitol, and chasing you into your
* very houses. Two years ago, the senate ordered levies
* for an army to be sent to the AJgidus. • But,—ever« since that time, you have loitered at home squabbling
* with one another like so many fish-wives, satisfied'completely with your present peace, and never reflect-
• ing, that that very peace would soon bring war upon
* you from every quarter.
• I am sensible, 1 might fall upon a thousand topics,4 that would please you better than the present, and be
* more agreeable to my own natural turn of mind: but
• necessity at.present rather obliges me to speak truth,
• than flatter you to your ruin. I would wish, O Romans,
• to give you ^pleasure;—but to give you happiness,
• however you may be disposed with respect to me, is
• my more ardent wish. Our nattiral temper is such,'that we listen more willingly to him who flatters us
• for his own interest, than to the man who has no earih-
• \y view, but the good of the community. You ima-
* gine, perhaps, that those flatterers, those worshippers


 







OCR Output








CHAP. 55. ROMAN HISTORY. m


"efficacy. That the consul, like one of the tribune's"Serjeants, could only act by their order, and at their"pleasure. If they entertained the least thoughts of"throwing off those chains, of restoring the power of"the senate, or establishing any other authority in the"Republic than that of the people, they should set be-"fore their eyes the banishment of C. Marcius, and the"condemnation and death of Menenius."
The fathers, animated with speeches to this purpose,no longer concerted measures publicly, but in secret;making very few privy to their designs. As there itwas concluded, that right or wrong, the accused must besecured, the most violent measures were relished most:and it was easy to find persons ready for any undertak­ing.
Wherefore, upon the day of the trial, the people stoodin anxious expectation in the forum, surprized that thetribune had not appeared; but at length when their pa­tience was wearied out with waiting, their suspicionswere raised, that, intimidated by the Patricians, he haddeserted and betrayed the public cause. Af last, theywho had remained at his door, brought word that he wasfound dead in his bed.
The news having spread among the people, they dis­persed on all sides, trembling and terrified, like an army-after the loss of their general. • But the tribunes wereparticularly affected, being instructed:by the event, thateven the laws which made their persons sacred, were notsufficient for their protection. The senators, on this oc­casion, took no care to moderate their joy; nay, theywere so far from shewing any remorse for the crime theyhad committed, that even those who had no hand in H,were proud to be thought the perpetrators; declaring inevery company, that nothing but an extraordinary blowcould subdue the power of the tribunes.
CHAP. LV.
The Senators exult on their victory, but meet with a check.
.IMMEDIATELY upon this victory, obtained by ajnost pernicious precedent, the levies were appointed,







OCR Output








CHAP. 46. ROMAN .HISTORY. 469


sacrifice peculiar to the Fabian family, which could beperformed nowhere, but on the Quirinal hill. For thispurpose, C. Fabius Dorso came down from the capitol,having his gown tucked up, and the sacred things in hishands ; passed through the enemy's guards; and withoutregard to their threats or noise, got safe to the Quirinalhill. Having performed there all the necessary cere­monies, he retumed the same way, with the same gravityof air and gesture, to the capitol, in full confidence ofthe protection of those gods, whose worship he had pre­served even at the risk of his life. The Gauls wereeither astonished at his surprising boldness,or moved witha sense of religion, which they by no means neglect.
In the mean time, the army at Veii not only gainedfresh spirits, but were every day considerably reinforced,not only by 'many Romans, who had been dispersed upand down the country, after the defeat of Allia, and thecapture of Rome, but also by crowds of Latin volunteers,who joined them, that they might come in for their shareof the spoil. Now, they concluded, was the time to savetheir country, and deliver it out of the hands of the ene­my: but though they were a formidable party, they hadnone among them able to take the command.
The place itself reminded them of Camillus; besidesthat, a great part of that very army had fought succes-fully under the command and auspices of that greatcaptain. Caedicius protested, ' That he would do nothing'to provoke either gods or men to put an end to his* command; but not forgetful of his rank, he would'himself demand a general.' It was unanimously agreedto send for Camillus from Ardea, but not before theyhad consulted the senate at Rome; such was their regardto propriety, and to the order prescribed by law, in all -things, even at a time when the Republic was on thebrink of ruin. To pass through the enemy's guards tothe citadel, was a dangerous attempt. Pontius Com-minius, however, a sprightly young fellow, promised to<lo his best in the business; and laying himself on thebark of a tree, was carried safely down the current of theTiber to the city. By a steep rock, on the side nextthe river, which the enemy thought unnecessary to guard,he got up with difficulty to the capitol.
He was brought before the magistrates, and delivered







OCR Output








80 . TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


by the sacrifice of a sow, a sheep, and a bull; and thiswas called the fmishing stroke of the lustrum, becausethen the census was completed.
It is computed, that eighty thousand citizens wereinrolled in that census. Fabius Pictor, the oldest his­torian we have, adds, " That this was the number of"citizens fit to bear arms." To accommodate thisgreat number of people, it was thought necessary to en­large the city: in consequence of which he added twohills, the Quirinal,* and Viminal.f and soon after, theEsquiline;| where, to give a reputation to the place, hedwelt himself. He fortified the city with a rampart,ditches, and a wall quite round it; and consequently en­larged the Pomcerium.
They only who have a regard to the natural significa­tion of the word, will have the pomaerium to be a spaceof ground without the walls; but it is rather a space oneach side of the wall, which the Etrurians formerly, inlaying the foundation of cities, consecrated by augury,extending to certain lines on each side of the wall theyintended to raise; so that the houses might not be joinedto it on the inside, as they do generally at present, andthat on the outside there might be some ground left un-tilled. This space, which could neither be ploughed,nor, built upon, is by the Romans called ponuerium,^not more because it lies without the walls, than becausethe walls lye without it. And, on all occasions, when thecity was enlarged, in propertion as the walls, so this con­secrated ground was also extended.
•' • t
CHAP. XLV.
Builds a temple to Diana, in conjunction with the Latins,


THE .-


! state being thus improyed, the city enlarged, andjevery thing in it modelled to t:he .best advantage, for the-practical purposes of peace and war, that they might notalways depend upon arms for their resources, he endea-
* Three miles round. f Two miles and a half round.
• Four mile.s round. § Post murum, aut mxrum.







OCR Output








226 TITUS LIVIUS' Book III.


might soon arrive according to concert, followed by thoseof the /Equi and Volsci, the eternal enemies of Rome;who would not come to ravage the country as formerly,but to take possession of a city, already half taken.Among so many causes of distrust, their principal terrorwas with respect to the slaves, no man knowing but hehad an enemy in his house, in whom they neither couldsafely contide, having no assurance of their fidelity, norseem to distrust, for fear of making them enemies. Suchwas their embarrassment, that they did not imagine thata thorough reconciliation between the orders, would besufficient to save the state. However, among all the ca­lamities that threatened them, they had not the least ap­prehension of danger from the people or their magis­trates. Their domestic dissensions they considered asevils of a gentle kind, being ever the consequences of.freedom from all other calamities, and for the presentseemed to be absorbed in this foreign alarm. However,it was this that bore heaviest upon them, when totter­ing this under the pressure of other troubles. Thephrenzy of the tribunes rose so high, that they insistedthe war was a mere bugbear,-'—that the capitol had beenseized with no other view than to make them forget thebill: but were it once passed, they would see those cli­ents and creatures of the Patricians, finding all theirriotous exertions to obstruct it ineffectual, steal away hias great silence as they entered. Then calling the peo­ple from their arms, they held an assembly to pass thelaw. In the mean time, the consuls convened the senate,more afraid of the tribunes than of the enemy, who badalarmed them in the night.
CHAP. XVH.
Animated speech of Valerius. Obstinacy of the Tribunes.
VA' HEN word was brought that the people had laiddown their arms, and quitted their posts, Publius Vale­rius, leaving his colleague to keep the senate together,left the senate-house in a great hurry, and flew to thetemple to the tribunes. "What is the meaning of this,"said he,) tribunes? Will nothing less serve you than







OCR Output








476 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK V.


CHAP. LI.
Speech r-f Camillia.t jx
X-/ISPUTES with the tribunes, gentlemen, are sounsupportable to me, that the only consolation I had.whilst I lived a miserable exile at Ardea, was to con­sider myself out of the reach of these cavils: for whichexpress reason, I was resolved never more to set a footin this city bad I not been recalled by a decree of thesenate, and your suffrages. Neither is it owing to aoychange in my opinion, that I am now returned; thesituation of your affairs obliged me to it. The ques­tion was not to replace myself in Rome, but to rein­state Rome itself upon the seat of its empire. And atthis instant, nothing would give me greater pleasure,than to remain quiet, and be silent, were not this tooa struggle in behalf of ;;iy country, to abandon which,would be shameful in any other, but in Cam ill us, cri­minal to the last degree, while any spark of life re­mains. For what occasion had we to recover, or wrestthis our city when besieged, out of the hands of the Bar­barians, if after all our exertions, we ourselves shouldabandon it r When the gods and tke Roman peopleheld, by actual possession, the capitol and citadel,whilst all the rest of the city together fell a sacrifice tothe victorious Gauls; shall we now, when conquerors,after all we have done to recover this-city, abandon al­so the capitol and citadel, and our prosperity bo the.cause of a greater desolation in Rome, than even ouradversity? If indeed these religious rites, which wereinstituted and handed down to us from the foundationof the city, were to be totally disregarded by us, yetthe protection of the gods, hath been so stronglymarked to us in the present instance, that for men toneglect the worship of the gods, were in my opinion,absolutely impossible. Only look back upon what hashappened to us, good or bad, for some years past, andyou will see evidently, that every thing has succeededwith us, when submissive and dutiful to the gods, andevery thing unfortunate, jvhen we despised them.'First of all, let us take a re view of the war with Veii,"^ich continued for so many years, with incredible







OCR Output








CHAP. 50. ROMAN HISTORY. 27*


baml of young Patricians, and having made way throughthe crowd, ordered him to be carried to jail. But, bythis time, Icilius had not only a numerous populace abouthim, but their patrons, L. Valerius and 3V1. Horatius attheir head ; who pushing away the lictor, told him, " If"he had a legal action against Icilius, they would be"bail to- defend him against the decemvir, who was"only a private person; but, if he dared to use force,"he would soon find the difference." This raised aterrible tumult. The decemvir's lictor fell upon Va­lerius and Horatius, and the mob broke his fasces. Appiuswent up to the Rostra to harangue the people; Vateriusand Horatius followed. When they spoke, the assemblyw«re all attention; but the decemvir could not be heardfor noise.
Matters were carried so high, by this .time, that Va­lerius took upon him to order the lictors to be gone fromAppius, who being only a private person, had no titleto lictors. Appius, in the mean time, terrified for theconsequences, and in fear of his life, escaped, with hishead covered with his robe, unknown to the opposition,into a house adjoining the forum. Sp. Oppius, from theopposite side, rushed into the forum to support his col­league. But there he saw his authority quite overpower­ed. After much deliberation, and urged on all sides tocomply, at last, in much consternation, he ordered thesenate to be assembled. This step in a great measurequieted the people, in hopes, that as many of the Patri­cians seemed dissatisfied with the conduct of the decem­virs, the senate would put an end to their authority. Thesenate were not for exasperating the people: but theythought particular care should be taken to prevent thesedition which Virginius might raise in the army.


A.


CHAP. L.
Virginius' remonstrance in the camp. A Secession.


ACCORDINGLY some young Patricians were dis­patched to the. camp, which was then upon mount Veci-tiofi to acquamt the decemvirs, with the necessity of us­ing every means to prevent a mutiny of the soldiers,







OCR Output








440 TITUS UVIUS' Boon V.


made of it, which was to be carried to Delphi, as a pre­sent to Apollo.
No sooner was the business of the vow settled, thanthe tribunes of the commons began to stir again. Themultiiude were enraged at the whole body of the nobi­lity, but especially at Camillus. In their absence theyexclaimed prodigiously, that by their sequestrations andtheir consecrations, they had reduced the spoils of Veitto nothing. In their presence, they bs-haved with moredelicacy, as they never seemed to avoid, but rather throwthemselves in their way, when they were disposed to bein a passion. Finding the matter was not like to be de­termined for this year, they chose again to the Plebeiantrihune-ihip, the same men who had preferred the bill;and the senators used all their influence to do the sameby those who had opposed it; so that there was littlechange in the college.
CHAP. XXVt •'
Camilku marches against the Falisci. Drives them intotheir city, which he besieges,
Jt3Y an extraordinary exertion of their interest, the fa­thers prevailed in the Comitia for electing military tri­bunes, to have Caraillus chosen to he one of them. Theypretended, that they wanted an able general for thewar, but their real aim was, to provide themselves in achampion fit to enter the lists with the tribunes of thecommons, who were violently bent on the partition ofthe lauds of Veii contended for.
With Camillus, were chosen for military tribunes, L.Furius Medullinus, a sixth, C. /F.milius, L. Valerius Pop-licola, Sp. Posthuiuius, and P. Cornelius, a second time.In the beginning of the year, the tribunes of the peoplemade no stir, till M. Furius Camillus, who was chargedwith the war against the Falisci, should take the -field,and even then they made but little progress, owing totheir delays: whilst Camillus, their roost formidable ad­versary, acquired new glory by his conduct in the warwith the Falisci.
The enemy for some time kept themselves shu' up inFalisci, till the devastations made by <he Romans, in the







OCR Output








ROMAN HISTORY. 429


* unsolicited, to the demand of my .son, and the request'which I add in his favour.
His request was granteJwithout difficulty; snd his son,P. Licinius, was returned military tribune with consularpower, together with those whom we have mentionedabove. Titjnius and Genucius, military tribuoes, march­ed against the Falisci and Capenates, and acting withgrealer bravery than prudence, fell headlong into anambuscade. ^Genucius paid dear for his temerity, for hewas killed fighting valiantly at the head of his troops.Titinius rallied his men, after they had recovered fromtheir fright, and having gained an eminence, drew themup again in order of battle; but he took care not to riskanother engagement upon fair ground.
The disgrace was greater than all the loss they sus­tained, which, however, in the consequesce was nearproving a total defeat, such was the consternation, notonly at Rome, where fame had exaggerated every cir­cumstance, but also in the camp before Veii. For a re­port having been circulated all over the-camp, that thevictorious Capenates and Falisci had cut off the Roman,troops with both their generals, and were in full marchand at no great distance, with all the Etrurian youth forVeil, it was with much difficulty the soldiers coutd beprevented from flying outright. The alarm was still,greater at Rome, f»r there they weje persuaded- thai thecamp at Veil was already attacked, and part of the ene­my in full march to attack the city. The citizens flewto the ramparts-, and the ladies, whom the general con­sternation had driven put of their houses, offered up sup­plications in the temples, imploring the gods, that if theRomans had by proper rites renewed the neglected cere­monies, if the prodigies had been duly expiated, theywould protect the temples, houses, and walls of Romefrom destruction, and turn all fhe present terror againstVeii.







OCR Output








qpp. 65. I^OMAN HISTORY. 297


their disinterestedness, in having shown themselves to th«last, the very reverse of the decemvirs; and then-pro­ceeded to the election.
Afier five new tribunes had been chosen, the presidentperceiving, that the other candidates would not be ableto engage a majority in their favour, because of thebusy opposition of his nine colleagues, dismissed the as­sembly, without appointing another day to complete theelection: alledging that he had satisfied the lave, whichno where required that the whole number of tribunesshould be chosen at once, provided room was left forcompleting the number: to those who had been chosen,he gave authority to name their colleagues. Then heread a copy of the act, which runs thus: " If I file abill for the election often tribunes of the people, andthe whole number should not be chosen on the day ofelection, those nominated shall themselves fill up thev,acant places, and the persons so chosen, shatl be'deemed tribunes as legally elected as themselves."Thus Duilius, continuing steady to the last, in maintain­ing that the republic could not have fifteen tribunes,defeated the ambitious views of his colleagues, and laiddown his office, equally dear to senate and people.
CHAP. LXV.
JJomestic broils. Depredations of the jEqui and Volsci.
JL HE new tribunes, in the choice of their colleagues,paid great respect to the recommendation of the senate;they even chose two Patricians, Sp. Tarpeius, and A.'. Haterius, who had been consuls*. The fasces were nowtransferred to L. Hermonius, and T. Virginius Ccelio-moiuanu?, who being no great zealots in the cause of ei­ther party, their government was entirely pacific.
L. Treboirus, one of the tribunes, being much dissa­tisfied with the Patricians, alledging they had over-reach­ed him, in the co-optation of the tribunes; when, at thesame time, he had. been betrayed by his colleagues, pro-
# An election of tribunes by the college, was said to be made byco-optation.







OCR Output








CHAP. IS. ROMAN HISTORY. 131


were just about to scale the walls, when the town surren­dered. The Arunci, however, shared the same. fate as ifthe city had been taken by assault; for the principal ci­tizens were all beheaded, the rest sold for slaves, the cityraited, and estates exposed to sale. The consuls obtainedthe honour,of a triumph, rather in compliment to the se­verity of the revenge taken on the enemy, than the im­portance of the war they had finished. • ,
CHAP. XVIII.
A Dictator created at Rome.
1.N the following year, Posthumus Cominius and T.Lartius, succeeded to the consulate. During the cele­bration of the games at Rome, as some of the Sabineyotuh were hurrying along with them some women ofthe town in a frolic, the mob rose upon them, and thescuffle that ensued had well nigh ended in a bloody bat­tle ; and-this circumstance, however inconsiderable in it­self, seemed to put the whole nation in a ferment. Addto this, the dread of a war with the Latins: certain intel­ligence they received, that thirty different nations hadentered into a confederacy against them, at the instiga­tion ofOctavius Marnilius.
Whilst the city was under the greatest concern aboutthe event of such mighty preparations against them, thenomination of a dictator was proposed for the first time;but in what year it happened, and who were the con­suls that were suspected to be in Tarquin's interest, isextremely uncertain. Nor does history authorise us tosay, who was the first dictator. The most ancient histo­rians condescend upon Titus Lartius, as being the firstthat was raised to that high office; and on Spurius'Cas-sius, as his general of the horse. To men of consulardignity, by the law made for the election of a dictator,their choice was confmed. For which reason, I shouldrather imagine, that Lartius, who had been consul, was.appointed to an office superior to the consulate, ratherthan Manius Valerius, the son of Marcus, and grandsonof Volesus, who .as yet had never been invested with theconsular dignity. For had they pointed :particularly at







OCR Output








CHAP. 33. ROMAN HISTORY. 153


ducing the belly by famine, all the members separate-ly, and the body in a lump, became lean and languidto an extreme. Hence it appeared, that the. belly wasnot'so idle as had been imagined, and that if it wasnourished by. the other members, it contributed no lessto their support in its turn, in communicating by thedigestion of food, to the several parts of the body, thatblood, by which their life and strength subsisted, andin circulating it in due quantities through all the veins."He compared this intestine sedition of the parts of thehuman body to the discord that then divided the senateand people; and the application, as it was very natural,had a wonderful influence upon their minds.
CHAP. XXXIII.
Tribunes of the People created. The Volsci routed, andCorioli taken.
J.T was then they entered upon terms of reconciliation;and among other concessions, the people were allowed tohave magistrates of their own, whose persons were to besacred, and whose office was to protect them against thepower of the consuls. Nor could any of the Patricianorder be elected into that office. Thus were two tri­bunes of the-people created in the persons of Cains Lici-nius, and L. Albinus, and they chose three colleagues forthemselves. Sicinius, the ring-leader of the mutiny, issaid to have been one of them, but about the other two,historians are not agreed. According to some authors,only two tribunes were created on the sacred mountain,and that the law, whereby their persons were made sa­cred, was enacted there.
During the secession, Sp. Cassius and Posthumus Co-rninius entered in office as consuls. In their consulship,'a treaty was concluded with the Latin nations. One ofthem remained at Rome, on purpose to ratify it, whilstthe other went to chastise the Volsci. The Volsci An-tiates were routed and forced into Longula, which wastaken by assault. Polusca, another city belonging to theenemy, shared the same fate. Then the Romans laidclose siege to Corioli.
Among the troops that sat down before Corioli, there







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








CHAF. 52. ROMAN HISTORY, 477


* fatigue, and was never brought to a conclusion, till by
* advice of the gods, the water was drawn off from the'Alban Lake. And what, after all, shall I say of the
* fatal blow which Rome lately received? That did not
* happen, till we had been forwarned by a miraculous'voice, that the Gauls were coming, which we slighted;'nor till the law of cations had been violated by our am-
* bassadors, and we, regardless of our duty to the gods,'shewed an unpardonable remissness in punishing them.'This, therefore, is the source of all we have suffered'from godsand men: we have been conquered, enslaved,'and ransomed, as examples to all the world. Our uus-
.' fortunes, at that time, put us in mind of the duties of'religion. We fled to the capitoI. to throw ourselves
* upon the -protection of the gods: we sat down in the'august abode of Jupiter the greatest and the best.'Amidst the general devastation, some of our sacred'things we concealed under ground, and others we car-'ried to the neighbouring cities, where our enemies'could not come at them. Though thus abandoned by'heaven and earth, we never omitted the worship of the'gods; and what is the consequence? Why, they have• restored us our country-victory, the Roman name, and'military glory, which **e had forfeited. And, as for the'enemy, who blinded .with their avarice, had broke'their faith and capitulation in weighing the gold,'they struck them with terror, put them to flight, and'delivered them to certain slaughter.
. CHAP. LH.
1 In Continuation.
JN OW having before our eyes, so many monuments« of the good and evil occasioned by our respect or con­tempt of the gods, do you perceive, gentlemen, intowhat an abyss of crimes, scarce escaped, as we are,from the wreck of our faults and misfortunes, we arenow going to plunge ourselves? We inhabit a city,built in consequence of auspices and auguries. Thereis not a single spot in it, where you will not perceivelegible traces of the gods and religion. Nay, the veryplaces for performing our most solemn sacrifices, are as.fixed as the days for their celebration. Would yop







OCR Output








CHAP. 26. ROMAN HISTORY. 53


nearer Alba, and of the Curiatii towards Rome; but OBdifferent spots, where they respectively fell.
CHAP. XXVI.
Horatius airaigned and acquitted.
1JEFORE they left the ground, Mettus went up to Tul-lu?, and in terms of the treaty, asked his commands. Tul-lus orders him to keep the youth in arms, as, in case ofa war with the Vejentes, he might have occasion fortheir assistance. After this both armies returned home.
Horatius marched at the head of the Romans, bearingbefore him the triple spoils he had so gloriously obtained.His sister, promised in marriage to one of the Curiatii,came out to meet him at Porta Copena. Perceiving onher brother's shoulder, a military cloak wrought with herown hands, and presented to her future spouse, she tearsher hair, and sheds a torrent of tears, in mournful ac­cents, calling upon her lover.now no more. The youngconqueror offended with his sister's lamentations, amidstthe public joy, and his triumph, stabs'herin the transportof his passion, with these severe reproaches, " Go, unnn-"natural sister; go to thy lover with thy unseasonable"passion; thou who forgettest thy dead brothers, thy"living brother and thy country. Thus let her perish,"who shall ever dare to lament the death of an enemy"to Rome."
To the senate and people of Rome, this seemed a ne­farious deed; but the lustre of his recent victory plead­ed 'strongly for the offender. He was dragged, however,to stand his trial before the king; who to avoid passinga sentence in so dismal and unpopular an affair, or or­dering execution, after sentence should be pronounced,having called an assembly of the people, " I appoint"Duumvirs, (says he,) to try Horatius according to law."The law was of a horrible tenor. Let the Duumvirs"judge of the felony; if the pannel appeal from their"sentence, let his appeal be received: If their sentence"be confirmed, let him be hood-winked, and hanged"with a rope upon an accursed tree, having been first"scourged, either within or without the Pomoerium."







OCR Output








CHAP. 45. ROMAN HISTORY. 81


voured to extend his empire by good policy, at the sametime that he added to the dignity of the city.
At that time, there was a temple of Diana at Ephesus,much celebrated. It is reported to have been built bycontributions from all the states of Asia. Servius tookoccasion to commend these people very highly, for theirunanimity in matters of religion, before the Latin no­bility, with whom, both in his public and private capfi-city, he had studied to live on the most friendly footing Jand by resuming the subject frequently, be at last carriedhis point so far, that the Latins joined with the Romans,in the expence of building a temple to Dtana. This wasa plain acknowledgment, that Rome was their capital,a point, which they had often disputed with their swords.
Although the Latins now seemed to have dropped allconcern about what they had so often attempted to esta­blish in vain; fortune seemed to point out to one of theSabines, an opportunity of recovering the superiority tohis country, by a private scheme of his own. A certainSabine had a heifer brought forth among his cattle, re­markable for her size and beauty. Her horns, whichwere hung up in the porch of the temple of Diana, re­mained for many ages, a monument of her enormousbulk. The thing was considered, and it could not wellbe doubted, in the light of a prodigy, and the sooth-savershad foretold, that the man who should sacrifice this heifefto Diana, should certainly fix the sovereignty of his coun­try. This prediction had also reached the ears of thehigh priest of Diana. The Sabine, on the first day thatseemed proper for. the sacrifice, drove the heifer to Rome,led her to the temple of Diana, and set her before the al­tar. Then the Roman priest, struck with the extraordi­nary size of the -victim, which had been so much cele­brated by fame, at the same time, recollecting the pre­diction, thus addresses the Sabine: " What do you pro-"pose, friend?" says he, " to offer sacrifice to Dtana,"with unclean hands? why do you not first wash your-"self in running water? The Tiber runs in the valley"below."
The stranger being impressed with a scruple of con­science, and wishing that every thing might be in sucha train, that the event might turn out agreeable to the







OCR Output








320 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV,


Only gentlemen of consular dignity, who were not presentat these meetings. Claudius's advice armed the handsof the consuls against the tribunes r but the Quintii,Cincinnatus, and Capitolinus declared against blood andslaughter, or even ottering violence to the persons ofthose, whom, by a solemn engagement with the people,they had obliged themselves to hold sacred and inviola­ble. In these private assemblies, it was at last agreed,that they should allow military tribunes, with consularpower, to be chosen indifferently out of either order;but that the mode of election with respect to consulsshould suffer no alteration.
This measure was received, and cordially embracedboth by the people and their tribunes. The Comitiawas then summoned tor the election of three militarytribunes with consular power: upon which, all thosewho had distinguished themselves most in the cause ofsedition, either in speaking or acting, especially the tri-bunitian gentlemen, ran on all' sides of the forum, dres­sed in white robes, soliciting votes. The Patricians see­mg them so active, and despairing of obtaining anyoffice of distinction, from a people so exasperated, at thesame time, were there hopes of succeeding, unable tobear the thoughts of associating with colleagues of Ple­beian rank, they were at first determined not to stand-for the office. At last however, yielding to the remon­strances of the leading men of their party, they offeredtheir services fo fill the new offices, that they might notseem to have abandoned their country with their sharein its government. The result of this assembly shewed,that there is a material difference between a people inthe heat and fury of disputes for liberty and honour, andwhen they act with dispassionate coolness afte.r these dis­putes are over.
The people elected none to the office of military tri­bunes, but Patricians only, being fully satisfied, thatregard had been shown to their demand. Where shallwe now find in any one man, that moderation, thatequity, that greatness of soul, which were then so cou.-spicuous in a whole, people?







OCR Output








CIiAfe.4U ROMAN HISTORY. . 261


"they had matters of the greatest consequence before"them, that considerations less weighty should be post­poned, till these be once discussed. With respect tothe charge brought against the decemvirs by Valeriusand Horatius, that their authority had expired on theides of May; he was of opinion, that the moment thewars with which they were threatened should bebrought to a conclusion, and peace once more restoredto the republic, the senate should take the matter un­der consideration; whilst Appius in the mean timeshould be preparing for his defence, being sensible hemust answer for those comitia, which in his first de-cemvirate he had held for the election of new decem­virs, that the senate might judge with precision, whe­ther their office was to continue for one year only, ortill such |aw' as .were then wanted, should be com­pleted At present it was his own opinion, that thewar was the only object they ought to have in view.If they thought themselves imposed on by a falsealarm, both by the-messengers and Tusculan deputies,it was their bussiess to come at the certaisty, by send- -ing out scouts to make the -strictest enquiry. But ifthey saw no reason to treat with diffidence the intel­ligence they had received, a moment should not belost in levying the army, which the decemvirs shouldlead out against the enemy, where they might seeproper; and previously to all other things, this oughtto be done."
CHAP. XLI.
The Decemvirs carry the point for the present.' .
J. HE young Patricians supported this opinion with alltheir might, and it passed by a plurality of voices. Va­lerius and Horatius then rose a second time with greaterwarmth than ever, crying aloud, " That they wanted to"-•speak relative to the state of the Republic; declaring,"at the same time, that if the power of faction should"compel them to silence in the senate, they would im-"mediately go out and address themselves to the peo-"pie. That private persons had no power to shut their"mouths either in the senate, or an assembly of the peo­







OCR Output








26 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


time, and had the entrails set,before them; but the Pi-narii, as the entrails bad been eaten up, came only tothe remaining part of the entertainment: For whichreason, it was enacted, that the Pinarii should never infuture be allowed to eat of the entrails at solemn sacri­fices.
The Poiitii, being instructed by Evander, continuedpriests of Hercules for many ages, till they gave up thissolemn hereditary office, to be administered by publicslaves, that the whole family became extinct.—This wasthe only foreign sacred rite, which Romulus adopted;and this too, out of deference to that immortality whichis the perquisite of virtue, whither his own fates seemedto point.
CHAP. VIII.
The Senate chosen. A. N. C. 753. Rom. 1.
XVOMULUS having, with all due solemnity, perform­ed the duties he owed to religion, called an assembly ofhis people, to whom he prescribed laws and regulations,which alone bade fairest for uniting them in one com­munity; and judging that these laws would have agreater impression on his uncivilized rustics, were hehimself distinguished by ensigns of royalty, he renderedbis appearance more majestic, by the richness of hisdress, and particularly by twelve Lictors* who were toattend his person.
Some are of opinion, that the twelve Vultures, whichhad been the omen of his regal power, determmed himto fix upon this number. But I rather imagine, accord­ing to others, that he copied the Apparitors,^ as wellas this kind of officers, and the number of them, fromhis neighbours, the Etrurians, from whom also he bor-
* A Ligandii reis. They carried each * bundle of rods tied upwith an axe; the first for arbitrary, and the last for capitaI punish­ments.
f Ati afiparco, being always ready to execute orders; such werethe scribes, or public notaries, &c.







OCR Output








CHAP. 54. ROMAN HISTORY. «l


JEqui and Volsci, your former enemies, should removeto Rome? Would you wish them to become Romans,whilst you were only burghers of Veii? Whetherwould you choose, that Rome should be a desert inyour own possession, or to be inhabited by your ene­mies? Of two alternatives so unaccountable, it is hardto say which is the more criminal. Would you reallyinvolve yourselves in so much guilt, and expose your­selves to such infamy, only to save you the trouble ofrebuilding the city? If in all the «ity, a house larger ormore handsome could not be raised, than the cottagewhich served our Founder for a palace of old, would itnot be more honourable to dwell in huts like shepherdsand herdsmen, amidst your household gods, and thetemples still existing, than to condemn yourselves to apublic and universal banishment? Did our ancestors,who were strangers and shepherd?, so quickly rear upa new city, when there was nothing here but woodsand marshes; and shall we, when the capitol, citadel,and temples of the gods are still standing and safe, shallwe, I say, think it a mighty matter, to rebuild a citythat has been consumed by fire? Is it not surprising,that as a community we should hesitate on doing, whenthe calamity is general, what every individual woulddo, were it his particular case?
CHAP. LIV.
In Continuation.
JjUT in the name of the gods, should a fire, either"by accident or design, happen at Veii, and the wind,as might naturally be supposed, spread the flumes so-asto consume the best part of that city, must we thenshift about from thence to Fidenae, Gabii, or some othertown? Has your native soil no charms to attract yourregard? Has this, our mother country, none at all:Does our love for our country extend only to roofs andrafters? Upon honour, I will frankly acknowledge,though it gives me more pain to call your injusticethan my own misfortune to remembrance, that duringmy exile, as often as I thought of my country, thesehills, those fields, the Tiber, the couutry I was accus-







OCR Output








392 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV


CHAP. LVI.
The Consuls offended with the Senate for proposing aDictator. The Tribunes refuse to interfere.
./\Sthe commons had prevailed in the first instance inobtaining the comitia they had insisted on, so in theevent ot' the Comitia, the senate prevailed in their turn.For, contrary to all expectation, three Patricians, C. Ju­lius Julus, Publius Cornelius CQSSuS, and C. ServiliusAhala were elected military tribunes with consular pow­er. It is said, that the Patricians had recourse to a stra­tagem, with which the Icilii reproached them at that ve­ry time, in setting up a number of low fellows to .appearas candidates with men of the first merit; and, that thepeople, ashamed of the tattered appearance made bysome of them, rejected the Plebeian candidates altoge­ther. Whether it was, that the hopes of the 3L(\ui audVolsci were revived from the circumstance of their hav­ing been able to defend the fortress of Carventum, or iftheir resentment was raised by the loss of the garrisonof Verrugo, advices were brought that they were mak­ing extraoidinary preparations for war, and that the Ao-tiates were at the head of the confederacy, who had am­bassadors making the circuit of tlieir different courts, re.monstrating against them as a body of poltroons, who,whilst they were skulking within their walls, suffered theRomans , the year before, to ravage their country atpleasure, and cut in pieces the garrison of Verugo.That hostile armies were not only stnt against them, butcolonies planted in their country; and, that the Roman)not content with a dividend of their subject among them­selves, had taken Ferentinurn from them, and given it ina present to the Hernici.
The resentment of the people being, by these re­proaches, screwed up to the highest pitch, wherever theywent, the youth were very forward to enlist. Where­fore the youth of all the confederate nations having ren­dezvoused at Antium, there they encamped and waitedfor the enemy. When advices of these motions werecarried to Rome, and greatly' exaggerated in the rela­







OCR Output








CHAP. $3.' ROMAN HISTORY, - 03


"might fall upon his own family: that the number of"his family affected him prodigiously; and, for that"reason, he intended to make his own house as thin as"he had done the senate-house, so that he might leave"no representative, nor heir to his crown. For his"own part, that he had escaped his father's fury, amidst"swords and daggers, and was fully covinced, that he"could be safe nowhere, but among the enemies of"Tarquin. For, that they might not be imposed on,"the war was by no means discontinued, as it was pre-"tended ; but only with a view of attacking them upon"an occasion, when they should be lulled in security."If there was no place among them to serve as a refuge"for the distressed, he would wander all over Latium;"and there, should there be occasion, he should make"his suit to the .Silqui, the Volsci, and Hernici,* till he"should have the good fortune to meet with some hos-"pliable power, who knew how to protect children"from the cruelty and unnatural tyranny of parents."Perhaps too, among some of these people, he might be•' able to" raise up an enemy to this overbearing monarch"and his mighty subjects."
When they saw that he seemed to be going, swelledwith resentment, if they should make no advances tostop him, he met with a handsome reception from theGabini. "They bid him not be surprized, that the man"who could act as he had done, to his subjects and al-"lies, if at last be treated his children in the same inhu-"man manner. Nay, if every other object should fail,"be would wreak his vengeance on himself. To them,"however, he was excessively welcome; and they had"no doubt, but in a short time, by his assistance, they"would be able to carry the war from Gabli, to the ve-"ry walls of Rome."
* Part of Campagna di Roma. i ..







OCR Output








CONTENDS. 491


Chap. Page
lviii. Application in favour of Appius fruit­less.—Oppius also tried, and both diein prison. The rest of the decemvirs
banished 287
lix. Seasonable interposition of Duiiius. The... -• fathers dissatisfied with the populari­ty of the consuls 288
tat. An action with the iEqui and Volsci 289
lxi. Victory over the iEqui aud Volsci 291
lxii. Battle with the Sabines 293
lxiii. The Sabines beat. The consuls voted a
triumph by the people 294
Ixiv. New elections. Candour of Duiiius 296
Ixv. Domestic brails. Depredations of the iEqui
and Volsci 297
Ixvi. Speech of Quinctius 299
'Ixvii. In continuation 301
Ixviii. Good effect of Quinctius's speech 303
lxix. The /Equi and Volsci severely chastised ... 305
lxx. The Roman people made arbitrators 307
lxxi. The people adjudge in their own favour ... 308
BOOK IV.
Disputes with the Tribunes relative to intermarriages be­tween the orders—the participation of State Offices, anda.division of the lands—Institution of Military Tribuneswith Consular power, and the Huastorship.— Wars withthe Volsci, the Maui, Fidenates, &c.
Chap. i. New laws proposed by Canuleius, not re­lished by the senate 310
. ii. The consuls remonstrate .-. 311
iii. Speech of Canuleius 313
iv. In continuation 316
v. Conclusion 318
y\. Military tribunes of either order, proposed
to supersede consuls 319
vii. Creation of military tribunes, who soonlay down their office, because there
was informality in their election 321
viii. Censors created 323
ix. Distractions at Ardea. Proceedings of
Geganius ., ,,--,.., ,,,..,..,. 324







OCR Output








332 TITUS LIVIUS* BOOK IV.


him with deserved praises, whilst the consul still persist­ed in his motion; he acquiesced at length, praying tothe gods, that the public weal might suffer no loss or re­proach, at so dangerous a conjuncture, through his infir­mities. He was instantly declared dictator by the consul,and named G. Servilius-Ahala, general of Hie horse.
CHAP. XIV.
Servilius cuts off Mxlius.
J.N EXT day, when he had posted guards in al! properplaces of the city, he went out into the forum, where anappearance so unexpected and unusual soon attracted theattention of the populace. While Ma;Iius' adherents,and himself too, saw plainly that the power of that su­preme magistrate was wholly pointed against themselvessuch as were ignorant of their designs to subvert the con­stitution, were asking one another, what insurrection,what unexpected war, had made it necessary to create adictator, aod to invest Quinctius, at upwards of fourscore,with that supreme office.
Servilius, master of the horse, having been sent bythe dictator to Mceiius( tells him, that he must wait up­on the dictator. Mselius, in great disorder, asked whatlie wanted? To make your defence, replied Servilius, inanswer to an indictment laid against you, by Minucius,before the senate, Upon that, Maelius made for acrowd of his adherents, and looking round him, beganto make the best 'of his way. By order of the general ofthe horse, an officer arrested him, but he was rescued bythe people about him; and whilst he fled, he imploredthe protection of the people, crying out that the senatehad concerted a plan for his destruction, because of hisgenerosity to the people, who, he begged might standby him, now that his life was at stake; nor suffer himto be murdered in their presence. Servilius Ahalacameup with him, as lie was pronouncing these words, andlaid him dead at his feet. Then, all sprinkled with theblood of the slain,. encircled with a band of Patricianyouth, he presented himself before the dictator, and tellshim that he had cited Mselius to appear before him ; but


 







OCR Output








CONTENTS. 487


Cha


ap. Pagexvi. War with the Sabines. Revolt of Porae-
tia. Death of yalerius ............... 129
xvii. Defeat of the Aronci, and capture of Po-
metia ................ 13O
xviii. A Dictator created at Rome ....... . ..... .. 131'
xix. War with the Latins .... ....... . ........ ... 132
xx. Battle of Regillus .......................... 133
xxi. News of Tarquin's death. A temple de­
dicated to Mercury ..................... 135
xxn. Honourable behaviour of the Latins ...... 13<>
xxiii. Disturbances at Rome on account of usury, 137
xxiv. War with the Vclsci ........................ 139
xxv. Defeat of the Volsci ........ .. .............. 141
xxvi. The Sabines and Arunci defeated ......... 142
xxvii. Disputes about the debts between the Se­
nate and People ...... . ................. 143
xxviii. Further contests, and the levies opposed, 145xxix. The consular authority slighted. Various
plans proposed .................. . ........ 1 Ui
xxx. Manlius Valerius chosen,dictator .......... .. 148
xxxi. Victory over the Sabines .................. 15O
xxxii. A Secession ...................... . ............. 151
xxxiii. Tribunes of the people created. The
Volsci routed, and Corioli taken ...... 153.
xxxiv. A famine ................ 155
xxxv. Coriolanus condemned ;— retires among
the Volsci ................: 156
xxxvi. A strange phcenomenon ..................... 158
xxxvii. Tullus's plan for spiriting up the Volsci
. against Rome ........................... 159
xxxviii. Resentment of the Volsci .................. 160
xxxix. The Romans dreadfully alarmed, sue to
Coriolanus for peace .................. 161
xl. Rome relieved by the intercession of
• . Veturia ................ 163
xli. Cassias condemned for afiecting popula­
rity ................ ..... 165
xlii. Domestic broils. The jE<|ui and Volsci
defeated ................ 167
xliii. Great generalship of Fabius ........... ... 168
xliv. Claudius' plan for defeating the tribunes, 170ixlr. War with the Vejentes and Etrurians.
Eagerness of the Roman army ...... 171







OCR Output








116 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


was a plain acknowledgment, that the majesty andpower of the' people, was paramount to that of the con­sul. When they were called to silence, the consul"highly extolled the good fortune of his colleague who"after the delivery of his country had fallen in the"greatest honour, fighting for its liberty, when his glory"was at its height, and before it was sullied by the foul"touches of envy: whilst himself had survived the glory"he had acquired, to become the but of envy and cri-"minal impeachments, and from being esteemed the"deliverer of his country, had his character now level-"led with that of the Vitellii and Aquilei. Shall there"never be a time," says'he, " that virtue will be so fully"approved by you, as to be proof against jealousy? Is"it possible, that I, who have shown myself an implac­able enemy to kings, should have reason to fear, thatever a charge of aspiring to regal power, would belaid against myself? Were I to live in the capitd,nay, in the citadel itself, could I ever imagine, that Ishould become formidable to my fellow citizens? Doesmy character among you depend on circumstances sotrifling? Is your confidence in me so slightly founded,that you should rather be concerned about the situa­tion of my house, than the conduct of my life? But,gentlemen, the house of Publius Valerius shall neverobstruct your liberty. No longer be afraid of Velia.I will not only bring down my house into the plain,but even build it at the foot of the hill, that you maydwell above me, a suspected citizen. Permit those tobuild upon Velia, whom you think more worthy to beentrusted with your liberty, than Publius Valerius."All the materials were accordingly brought down tothe valley below Velia, and his house was built atthe foot of the hill, where the temple of Victory nowstands.







OCR Output








2?»- TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK III.


they had consigned them in a city, where neither thehonour of women, nor public liberty was sate?
Rome saw herself now changed into a frightful soli­tude, and not a creature to be seen in the forum, butsuch as were worn out with years. When the fathers,after they were assembled in senate, observed nobody inthe forum, several besides Valerius and Horatius, boldlyremonstrated to this effect: " What is it you wait for,"venerable fathers? II the decemvirs will persist in their"obstinacy, will you suffer all to go to perdition? And"pray, Messieurs Decemvirs, what is that sovereignty,"of which you are so tenacious?—a sovereignty overempty houses and bare walls? Do not you blush tosee, that all the citizens in the forum scarce equal thenumber of your lictors? Should the enemy come toattack us, what could you dor Should the people, see­ing us so unconcerned about their removal, advance"hither in arms against you, what would be the conse-"quence ?, Are you determined to make the period of"your authority, of the same date with the ruin of the"republic? Is it not evident, that you must either have"no people, or they must have tribunes? We shall"sooner give up our Patrician magistrates, than they"their Plebeian. They extorted from our fathers thatPlebeian magistracy, of which, at that time, theyhad not experienced the benefit; and it is not veryprobable, now that they have tasted the sweets of it,they will ever consent to part with it; especially asyour government has been such, as to make them feel"the want of protection."
Discourses of this kind saluting the ears of the decem­virs from all sides, they were overcome by so unanimous*a concurrence, and declared, that since it must be so,they should be wholly governed by the' senate. Butthere was one thing they begged leave to request,xwhichwas not unworthy of attention, that they might not beexposed as victims to the rage of their enemies, for itconcerned them nearly, not to accustom the people inthe punishment of the decemvirs, to dip their hands inthe blood of the Patricians.' •







OCR Output








166 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK It.


Both the promoter and the opposer of the Agrarianlaw, had each his party among the people, to whomboth consuls were emulous, who should be most oblig­ing. Virginius declared he should have no objection tothe division proposed, were it confined to Roman citizensonly. Cassius's credit sunk greatly with the people, forthe kindnrss he showed in getting the allies included inthe Agrarian law; wherefore, to recover their goodgraces by another act of generosity, he ordered the peo­ple to be reimbursed in the money they had paid for thecorn imported from Sicily; but the people rejected itwith indignation, considering it in no other light, than asbounty-money to enlist them to serve under the ensignsof tyranny. Nay, such was their aversion at monarchy,that they spurned at his presents, as if ihey had swimmedin plenty.
It is certain, that the moment he was out of office, hewas condemned and suffered accordingly. Some makehis father'the author of his punishment, who having triedhim at home, scourged and put him to death"; consecrat­ing, at the same time, all his effects to Ceres, and apply­ing the proceeds to the erection of a statue to that god­dess, with this inscription, " PRESENTED BY THE CASSIAN
"FAMILY."
I find in some authors, what seerns most probable, thata day was assigned him, by Kaeso Fabius and LuciusValerius the qusestors,* to answer to an impeachmentfor treason, when he was condemned by a sentence ofthe people, and his house demolished by public autho-rity. It stood where we have now the area before thetemple of Tellus. By whomsoever he was sentenced,whether by his father, or the people, it is universallyadmitted, that he suffered in the consulship of Ser. Cor­nelius, and Q. Fabius.
* The business of these magistrates was to take care of thefinances and the public treasure, for which they were answerable,at the expiry of their office, which save them a right to appearas prosecutors, against sr.ch as attempted to misapply the public•property.







OCR Output








CHAP. 12. ROMAN HISTORY. S3


with jewels: they have added another circumstance:, thatshe contracted with them for what they had on their leftarms, and that instead of the golden bracelets, she wascovered with their shields. Some also alledge, that inconsequence of her bargain, she insisted for their arms,and thus seeming to have acted with duplicity, she gotthe reward she had urged.


CHAP. XII.
The Romans dtfeat the Sabines in battle.
A HE Sabines, however, got possession of the citadel;but from thence, though the Roman army, the next day,was drawn up along the field, which lies between thePalatine and Capitolioe hills, they did not venture intothe plain, till the Romans, fired with indignation, andeager to recover the citadel, charged up to* their front.The battle was begun by two principal officers, Mettius('minis on the side of the Sabines, and Tullius Hostiliuson the side of the Romans. He, in spite of the disad­vantage of ground, supported the Romans, among theforemost ranks, by his spirited and intrepid conduct.The moment he fell, the Romans gave way, and fled tothe old gate of Palatium.
Romulus too, being hurried along with the fugitive?,lifting up his arms to heaven; "Jupiter, (cried he) com-"manded by thy birds, I laid the foundation stone of"this city on the Palatine hill. These Sabines, by vil­lainous bribery, are already in possession of the cita-deK From thence they are pursuing us in arms, hav­ing already passed the middle of the valley. But, Ofather of gods and men, do thou at least enable us todrive the enemy hence, cure the Romans of this panic,.and put a stop to their shameful flight. Here, to thee,^'Jupiter Stator, do I vow a temple, which shall tell it •to posterity, that by thy present interposition, this citywas saved."
Having finished his prayer, as if he had been convin*ced that his prayers were heard; "Romans, (he cried,)







OCR Output








348 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV.


x
misunderstanding between themselves, and crossing eachoilier in every measure. Some authors affirm, that theyvere defeated at the Algidus, which was the reason thata dictator was named. One titing, nevertheless, is certain,that however ihey differed in other things, they joinedin opposing the senate's motion for naming a dictator,till expresses upon expresses announced the progress ofthe enemy's arms, and the consuls still persisted in theirobstinacy. Q. Servilius Priscus, who had enjoyed thehighest honours of the state with great credit, turning tothe tribunes of the people, told them, ' Since maiters are
• now come to this extremity, tribunes, the senate calls'upon you, considering the danger to which the state is'exposed, to exert your authority, and compel the con-'suls to name a dictator. This was no sooner said,than the tribunes, who thought they had now a fair op­portunity of extending their power, withdrew a littte,and returned with the following declaration in name ofthe college: 'It is the pleasure of the tribunes, that the'consuls should obey the senate; and if they persisted'one moment longer in their opposition to the united
* desire of that very august order, they would command'them instantly to be laid in jail.'
The consuls chose rather to submit to the tribunesthan to the senate; upbraiding ihe fathers, however,that it was by them the consular authority was beiray­ed, and subjected to the power of the tribunes. For, ifa tribune, by his authority, could oblige the consuls todo as he pleased, and if he refused, could also order himto jail, what worse had even a private person to tear?It fell by lot, to Titus Quinctius to name the dictator,for the matter could not otherwise be settled betweenthe consuls. He named his father-in-law, A. Posthu-miu? Tubertius, a man exceedingly haisb and imperious,to the dictatorship, and he, L. Julius, for his general ofthe horse. A vacation was immediately proclaimed, andnothing minded in all the city but preparations for war.The trial of those who pleaded an exemption from the'service was put off till the end of the war; so that theywhose title was doubtful, .suffered themselves to be en-rol-ed. The Hernici and Latins were ordered to furnishtheir quotas, and both paid respect to the dictator's or­ders with all possible diligence.


 







OCR Output








HAP. 33. ROMAN HISTORY. 24$


plague; asdid C. Horatius PuU'illus, the augur, in whoseplace the college chose C. Veturius, the rather becausehe had been condemned by the people. Quinctilius theconsul, and four of the tribunes, fell also victims of theplague, so that this year was tainted with a prodigiousmortality. • , ',
In the mean time, they had no disturbance from fo­reign enemies. In the next year, in the consulship of P.Sestius, and T. Menemus, there was no foreign war, butthe daemon of discord once more began to rage at home.The commissioners were now returned with the Athenianlaws, and the tribunes were very urgent, that the greatwork of compiling a complete code of laws "should beimmediately entered upon. It was at last determined,that ten gentlemen should be delegated to act as solemagistrates for one \earj £tmi whose authority thereshoutd be no appeal. The debates ran high for sometime about admitting Plebeians in the commission. Atlast the senate prevailed, under this restriction, that neitherIcilius' law with respect to the Aventine mount, nor thelaws relative to the functions and privileges of the tri­bunes, should be repealed..
CHAP. XXXIII.
The beginnmg of the Administration of the Decemvirt.A disinterested instance.
1 HUS in the year 30^ after the building of the city,there was a second revolution, the administration beingnow transferred from the consuls to'the decemvirs, as ithad been in the first instance, from the kings to consuls.This last revolution was less memorable, as it was ofshorter duration. The joy thai this new form of govern­ment diffused at first was rather extravagant, and uponthat account less permanent, insomuch that consular go­vernment, both in name and authority, came sooner tobe in request. -
The decemvirs created by the people, were AppiusClaudius, T. Genucius, P. Sestius, L. Veturius, C. Ju­lias, A Manlius, Ser. Sulpicius, P. Curiatius, T. Romi-Iin--, and Sp. Posthumius. This compliment was paid to







OCR Output








CHAP. 14. ftOMAN HISTORY! 2-23


rigorously exacted of the father; so that having sold thebetter part of his estate, he lived for some time, like anexile, in a retired and solitary cottage, on the other sideof the Tiber.
CHAP. XIV.
The young Nobility, by their complaisance, get the betterof the Tribunes.
J. HIS trial and promulgation of the law, kept thewhole city employed, for there was no foreign war todisturb them. The tribunes, as if they had really ob­tained a victory, concluded, that now, the Patricians be-ing effectually intimidated, by the banishment of Caeso,that they were at last secure of getting the bill passed;and, thai the elder senators, having withdrawn them­selves, in a great measure from the administration, seem­ed to yield to them all authority in the state.
The young nobility, especially the late companionsof Caeso, without any diminution of their courage, be­came still more incensed against the plebeians. But inone respect, they were much improved, for they hadlearned to manage their fury with more caution. Themoment the law was proposed, after the banishment ofCaEso, being quite prepared, and supported by a greatnumber of their clients, whenever the tribunes furnished:them with an excuse for violence, by attempting to re­move them from the assembly, they attacked them insuch a manner, that no one of the assailants could besingled out as the author, to incur the odium or the ho­nour. The people complained, that instead of one Caeso,they had now to straggle with a thousand.
In the intermediate days, when the law was not inquestion, no men were more composed or complaisant,than these young nobles. They addressed the commons.with the greatest shew of affability, entered into the mostfamiliar conversation with them, inviting them to theirhouses, assembling with them in the forum, and in othermatters, suffering the tribunes to hold their plebeiancouncils, without the least interruption. Neither in pub­lic^ nor in private, did they discover any rancour, ex-







OCR Output








CHAP. 32. 'ROMAN HISTORY. 63


lence the Roman ambassadors sent to demand satisfaction,imagining, that the Roman king would waste his time inindolence among the chapels and altars.
The spirit of Ancus seemed to partake equally of thegenius of Numa and Romulus. He easily saw that pacificmeasures, in the reign of his grandfather, when the peo­ple, naturally fierce, had been but lately settled, wasthe best policy; but how, it would be no easy matter forhim, to enjoy the peace which had distinguished hisgrandfather's reign, unless he should resolve tamely toput up with insults; that his patience had been alreadytried, and his good nature despised ; for which reason, toRome, at present, a Tullus was more necessary than aNuma.—However, as Numa, in. time of peace, had in­stituted the ritual, with respect to religion, the ceremo­nials, with respect to war, should be his care; that warmight neither be proclaimed, nor carried on, but in pro­per form. From the ancient nation of the Equicoloe,*he borrowed that ceremony, observed by the heratds,even at this day, when satisfaction is demanded. Theambassador, the moment he reaches the frontiers of thatpeople, upon whom he is to make the demand, his headbeing covered with a woollen cap, cries out, "Give ear"O Jupiter; hear ye confines, [naming the country ;]"let justice hear. I am the public ambassador of the"Uoman people; I come with a legal and just coiamis-"sion; let credit be given to what I say." Then hemakes his demand, and takes Jupiter to witness. "If I"with any fraudulent, or wicked intent, demand these"persons and these effects to be restored to me, then"may I never return to nry country again."
These words he repeats, as he enters the frontiers, tothe first'man he meets, as he enters the gates of the city,and as he goes into the market place, with the variationof a few words in the Form of the speech and oath. Ifhis demand be not satisfied, in thirty-three days aftersuch requisition, for so many days are allowed, he thendeclares war, in words to the following effect: " Hear,"O Jupiter; and you, O Juno, Romulus, and all ye"gods in heaven, in earth, and hell, give ear; I take
• A highland people, inhabiting tbe hills above the Tiber.







OCR Output








CHAP. 38. ROMAN HISTORY. 457


when she is unwilling they should avert her impendingpurposes, that in the present conjuncture, when an un­known and terrible enemy from the ocean and utmostverges of the earth, were advancing by rapid marches toattack her, Rome made no extraordinary effort, by ap­pointing a supreme magistrate, or suing for foreign aid.The tribunes, whose rashness had involved Rome in thiswar, presided in every thing, speaking lightly of the war,they made the levies with no more care than was usualupon the most ordinary occasions.'
In the mean time, the Gauls, when they were inform­ed that the violators of the law of nations had been rais- •ed to the first dignities of the state, and their embassy-slighted, gave full vent to their passion, to which .thenation is much addicted, immediately pulled up theirensigns, and began their march with all expedition.When during their march, they observed the confusionand terror of the cities through which they passed, asthey ran to their arms, and the peasants flying beforethem, they called out aloud, that they were marching toRome. Wherever they went they made a very formid­able appearance, as their numbers, both in horse and foot,covered a vast tract of ground. The rapidity of theirmarch, the news whereof, fame and couriers from Clusi-um, and other states, had brought to Rome before them,occasioned a terrible consternation there.
Troops were levied in haste and without choice, andJed out in great confusion, which with difficulty came upwith the enemy eleven miles from the city, where theriver Allia rising out of the river Crustuminum, and run- .ning in a very deep channel, falls into the Tiber, a littlebelow the Salarian high-way. The whole plain, bothbefore and round them, was covered with enemies, andthe Gauls, of whom a mighty bluster is characteristics),by their barbarous songs and hideous bowlings, made allabout them resound with a horrible noise.
CHAP. XXXVIII.
A battle. Tfie Romans defeated.
.1 HERE the military tribunes took no care, either tomake choice of au advantageous post for their camp, or
i







OCR Output








CHAP. 29. ROMAN HISTORY- 147


were employed; the alfair passed with more noise andangry words, than any real mischief.
The senate assembled tumultucmsly, and went uponthe business still more so. Those who hod been person­ally insulted demanding an inquiry, and the most violentmembers declaring themselves more by their noise andclamour, than by giving their opinions. At length, theirpassion subsided; and the consuls having remarked, totheir reproach, that the same ungovernable spirit thatprevaited in the forum, had now taken possession of thesenate-house, they began their deliberations with morecomposure.
There were three different opinions prevailed in thesenate. P. Virginias was not for a general act of grace;and gave his opinion, " That those only, who upon ihe"promise of the consul Servilius, had carried arms"against the Volsci, Arunci, and Sabines, were entitled"to a discharge.''
Titus Largius represented, " That this was not the"time to weigh and balance services with precision ;—"that the whole body of the people were drowned in"debt, and it was impossible to stop the evil, but by a"general release. For to make a distinction among the"debtors, would only inflame, not extinguish thii flame"of discord." Appius Claudius, who was naturallyviolent, and rendered still more so, in the present emer­gency, by the haired of the people on the one side, andthe excessive praise of the senators on the other, criedout, " That it was npttmiseiy, but licentiousness that"was the source of thq|e riots.—That the behaviour of"the populace, was the effect of wantonness and not of"fury. The source of all these disorders lay in their"right to appeal, which divested the consuls of every** power, but that of threatening, since a delinquent"could appeal from their judgment, to that of their owa"peers and co-operators." "Come," continued he,"let us create a dictator, from whom their lies no ap-"peal, and this flame, which spreads with such vio-"lence, will, in an instant, come to nothing. Let them"dare to insult an officer, when they see the power of"life and death in the hands of that person, whose au-"thority they had the assurance to insult/'







OCR Output








356 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK. IV.


The Vejentes, elated with their success, sent ambas­sadors to all the nations of Etruria, boasting that theyhad defeated three Roman generals in one pitched battle:they could not however prevail with any of these siatesopenly to espouse their cause, but the hopes <.l plunderdrew volunteers from all quarters. The Fidenates werethe only people who were pleased to ami. And as if ithad been unlawful to commence a war, without some ex­traordinary guilt on their side, they sullied their arms withthe blood of the new coiouy, as they had, on anotheroccasion, done with that of the ambassadors, and thenjoined the Vejentes. The question now- between thechiefs of these two nations came to be, whether theyshould make Veii, or Fidenae, the seat of the war. Fi-den& was agreed on as the most proper. Wherefore, cros­sing the Tiber, the Vejentes carried the war to Fidenae.Rome was in ihe utmost terror ; wherefore, recallingtheirarmy .from .Veii, whose spirits were much depressed onaccount of the late miscarriage, a camp was formed be­fore the gate Collina. Guards were posted on the walls,the administration of justice was suspended, the shopswere shut, and all things resembled a camp, more thana city. «
CHAP. XXXII.
The dictator addresses the People. Action with theConfederates.


HILST the city was in this consternation, the dic­tator seat about public criers through all the streets, toSummon an assembly of the people, when he began withreproaching them,.' For suffering themselves to be somuch alarmed, at the most trivial accidents. Thai aninconsiderable los? , not occasioned by the enemy's va­lour, nor the cowardice of the Roman army, but by adisagreement among the commanders, should makethem afraid of the Vejentes, an enemy who had fledbefore them, six several times: and of the Fidenates,whose capital they had taken oltener, if possible, thanthey had even laid siege to it. The Romans and theenemy were the same sort of men they bad been for so,many ages. With regard to courage, strength of body,


 







OCR Output








CHAP. 40. ROMAN HISTORY. 170


"cerned in it, so that the state may be at no charge in"men, or money, upon that score." The offer was ac­cepted with great acknowledgments; aud ihe consulleft the house, and retired home, accompamed by anumber of his clan, who stood waiting in the porch, tillthey should know the resolution of the senate. Theywere ordered to rendezvous the next day in amis, at theconsul's gate, and each of them departed to. his ownhouse accordingly. ,
CHAP. XLIX.
Tlit Fabii leave the city to keep the Vejentet in awe, whosue for peace.
J. HE news immediately spread over the whole city.Every body admired, every body extolled the Fabii tothe skies. That one single family should take uponthem the burden of the state ; that the war with the Ve-jentes should be carried on at the expence, and by thearms of private persons, was an act of generosity neverheard of before. Were there two more such families inRome, the one might take upon them the war againslthe Volsci, and the other agamst the JSqui, whilst the. cornmomveali h would remain quiet, and all the neigh­bouring nations be added to its domain.
The next day, the Fabii appeared all accoutered asthey had been ordered. When the consul came out in'his military dress, he saw his whole clan draw.i up inthe court before his house, Tmd being received into themiddle of tliem, commanded them to march. Neverdid an army, so few in number, and so highly distinguish­ed with the praises and admiration of all, march throughthe city. Three hundred and six heroes, all Patricians,all of the same family, of whom, not one but might bejudged worthy of commanding an army, left the city,threatening destruction to Veii, by means of their in­trinsic power alone. They were followed by a crowd oftheir friends and clients, animated with the same spiritand zeal, and actuated only by great and noble views.
Others excited, by public concern, and transportedwith esteem and admiration, cried out, " Go, brave men,







OCR Output













OCR Output








CHAP. 23. ROMAN HISTORY, 343


He divided his Army into foiir parts, and carried onhis attacks uponMhe walls, in- places very distant fromeach oilier. He constantly relieved those who were fa­tigued, by fresh supplies of men, artd so continued toskirmish with the,townsmen night and day. By these,diversions he kept the enemy from perceiving the worksLe was carrying on, till he lta<) digged quite through tliebill) and opened a passage all the.way to the castle, andtill the Etrurians having been diverted with the show ofdanger, from all attention to the reality, and a confirma­tion that their city was taken in the enemy's shouts overtheir heads. This year, C. Furius Pacilus, and M. Ge-ganius Macerinus, the censors, fitted up a building Inthe Campus Martius, where the census was made for thefirst time.
N
CHAP. XXIII.
The conquered are again in motion.
JL FIND in Licinius Macer, that the same consuls, Ici-lius, a third time, and Virginius, a second, were re-elect­ed tor the following year. Valerius Antias, and Q. Tu-IJM-O, mention M. Manlius and Q. Sulpicius, as consulsfor that year. Yet, notwithstanding so great •» differ­ence, both pretend the authority of the linen books, andneither refuses, that according to ancient historians, thepublic administration, for that year, was vested in mili­tary tribunes. Licinius follows these linen records as anoracle of truth, but Tubero is not so confident; so that,among other things which antiquity has involved in dark-riess, this too must be left undetermined.
• The taking of Fidenae spread a general alarm through­out all Etruria. For, the Vejentes w"ere not only in themost dreadful terror for meeting with the same fate, butthe Falisci too, from the part they had acted in the firstwar, although they had no hand in the second. Where­fore, these two states having dispatched ambassadors toall the twelve nations, prevailed with ihem to appoint Etgeneral assembly of all Etruria, at the temple of Voltum-na; upon which, the senate, as if a cloud had been readyto burst over their heads, ordered Mamercus







OCR Output








354 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV.


The Vejentes now renewed their incursions upon theRoman territories. Fame will have it, that some of theyouth of Fidena- were concerned in these depredations.The cognizance of this affair was assigned to L. Sergius,Q. Servilius, and Mamercus /Kmilius. Some of the de­linquents were banished to Ostia, because they could notaccount for their absence from Fidenae, thedayson whichthese trespasses happened. An additional number ofplanters was sent to the colony, who had.-the lands ofthose who fell in battle assigned them. -^\
This year was remarkable for an excessive drought.For the rains not only tailed, but the earth too dramedof its native moisture, was scarcely sufficient to supplythe fixed rivers. In other places, near the springs andrivulets which were quite dried up, the want of water-made terrible havoc among the cattle, which perishedfor thirst. Others of them were cut off' by the murrain.From them the infection spread among the people, rag­ing at first among the peasants and slaves. But it wasnot long before the city swarmed with sick. Nor weretheir bodies alone infected with the distemper, but theirminds were also seized with various superstitions, mostof them too of foreign growth. Some impostors turnedthe credulity of the people to their account, by pretend­ing to prophecy, and introducing into families new ritesin offering sacrifices; till the principal men of the statecame to be acquainted with the public nuisance, by see­ing in all the streets and chapels, foreign and uncommonexpiations for recovering the favour of the gods. The.ffidiles were then enjoined to take care, that none butthe Roman gods should be worshipped, nor these in anyother manner than that which custom had established.
The chastisement of the Vejentes was reserved for C.Servilius Ahala, and L. Papirius Mugilanus, the consulsfor the following year: and even then they had a scru­ple at declaring war, or marching an army immediatelyagainst them before the Feciales should be sent to de­mand restitution: a step which they thought should beprevious to all others. It was but lately that they hadmeasured their swords with the Vejentes, at Nomenturoand Fidense, where a truce, but not a peace ensued. Thetruce was indeed expired now, but before that time theyhad been in arms. The Feciales were however dispatch­


 







OCR Output








*72 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK V.


CHAP. XLVI1I.
Pestilence. Famine. A Compromise.
JtjUT now famine began to distress both parties, morethan all the calamities consequent on the siege of the war.Add to this, that a pestilential distemper raged among theGauls, who were encamped in a valley between two bitls,rendered excessively hot by the flames of the houses, andsmoke issuing from them, at the same time, that the leastblast of wind made not only the dust, but the ashes in­supportable. The Gauls, who had been accustomed toa moist and cold climate, could not support under theseinconvenience?, but oppressed with the excessive best,and a lowness of spirits, they died like rotten sheep; in­somuch, that they could no longer be troubled with bury­ing them one by one, but piled them up in heaps pro­miscuously, and set fire to them at once; rendering theplace famous, by the name of the Gaul's burying-place.
After this, a suspension of arms was agreed on by bothparties, during which, by permission of the generals,the troops had frequent intercourse together; and whilstthe Gauls insisted principally on the short allowance towhich the besieged were reduced, and advised them tosurrender on that account; to remove such thoughts, iis said, they threw loaves from the capiiol, at dill ere uplaces, into the posts of the enemy.
But, by this time, the famine had risen to such anheight, that it could neither be concealed, uor endureany longer. Therefore, while the dictator was levyintroops in person at Ardea, having dispatched L. Valerius, general of the horse, to march the troops from-Veii, and was making every preparation to act on thoffensive with the enemy ; the army in thecapitol, quitexhausted with hard duty and watching, though theyhad bravely surmounted all other human obstacles, against the cravings of nature their courage could furnishthem with no antidote, and being every moment on thawatch for assistance from the dictator, at length theifhopes failed them with the provisions, whilst their en-icbled bodies sunk under the pressure of their arms almounted guard, insisted absolutely to surrendei


 


'







OCR Output








 


I







OCR Output








CHAP. 3O. ROMAN HISTORY. 447


by the advice of the senate, trusting to their promisedprotection.
• * - . •'.''
CHAP. XXX.
Disputes about settling at Veit. The Fathers prevail.
JjY haranguing openly to this purpose, he daily incens­ed the people against him' more and more. As to thelaw in question, he never ceased to spirit up the fathersagainst it: telling them, 'That they ought not to godown to the forum upon the day when the law was tobe proposed, but as to a field of battle, where theyshould remember, they were to fight for their altars;their fire-sides, the temples of their gods, and the placewhich had given them birth. That with regard to him­self, considered in a private Capacity, could he allovrhimself to think of his own glory, when that of hiscountry came in competition, riothirig could flatter iiisambition more, than to see a city, which he had re­duced, filled with inhabitants, wlio could be so many.living witnesses of his glory, and constantly present to,him the monuments of his viplftry, where nobody couldmove a step but on the. t-race^, pf hisiatchievemgnts.• But it was impious to conceive thoughts of inhabitinga city, forsaken and abandoned b'y the immortal gpds,and shameful to propose, that the Roman people shouldreside on a captive soil, and prefer to their pwij.ceun-.try, a country conquered by it.'
, .The senators old and young, roused with, these e^hpr-tations of-their champion, when the law was to be pro­posed, went all in a body to the forum, and dispersingthemselves among the tribes, each addressed himself totheir fellow citizens of his own tribe, and began to beg,with tears in their eyes, that they would not abandon thatcountry, for which they and their fathers had fought\vith so much valour and success; pointing, at the sametime to the capitol, the temple of Vesta, and other templesaround them, conjuring them not to drive t|ie Romanpeople, like felons and exiles, from their native country'and their guardian gods; to Inhabit a city but latelypeopled by their enemies, and bring matters to that pass,







OCR Output








236 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK III.


At the head of the Roman infantry, he posted himself inthe centre. He then ordered them to observe the signal,that they might keep time to a moment in making theattack, or in retiring, if a retreat should be sounded.The cavalry of each were posted in the rear of their re­spective battalions. In this disposition he invested theircamp in three different places, and attacking it withspirit on all sides, drove the Volsci, who could not standthe charge, from their lines. Then getting immediatelyover their fortifications, where fear had crowded themtogether and cooped them np in a cjorner, he drove themfrom their camp. • As they fled in the greatest disorder,the cavalry, unable to cross the ditch, and upon that ac­count, only spectators of the action, having them now inthe open plain,'came in for their share of the glory bymaking dreadful havork of them, while they fled in theutmost fright. Many were cut to pieces in the camp,and majiy in their flight without the lines. The bootywas the more considerable, because the enemy hadenough to do, if they carried their arms with them, and yh:id not the woods covered their flight, not a man of:them would have escaped.
CHAP. XXIII.
The Mqui beat at Tusculum.
D'URING these successes at Antiom, (he /Equi, bav­ing detached the flower of their youth before them, sur­prised the citadel of Tusculum in the night; and encamp­ed the rest of their army in the neighbourhood, to in­tercept the enemy's forces. This intelligence coming byexpress to Rome, and transmitted thence to the camp atAntium, affected the Romans as sensibly, as if theyhad been told, that the capitol was in the hands of theenemy. The obligations they lay under to the Tusculans,in a similar disaster, were too gratefully remembered,not to command assistance in return. Wherefore, FabiOshaving conveyed the booty from the camp to Antiumwhere he left a'small garrison, neglecting every thingelse, marched with all expedition to Tusculum, allowinghis soldiers to encumber themselves- with nothing but







OCR Output








HAP. 34. ROMAN HISTORY. 251


CHAP. XXXIV.
Great satisfaction in the laws and practice of the Decemviri.
VV HILST all ranks were in raptures with an admi­nistration which rendered justice with so much dispatchand impartiality, the decemvirs applied themselves dili­gently in preparing their code of laws. At length theycalled an assembly of the people, big with expectation,and exposed to public view, ten tables of laws : and pray­ing, " Jt might prove beneficial, fortunate, and auspici­ous to the state, themselves and their posterity, re­quested, they would now read the laws they had pro­posed. That they had laboured, to the utmost of theircapacity, to adapt them to the circumstances of allranks, high and low; but the reflections and remarksof the whole body of the people, might make manyimprovements. They therefore exhorted the people,to examine each article with attention in private, andthen communicate to each .other their respective senti­ments, so that they may be prepared to declare inpublic, what they conceived should be added or re­trenched; that in consequence, the Roman peoplemight have laws, which they could not so properly be"said to have accepted and .confirmed, as to have dic-"tated and composed themselves."
After the people had examined and commented uponevery chapter of the laws, and all necessary correctionsand amendments made, to the satisfaction of all concern­ed, the ten tables were ratified and confirmed in theComitia by centuries, and are at this day, the foundationof ail right, public or privaie, however much systems ofjurisprudence have been multiplied since. It was nowsurmised, that several regulations, which would fill twoother tables, ought to be added to the former, in orderto make.a complete code of Roman laws. This opiniongained ground, and occasioned a .proposal to continuethe decemviral government one year longer; for by thatexpedient, the people thought they would be deliveredfrom the authority of the consuls, now no less odiousthan that of kings, and they found no occasion for the







OCR Output








210 . TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK III.


blow, as he met with them carrying off their booty; for,by this minute reckoning, four thousand two hundredand thirty of them were cut to pieces.
After this, they returned to Rome, when all the connsof justice were opened. At this time, the heavens seemedto be all in flames. Many other phenomena were real­ly seen, or seemed to be so, by people overcome withtheir fears. To avert these dreadful omens, three so­lemn fast-days were appointed, during which, the tem­ples were crowded with multitudes of both sexes, implo­ring the protection of the gods. Then the Latin andHernician troops were dismissed by the senate, who re­turned them their warmest acknowledgments • for theirsignal services in the war; but a thousand soldiers fromAntium, who came too late to share in the glory of theday, had not so honourable a discharge.
CHAP. VI.
A pestilence at Rome. A. R. 291.
I PON this followed an election, when L.. .SJbutiusand P. Servilius were chosen consuls, and entered on.their office, the first of August, which, at that time, wasthe beginning of the year.* This was a melancholyyear, rendered so particularly by a plague, which ragedin town and country, and carried off both man andbeast. The fear of a.n invasion, contributed not a littleto spread the infection, the peasants and their cattlebeing all received into the city. This medley of animalsof every kind, raised an intolerable smell, which becamenauseous to the citizens, and stifled the country people,whilst they were pent up in close rooms, with heat andwant of sleep; Besides, their attendance on each other,with the infections nature of the distemper, propagatedit every where.When they were scarce able to support themselves un-
* The beginning of the consular year, was at this time, and longafter, quite fluctuating and uncertain; sometimes commencing inMarch, sometimes in October, August, July and December: but,at tast,'A. R. 599, it was fixed to commence in January, whichever aftej it continued to do, till the ruin of the republic.







OCR Output








CHAP. 52. ROMAN HISTORY. 183


the Romans could boast of no great advantage, yet thatengagement gave them new spirit, and encouraged themto behave better in every future action.
A. Virginius and Sp. Servilius, succeeded as consuls;after the check the Vejentes received in the last engage­ment, they declined coming to another: But they plunder­ed the country; and from the fort Janiculum, they madeincursions upon the Roman lands all around. Neitherthe farmers, nor their cattle, were any where safe. Butthey were at last taken in the same trap they had laidfor the Fabii: For, pursuing some cattle, which had beensent out on purpose to decoy them, they fell headlonginto the ambuscade; their numbers only served to in­crease the slaughter. Their extravagant resentment for.this loss, laid the foundation of a much greater: For,passing the Tiber in the night, they attempted to stormthe camp of Servilius the consul. But there they metwith so warm a reception, that after a prodigious slaugh­ter, with great difficulty they got back to the Janiculum.
The consul immediately crossed the river, and fortifiedhis camp at the foot of the hill. F^rly next morning, akittle flushed with success the day before, or ratherimpelled by the want of provisions, to take the shortestcourse, however dangerous, to procure them, he incon­siderately led his army up the hill to the enemy's camp,where he received a more shameful repulse, than he hadgiven the day before: But his colleague came up andsaved both him and his army. Between the two armies,a dreadful havock was made among the Etrurians, asthey were endeavouring to escape, first from the one,and then from the other. Thus by a fortunate impru­dent step, the war with the Vejentes got a finishingstroke.


U.


CHAP. Lll.
Trial of Menqnius and Servilius.


'PON the return oF peace, provisions became cheaperin the city; for they had corn from Campania: andthere being now no apprehensions of future scarcity,the citizens brought out what they had concealed and







OCR Output








338 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV.


noise or motion, the Etrurians having no mind to cometo blotos, unless they were compelled; and the dictatorlooking back to the capitol, tor the signal from the au­gurs, which they were to set up, as had been concerted,the moment they had obtained a favourable omen.Whenever it appeared, setting up a great shout, he sentthe horse to begin the attack. They were followed bythe foot, and fought wiih great fury. The Etrurianswere obliged to give way every where, to the superiormettle of the Romans. The horse kept their groundbetter; and the king himself, the life and soul of thewhole, riding from place to place, whilst the Romanspursued him everywhere, kept the victory in suspense.
CHAP. XIX.
Gallantry of Cossus;—Defeat of the Confederates.
J. HERE was at that time an officer of the Romancavalry, named A. Cornelius Cossus, very remarkablefor the gracefulness of his person, extraordinary strength,and exalted courage, who, constantly#?attentive to thehonour of his family, which was very illustrious, bothsupported and augmented its glory. Observing thatTolumnius carried terror and confusion among the Ro­man troops, wherever he moved, and distinguishing himby his royal robes, as he flew along the line of battle,cried out, ' Is that the man who infringes human trea-'ties, and tramples on the law of nations; if the gods• will permit any sanctity to remain among mortals, I'shall soon see, whether I can sacrifice him as a victim.'to the manes of our ambassadors.' Then springingforward with great impetuosity against the king, as hispeculiar adversary, with one blow of his lance, unhorsedhim, dismounting himself, the same instant, supportedby his spear. Whilst the king attempted to rise, hebeat him down upon his back with the boss of his buck­ler, and having given him several wounds, thrust himthrough the body, and nailed him to the ground. Hethen stript him of his spoils, cut off his head, and fixedit on the point of his spear, evidencing by that bloodytrophy, his victory to the enemy, and spreading terroramong them everywhere.


 







OCR Output








CW..59. ROMAN HISTORY. , 39?


A.


CHAP. LIX.
Anxur taken and plundered by the Soldiers, who aftappointed pay by a decree of the Senate.
J.N the mean time, the military tribunes resolved to leadan army against the Volsci. Only Cn. Cornelius wasleft at Home. The other three, fmding that the Volscihad not encamped, and did not seem as if they wouldhazard a battle, divided their forces into three bodies,and laid waste the country on different sides. Valeriusroarched to Antium, and Cornelius to Ecetrse, pillagingthe houses and country all the way, to amuse the Volsci.But Fabius, without stopping to plunder, marched di­rectly to lay srege to Anxmy the principal object of the'expedition. This was .that Anxur, which was after­wards called Terracina. It was situated above a marsh,whence Fabius made a feint of carrying on his attack.Four cohorts were sent round, under the command of C.Servilius Ahala, to take possession of an eminence wnichoverlooked the city: From this eminence, where thetown was not defended, they made an attack upon thewalls, with a prodigious clamour and noise, which quiteconfounded those who defended the lower part of thecity against-Fabius, and gave him an opportunity unob­served to prepare for a scalade. In a moment everycorner was crowded with enemies: and for some time up­on the walls, there was a great slaughter among thosewho fled, as well as those who fought, and among thearmed and unarmed without distinction. Whereforeithe conquered having no hopes of quarter, even shouldthey surrender, were driven by necessity to renew thefight, when all of a sudden it was published aloud, thatnone but such as were found in arms had any thing tofear, which determined the.whole multitude to lay downtheir arms, and surrender at discretion.
Two thousand five hundred were made prisoners; butthe rest of the booty Fabius would not sufter to be touch­ed, till his colleagues should come up, representing to his'army, that they had also contributed their share in thetaking of Anxur, in so far as they had prevented theother cities from coming to its relief. When they arriv«S .







OCR Output








122 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


blockade, and seventy of the famine, the slaves would allcontinue faithful, but some of them desert to the enemy.
It happened accordingly, that they were informed bya deserter, a much greater number had crossed the rivernow, from a persuasion, tltat they were to carry off allthe cattle together. Upon this, Valerius orders TitusHerminius to post himself with a pretty considerableparty, on the Gabinian way, about two miles from thecity, so as they might not be observed; Spurius Lartiusto post himself at the gate of Collina, with a select corpsof light armed youth, till the enemy should pass, andthen to throw. himself between them and the river, toprevent their return.'
Titos Lucretius, the fcther consul, sallied out at theport Naevia, with some companies of foot, whilst Vale­rius himself led some select cohorts out from mount Cae-lius; and these were the first that were observed by theenemy. The moment Herminius heard the noise, heburst from his concealment; and the Etrurians havingnow turned to charge Valerius, he galled them in therear. The alarm was given on the right and left, fromthe ports Colliiia and Naevia. Thus these marauderswere surrounded and cut to pieces, being too weak forresistance, and every avenue blocked up, that could fa­cilitate their escape. This proved a lesson to the Etru­rians, with regard to straggling parties.
CHAP. XII.
Macius adventure.
NOTWITHSTANDING of all this, the blockade wascontinued, wh:!M, at the same time, scarcity, lr well asa prodigious dearth of provisions prevailed; by whichmeans, Porsenna was not without hopes, that only bycontinumg die. siege, the city would surrender in course.Thtm Caius 'Mucius, a young Roman of noble birth,reflecting, with indignation, that the Roman people,when eni.lave'1 by the hand of iyranny, had never puce. been blocked up .by any enemy; and that now, whenthey were a free and independent people, they wereconfmed within tlieir walls by the Etrurians, an erieroyv







OCR Output








106 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK It.


injury to the public interest. For, what would havebeen the consequence^ had that commonalty, consistingof herdsmen arid strangers, out-laws from their countries)who under the protection of an inviolable asylum, foundliberty, or at least, impunity, besn set free from the dreadof majesty, and begun to be agitated by the storms oftribunitian fury? What would have been the conse­quence, "had they then begun to engage in quarrels withthe nobles, in a strange city, before the pledges of wivesand children, and an attachment to the soil, which comesnot in an instant, had associated their hearts? Distrac­tions of this nature in a state, not brought to maturity,would certainly have ruined it: whereas a peaceable andge«tle government, fostered and cherished it, and by aproper nourishment, brought it to such strength and per­fection, as already to produce the wholesome fruits ofliberty.
But it is to be observed, that the source of liberty isfound rather in the duration of the consular government*which was only for a year, than in the diminution of thepower, which had been invested in the crown. The firstconsuls had all the privileges and ensigns of authority,which belonged to the kings; only it was provided, thatboth consuls should not be attended with the fasces at thesame time, so as they might not appear to be armed withdouble terror.
Brutus, who was not more active in recovering liber­ty, than he was steady in maintaining it, was the first,with permission of his colleague, who was attended bythe fasces. Of all the people, who at first were mightyfond of their new acquired liberty, he exacted ait oath,that they never would suffer another to sway the sceptrein Rome, that they might not, upon any after occasion,either affected with the prayers, or corrupted by thelargesses of Tarquin, be prevailed onto recede. Thento add to the influence of the senate, by increasing the
* According to Pompohius, ex cansulere, to watch for the publicgood; but according to v'arro and Cicero, ex consubreto ask coun­sel ; because, according to the original institution of consuls, theywere to do nothing without the concurrence of the senate and peo­ple. Hence Tuily calls the office, regium mperium, regia potestas.







OCR Output








»64 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


"How violent soever your resentment and thirst ibr re-"venge, did not the sight of these plains disarm your"rage? And when you came within sight of Rome, did"you not then think within yourself, those walls which I"am about to attack, contain all that is dear tome in the"wortd—mv house—my household gods—my mother—-"my .wife—mv children ! Alas! had I not been a mother,
. " Rome would not have been besieged. Had I not had"a son, I should have died free, in a free country. But"1 can suffer nothing now that is not more shameful for"you, than miserable for me; nor can my misery, how-"ever great at present, be of long continuance. Let"these infants be your care, who, if you persist, must"either suffer an untimely death, or a long servitude."
His wife and children then saluted him. The tearsand lamentations of all the Roman ladies, for their ownaccount and that of their country, at length softenedCoriolanus. He embraced his relations, and dismissedthem; soon after he decamped, and marched his armyback from the city.—Accoiding to some accounts, theVolsci were so exasperated at his withdrawing the legi­ons from the Roman territory, that they put him to death.
.Others give a different account of the matter. Fabius,by far the most ancient author extant, affirms, that helived to a great old age; and mentions a saying of his inthe decline of life, " that banishment was iti all cases in-"supportable, but especially to an old man."
The men were not jealous of the encomiums bestowedupon the women: for such was their disinterestedness,that none endeavoured to detract from the glory of ano­ther. To preserve the remembrance of so singular anevent by a public monument, they built and dedicateda temple to Female Fortune. The Volsci once more, inconjunction with the /Equi, returned into the Roman ter­ritory; but the jEqui refused to fight under the commandof Attius Tullus. This contest about the nomination ofa general, who should command both armies, was pro­ductive at first of a quarrel, which ended in a bloodybattle. There the fortune of the Roman people dispatchedtwo formidable armies, in a battle no less fatal to thecombatantsi, than it was obstinate.
The consuls for the ensuing year, were T. Sicinius and







OCR Output








Chap. 25. ROMAN HISTORY. 439


nity of these gentlemen, saved them from harm; andthe people, ashamed of their resentment, behaved withmore delicacy for the future. Camillus we'nt from placeto place, loudly declaiming; * That he was not at all sur-
,' prised to see the people seized with madness, seeing'they had nothing less at heart, than the performance'of their vows to the gods; he would say nothing of
'* the contribution, which had more the appearance of'an alms, than a tenth of the spoil. Each of the indi-
* viduals had bound himself to the performance, so that'the state was free. But he was obliged in conscience'to tell them one thing, that the tenth of the moveable
* part of the spoils had only been set apart for the god,
'whilst the captive city and all the territory belonging'
* to it, were comprehended in his vow.'
The senate, pretending to be perplexed about thisscnuple, referred the whole to the pontiffs, who in con­cert with Camillus, declared, as the opinion of their col­lege, that a tenth of whatever had belonged to the Ve-jentes, before the dictator made his vow, and had, afterhe had made the vow, fallen into the hands of the Ro­mans, ought to be sacred to Apollo. In consequence ofthis judgment, the city and territory were valued, anda tenth of the estimate given out of the treasury to themilitary tribunes, to be given in exchange for gold. Butas there was not enough of this metal to be had in Rome,the Ladies having had several meetings to deliberate onthat affair, with one consent made offer of their serviceto the military tribunes, and in consequence thereof;brought their gold and all their ornaments to the trea­sury.
Never were thev fathers better pleased with any thing,than with this instance of complaisance in the ladies;in return for which generosity, it is said, they conferred-the honour on them, of riding in covered chariots to thesacrifices and public games, and in open phaetons onfestival and other days. The gold from each was weigh­ed*, and valued, so as the equivalent might be return­ed" them in money, and they fixed on a massy cup to be
* Plutarch makes that gold amount to eight talents, an enor­mous sum for those times, amounting nearly in value to £ 12,000-Sterling:. ^: . *'







OCR Output








468 TITUS LIVIUS' 'BO^K V.


escaped into the country of Antium, where they were setupon by the inhabitants and cut to pieces.
The Tuscans were served in the same manntr, in theterritory of Veii. This people far from commiseratingthe misfortune of a city, settled almost four hundred yeanin their Neighbourhood, oppressed by a strange and BB-heard-of enemy, m;uli; incursions at that very time uponthe Roman territories, and loaded with booty, had laid aplan for attacking Veii, the only asylum, and last resourceof the Roman name. The Roman soldiers had observedhow they were ranging through the country, and driv­ing the booty before their main body, at the same timethat they had their camp not far from Veii. At first, themelancholy state of their own affairs threw a damp ontheir spirits: but it soon gave way to indignation, whichimmediately kindled in their minds the highest resent­ment. 'What!' said they, 'do the Etrurians too, from
• whom we turned the arms of the Gauls upon ourselves,
• insult us in our adversity?' Nothing could have giventhem greater pleasure than to have attacked them thatmoment; but by the advice of Coedicius, a centurion,whom they had chosen for their leader, they suspendedthe business till night. The name and authority of Camil­las were all that were wanting on this occasion; all therest was conducted with great propriety and good success.The prisoners, who had survived that night's slaughter,conducted them to another body of Etrurians, encampedat the salt-pits, of whom, before they dreamed of theirdanger, they made a still greater slaughter the next night.With this double victory they returned exulting andtriumphant to Veii.
CHAP. XLVI.
Resolution of a yo'ing Roman. Camillus recalled, andcreated Dictator, heads the army at Veii.


N the mean time, the siege of Rome went on but slowly,both sides remaining inactive. Whilst the Gauls weresolely intent upon preventing any one of the enemy toquit the ptace by passing their guards, a young Romanall of a sudden drew on himself the admiration, as wellof the enemy as of his fellow-citizens, There wa' »







OCR Output








CHAP. 32. ROMAN HISTORY. 151


had their measures so conceited, that by their interest andartful management, they not only frustrated the expec­tations, but tf.e good intentions of the dictaior also.
Valerius, immediately after the return of the consulVetusius, previous to every other consideration, made amotion in favour of the victorious commons, and pre­pared a bill for the relief of insolvent debtors. Whenhis motion was rejected ; " I plainly perceive, (said he,)"that I am by no means agreeeble to you, because I"am for peace in the bosom of the republic. My Her-"cules, the period is not distant, when you will wish"that the Roman people had patrons of the same prin-"ciples. But, as to what regards me, expect not that"I will deceive my fellow-citizens, or continue dictator"in vain. A foreign war, and domestic feuds were the"republic's motives for honouring me witd the dictator-"ship. We have now peace abroad, ami I am prevent-"ed from establishing it at home. I had much rather"behold the sedition as a private person, than with the"title of dictator."
Then leaving the senate abruptly, he resigned thedictatorship. The matter appeared to the commons inits genuine point of view, that he had laid down hisoffice from a generous resentment of their injuries.Wherefore, as he had nobly exerted himself in their fa­vour, they conducted him home with loud shouts andacclamations, as if he had fulfilled every obligation hehad come under.
CHAP. XXXII.
A secesiion.
J. HE Fathers were now in the utmost terror, lest thearmy should. be disbanded, and their private caballingand plotting be resumed; for this reason, though the le­vies had been made by the dictator, since they had takenthe oath to the consuls, they thought they were stillbound to obey them; and under pretence that the .Equiwere again in arms, ordered them to be marched intothe field: An immediate sedition was the consequence.The soldiers at first proposed, it is said, to put the con­







OCR Output








27* TITUS LIVIUS' book III.


But Virginius had excited a greater tumult in the camp,than he had left behind him in the city. For, besidesthat, the troop of almost 400 citizens who accompaniedhim from the city, in condolence for his misfortune,made his arrival more •conspicuousi; the knife which hecarried in his hand, and the blood with which he wascovered, drew on him the eyes of the whole army.
The gowns which were observed in many differentparts of the camp, made the number of citizens appeargreater than it really was. Whilst every body asked himwhat had happened, he continued silent for some time,and answered only with tears. At length, recoveringhimself a little from that confusion, which the suddenconcourse had occasioned, there was silence all over,when he repeated every circumstance, in order, as ithappened. Then lifting up his hands to heaven, andaddressing himselfto his fellow-soldiers, beconjured them-,•' not to ascribe to him a crime, the impuiation of which"was due to Appius Claudius alone, nor to look upon"him with abhorrence, 'as the murderer of his own"child. The life of his daughter was dearer to him"than his own; if, in preserving it, she could also have"preserved her liberty and her honour; -but seeing her"just about to be dragged away as a slave, to be made"the victim of a decemvir's wild desires, he thought it"more honourable to lose his child by death, than in-"famy. It was pity and tenderness alone, that showed"him in a savage point of view; nor would he have"survived her, but for the hope of revenge in the as­sistance of his fellow-soldiers: They have also daugh­ters,—sisters,—wives. The lust of Appius had notex-pired with his daughter; but the more it was sufferedwith impunity, would be still the more outrageous.They ought to take warning from another's misfor­tune, and guard against the like injuries. For his ownshare, he had lost his wife, and his daughter, as shecould" have preserved her virtue only by the loss of herlife, and had suffered an unhappy, but an honourable"death : he had now nothing to fear from the b'rutality'of Appius, in his own family; and from any injurious* attempts against his person, he knew how to deliver"himself with the same spirit he had done his daughter.


 







OCR Output








CHAP. 27. ROMAN HISTORY. 441'


territory about it, provoked them at length to come out.Their tear, however, did not suffer them to advance far.They encamped about a mile from the town. The onlysecurity, and that not a slight one, upon which they de-'pended, was the difficulty of approaching them, throughrough and craggy Ways, through narrow defiles, andover steep rocks. Cnmilius pressed a peasant for a guide,and decamping in the dead of night, shewed himselfby the morning's dawn, on a ground that overlookedthem. The Romans intrenched themselves in three di­visions; the remainder of the army standing under arms,ready to engage: whilst the enemy attempted to ob­struct the warks, they were routed and put to flight.Such was the consternation of the Falisci, that they ranpast their camp, which was in their way, with great pre­cipitation, to the town.
The list of the killed and wounded, before the fugi*tives could get within their gates, was numerous. Thecamp was taken, and the whole spoil given up to thpquaestors, much to the dissatisfaction of the soldiers, butthey were kept in order by strict discipline. The samevirtue for which they hated him, they could not help ad-'miring. After this victory, he invested the town andsurrounded it with lines. The townsmen sometimes, asthey found an opportunity, sallied out, and had slightskirmishes with the Roman guards,spinning oul the time,with little difference as to their hopes on either side.For the town was better supplied with corn and otherprovisions than the besiegers, having taken care to filltheir magazines before hand: and, in all probability, thesiege of Falerii would have cost them as much time andtrouble as that of Veii had done, had not the fortune ofthe Roman general, and a new instance which he exhi­bited of his well known abilities in military affairs, has­tened on the victory.
CHAP. XXVII.
Villainy of a Schoolmaster. Generosity of Camillm. Itseffects on the Falisci.
IT was a custom among the Falisci, to make the sameperson both tutor and companion to their children, and







OCR Output








452 . TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK V.


original, but a little of their language, and that too cor­rupted.
CHAP. XXXIV.
In continuation.
JL HE history which "I have been able to collect ofthe descent of the Gauls into Italy, is as follows: Dur­ing the reign of Tarquinius Priscus at Rome, the Bitu-riges had the supreme authority among the Celue, whoinhabited a third part of Gaul,* and gave them a kingcalled Ambigatus, a very powerful prince, both on ac­count of his personal bravery, and fortune, public andprivate; who finding that the part of Gaul of which hewas sovereign, was so overstocked with produce as wellas inhabitants, that it was next to impossible to manage/ --them, signified to Bellovisus and Sigovisus, his sister's'sons, two active young fellows, as he was now an oldman, and wished to get clear of a troublesome crowd,that he resolved to send them into whatever settlementsthe gods by augury should direct. They might rais«what number of "men they pleased, that no nation,wherever they came, might be able to repel them.
The Herniciau forest (a) fell by lot to Sigovisus, batthe gods pointed out to Bellovisus a wore agreeableroad to Italy. He assembled the Bituriges (A), Averni (c),Senones (d), jEqui (e), Ambarri (/), Carnutes (g), andAulerci (/<), because these cantons were overstocked withpeople.
* Gaul was divided into three parts, and inhabited by three dis­tinct sorts of people, the Belgse, the Gauls or Celts', and the Aqui-1*ni. tietsic Gaut was bounded by ihe Seine, the Marne, the moun­tains of Vague, the Rhine, and the ocean. Cettic Gaul, by theocean, the Seine, the IVIarne, the Soane, the Rhone, and the Ga­ronne; and Aquitanic Gaul, by the ocean, the Garrionne, and thePyrenees. Modem Gaul has a fourth, namely Provence, wherethe Massilians landed and founded the city Marseiltes.
(a) This forest covered a great part of the ancient Germany,commencing at the banks of the Rhine, and in Suabia, where it i*calted at this day the Black Forest, and extending beyond Bohemia.
(k) People who inhabited Bourges. (c) Auvergne.
('0 Senonois. (e) Antonsis. (/) Charlois. (g) Cbartres.(A) Evreux. -.







OCR Output








CHAP. 48. ROMAN HISTORY-. «5


a crime, being astonished at the surprising revolution,and fully convinced it was all over with Servius.
Then Tarquin began his invectives against the king,with the obscurity of his birth: " That being a slave,"and the son of a slave, he had, afier the cruel murderof Tarquin his father, possessed himself of the king­dom; not after an inter-regnum, according to custom,nor by the free voices of the people, nor the approba­tion of the senate, but by the mere artifice of a wo­man. Thus descended, and thus created king, he hadever been the favourer of mean wretches like himself;and, out of hatred to the Patricians for their noblebirth, he had stript them of their estates, to distributethem among the vilest of the people: That the bur­dens, which before were common to all, he had heapedon the nobles alone: That he had instituted the census,that the fortunes of the rich might be more visible to"the eye of envy, and be ready, whenever he had a."mind, to throw them away among beggars."
CHAP. XLVIII.
Tullius murdered by L. Tarquin, at the instigation of •Tullia.
VV HILST he was yet speaking, Servius appeared, hav­ing been alarmed with the news of what was going on,and immediately from the porch of the senate-house criesout with a loud voice, "What is it you mean, Tarquin?"What is it that has made you so audacious, to convene"the senate and take possession of my throne, while I"am alive: I only take possession, replied he sternly, of"my father's throne, to which, I am surely much better"entitled than my father's slave, a slave that has been"too long permitted to insult his masters." The parti-zans on both sides set up a shout, and the people crowd­ed into the senate-house; it seeming now to be past adoubt, that the sovereign power would follow the victoryin this struggle.
Then Tarquin, compelled by necessity to out-braveevery difficulty, having much the advantage in youthand strength, seized Servias by the waist, and carrying
E







OCR Output








134 TITUS LIVIUS* BOOK II.


lance. Tarquin, to avoid the charge of so terrible an.enemy, fell back into a battalion of his men: and whilstValerius pursued him wit.li inconsiderate ardour amopgthe exiles, he was run through the body by on* of them;and the wound of ihe rider havmg no impression on thehorse's career, the Roman fell breathless to the ground,with his arms above him.
Posthumius the dictator, seeing the fall of this braveman, and the bold and rapid movement of the exiles,before whom his troops were giving way, gave the signalto his own cohort, a set of brave fellows, which he keptabout .his person as body-guards, to treat every Romansoldier, who should attempt to run away, as an enemy.The Romans fmding iheir danger the same in trtmt asin rear, returned to the charge, and restored the battle.The dictator** cohort, who had not been engaged before,now, with fresh vigour and courage, fell upon the wea­ried exiles and cut them to pieces. Here the principalofficers on each side engaged a second time.
The Latin general, seeing the exiles just on the pointof being surrounded by the dictator, flew to -the frontwith some companies of the .corps-de-reserve. TitusHermimus, the lieutenant-general, observing the move­ment of this corps, and Mamilius at tlieir head, distin­guished from the rest, by his dress and arms, he charg­ed him with a toice so much superior to the general ofthe horse, .that at the last push lie laid him dead withhis lance. But whitst lie- was intent upon taking thespoit-, he received a wound himself with a javelin fromthe eniifloy: and though he was carried back to thecamp vu t nous, he expired under the surgeon's hands amoment after. %
Then the dictator flew to the horse, beseeching themto alight and relieve the foot, wearied out with fighting.They instantly obeyed; and having dismounted, flew tothe van, covering those in the front rarrks with theirround bucklers. 'This ga^e new spirits <o the foot, see­ing the young nobility ser-vi-ngon a level wit-h themselves,and sharing the same dangers. The 'La\ms, being thusrepulsed and struck with terror, retreated. The cavalryremounted, the better to pursue the enemy j and the in­fantry also followed.







OCR Output








CHAP. 42. ROMAN HISTORY.


CHAP. XLII.
Domestic broils. The jEqui and Volsci defeated. ,
.BUT the resentment of the people did not long sur­vive Cassius. The charms of the Agrartan law, the pro-moter of which they themselves had cut off, recurredto their minds with double force. What added to theseimpressions, was the rapacity of the fathers, who, aherthe defeat of the Volsci and jEqui that year, defraudedthem of the plunder; for all the perquisites arismg fromthe war, were converted into money by the consul ta-biud. and lodged in the exchequer. The whole Fabtanfamily became odious to the people, on account ot thelast consul: The fathers, however, prevailed so tar, hatKaeso Fabius succeeded to the consulate, with L. flSmilHM.The people still more unrated by this election, raised aforeign war with their seditious behaviour at home.This war gave a short respite to their civil commotion;and the senate and people uniting under the conduct otjEmiiim, -ave a fatal blow to the jEqui and Volecr, whohad renewed the war. The enemy suffered more mtheir flight, than they did in the battle; so warmly did-the horse pursue them. .
The temple of 'Castor was dedicated upon the IJtttday of July of that year.* It had been vowed durmgthe war with the Latins, by Posthumius the dictator,whose son was created duumvir on purpose for its deo>cation. That year too, the alluring impressions o theAgrarian law were revived in the minds of the populace.The tribunes of the people, by their exertions m favourof this popular law, strove to ennoble their popular office.The fathers, sensible that there was too much fire m thespirit of the commons, even when they had no mduce­ment to shew it, trembled at the thoughts of largesses,as incitements to rashness. The consuls, at the head otthe senate, showed themselves extremely keen m the op­position; and prevailed not only for the present, but hadalso the address to get M. Fabius, the brother of K»so,


* Anno Romse, 269.







OCR Output








CHAP. 5. ROMAN HISTORY. Ill


gent solicitations to write to the Tarquins. For how-else, said they, is it possible to convince them, thatwhat we have to advance about a business of the highestconsequence, is not altogether a mere fiction?
These letters', which were given as a pledge of theirfidelity, discovered the whole plot. For the day beforethe ambassadors were to take their departure, they hap­pened to sup with the Vitellii, where the conspirators,as is usual in such cases, conversed long together in pri­vate about their new concerted plot. One of their slaves,who before had found out what they were about, over­heard their conversation: but he waited for that oppor­tunity, when the letters should be delivered, which whenseized, would make a full discovery of the whole affair.The moment he observed that the letters were delivered,he advised the consuls, who went directly to seize theambassadors and conspirators together. The whole affairwas crushed without any noise. They took care in thefirst place, to secure the letters, lest they should be putout of'the way. The traitors were immediately claptin irons; but with respect to the ambassadors, they werefor some time at a loss. Their crime, indeed, meritedthe treatment due to enemies, but a regard to the law ofnations prevailed.
CHAP. V.
The conspirators condemned and executed; and the effectfof the Tarquins given tip to be plundered by the people.
J. HE restitution of the tyrant's effects, which the"senate had formerly voted, came once more upon thecarpet. The fathers, exasperated as they were, wouldneither suffer them to be restored, nor confiscated. Theywere, therefore,. given up to be rifled by the people,who/ after they had shared in the plunder, might, uponno future occasion, have any hopes of a reconciliationwith the Tarquins.
A field, between the city and the Tiber, their pro­perty, was consecrated to Mars; and ever since hathbeen called, the Campus Martius. It happened, that itwas tmder corn ripe for cutting down; but as they deem­







OCR Output








CHAP. 61. ROMAN HISTORY. 399


might wink at this innovation, those who bad alreadyserved out their time, would never consent, that the-condition of their successors should be better thantheirs had been; or, that they who had already servedtheir country at their own charge, should be saddledwith a tax for the 'support of others.' Such speechesleft an impression with some, and the tribunes proclaim­ed, that they were ready to assist all those who weredisposed to stand out against the tax for the pay of thesoldiers. .' .
The fathers, however, were determined to persevere• in supporting so laudable an undertaking, and were thefirst to pay in their contributions: and because they hadas yet no silver coin, some sent carriages loaded withbrass to the treasury, which gave their contingents amagnificent appearance. When the senators had paidin their respective quotas, with the utmost impartiality,agreeable to their valuations, the principal Plebeians,who were in friendship with the nobility, as had beenconcerted, began to pay in their assessments; and whenthe lower Plebeians observed how much they were com­mended by the senators, and respected as good citizensby the soldiers, all at once despising the assistance of thetribunes, he was the best man who paid first. The billwas now passed for declaring war against the Vejentes;and the new military tribunes- led an army against Veii,the greatest part of which consisted of volunteers.
CHAP. LXI.
Artena taken, the Fort having been betrayed by a slope.
J. HE'military tribunes this year, were T. QumctiusCapitolinus, P. Quinctius Cincinnatus, C. Julius Julus, asecond time, A. Manlius, L. Furios Medullimis.'a secondtime, and Manius ^EmiliusMamercinus, who first invest-ed Veii. About the commencement of this siege, thestates of Etruria held a general council at the templeof Voltumna, to consider whether they should make thesiege of Veii a common cause, but it does not .appearthat they came to any resolution The siege, in theyear following, was carried on with still less vigour thanat first, part of the tribunes and the armies they com­manded, having been called off to a war with the Volsci.







OCR Output








CHAP. 56. ROMAN HISTORY. 283


injury, is liable to the pains of law. For which reason,an ^Edile may be arrested and imprisoned by a superiormagistrate; which, though not expressly warranted bylaw, for it is hurting a man, who by this law is secured ;.yet it is an argument against it, that the person of anjEdile is not sacred. They likewise maintain, that thetribunes were declared sacred, by an oath of the people,at the first institution of their office. It is also assertedby some, that the consols, and the praetors also, chosentmder the same auspices with thenv have the privilegeof this law, as the consul comes under the denominationof a judge. But, as" the praetors at that time, not theconsuls, were considered as judges, this explanation ofthe law is madmissible.
The same consuls also ordained, that the decrees ofthe senate, which before that, the consuls could suppressor alter, should for the future be deposited in the templeof Ceres, and kept by the /Ediles. Duilius then broughtin a bill, which the people passed into a law, " That"whoever should deprive the people of their tribunes,"or create a magistrate without appeal, should be scour-"ged with rods, and lose his head." Though the Patri­cians opposed none of these laws, as none of them hadbeen personally injured, yet they did not receive themwithout regret.
CHAP. LVI.
Appim brought to his trial by Virginius.
1 HE authority of the tribunes, and the liberties of thepeople being thus established, they thought it was hightime now, to call the decemvirs to account, but not bythe lump, only one by one, in consequence of which,Virginius was pitched on as the first prosecutor, andAppius, in course was the defendant. When the day/or Appius's trial was come, he stept into the forum,escorted by a band of young Patricians, which gaveevery one a retrospect of those melancholy days, whenthe same Patricians, like so many guards, made up histrain.
Virginius then addressed himself to the people, to the


 







OCR Output








CHAP. 25. ROMAN HISTORY. 1«


CHAP. XXV.
Defeat of the Volsci.
\. HE next night the Volsci, confidmg in the differ­ences that subsisted among the Romans, made au attemptupon their camp, expecting to find some under cover ofthe night, who would either desert to them, or betraythe rest. They were discovered by the guard, an alarmspread, and upon a signal given, they ran to arms. Thuswere the Volsci disappointed in their design; and bothparties, for the remainder of that night, continued quiet.Next morning early, the Volsci having filled up theditches, made an attack upon the rampart. Alreadyhad they begun to break down the pallisadoes op allsides, but the consul, willing to try the mettle of his sol­diers, delayed coming to action for some time, althoughthe soldiers from every quarter, especially the debtors,cried out to him to give the signal. But now, convincedof their ardour, he at length gave the word of command,and the soldiers eager to attack, made a general sallyfrom every gate of the camp.
The enemy unable to stand so vigorous a charge, wereput to flight; the foot pursued, and put all to the swordthey could overtake. The rest'were driven in great con­sternation by the horse to their camp, which was imme­diately invested by the legions, soon after deserted bythe Volsci in a panic, and taken and plundered by thesoldiers.
The enemy fled to Suessa Pometia, whither the Ro­man legions pursued them, the day after. In a fewdays tlie city was taken, and given to be plundered bythe soldiers, which was some relief in their present dis­tress. The consul marched back his victorious army toRome, with the greatest glory. When he was appliedto by the deputies of the Ecetrans, who were a part ofthe Volsci, and after Pometia was taken, were afraid forthemselves, the senate, by their decree, granted thempeace, but their lauds were taken from them.







OCR Output








66 . TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


the Latins, that by means of their power, his safety athome might be less precarious. Nor did he only culti­vate friendship with their nobility, but to make the con­nection stronger, by family alliances: For he married hisdaughter to Octavius Mamilius Tusculanus, the most il­lustrious of the Latin name, beinjr descended, if we canbelieve the story of Ulysses and Circe, by which means,he secured in his interest the numerous iriends and rela­tions of that nobleman.
CHAP. L.
He appoints a general convention. Inveighed against byTurnus Herdonius.
J. ARGUIN having now a considerable weight amongthe Latin chiefs, he appoints a day for a general conven­tion at the grove of Ferentium, pretending he had some­thing to propose tor their common interest. Great num­bers appeared by tive morning's dawn. Tarquin was in­deed, punctual to the day, but not to the hqur; for he didnot make his appearance till a little before sun-set. Dur­ing the whole day, iu the course of their debates, manyobservations were made in council. Turnus Herdoniusof Aricia,* inveighed bitterly against Tarquin, in his ab­sence, exclaiming, "That it was no wonder that he was"surnamed the proud at Rome, (for he went common-"ly by that name, though it was only in corners, and"in whisper?,) can any thing be more impudent than"to trifle thus with the whole Latin name? To sum-"mon hither the Latin chiefs, from so great a dislancei"and yet the scoundrel who had appointed the meeting,"not deign to appear himself. Doubtless he means to"put our patience.to the test, and to judge by our tame-"ness, how far he can subject and oppress us, when we"have no moans of relief. Is there any of us so blind,"as not to fmd out that he pretends to an hereditary"right over the Latins? Supposing his own subjects"had made a judicial surrender of their liberties to him,"if that might be called a surrender, which had been
• Now Marino.







OCR Output








CHAP. 35. ROMAN HISTORY. 157


"our mouths, unless we give up our Tribunes tied hand•" and foot to Coriolanus,—unless he be allowed to"wreak his vengeance on the commons of Rome*"Death, or slavery, is the only choice this new execu-"tioner has left us."
The mob would have fallen upon him as he left thehouse, had not the tribunes very seasonably appointedhim a day to take his trial.
Here their rage subsided, because every one saw him­self, the judge, and the disposer of the life or death ofhis adversary. Marcius at first, heard the threats of thetribunes with contempt, affirming, That their office was .instituted for protection, not punishment, and that theywere the tribunes of the commons, not of the fathers.But so outrageous were the people, that the fathers wereglad-to purchase their peace at the expence of one oftheir order. They did all, however, in their power tostem the torrent of public odium, and strained everynerve, each in his private, as well as public capacity, tosave him. The first expedient they put in practice, wasto dispose his clients so judiciously as to deter the peo­ple, one by one, from frequenting their meetings andcabals. Then all the senate went in procession, as if thewhole body had been impeached, and with the mostpressing instances, begged the people, fltat if they wouldnot acquit Marcius, for the sake of his innocence, theywou.ld, at their intercession, spare one citizen, one sena­tor, even should he be found guilty.
He did not appear on the day of his trial, which in­flamed them still the more. He was • therefore, con­demned in his absence; in consequence of which, he re­tired amongst the Volsci, even then breathing nothingbut revenge, and carrying with him eve^y hostile inten­tion against his country. The Volsci received him withevery mark of respect, and their civilities daily increas­ed, in proportion as his resentment against his countrywas more strongly marked; for bitter complaints, suc­ceeded by terrible threats, were often observed to dropfrom him.
He lived with Attius Tullius, at that time, the most
respectable nobleman of all the Volsci, and one who had
always been an enemy to the Romans. As the one was
actuated by a hatred of an old standing, and the other.
.H







OCR Output








CHAP. 22. ROMAN HISTORY. 4T


Caius Cluilius presided then at Alba. To demand re­stitution, ambassadors were sent much about the sametime, from bcjth courts.
The Romans were strictly enjoined by Tullus, not tolose a moment in executing their commission, becausebeing convinced they would mce* with a retusal, hewould thereby be furnished with a plausible pretence fordeclaring war. The Alban ambassadors were not soalert, they were received by Tuilus with much civilityand respect, and enjoyed themselves with him in all thepleasures ot social festivity; the Romans, in the meantime, havingfirst demanded restitution, and that bemg re­fused them, declared war within thirty days, and returnedwith the news to Tullus. Then the Alban ambassadorswere admitted to an audience, when the design of theirembassy was inquired into. Being ignorant of all thathad past, they began with long apologies, " That it was"with the utmost reluctance they should be obliged"to express themselves in any manner disagrreable to"Tullus, and that nothing could have laid them under"that necessity, but the orders of their state.—In one"word, they had come to demand restitution, and in"case of refusal, to declare war."
Tuilus answered: " Tell your master, that the king"of the Romans appeals to the gods, whether Rome \"or Alba did first contemptuously dismiss the other's"ambassadors demanding satisfaction, that upon that"nation, they may heap all the calamities of this war."The Albans return and deliver the message.
Both parties now exert their utmost in making pre­parations for war \—a war indeed, that had the nearestresemblance to that carried on between factipjjs of the- same community, or rather of the same fan»ly\i^for bothwere of Trojan extraction, because Lavinium was ofTroy, Alba of La^jnium, and the'Romans were the raceof the Atban kings.-* But the manner in which the con­test was decided, prevented the effusion of much blood,for they never came to a general engagement: and bothnations became one people, at the expence only of thehouses of one city, which were demolished. The Albanswere first in the field, and entering the Ronran territory,with a prodigious army, encamped and entrenched







OCR Output








CHAP. 17. ROMAN HISTORY. 227


"a subversion of the commonwealth, under the conduct"and auspices of Herdonius? Has he, who had not suf-"ficient influence to entice our slaves to join him, found"the way to bring you over to his party? How! whilst"the enemy are over our heads, do you order the peo-"pie to lay down their arms, that they may make"laws?" Then, addressing himself to the people,,hecontinued, " If you should be under no concern for"the city, and should you be quite insensible of your"own danger, you ought at least to have some regard"to the gods of your country, who are m the hands of"the enemy. Jupiter, the most high, the most bene-"volent, queen Juno, Minerva, and all the gods and"goddesses are at this moment suffering a siege. Slaves"are encamped round your tutelar gods. Do your pro-"ceedings evince that you are in your senses? While"so formidable an enemy is not only within our walls,"but in the citadel, overlooking the forum, and place"of our assemblies; yet we hold our assemblies with in-"difference, and deliberate with as much unconcern, as"in times of the greatest tranquillity. Ought we not"rather^ Pa'ricians, -plebeians, consuls, tribunes, citi-"zens, every man to take arms and lend their aid?"Ought we not to fly to the capitol, to deliver and re-"gain that august habitation of the almighty Jupiter?"O thou, father Romulus, inspire thy descendants with"the same gallant spirit which animated thee, when"thou di«Ist formerly recover this citadel from the same"Sabines, after they had obtained it by the power of"goM. Move them to march the same way by which"thou didst conduct thy army. As for me, I am ready"as consul, to be the foremost in following thee, anrl"tread thy paths, as far as a mortal man can follow a"god." At the conclusion of his speech, he declared,"That he would take arms, and called upon every Ro-"man to do the same; protesting, if any one should"dare to hinder them, that without regard to consular"authority, tribunitian power, or the sacred laws them-"seives, that whatever was his quality, or wheresoever'' he should find him, he would treat him as an enemy".to the state. That the tribunes, if they pleasedj since- they had forbidden them to arm against Herdonius,







OCR Output








CHAP. 22. ROMAN HISTORY. 435


with a riew to make them the authors of,his own male­volence, had submitted an affair to them, which entirelydepended on himself; nor to the senate, but to the fa­mily of the Liciui, a son whereof had laid the matter be­fore the senate, and his father had strongly espoused theinterest of the people, in supporting the motion.
After all the worldly riches had been removed fromVeil, they began to remove what had been consecratedto the geds, and the gods themselves; but in this theyacted more like worshippers than pillagers. For some ofthe youngest men of the whole army were selected, towhom, wheii their bodies were washed perfectly clean,and clothed in white, it was given in charge to transportqueen Juno to Rome: They entered her temple with re­verence, touching her at first with a religious awe, be­cause that statue, by a ceremony among the Etrurians,none used to. touch, but a priest of a certain family. Atlast when one of the lads, whether by a divrne impulse,pr in a youthful frolic, asked her, 'Will you go to Rome,'Juno?' 'Yes, yes, (cried they altogether,) you see the'goddess nods her assent;' which gave rise to the story,that she was heard to pronounce distinctly, ' With all'my heart.' Certain it is, that she was easily movedfrom her place, and that they got her to Rome, with aslittle trouble or difficulty as if she had followed them.They conveyed' her safe and sound to the Aventine hill,whither the dictator had invited heV; and which- wasfrom'that time to be the seat of her residence for ever:and where he dedicated a temple to her, in discharge ofa vow he had made.
Such was the fate of Veii, the richest city of all Tus­cany; the final ruin of which, demonstrated its great­ness: for having sustained an unremitted siege for tensummers and as many winters, wherein Rome had suf­fered more from it, than it had done from Rome, it wasat last, by unavoidable destiny, reduced not by force,. bus­by stratagem. .







OCR Output








CUAP. 47. ROMAN HISTORY. 471'


up his arms, and spreading the alarm, flew to the ram­part, and whilst the rest were in a mighty consternation,•with the boss of his buckler he beat back a Gaul, whohad by that time reached the top of the battlement, andhe, in his fall, tumbled down those who were nexthim, whilst Manlius killed others, who throwing downtheir arms in the utmost terror, hung by their handson the rocks. By this time too; others had crowdedto theplace, and with stones and darts precipitated the rest, sothat the whole of these adventurers tumbled headlongfrom the top to the bottom of the rock.
When the confusion was over, the rest of the nightwas devoted to repose, as far as could be enjoyed aftersuch an alarm, and solicitude for the danger that waspast. Early next morning, the military tribunes assem­bler! the troops by sound of trumpet, in onler to dispenserewards and punishments, as merit, or demerit shouldappear. First of all, Manlius was praised for his nobleexertions; and had presents, not.only from ihe military*tribunes, but from all the soldier*; for each of them car­ried to his house, which stood in the citadel, half a poundmeal, and a measure of wine containing five ounces.
reward, considerable only as it was a singular proof oftheir affection, when in the extreme scarcuy of provi­sions, they could part with their very living, to do ho­nour to the merit of one man.
The centinels on that post, where the enemy hadescaped their vigilance and climbed up the rock, werecalled upon next; and though Sulpicius, the militarytribune. sentenced them all to die according to the lawsof military 'iscipline, yet as all the soldiers faid the blameupon one centinel, he 'was afraid oF a in'iM'v an"! sorespited the rest. With the approbation of the whole,he who was undeniably in the wrong, was thrown overjhe rock. From thenceforth, the guards were kept onboth sides with more attention. On the part of the Gauls,because it was commonty talked, that a correspondencewas kept up between Roait and Veii; and on thai of theRomans, from a retrospect of the danger they had escap­ed in the night. i







OCR Output








. 25. ROMAN HISTORY. 230


CHAP. XXV. ~ -
New disturbance from the


. .
HESE consuls gave way to L. Menucius and C.Nautius, who took under their consideration, the twocauses, that lay over undetermined the former year. Theconsuls would not hear of the law, nor the tribunes ofVolscius's trial, but ihe new Qutestors were men of greaterresolution and more weight. There were in that officeTitus Quinctius Gapitolinus, who had been thrice con­sul, and M. Valerius, the son of Valerius, and grandsonof Volscius. Quinctius, since Ceeso, the pride of the Ro­man youth, could neither be restored to his. family, northe state, thought it his duty to prosecute the man whohad given false evidence against him, and so deprivedhim of an opportunity of pleading his innocence, as faras law or justice would go.
When Virginius, particularly, and the other tribuneswere bustling about the law, the consuls were allowedtwo months to examine it, and explain to the people themischief latent under it, after which they were to sufferit to be put to the vote. The concession of this respite,produced a general tranquillity all over the city; but itwas soon interrupted by the JEqui, who, having brokethe treaty they had made with the Romans the year be­fore, bad put themselves under the auspices of GracchusCltelius by far the most considerable man in their coun­try. Led on by him, they passed through the Lavicanterritories, entered the Tuscutan, which they ravagedwithout mercy, and laden with spoil, retired to the Algi-dus, where they encamped.
Q. Fabius, Pubiius Volumnins, and A. Posthumius,were sent thither, ambassadors from Rome, to complainof the injuries, and demand restitution, agreeable to treaty.The general of the Jiqui, in return, ordered them, " to"deliver their commission from the Roman senate to the"oak tree; for at present, he had other business to mind."The oak tree, alluded to, was a large one hanging overliis tent; and by its branches forming a cool shade.Then one of the ambassadors, as he departed, said, " Let







OCR Output








CHAP. 39. ROMAN HISTORY. 161


"gentlemen resolve to bury in oblivion, the injuries"done you by the Romans in former times, and the"losses you have suffered; in short, though you should"forget all former wrongs, is it possible that you can"tamely bear the insult offered you to-day by the Ro­mans, who have made our disgrace the 'prelude totheir games? Are you not sensible of the triumphthey have this day over you? What! in the face ofall the citizens,—all the strangers,—all the neigh­bouring states, to make such an ignominious depart-ture? Were not your wives and your children public­ly affronted? What were the sentiments of those whoheard the proclamation? What were the sentiments ofthose who saw you leaving the city? Or, what were thesentiments of those who met you on the way loaded withignominy? Why? that we are a set of impious andprofane wretches, whose presence would have pollut-"ed the solemnity of the games, and that we were re-"turning to make expiation? This, therefore is the rea-"son, we are driven from the habitation, the company,"and communication of honest men. What! are younot sensible that our very lives depended on our'speedy departure? If it does not rather deserve thename of a flight. Do you not consider the Romansas your enemies, among whom, one day's delay wouldhave been our last? War is declared against you in"this affront, to the perdition of those who have doni;"it, if you are but men." Full of resentment before ofthemselves, and exasperated still more with this discourseof Tullu?, each returned to his own home, and inflamedtheir countrymen to that degree, that the whole nation"revolted.
I
CHAP. XXXIX.
The Romans dreadfully alarmed, sue to Coriolanus 'fat-peace.
JjY the unanimous consent of ail the states, AttiusTul-lu.', and the Roman exile, C. Marcius, in whom theybad an extraordinary confidence, were chosen generalsto conduct the war. Nor did he ever disappoint them;that it might be evident from his conduct, that the Re.mans owed more to the abilities of their generals, in their







OCR Output








220 /TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK III.


provoke this rash young nobleman. Many things thathad been said and done without consideration, by theyoung nobility, were all charged'upon Caeso, who wasnow become odious. Notwithstanding of which, he per­sisted in his opposition to the law. ,
A Virginius was every now and then trumpeting tothe people, to this effect: " Are you not sensible, fellotft"citizens, that you cannot retain Caeso, and carry the"law you are so much set upon? But why do I rnen-"tion the law? He is an enemy to your liberty, and•" in pride, exceeds all the Tarquins put together. Only"wait till he is made consul or dictator. You see w'rth"what force and violence he lords it now, while only a"private citizen." Many approved of the tribune'sspeech, coirfpiaining, that they had been.roughly hand-kd by him,. and urged the tribune, to strain every nerveto bring him to condign punishment.
CHAP. XII.
Caio deprecates the wrath of the people.
JL HE day for the trial came, and the people in gene­ral seemed to think, that their liberty depended on thecondemnation of Caeso. Urged, therefore, by necessity,with much inward indignation, he went about solicitingtheir favour one by one; his relations and friends, theprincipal men of the-city, attending him. T. Quinc-tius, who had been thrice consul, after recounting thehonours which he himself, and others of his family hadacquir-ed by their gallantry, affirmed, " That neitherthe Quinctian name, nor even the whole Roman state,had ever produced a more excellent genius, or a sol­dier of more consummate bravery L—that he hadmarked him a* the first soldier in the army, as he hadoften-seen him" signalize himself, when engaged withthe enemy." Sp. Furius bore testimony, "Thatwhen he was in the most dangerous situation, Quinctiussent Caeso to his relief; and that his valour, upon thatcritical occasion, was peculiarly essential to the pros­perity of the state." Lucretius, one of the last year'sconsuls, covered with fresh laurels, divided his "glorywith Caeso.; enumerating his combats, and glorious.







OCR Output








CH'AP. 41. ROMAN HISTORY. . 75


inmost rooms of the palace, they were called and accord­ingly went before the king. Upon theirfirst appearance,they bawled out both at the same time, the one strivingto interrupt the other; but, when checked by the Lie-tor, and ordered to speak each in his turn, they gaveover their railing. One of them then, as had been con­certed, began to tell his story; to which, while the kingwas all attention, the other lifting up his hatchet, threwit against his head, and leaving the weapon in the wound,both ran instantly out of doors.
CHAP. XLI.
Tarquin succeeded by SermusTttltius.
W..I1ILST some of the company hastened to assist thewounded king, the lictors pursued the rufftans, and seiz­ed them. By this time there was a great uoise, and con­course of people about the palace, wondering what couldbe the matter. During the confusion, Tanaquil ordersthe palace gates to be shut, and having cleared it of thecrowd, she carefully gets every thing ready for the cureof the wound, as if there had been hopes of her husband'srecovery: at the same time, should no hopes remain, sheplans other expedients for her security. Servius beingcalled, in all haste, she carries him to her expiring hus­band, and taking his right hand in tier's, she conjureshim, that he would not suffer his father-in-law's death topass unrevenged, nor his mother-in-law to be exposed tothe insults of her enemies. If you are a man, Servius,continued she, the crown is thine, not theirs, who, bythe hands of assassins, have committed the most exe­crable villainy. Take Courage then, and follow thegods thy conductors, who foretold thy future glory by,the divine fire which shone around thy head: let thatcelestial flame now warm thee. Rouse thyself now inearnest. We who were strangers have reigned here.Consider, who, not of whom, thou art. If your owncounsels are at a stand, by reason of this unexpectedblow, follow mine."When the noise and pressure of the mob became in­tolerable, Tanaquil addresses the people from a window







OCR Output








306 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK 111.


These orders were not given in vain. The wholeRoman cavalry charged the enemy at the same mstant,and put them to flight. Many of them were tumbledfrom their horses, and both together transfixed by thespears of the Romans. The enemy's cavalry were thnsentirely defeated.
They turned then upon the foot, having dispatchedan aid-de-camp with the news of their success to theconsuls, who had al&o made some impression on the wmgsthat opposed them. This intelligence redoubled theirardour, and occasioned a great consternation among the.SLqui, who were already giving way. The centre of theenemy's army, which had been thrown into disorder bythe Roman horse, was the first that broke. Quiuctiusbore down the left wing, but on the right there was muchhotter work.
Then Agrippa, who was brave and full of fire, seeingthe Romans carrying all before them, excepting wherehe commanded, snatched the standards from the ensigns,and advancing with them in person, threw some of them.into the midst of the enemy's battalions. The soldiersthrough fear of losing them, which would have been agreat disgrace, fell upon the enemy like lions. Thuswas the victory rendered complete, on the side of theRomans. By this time, Quinctius' aid-de-camp cameto inform them, that he had beat the enemy, and wasready to fall upon the enemy's camp, the moment heknew they had done their business in the left wing; andif they were already masters of the field, he orderedthen/to join him immediately,-that all the army mightshare alike in the spoil. Agrippa, now victorious, ad­vanced to his colleague, and after mutual congratulationson their mutual successes, began the attack. The fewthat guarded the camp being easily managed, they brokethrough the works without opposition.
The consuls marched back the army to Rome, ladenwith the spoils they had taken from the enemy, exclusiveof all they had lost in the plunder of their country.,which they now totally recovered. It does not appearthat they either demanded, or that the senate decreedthem a triumph; nor is there any reason assigned fortheir neglecting, or despairing to obtain that honour.


 







OCR Output








CONTENTS.485


Chap.
xxviii. Mettos Fuffetius punished 57
xxix. Alba destroyed 58
xxx. The Albans made citizens of Rome. War
declared against the Sabines 59
•xxxi. Tullus killed b.y lightning 61
xxxii. Atiens Martius renews the institutions of
Numa i 62
xxxiii. The Latins conquered, and made free of
the city 65
xxxiv. Lucumo comes to Rome 66
xxxv. Lucumo succeeds Ancus 68
xxxvi. Tarquin makes war with the Sabines 69
xxxvii. He beats the Sabines 7O
xxxviii. He builds a wall round the city, and
drains the water from the vallies .... 71
xxxix. A strange phenomenon 72
. - xl. Tarquin killed by a plot of the sons of
Marcius 7*
xli. He is succeeded by Servius Tullius, 75
xlii. Tullius routs the Vejentes, and consti­tutes the Census 76
xliii. He divides the people into classes and
centuries ?7
xliv. He enlarges the Pomaerium, and adds se­veral hills to the city 79
xlv. He builds a temple to Diana, in conjunc­tion with the Latins .' 80
xlvi. He is accused by young Tarquin .... 82
xlvii. Tarquin usurps the throne 83
xlviii. Tullius murdered by L. Tarqnin, at the
instigation of Tullia 85
xlix. Tarquin keeps an armed guard ............ 87
1. He appoints a general convention. In­veighed against by Turnus Herdonius, 88
li. He conspires against Turnus 89
Hi. His address to the assembly 91
liii. He defeats the Volsci; and with the spoils
builds a temple to Jupiter Capitolinus, 92liv. Sextius admitted into the Gabinian coun­cil. Gabii reduced 91'
Iv. Tarquin turns his attention to the affairs
of the city - 95







OCR Output








470 TITUS LIVIUS' , BooicV.


his commission from the army. Having then got thesenate's decree, ordaining, ' That Camillas should, by'an act of the comitia assembled by curia, be recalled'from banishment; and by authority of the people be'immediately appointed dictator, at the same time, thatc the arrny should have the general they desired.' Re­turning the same way, he posted to Veii with the news;whence the commissioners were sent Camillas at Ardea,who conducted him to Veii: or rather an act repealinghis banishment, was passed in the comitia assembled bycuria-, and he declared dictator in his absence; for it »more likely that he did not move from Ardea, till hehad certain advices of the act passed by the senate; be­cause he qould not change the place of bis retreat, with­out the voices of the people, nor take the auspices regu­larly in the army, in order to their entering upon action,till he was appointed dictator.
CHAP. XLVII.
An attempt of the Gattls frustrated by the gallantry of
Manlius.


D.


rURING these transactions at Veii, the citadel andcapitol of Rome were in extreme danger. The Gauls,whether they had observed the impressions of a man'sfeet, in that place where the messenger from Veii badclimbed the rock, or of themselves had discovered thatit wa& accessibte by the rock Carmemalis, it is certain,that one night, when it was pretty clear, ihey first sent*man before to examine the way, without his arms, whichthey afterwards handed up to him; and where it wassteep, they supported, lifted and lent each other a band,as the difficuty of the place required, till they had reach­ed the top. This they did with so much silence, thatneither the centinels, nor even the dogs, animals thatare apt to stir at the least noise in the night-time, werein the least alarmed. But they did not escape unnoticedby the geese, which being sacred to Juno, the Romans,in all their scarcity of provisions, had preserved alive.This saved the capitol. For by their gagling and beat­ing their wmgs, they raised M. Manlius, a great soldier,who had been consul three years before; he snatching







OCR Output








CHAP. i. ROMAN HISTORY. 15


In the study of history there is this peculiar advantage:There you have examples of every kind set before you,in a conspicuous point of view; whence you may set upmodels for your imitation, as an individual or a state,or beacons to warn you against base attempts, which.end in disgrace. But either I am prepossessed in favourof the work I have undertaken, or there never was astate more respectable for its greatness, its sanctity, orvariety of excellent characters. Never was there a state,into which luxury and avarice found their way so late,nor where poverty and frugality were held so long andso much in repute, that the less they had, the less theydesired. Of late years, riches have introduced luxury,and a profusion of pleasures, a taste for extravagance inail the ways of riot and debauchery: but as complaintswill not even then be agreeable, when perhaps they arenecessary, let us at least drop them in the introductionto so great a work, or rather, were it fashionable withus histdrians, as it is with the poets, set out with moreenlivening ideas, with good omens, and vows, andprayers to the gods and goddesses, that they wouldvouchsafe to-grant success, adequate to the greatness ofthe undertaking.
CHAP. I.
ENEAS' arrival in Italy, and marriage.
Anno Mundi, 2282.
I\| OW first of all, it is abundantly evident, that afterTroy * was taken, great havoc was made among all theTrojans, excepting only two, jEneas,,ajid.Antenor, whomthe Greeks exempted from the rigours of war, becausethey had always been for peace; and insisted thatHelen should be given up:—That Antenor thereafter,having run through many adventures, arrived in theinterior bay of the Adriatic sea, with a body of Heneti,who having, for seditious practices, been expelled
* A city of the Lesser Asia, its territories constituting part ofTMirygia, lying between the river Simois and Scamander.







OCR Output








-ISO TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


may fortune be with you;—may your success beadequate to the generosity of your undertaking. Thenmay you look for consulships,—triumphs,—all the re*-Wards, alt the honours, it is in the power of yourcountry to bestow." Passing by the capitol, citadel,and other temples, every body implored all the gods thatoccurred to their eyes, or imagination, to favour theifdeparture and undertaking, and to grant them a speedyand happy return to their country and parents. Butthese prayers were not heard.
Marching out by an unlucky way, through the rightarch of the gate Carrnentalis, they arrived at the riverCremera, where they judged it would be proper to raiseworks and leave a garrison for their defence,* Lucius."Emilius, and C. Servilius, were at that time chosenconsuls.
Whilst nothing was studied on either side but plun­dering and reprisals, the Fabii found themselves suffi­cient to protect the Roman territory; and by detachingflying parties through all the country, where the Tuscauterritory borders upon that of Rome* protected their ownfrontiers, and became very troublesome to that of the"hnemy. But these devastations were cut short:. For, toenable die enemy to carry the works at Cremeraj theysent for an army .out of Etruria. L. Emilius the consul,in the mean time, coming up with the Roman legions,immediately attacked them. The Vejentes had no timefor battle arrangement; insomuch, that in the first hurryand confusion, whilst theywere drawing up in form,and posting a corps-de-reserve, a wing of the Romancavalry charged them so suddenly in flank, that theyhad neither room to form their lines, nor make an attack.They were consequently routed: and retreating to theRed Rocks, where they had their camp, humbly suedFor peace. That they obtained; but from the naturallevity of their tempers, before the Roman garrison was.withdrawn from Creraerai tliey were qaite of anothermind.







OCR Output








222 TITUS LIVIUS' . BOOK III.


"the consuls, for the preceding years, would not permit"him to prosecute Coeso, as the author of this inhuman"murder." The people were so exasperated at thischarge, that in their fury, they were not far from takingimmediate vengeance on the spot.
Virginius ordered him to be seized and carried to pri­son; but the Patricians prevented the execution by force.His father, T. Quinctius, insisted, " That it was quite in-"consistent with all law, to do violence to the person of'any citizen accused of a capital crime, for which he'was to be tried, before he was heard in his own de-'fence and condemned." The tribune replied, " That'he had no intention of hurting his person, till he should'be legally condemned, but only to secure him in pri-'son till the day of his trial, that as he had been guilty'of murder, the Roman people might have it in their'power to punish him for it."
When an appeal was made to the tribunes, they exert­ed their right of relieving the oppressed, by taking amiddle way. They agreed, that he should not be im­prisoned, but should find bail for his appearance iujudgment, on the day appointed, under a penalty, tobe forfeited to the people, in case of non-appearance.There was a dispute about the extent of the penalty,which was at last submitted to the nomination of thesenate; and during the deliberation of the fathers on thatpoint, Caeso was kept under arrest in the forum. Theyfixed the sum in which each surety should be bound,at three thousand asses of brass;* but left it to the col­lege of tribun<'s to determine the number. They de­manded ten, and ten were bound for Cseso's appearanceaccordingly. This was the first instance of a state crir-minal's finding bail.
Being now at liberty, the very next night, he leftRome, and retired in exile among the Etrurians. Whenthe day fixed for his trial came, it was pled, that Caesohaving banished himself, he was not amenable to theirassembly; but Virginius held the Committa notwithstand­ing, and an appeal being entered to the other tribunes,tlie assembly was dismissed. The penalty was, however,
# Nine pounds thirteen shillings and sixpence.







OCR Output








2(38 BOOK III. TITUS LIVIUS'


brutal lust. Go on to scourge and tyrannize over our'persons; but let chastity and innocence escape yourviolence. Should any violence be offered to ibisyoung lady, in behalf of my bride, I will implore the-assistance of the Romans here assembled; Virginiuswill implore the aid of his fellow soldiers, for his onlydaughter: in short, we will beg assistance from everybody, and implore both gods and men. You shallnever put this sentence in execution, till I am num­bered among the dead. Wherefore, let me intreatyou, Appius, to consider well what you do, and toweigh the consequences. When Virginius comes, hewill see what is the most proper step to be taken, withrespect to his daughter. Let him only be told, witha certification, that if he yields to this scoundrel'sclaim, Ihave no more to say to his daughter. Withrespect to myself, as long as I have life, I will retainthe courage and constancy with which a generouspassion for my bride's liberty and honour, justly in­spire me."
CHAP. XLVJ.
Appius' decree.
A HE whole multitude were in great emotion, and readyto proceed to the utmost extremities. The lictors cameround Icilius; but they proceeded only to threat-). ThenAppius spoke to this effect: "The spirit which Icilius dis-"covers upon this occasion, is not exerted in defence"of Virginia, but naturally turbulent, and full of the"pride and violence of the tribune, he makes that a"pretext for exciting a tumult; but, for the present, I"am resolved to disappoint him. At the same time, Iwould have him to know, that it is not on account of hisinsolence, but of the absence of Virginius, and a ten­der regard to the name of father and to liberty, that Iwill defer judgment, and not put my decree in forcefor this day. I will prevail upon Claudius to give upsomewhat of his right, in permitting the girl to remainin liberty till next day: But should Virginius fail to'appear to-morrow, I certify to Icilius, and all such se­







OCR Output








Chap. 34. ROMAN HISTORY. 155


Ti


CHAP. XXXIV.
A Famine.


1TUS Geganius and Pubiius Minutius, were electedconsuls for the following year: under whom, thoughthere was no enemy stirring abroad, and every d tl'er-ence settled at home, the stale wa» afflicted by a cala­mity more gnevous than either. During tlie secession,there was a total suspension of agriculture., which broughton a dearth of provisions, aud that was followed by a fa-:mine, as severe as if the city had been besieged. Itwould undoubtedly have ended in the destruction of bothslave's and people, had not the consuls provided for theirrelief, by dispatching agents through all the countriesaround to buy up corn, not only into Etruria, all alongthe shore to the right of Ostia, and through the countryof the Volsci on the left, as far as Cumae, but even toSicily; such was the ill-will of their neighbours, thatthey were obliged to apply for relief to these remotecountries.
Wheu they had purchased some corn at Cumae, Aris-todernus the tyrant, detained the ships, by way of re­prisal, for the effects of the Tarquins, who had madehim their heir. They could make no purchases amongthe Volsci, and in the country of Pomptinus; the vic­tuallers were in hazard of being insulted by the inha­bitants. However, Tuscany furnished them with asmall quantity Ly the Tiber, which, relieved the com­mon people lor the present.
A dangerous war would have doubled the distress oc­casioned by the famine, had not a plague raging amongthe Volsci, cut short their intentions, when they werejust On the point of beginning hostilities. This calamity,however, sunk them so low, that even when its vio­lence had subsided, they had not'got the better of theirfright
The Romans increased their colony at Velitrae, andsent a new one into the mountains of Norba, whichmight serve for a fort in Pomptinus.
In the consulship of Marcus Minucius and A. Sent­







OCR Output








CHAP. 36. ROMAN HISTORY. 69


tores minorum gentium: a party, no doubt, that wouldcontinue firmly attached to the prince, by whose favourthey were raised to that dignity.
The first that felt the weight of his resentment, was the"Latins. From them he took Appiolse by storm; and,having returned with much more booty than couki havebeen expected, from an expedition so inconsiderable, he. celebrated his games at an expence, and with a magni­ficence, above any of his predecessors. The place forthe Circus, now called Maximus, was then first markedout, and divisions made for the senators and knights,where they might erect scaffolds for their accommoda­tion during the games. These scaffolds were called Fori,and supported by forked posts, twelve feet high. Thegames consisted chiefly in horses, and boxers, broughtfrom Etruria; and, from that period, have continued tobe celebrated every year, being sometimes called theRoman, and sometimes the great games. To privatefamilies also the prince let out the ground about the Fo­rum, for shops and piazzas.
CHAP. XXXVI.
Tarquin makes war with the Sabines. "' . . .
J. JLE was making preparations for raising a stone vailround the city; but a war with the Sabines interruptedhis designs. The incursion was so unexpected, that be­fore the Roman army could march out to stop their pro­gress, they had crossed the Anio. ' Wherefore, great wasthe alarm at Rome, and in the first engagement, thoughnumbers fell on both sides, the victory was disputed.
After this battle, the enemy returned to their camp,and the Romans got time to recruit. Tarquin, sensiblethat his army suffered much for want of horse, resolved'to add other centuries to the Ramnenses, Titienses, andLuceres, and to distinguish them by his own name.
As Romulus had instituted this order by augury, AttusNayiu?, at that time much celebrated for his skill in theart, contended that no alteration, or new appointmentcould be made, without the approbation of the birds.At this, the king flew in a passion, and in ridicule of the







OCR Output








CHAP. 48. ROMAN HISTORY. . m


"of his brother, Q. Fabius, and the republic for the loss"of one of its parents, he could not think of accepting"the laurel, defaced with public, as well as private"grief." . , ,
. The refusal of a triumph did him more honour thanany triumph could have done; so true it is, that a properneglect of glory sometimes considerably exalts it. Hisfirst care was to pay the last honours to his brother andhis colleague: he pronounced their funeral orations him­self, and set the glorious actions of both in the fullestlight ; by which means, the generous praises he bestow­ed, reflected in a very great degree upon himself. Agree­able to a plan he laid down to himself, in the beginningof his consulship, of bringing about a reconciliation be­tween the senate and people, he distributed the woundedsoldiers among the houses of the senators to be cured,and most into those of the Fabii, and they were drest nowhere else with so much care. From that date, theFabii became popular, but by methods entirely consistentwith, and salutary to the commonwealth.
CHAP. XLVIII.
Proposal of the Fabian Family.
J.N consequence of this agreeable reverse, Caeso Fabiusis chosen consul, with T. Virginins, as much by thegood will of the populace, as the interest of the senate 5and make a point of it) before he entered upon levies,wars, or any other public business, that the hopes of con­cord, which begun already to be conceived, should benourished, so as the senate and people might rjuicklycome to a perfect understanding. For this purpose, inthe beginning of the new year, he made a motion, thatbefore any tribune should have it in his power to revivethe question about the Agrarian law, the senate should*in its own right, begin the division of the land takenfrom the enemy among the people, with all the impar­ttality in their power. For nothing was more just thanthat these people shoutd have it, by whose blood andtoil it had been purchased. The fathers would not agreeto the motion 5 nay, some of them complained, that the







OCR Output













OCR Output








CHAP. U. ROMAN HISTORY. 369


* of the Roman army, but by the shouts and cries whichhe heard, he judged, that the action continued tillnight. Considering the enemy's numbers, he did potbelieve it was possible to force a passage to the risingground which he had seized. That he knew not wherethe army was, but he had reason to imagine, for thepreservation of the army, the consul had retired to someplace of greater safety than his, own camp, as he him­self, in a case of necessity, had secured himself and fol­lowers, by the natural strength of the ground he hadtaken. That it was his own opinion,'the affairs of theVolsci were in no better condition than, those of theRomans; and that the darkness had concealed fromboth parties, their own situation, and that of eachother.' He was then, at his request, that they woulddetain him no longer, as he was quite exhausted withthe fatigue of his march, and the pain of his wounds,dismissed with the applauses of all the people, for hismoderation, still more than for his valour and good con­duct.
This scene was scarcely over, when the consul ap­peared at the temple of Quies, in the Lavinian way.Thither horses and carriages and other conveyances weresent from the city, to take up the soldiers, quite spentwith the fatigue of the battle, and travelling all night.A little after, the consul made his entry into the city,and was not at greater pains to clear himself, with re­spect to the late miscarriage, than to give Tempanius thepraises due to his merit.;
Whilst the state was afflicted, on account of their latedisaster, and highly dissatified with their generals, M.Posthumius, who had been one of the military tribunes,with consular power, that commanded at Veil, was im­peached before, the people, and fined 16,000 asses ofbrass.* Titus Quinciius, his colleague,. laid the wholeblame of that miscarriage upon Posihumius, who wasalready condemned; and out of regard to his great ser-vjces agai.ist the Volsci, when consul, under the dicta­tor Posthumius Tubertus; and at Fidense, in quality oflieutenant-general to Mamercus ^Emilius, another dicta-
* .£32:5:10.







OCR Output








490 CONTENTS.


Chap. Page
xxxi. The consuls fined by the people. A code
of laws proposed 247
xxxii. The commissioners from Greece returned,and the decemvirs proposed for com­piling the new laws.. 248
xxxiii. The beginning of the administration ofthe decemvirs. A disinterested in­stance 249
xxxiv. Great satisfaction in the laws and practice
of the decemvirs 251
xxxv. Decemvirs chosen a-new 252
xxxvi. Villainy of the decemvirs., 25J
xxxvii. The decemvirs introduce licentiousness ... 235xxxviii. The Sabines renew the war. The de­cemvirs at a loss 256
xxxix. The decemvirs are told their real charac­ter 258
xl. Cornelius Maluginensis vindicates the de­cemvirs 259
xli. The decemvirs carry the point for the
present 261
xlii. Ill conduct of the Roman armies ,. 263
xliii. Base treatment <it Srccius 284
xliv. The villainy of Appius 265
xlv. Appius is opposed by Icilius 287
xlvi. Appius's decree 268
xlvii. The opposition to the decree ., 27O
xlviii. Virginius stabs his daughter to save her
virtue 271
xlix. Appius's authority sinking 272
l. Virginius' remonstrance in the camp. A
Secession - 273-
li. The secession in continuation 276
lii. The decemvirs are prevailed on to lay
down their authority 277
liii. A coalition of the two orders 279
liv. Restoration of the consulate and tribuni- -
tian power ;230
Iv. Popular laws introduced by the new con­suls 239
Ivi. Appius brought to his trial by Virginius, 28JIvii. Appius imprisoned; War with the jEqai
and Volsci. War with the Sabines, 285







OCR Output








CHAP. 22. ROMAN HISTORY. . 255


"declaring, that if any did, his vote would not be ad-"mitted."
CHAP. XXII.
The Volsci dtfeated.
JL HE consuls for this year, were Q. Fabius Vibulanusand L. Cornelius Maluginensis. This was the third timeFabius had been raised to that dignity. There was acensus held this year, but no lustrum, owing to somereligious scruples about the pollution of the capitol, andfall of the consul Valerius.
In the beginning of this consulship, state clouds quick­ly gathered. The tribunes still tampered with the peo­ple, and advices were brought from the Hernici andLatins, that the ^Equi and Volsci were making vast pre­parations for war. The Volscian legions had alreadyreached Antium; and it was strongly suspected, that theAntiates were meditating a revolt. Besides, it was withno small difficulty that the tribunes were prevailed onto suffer the progress of this war to be stopped in time.The consuls shared the provinces between them. It fellto Fabius to march the legions to Antium, while Corne-lius stayed to guard the city, lest, according to custom,the /Equi should detach parties to ravage.the country.The Hernici and Latins, were ordered to furnish theirrespective quotas of troops, stipulated by treaty ; conse­quently two-thirds of the army consisted of allies, andone of Romans.
These confederates having come up on the day ap­pointed, the consul encamped without the gate Capena.from thence, after the army had been purified by sacri­fice, he marched to Antium, and encamped in its neigh­bourhood, not far from the enemy.
The Volsci, as the .ffiqui had not yet joined them, notdaring to risk a battle alone, thought only of remainingquiet in their camp, and defending themselves withintheir works. Next day Fabius drew up his army, notin a body, composed promiscuously of allies and citizens,bat into three distinct battalions of Romans, Latins, andHernici, each by themselves, round the enemy's lines.







OCR Output








CHAP. 37. ROMAN HISTORY. 15§


Now he felt the impression more forcibly. But stillhesitating and putting it oil', he was struck with a palsy,all over his body. It was then that the wrath of thegods roused him from his lethargy; for, afflicted by hisformer calamities, and oppressed with the weight of hispresent trouble, he called a meetmg of his nearest friends,'and telling them all he had heard and seen, how Jupiterhad often appeared to him in a dream; how he hadbeen threatened, and the calamities in consequence,which the gods had inflicted oh him; by the unanimousadvice of all present, he was conveyed to the consuls ina litter, into the forum. By their order he was trans­ported from thence into the senate-house; and when hehad made the same relation there, another extraordinarycircumstance happened, to the surprise of every body;the man who was carried thither, without the use of asingle member, returned, as the story goes, upon hisown legs.
CHAP. XXXVfl.
Tullui's plan for spiriting up -the Vdsci against Rome.
1 HE senate decreed, that the games should be cele­brated with all possible magnificence. At the desire ofAttius Tullus, vast numbers of the Volscian youth re­paired to Rome to see them. Before the exhibition,Tullus waited on the consuls as had been concerted athome with Martins, and tells them Ire had something ofimportance to communicate that concerned the state.Having retired where they could not be overheard, hetold them, " h is with the utmost reluctancy that I am to"mention any circumstance that may seem to reflect"the teast dishonour on my countrymen: but I come"not to accuse them of any thing they have alreadyl•' done, but to put you on your guard, with respect to"what they may do. The disposition Of my country-"men is by far more fluctuating and restless than I"could wish. This we have felt to our cost, since we"owe our existence as a nation, at present, more to"your good nature, than our own good behaviour."There are in the city at this moment, vast numbers of"the Volsct. The scene of exhibition will soon open.







OCR Output








CHAP. 13. ROMAN HISTORY. 125


CHAP. XIII.
Porsenna concludes a peace with Rome. Adventure ofC/alia.
JVlUCIUS being thus dismissed, who afterwards fromthe loss of his right hand, got the sirname of Scaavola;ambassadors from Porsenna followed him to Rome. Sostrongly had he been impressed with the first attemptagainst him, in which nothing had saved him but a mis­take of the hand that directed it, and reflecting, that hemust repeatedly run the same risk, while a single oneof the conspirators existed, he was determined to offerconditions of peace to the Romans, as a motion fromhimself.
He endeavoured, though to no purpose, to have therestoration of the Tarquins made a clause in the articlesof pacification, because he conld not refuse them t hatfavour; not but that he knew welt th« Romans wouldnever accede to the proposal. An article; requiring therestitution of lands to the Vejentes, was granted; andthe Romans agreed to give hostages, upon condition thegarrison should be withdrawn from the Janiculum. Peacebeing now settled upon these terms, Porsenna drew offhis troops from the Janiculum, and evacuated the Ro­man territory. The fathers, in consideration of Mucins'sspirited conduct, made him a present of lands on theother side of the Tiber, which ever after, weut by thename of the Meadows of Mucius.
Bravery being thus distinguished, the ladies too wereemulous, by their actions, to do honour to their country.Clselia, a young lady, one of the hostages.xas the campof the Etrurians, was at no great distance from the banteof the Tiber, having escaped from her guard, put-her­self at the head of a troop of her companions, and amidsta shower of the enemy's darts, swam to (he other side ofthe river, brought them to Rome, and delivered themsafe to their relations. At which, when it was told tothe king, he was at first offended, and sent deputies toRome, demanding Clselia to be delivered up again; forthe rest, he did not much regard. Afterwards transport-







OCR Output








CHAP. 9. ROMAN HISTORY/ 27


rowed the Curule chair,* and the Toga pratexta.^—What gave occasion to this number among the Etruri­ans, was the number of nations of which they consisted,each having a vote in the election of a king, to whomalso each of them assigned a Lictor.
In the mean time, the walls of the city were extended,by including one place after another within their works;which they carried on more in hopes of an accession ofinhabitants, than for the accommodation of the numbersthey had at present. Thereafter, that this speculationmight not be aerial, Romulus, in order to increase hisnumbers, adopting the policy of those ancient founders,who by drawing togetlier an assemblage of people in lowcircumstances, and of mean extraction, pretended thatmen arose to them out of the earth, opened an asylumin that place, which is now enclosed, as you go downthe hill between the two groves: thither, freed menand .slaves, and whoever had a taste for novelty, fled inmultitudes without distinction, from the neighbouringnations, which was the first accession to their infantpower, -
As they were now become a pretty formidable party,the next step was to put them under some proper regu­lation. For this purpose, an hundred Senators werechosen; either because that number was thought suffi­cient, or because no more were found, who could withpropriety be elected. But it was surely out of respect/that they were called Fathers, and their children Pa^tricians. s-~~
CHAP. IX.
War with the Ssiinw.
JK.OME was now powerful enough to cope with anyof its neighbours; but for want of women, their dura­tion as a state, could not be extended beyond the period
* An ivory chair, carved and placed in a chariot, in which thechief magistrates were carried into council.
f A white robe reaching down to the ancles, edged with a pur­ple lace, wore by the chief magistrates and senators on festivaldays, M a badge of distinction.







OCR Output








CHAP. 5. ROMAN HISTORY. .21


home the children to his cot, to be nursed by his wifeLaurentia. Some contend that this same Laurentia, wascalled Lupa among the shepherds, on account of hereasy virtue, and that the miraculous story took its risefrom that circumstance.
The children being thus born, and thus brought up,did not loiter about the folds, nor tend the flocks, evenwhen they were yet young, but roamed and hunted inthe forests; by which exercise, having acquired strength,and .courage, they not only encountered witd beasts, butattacked bands of robbers, loaded with plunder; anddivided the spoil amongst the shepherds. Their corpsbecoming more numerous every day, they now beganto keep festivals, and have rural sports together.


I


CHAP. V. AmuIiiM killed.


T is asserted, that at this very time, the festival ofthe Lupercalia* was solemnized on mount Palatine,which, from Pallantium, a city of Arcadia, was firstcalled Pallantiuro, and afterwards Palatium.—That thereEvander, descended of these Arcadians, who,for manyages before, had been in possession of that country, hadinstituted that festival brought with him from Arcadia.It was to be solemnized by young men, who were to runnaked, making every attitude expressive of mirth andhumour, in honour of Pan Lyceus-f; to whom after­wards the Romans gave the name of Innus.—That therobbers having learned when this festival was to be so­lemnized, and irritated for the loss of their plunder, layin wait for them while engaged in these sports. Romu­lus by the gallantry of his defence, got clear off, but Re­mus fell into their hands, and was delivered to km**Amulius, loaded with accusations attested bv themselves.
* Two goats and a dog were sacrificed; and the foreheads oftwo young men of quality were touched with the bloody knife,whitst others wiped oft'the blood with woot dipt in mitk. Thegoats skins were cut in thongs, with which the young men struckall they met, particularly young married women, who believedthat such strokes contributed to easy conception and delivery.
f A sirname given to Pan, because it was thought he "protectedthe flocks from the wolvw.







OCR Output








CHAP. 27. ROMAN HISTORY.


CHAP. XXVII.
^•< . •"
Disputes about the debts betvxen the Senate and People.
jT\.FrERthe defeat of the Arunci, the Romans whobad been victorious in so many battles, in so short atime, now fully expected, thai the promises made themby the consul and senate, would have been put in execu­tion. But Appius, from the native haughtiness of histemper, and with a view to make void the promise hiscolleague had made the people, adjudged the causes ofthe debtors, with all the rigour the law would admit. Inconsequence of which, they, who before had been prison­ers, were delivered up to (heir creditors again, and otherswere also added to the list.
When diligence was to be executed against a soldier,he immediately applied to the other consul. To Servi-lius the multitude crowded for relief. They remindedhim <-f his promises, enumerating their respective ser­vices, and exposing the wounds they had received. Theypressed him to lay their case before the senate, that astheir consul, he might protect his citizens, and as theirgeneral, his soldiers.
These arguments had sufficient weight with 'the con­sul, but circumstances obliged him to temporize: for hehad not only his colleague to combat with, but the wholebody of the Patricians were unanimous against him. Inendeavouring to please both parties, he had the good-willof neither. - The senators considered him as a soft easyconsul, that flattered the multitude, and the people pro­nounced him a cheat, and it soon appeared that he wasbated as much as Appius.
A dispute arose about the dedication of the temple ofMercury, an honour, which each of the consuls claimedas his right. The senate referred the cognizance of thataffair to the people, aml enacted, that whoever should bepromoted to that honour, should preside in the court ofvictuallers, establish a board of trade, and act as highpriest, within the verge of the temple.
The people gave that honourable commission to M.Loetonus, the first centurion of a legion; but it was abuu­







OCR Output








CHAP. 55. ROMAN HISTORY. 391


Sortie time after, fortune inclining to the side of thepeople, expresses arrived with the accounts that the sol­diers yjio kept garrison in the fortress ot Carventum,having gone out on a foraging match, the jEqui hadsurprised the'fort, and put the tew who were left for itsdefence to the sword. That the rest of the soldiers, eitheras they returned, and were entering the fort again, oras thev were found straggling in the country, had metwitti the same fate. This affair, prejudicial as it was tothe state, strengthened the hands of the tribunes in thepresent dispute. For, it was to no purpose that theyhad been solicited to obstruct the levies no longer, nowthat matters were come to this extremity; wherefore, asthey still continued inflexible, notwithstanding the siermwhich threatened the state, and the odium they werelike to bring on themselves, the senate was obtiged topass an act for the election of military tribunes, but withthis express provision, that none of those who acted inthe capacity of tribune of the people for this year, shouldbe elected, nor be re-elected to the office of tribune forthe succeeding year.
Without all doubt, the senate had the Icilii in theireye, whom they accused of aspiring to a consular office,as a reward of the seditious use they made of theirtribunitian power. Then the levies were made, andpreparations for war carried on, with the universal con­sent of all ranks. Whether both consuls marched to re­take the fortress of Carventum, or one of them staid inthe city to preside at the election, is a question aboutwhich authors are not agreed. But, it is abundantlycertain, nor has it been contradicted, that the Roman ar­my, after they had spent a long time before Carventum,raised the siege, and went against Verrugo, a city of theVolsci, which they reduced, and by ravaging the terri­tories of the /E(jui and Volsci, made a considerablebooty.







OCR Output








388 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV.


public, would give up what they held by so unjust a te­nure, he would obstruct the levies no longer. The othernine tribunes put an end to the dispute, and declared itwas the opinion of their college, ' That in opposition to'their colleague, Micnius, they should support the con-• sul Valerius, in imposing fines, or inflicting other pu-'nishments on those who refused to enlist for the war.'The consul now armed with this decree, having seizedand imprisoned some of them who had appealed to thetribunes for assistance, the rest were afraid, and took themilitary oath.
However much the consul hated the army, and thearmy him, the moment they appeared before the fortressof Carventitm, they discovered the greatest ardour in dis­lodging the garrison, and recovering the fort. The ne­gligence of such of the garrison as had gone to plunder inthe neighbourhood, gave them a favourable opportunityfor the assault. The booty was considerable, as it con­tained the magazine of all their praedatory acquisitionsround the country. The consul ordered the quaestors tosell the whole at vendue, and put the price in the pablictreasur)-, telling the soldiers they should share in the spoil,when they showed less reluctance to the war. This in-.creased the resentment of the people, as well as of thesoldiers, against the consul; insomuch,.that when, by.order of the senate, he entered the city with an ovation,the soldiers, in their licentious manner, repeated alter­nately a. rough kind of verses, expressive of reproachesto the consul, and high encomiums on the name ofMaenius. The people who lined the way to see the pro­cession, rivalled the soldiers, in expressing their regardto Maenius, by loud acclamations and applauses, as oft asthey heard his name. The senators were,more uneasy onthis account, than at the freedom the soldiers, were tak­ing with the consul, as it was no uncommon thing, onsuch occasions; and concluding from this, that Maeniuswould certainly be advanced to the military tribuneshijj,should he appear as a candidate, they took care to ex­clude him, by appointing thu comitia to be hehj for ,electing consuls.







OCR Output








CHAP. 36. ROMAN HISTORV. 453


CHAP. XXXVI.
- , •\-.'.. ' ." I
Fatal error of the Fabii.
T. • . : ,. '. . j.HE embassy in itself had nothing irritating, but itwas delivered in a tone, -and with an air which breathedmore of the Gaulic fierceness, than of Roman politeness.Having delivered their commission in a council of theGauls they had the following return: 'That the name ofthe Romans.was but iittle known to them, though theyhad no tioubt of their bravery, since the Clusians hadthought proper to apply to them in their danger. Thatas thjey had chose rather to employ the methods of pa­cification, than their arms, in defence of their allies,they, on their side, should not reject the offered peace,provided the Clusians, who had more land than theycould well manage, would give up a part of it to the Gauls,who needed it. Without this condition, all proposalsfor peace were inadmissible. That they would be gladto receive their answer in presence of the Roman am­bassadors; and in case of a refusal, they would givethem battle in presence of the same Romans, that theymight be able to say, upoo their return, how much theGauls are superior to all mankind in bravery.'Upon this, the ambassadors demanded to know, ' Bywhat right they could insist on having land from itspossessors, and if not granted, to threaten them withwar? Besides, what business had they in Tuscany?We carry our right,' replied they fiercely, ' in the pointsof our swords; the brave are lords of the world.' Bothsides were now highly exasperated, and flew to their arms,and began the action. There, the ambassadors, the fatesHOW pushing on the destruction .of Rome, in direct con­tradiction to the law of nations, took up arms. Nor couldthis remain a secret, when three warriors of the greatestdistinction and valour of all the Roman youth, fought atthe head of the Etrurians: so conspicuously did thebravery of the?e strangers distinguish them from theClusians. Moreover, Q. Fabius, riding up before thefirst line, and meeting one of the Gaulic commanderswho was rushing furiously upon the van of the Etrurians,ran him through the side with his lance, and kilted him







OCR Output








216 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK 71I.


"like this would not only render the consular, but the"tribnnitian power, odious and insupportable, which"having only of late been made familiar, and recon-"ciled to the minds of the patricians, would again be-"come their abhorrence."
"I am not, (says he,) to insist, that you should give"up your proposition;" and addressing himself to hiscolleagues, " It is you whom we conjure, first of all to-"consider, that the original design of the tribunitian"power was for the protection of individuals, and not"for the destruction of the whole community. You"were made the tribunes of the people, not ihe perse-"cutors of the senate. Should the majesty of the Re-"public in the absence of its magistrates be violated, it"would be painful to us ;—to you it would be an invi-"dious affair. A tittle of your power you will not lose,"but you will avoid much hatred. Use your interest"with your colleague, to suffer the matter to rest as it"is, till the return of the supreme magistrates. The •"very JE<^a\ and Volsci had the humanity to desist from"a cruel and destructive war against us last year, when"the plague had deprived us of both our consuls." Hiscolleagues interposed, and Terentillus complied; and thebill being in appearance put off', though in reality it waswithdrawn, the consuls were immediately recalled.
CHAP. X.
Lucretius it appointed a triumph. Prodigies.Tribunitian contests,
.LUCRETIUS returned to Rome with prodigious booty,but still greater glory. On his arrival, he exposed thewhole spoils in the Campus Martius, for three days toge­ther, that individuals might know, and carry away theirown property, which considerably enhanced his repu­tation. What nobody appeared to rlaim, was sold, Atriumph was unanimously decreed him, but it was sus­pended; the tribune still insisting on his bill, which incourse came in before the decree relating to the consul.For some days it was warmly debated in the senate', andbefore the people; but the tribune at length yielded tothe consuls' authority, and withdrew his bill.







OCR Output








362 TITUS LIVIUS' . BOOK IV.


'to disputes, where the danger was so great, and the ad-'vantage nothing; from which he could promise himself
• for certain, eternal persecution from the senators, with'whom he was to enter the lists; and from the people,'from whom are all his exertions, no further honour or
• regard. . It is from great honours that great courage'proceeds; and no Plebeian could think meanly of hiui-
• self, if he ceased to be despised by others. They
• ought certainly, at least, to make a trial, in an instance'or two, whether any Plebeian be capable to support the'weight of a great office in the state, and whether it is'so prodigious an affair, to find a man of real merit and'valour, born among the people/'
After many a struggle, it was carried, that military tri-.bunes, with consular power, might be elected, and thattoo from the body of the people. Men who had distin­guished themselves, both in peace and war, offered theirservices. In the first years they were insulted, rejected,and exposed to the ridicule of the senators; and at last,they would no longer lay themselves open to such af­fronts. No good reason could be assigned, why a lawshould not be entirely abolished, that gave a right whichthey were never to use; for, it would be less shameful forthem to be excluded by an unjust law, than passed byand neglected, for their own personal defects.
CHAP. XXXVI.
Scheme nf the Military Tribunes.
JL HE applause with which harangues of this kind werereceived, induced some of the Plebetan order to standcandidates for the office of military tribune; promising,some of them to get one, some another law passed, forthe interest of the commons, during their administration.The people were encouraged to hope for a division of thepublic lands among them, an establishment of new co­lonies, and a tax to be laid on ihe landed interest, to raisea fund for the payment of the army. The military tri­bunes took the advantage of a season when few of thepeople were in town, having given the senators secret in­timation to return against a certain day, iu absence ef the
-' ''


 







OCR Output








316 TITUS LIVUUS' , BOOK IV,


CHAP. IV.
In continuation.
1 GRANT you that no Plebeian has been made con­sul, since the expulsion of the kings; and pray, whatthen? Are we never to think of any new institution?In an infant state as this is, how many regulations muststill be wanting? and must these, however necessary,and essential, be for ever excluded? In the reign ofRoruulus, whoever heard of priests or augurs? but theyware instituted by NumaPompilius. In the city therewas originally no census, no distribution of the peopleinto centuries and classes, till they were appointed byServius Tullius. The title of consul never existed, tillconsuls were created after the expulsion of kings. Wasthere ever a dictator, either in name or authority, till thesenate brought that office into existence? There wasa time when tribunes, ediles, and quaestors were un­known; but it was determined that they should b.e.Within these ten years, we made decemvirs for com­piling laws, and we have also unmade them. Whocan imagine, in a city which is to endure for ever, andis increasing to infinity, b'ut that new offices, priest­hoods, privileges and laws, will be instituted both forfamilies and individuals? This very law, which prohi­bits intermarriages between the two orders of the state,was it not passed by the decemvirs a few years ago, tothe disgrace of'the public, and the detriment of thepeople? Can any thing in effect be more expressive ofcontempt, more scandalous and disgraceful, than to de­clare one part of the city so impure and unclean, thatit is unworthy to be allied with the other in marriage?What is it else than to be subjected to a sequestration,a banishment within these walls? They are all uponthe watch to prevent every connection with us by af­finity or relation, and particularly that there may beno mixture of blood. What is the meaning of all this?If this nobility of yours has been polluted in this way,which, after all, the greatest part of you, who are de­scended of the Albines or Sabines, owe neither to your


 







OCR Output








CHAP. 21. ROMAN HISTORY. 4SS


. • CHAP. XXI; . • \
i
Veii taken and plundered by the Soldiers.
JL HE dictator then wept out to take the auspices, andordered the soldiers to arm. 'O Pythian Apollo, (saidhe,) it is by thy inspiration, and under thy direction,that I am going to carry destruction to Veii; to you,then, I devote the tenth part of the spoils. And Oqueen Juno, who now residest in Veii, be pleased tofollow us victorious to our city, which shall soon be thycity, and where thou shalt possess a temple worthy thymajesty.' Having fmished his prayers, and his armybeing sufficiently numerous, he ordered an assault to bemade on all sides of the place at once, to give the be­sieged no opportunity of discovering their danger fromthe mine. The Vejentes never dreamed that they werebetrayed by their own diviners, and given up by foreignoracles; that some of their tutelarv gods had been invit­ed to partake of the spoils, and others conjured to leavetheir city, to take up with, new habitations and newtemples among the enemy; and, in shori, that their lasthour was come: and, therefore, feariug nothing less thanthat their walls were undermined, and their citadel fullof enemies, were eager to run in emulation of each other•to the walls, unable to guess why the Romans, who hadnot appeared out of their lines for many days, advancedall mi a sudden like madmen, to attack the place on allskies.
A story goes here, that his majesty of Veii was, at thatinstant, sacrificing to the gods, when the soldiers in themine heard the diviner say, that the gods would give thevictory to him who should dissect the entrails of that vic­tim; and the Romans immediately opening the mine,seized upon the entrails, and carried them to the dicta­tor. But in things of so old a date, I think it sufficientto take what is probable for true. Incidents'of this kind,which are fitter for the stage, that dehghts in the marvel.Ious, than for history, it is not worth while either to af­firm or refute.
A select body of troops, which at that time filled thewine, appeared suddenly in arms in the temple of Juno,







OCR Output








22 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


They were charged in particular, with making incur­sions on, and ravaging Numitor's lands, assisted by aband of young fellow scollected tor the purpose; in con­sequence of which, Remus was delivered over to Numi-tor to be punished. It is to be observed, that Faustulusfrom the beginning had some notion that the childrenhe bad been bringing up were of the blood royal, forhe knew they had been exposed by the king's order, andthe time he had taken them up, corresponded exactlywith the date of the order: but he bad no intention ofdiscovering the secret unseasonably, before he found aproper opportunity, or was.compelled by necessity. Ne­cessity was his first motive: for, instigated by his concernfor the safety of his ward, he makes a full discovery toRomulus. By chance too, when Nutnitor had Remusin custody, he had heard that he had a twin-brother;and by comparing their ages with their dispositions,which he found the very reverse of servile, he was struckwith the idea of his grand-children; and upon fartherinquiry, was almost determined to acknowledge Remus.Wherefore a plot is laid for the king on all sides.
Romulus, however, did not advance with his young^adventurers in a body, as being, by open force, unequalto the attempt; but having ordered the shepherds, bydifferent routs, to meet at the palace, at an hour con­certed, he then forces his way to.the king, whilst fromNumitor's house, Remus advances with another party,which he had convened for his brother's assistance.


CHAP. VI.


The city Rome built by Romulus.
j\UMITOR, at the beginning of the insurrection,under pretence that an enemy had invaded the city,and made their way good to the palace, called off theAlban youth to garrison and defend the castle. Butwhen he saw his grand-sons advancing towards him, withloud huzzas, having done their business, he immediatelycalled a council, laid open to them his brother's wickedproceedings against himself, acquaints them with the







OCR Output








28 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


of their own existence, having no partners at home,nor the means of procuring (hem from their neighbours.For this reason, Romulus, with the advice of the fathers,sent deputies through the neighbouring states, to solicittheir alliance and connexion, by intermarrying with hisnew subjecis: and urging, "That cities, like other"things, rose from very small beginnings;—That those"who were assisted by the gods, and their own indus-"try, have in time become great and opulent.—That"they might be very sensible, that the gods had coun-"tenanced the building of Rome; and that in point of"virtuous industry, the citizens would not be deficient.—"That therefore, he hoped, as they themselves were*• men, they would not refuse to mix their blood and fa-"milies with men like themselves." ,i.!
This embassy had a gracious reception nowhere, andat the same time that they were held in the utmost con­tempt, they were dreaded as a monster growing up inthe heart of their country, to devour them and their pos­terity. They were therefore dismissed by most of theneighbouring states, with this insulting question, " Whe-"ther had they opened an asylum for female vagrants,•" for such only would be suitable matches for them?"The Roman youth were not a little piqued at this afl'ront,and without doubt, began to meditate on a more violentmode of courtship. To give them time and opportunityfor putting their designs in execution, Romulus, con­cealing his chagrin, makes preparations for celebratingsolemn games in honour of Equestrian Neptune.* Hecalls them Consualia ;f and orders them to be announ­ced to all the cities around. They were celebrated withall the pomp and magnificence they could contrive orafford, that their splendour might not come short of thepopular expectations. Great crowds assembled, particu­larly from the adjoining cities Caenina, Crusturninium,and Antemnae.J even out of curiosity to see the new
* Because be is said to have raised the first house from theearth by a stroke of his Trident.
•(•From Consus, the go<\ of counsel, because this politic wasthe effect of great deliberation.
J Towns near Rome, but their modern names little known.







OCR Output








CHAP. 43. ROMAN HISTORY. 465


CHAP. XLIII.
The Gauk disappointed. Turn the siege into a blockade.Cumillus at Ardea.
JL HE Gauls, on their side, who for some days had car­ried on an ineffectual war against the houses, and seeingnothing now remaining of the captive city, after theHumes and ruins, but the enemy still in arms, neitherterrified with so many calamities, nor in the least dis­posed to surrender, unless compelled, resolved to makethe last experiment, and attack the citadel in form. Hav­ing, therefore, given the signal, by the morning's dawn,they drew up their whole army in the forum? afterwhich, they advanced to the hill with great cries, co­vering their heads with their shields, in the form oftortoises. The Romans, without trouble or confusion,having posted guards on all the avenues, and disposedtheir best troops against the attack, suffered the enemyto ascend, concluding that the higher they advanced, themore easy it would be to drive them down the steep de­clivity. Accordingly, they stopped short in the middleof the descent,' and having the advantage of an emi­nence, which seemed to be calculated by nature for an­noying the enemy, they fell upon the Gauls with greatimpetuosity, and drove them back tumbling one aboveanother, with such slaughter, as prevented them frommaking a second attempt,. either with detachments, or thewhole of their army.
WJierefoix-, finding it impracticable to carry the cityby assault, they turned their seige into a blockade. Thishad never come into their heads-before, for all the corn inthe city had perished in the general conflagration, andthe Romans took care to carry all that could be found inthe country into Veii. Wherefore, the Gauls havingdivided their army, employed part of them to forage inthe neighbourhood, whilst the rest remained to contmuethe blockade, trusting for provisions to the'rr foragingparties.
In their excursions, they found an opportunity of put­ting the Roman bravery to the test. For, chance fed







OCR Output








CHAP. 3. ROMAN HISTORY.


tuals and sleep, and next morning, as soon as it was^ight, the Roman army was drawn up, a little beforethe /Equi made their appearance, who, at length, -ad­vanced in battalia.
The battle was obstinate on both sides. Revenge andpassion animated the Romans, whilst the .ffilqui, consciousof having involved themselves in this difficulty, by theirperfidy; and despairing of future credit,. were stimulatedto make the boldest efforts. They could not, however,stand the charge of the Roman army, but were defeated,and obliged to retire into their own country. Notwith­standing of this chastisement, they were as little as ever"inclined to peace, the licentious populace, upbraidingtheir leaders with risking their cause to a pitched battle,in which the excellency of the Romans consisted. Thatthe /Equi succeeded best, when disposed in plundering•parties, by making inroads, and that it was much saferto trust to an irregular Vvar, by skirmishing parties pro­perly disposed, than to their whole force, in one decisiveaction.
CHAP. III.\
New attempts of the Mqni, who are discharged.
VV HEREFORE, leaving their camp under a guard,they sallied out with such fury upon the Roman territo­ries, that they spread terror, even to the city. The terrorof this invasion was greatly heightened by the surprise;for an enemy already conquered, and as it were, besieged• in their camp, could not be in the properest trim forplundering excursions, and consequently no formidableobject. The country people, struck with a panic, runup to the very gates, and their fears shewing them everyobject in a magnifying glass, cried out, that it was notsmall foraging parties, but a regular army, and wholelegions of enemies advancing with every hostile purposeto storm the city. They who were nearest the gates,retailed this intelligence to others, and the farther itspread, the more it was magnified'. Such was the con­fusion and noise whilst they called to arms, that, hadthe city been taken, the terror could not have been much
K







OCR Output








36 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


demanded satisfaction, were very little regarded byTatius; for which reason the punishment of his relationsrecoiled upon himself; for the people at Lavinuim, wherehe was attending some annual solemnity, rose up andkilled him.—It was said of Romulus, that he gave him­self less concern about this event, than it seemed to claim;whether it was, that associates in sovereign power areseldom firm friends, or that he really thought Tatius hadmet with the fate he deserved: however, no war follow­ed. Only, to expiate in some measure the indignity donethe ambassadors, and the murder of the king, the treatybetween the two cities, Rome and Lavinium, was renewed.Though peace, of which there was little expectation, hadbeen thus concluded with the Laurentes, another warbroke out much nearer, nay, almost at the very gates ofRome.
The Fidenates finding the Roman power was growingtoo formidable in their neighbourhood, were for strikinga blow before it should arrive at that pitch of greatness,which the Vapidity of its progress seemed to point at?Wherefore, having let loose a body of youth in arms,upon the Roman territory, they laid waste all the coun­try between Rome and Fidenae. Then turning to theleft, because they were prevented by the Tiber on theright, they continued their depredations, to the greatterror of the country people, who flying in crowds fromthe country to the town, were the first to bring adviceof the irruption.
Roused by this intelligence, Romulus instantly leadsout his army; for the approaches of the enemy were toonear to admit of deliberation. He encamps about a. mile from Fidenae. Marching put with the main body,and leaving only a small party'for a guard, he orders adetachment to ly in ambush, in a place entirely coveredwith brushwood: then advancing with the greater partof the foot, and all the horse, he rode up to the enemy'sgates in a disorderly and blustering manner; by whichhe provoked the enemy to sally out, which was all heaimed at.
The behaviour of the horse too, made the appearanceof a sudden retreat seem less affected; for whilst theyseemed through fear to hesitate whether they should







OCR Output








54 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


Thus were Duumvirs appointed, who thought, accord­ing to the letter of the law, they could not acquit him,even had he been innocent, wherefore, havmg foundhim guilty, one of them condemned him in these words:"Publius Horatius, 1 judge thee guilty of murder; Go,"Lictor, bind his hands." The Lietor had come up,and %vas fastening the rope, when Horatius, by the adviceof Tullus, a mild interpreter of the law, cried out, "I ap-"peal;" upon which the cause was carried before thepeople.
During the trial, the judges were moved with com­passion, especially when old P. Horatius cried out, "That"it was his own opinion, his daughter had justly me-"riled her fate; for had he thought bis son criminal,"he would, by his paternal authority, have punished<" him." , Then having recourse to' entreaties, conjuringthem not to render him childless now, whom but a littlebefore, they had seen blessed with an eKcellent progeny.In the mean time, the old ma'n embracing his sou, andpointing to the spoils of the Curiatii, deposited-in thatplace, which they now. call Pila Hnratia: "Is it possi­ble, (continued he,) O Romans! that you can tamelyl>i-lu Id this brave champion, who but a little whileago, walked in your sight, glorious and triumphant,adorned with the spoils of your enemies, bound to aitinfamous stake,—expiring amidst scourging and tor­tures? A spectacle so shocking that even the Albaascould hardly bear! Go, Lictor; bind those victorioushands, which so lately, in arms, acquired empire forthe people of Rome; veil the head of the deliverer ofthis city; hang him on an accursed tree; scourge him"either within the Pomrerium, so it be done amidst the"Pila Horatio.,* and spoils obtained by his valour, or"without the Pomoarimn, provided it be among the"tombs of the Curiatii: For which way can you lead"this youth, where he shall not find in the monuments"of his glory, a protection against the ignominy of such"a punishment."
The people could not hold out against the tears of
* A square pillar built of stone.







OCR Output








486 CONTENTS.


Chap. Pag*
Ivi. He sends a colony to Signia and Cere-
ihim. Sends Brutus to Delpho? ..... 96
Ivii. A dispute about the excellency of wives, 99
Iviii. Lucretia ravished; stabs herself 100
lix. The Tarquins banished 102
Ix. Brutus and Collatmus created consuls .... 104
BOOK II.
Containing the Establishment of the Consular Government,and of the Tribunitian Power; their contests at home,and Wars abroad, till the year of Rome, 286.
Chap. i. Brutus binds the people by oath never to
suffer a king at Rome 105
ii. Constrains Tarquinius Collations, on sus­
picion of an attachment to the Tar-
iiuins, to resign the consulship, and
leave Rome 107
lii. Deputies from the Tarquins arrive at
Rome 109
iv. The plot discovered by means of a slave,
and the conspirators clapt in irons ... HO-v. The conspirators condemned and execut­ed; and the effects of the Tarquinsgiven up to be plundered by the peo­ple Ill
vi. The Tarquins muster an army, are de­feated; but Brutus is killed 1 I3
vii. The ladies mourn for Brutus a whole year, 115
viii. P. Valerius proposes a law, for allowingappeals to the people. The capitol
dedicated II?
ix. Porsenna prevailed on to espouse the
quarrel of the Tarquins IIS
x. The gallantry of Cocles 119
xi. "Porsenna turns the siege into a blockade, 121
xii. Mucius's adventure .'... 122
xiii. Porsenna concludes a peace with Rome.
Adventure of Claelia 125
xiv. Aruns, Porsenna's son, roughly handled
at Aricia .' 126
xv. Porsenna semis an embassy to Rome ...... 127







OCR Output








. ii. ROMAN HISTORY. 41?


—No rest at all for the poor Plebeians, who after all
their other hardships, are now taxed, although they had
brought back nothing from the wars, but bodies worn
out with fatigue, wounds, and old age; and at home,
found their farms uncultivated through the long absence
'of their owners; and yet, notwithstanding the ruinous
'state of their affairs, tribute they must pay. Thus does'
''the pay of the army return accumulated to the state, as
• if it had been let out at interest.'
Besides the levies, taxes, and other cases of more im­portance, at the election of the Plebeian tribunes, thenumber could not be completed. The Patricians strug­gled hard to get some of their erder co-opted to fill upthe vacant places; and when they failed in that attempt,they carried that two Plebeians, C. Lacerius, and M.Acutius, should be elected, and that no doubt, by meansof their own influence, for the purpose of invalidatingthe tribonian law.
CHAP. XI.
Prosecution of Scrgiiis and Virginius.
./\MONG tfiose who had been chosen, there happenedto be one Trebonius, who believ.ed that nothing less wasdue to his name and family, than the defence of a lawinstituted by one of his ancestors. He exclaimed, ' Thatthe military tribunes had extorted what some of thePatricians had sued for in vain, as they had found intheir first attempt; that the Trebohian law was infring­ed, and a co-option of tribunes effected, not by thesuffrages of the people, but by the authority of thePatricians, and the matter was now come to that pass,that the tribunes of the commons were either actuallyPatricians, or their creatures. The sacred laws wereprostituted, and the power of the tribunes trampled un­der foot: and he insisted all these were owing to thefraudulent practices of the Patricians, and the wicked­ness and treachery of his colleagues.'Whilst not only the senators, but even the tribunes,the co-opted as well as the elected, had incurred theodium of the people, these of the collesje, P. Curatius,AL Mitilius, and M. Minutius, afraid of losing their in­







OCR Output








CHAP. 3. ROMAN HISTORY. 109


ing, and sonffitimes advising him to suffer himself to beprevailed upon, by the united wishes of his country. Hethen began to consider, that after he should be returnedto the condition of a private citizen, he might be obligedto leave the city, his estate might be confiscated, and be­sides, he might receive some other mark of disgrace;wherefore, he resigned the consulship, and having con­veyed all his effects to Lavinium, he retired from Rome.Brutus, by a decree of the senate, moved to thepeople, that all the family of the Tarquins should bebanished: and in an assembly by centuries, he got Pub-lius Valerius, who had assisted him in expelling theTarquins, to be chosen his colleague.
CHAP. III.
Deputies from the Tarquins arrive at Rome.
.ALTHOUGH nobody doubted that the Tarquinswould have recourse to arms, yet that happened not sosoon as was generally expected: The Romans were onthe point, however, of losing their liberty by deceitfuland treasonable practices, of which they had never en­tertained a suspicion.
Among the Roman youth, there were some of illus­trious families, who, during the late reign had pursuedtheir pleasures without restraint; and being much aboutthe same age, and much in company with the youngTarquins, were accustomed to take all the liberties com­mon to princes. Wishing still to live in the same licetvtious stile, although now every citizen was upon the samefooting, they complained to one another, that whateverliberty other men enjoyed, they saw nothing for them­selves but slavery. "A king, continued they, is a man;—from whom you may obtain justice; and in case ofneed, you may have indulgence too. Here there is aplea for interest and favour. A king can both showhis resentment and 'his clemency, and distinguish afriend from a foe. But the laws, always deaf and in-"exorable, are better calculated for the poor than the"rich! only once transgress them, and you will find,"that neither indulgence nor pardon is competent.
F







OCR Output








344 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK. IV.


once more to be created dictator. Tlf named for masterof (he horse A. Posihumius Tubertus^and preparationswere made for the war, with a vigour proportioned to theforce of all Etruna, compared to thai of only two of itsconstituent parts. •-"
CHAP. XXIV.
The Dictator passes a popular law, which is highly resentedby the Censors.
.DUT this affair created less disturbance than was ge­nerally expected: wherefore, when advices were broughtby the merchants, that the Etrurians had refused to beconcerned with the Vejentes, telling them, since they hadengaged in a war, without consulting them, they mustcarry it on without their assistance, and not involve thosein their misfortune?, whom they excluded from their hopesin more promising days.
The dictator then, thus disappointed in his expectationof military glory, that he might not seem to have beencreated in vain, wished to leave a monument of his dicta­torship in time of ps:ace; and, with that view, set aboutreducing the privileges of the censors; either because hethought their power too extensive, or perhaps because bewas less dissatisfied with the greatness of their honoursthan the time of their duration. Therefore, having cal­led an assembly, he represented, 'That as the immortalgods had takpn upon themselves the charge of the re­public's affairs abroad, under whose protection theymig-ht rest secure; it was his business to attend to theliberty of the people, which could only be done with­in the walls of the city. That lor this purpose, he hadto observe, that it was a matter of the last importance,to take care, that the great offices of the state shouldnot continue long in the same hivnds, and that boundsbe set to the duration of employments, to the powerannexed to which, all limitation is impossible. Thatall other offices were annual, the censorship alone quin­quennial. That it was intolerable to live for so manyyears exposed to the power of the same persons. Thattherefore, he was to propose a law restricting the cen­sorship to the continuance of eighteen months.*


 







OCR Output








SI* TITUS LI VMS' Boon IB.


Rome was in the most dreadful consternation; notthat they wanted the means of defence, but because thealarm was sa sudden and unexpected. The governmentof the city bad, at that time, been committed to Q. Fabius.He armed all the youth; and having posted guards inproper places, put the city in a state of safety and quiet.Wherefore, as the enemy, having seized upon all th«ycould in the adjacent countries, were fetching a compassto return home, not daring to advance nearer the city,and growing more careless in their march, the fa-rthe^they got from it, fell in with the consul Lucretius, pre­viously informed of their route by his scouts, and everyway prepared for action. Wherefore, the courage of thesoldiers being already wound up to the highest pitch,they charged the confederates, who were struck with asudden panic, and though somewhat inferior in point ofnumbers, gave them a total overthrow. They fled- intothe valleys, whence the outlets were difficult, and so weresurrounded on all sides. There the whole nation of theVolsci was almost all cut to pieces.
Some annals ascertain the number of the slain in theaction and the flight, to be' 14,470, the number of pri­soners 1,250, and add, that twenty-seven standards werebrought out of the field. It is very possible this numberof killed may be somewhat exaggerated; but it is verycertain, however, that the slaughter was prodigious.—The victorious consul returned with a great booty, backto his camp.
Then both consuls encamped together; and the jEquiand Volsci also joined the wreck of their armies. A bat­tle was the consequence, the 'bird this year, [A. R. 291.]Fortune still contmuing to side with the Roman*; forthe enemy were routed, and their camp taken.
CHAP. IX.
A law proposed to retrench the power of the Consuls, andopposed by 2. Fabius.
.l HUS, once more, did the Roman state resume its for­mer splendour: But success abroad, was immediatelyproductive of commotions at home. C. Terentillus Arsa,was this year tribune of the people. He thinking the







OCR Output








350 TITUS LIVIUS' Book IV-


Albus, he mached himself with a part of his army,fetching a small compass, to a place quite out of sight ofthe action; from whence he might fall on the enemy'srear, before they could be aware of his design. He leftthe care of the.camp to Q. Sulpicius, one of his lieuten­ants, and pat M. Fabius, another lieutenant, at thehead of a party of horse, with orders not to stir till day­light, as it was difficult to manage horse in such a hurly-burly by night.
.All that could be expected from the valour and con­duct of the most able general, was performed by thedictator. But, in one instance, be has a peculiar merit,and appears in a glorious point of view. For, havingbeen informed for certain, that the enemy, in greatnumbers, had left their own camp, with a view to attackthe consuls, from a motion of his own he dispatchedM. Geganius, with a select body of troops, to invest thecamp they had left. Geganius fell upon them, whilstthey were entirely taken up about the event of their as­sault, and so totally regardless as to themselves, that theyhad neither posted guards nor sentries, and had almostmade himself master of their camp, before they werefully convinced that it was attacked. He then gave thesignal by raising smoke, as had been concerted; andwhen it was observed by the dictator, he cried out, thatthe enemy's camp was taken, and ordered it to be pub­lished everywhere. »
CHAP. XXVIII.


B^


Battle with the iEqui and Vohci.


)Y this time day-light began to appear, when alltheir operations were laid open. At the same time thatFabius had charged whh his horse, the consul had madea sally from the camp upon the enemy, by this timequite dejected. The dictator, from another quarter,falling upon their second line and corps-de-reserve, hadposted his victorious army quite round the enemy, whowere wheeling about to examine whence 'he confusedshouts and sudden commotions proceeded. Wherefore,being now surrounded on all sides, and shut up in the







OCR Output








198 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.'


They were, however, rescued from the danger, intowhich the consul's carelessness had led them, by theirown noble exertions. The war with the Volsci wasconducted with more address; for, in the first baule theywere routed, and driven to Antium, a very rich city.Numicius not daring to besiege it took Cenon, anothercity belonging to the Antiates, but not so opulent as An­tium. \
Whilst the Romans were thus employed against the.SLqui and Volsci, the Sabines entered their territories,and advanced to the very gates of the city, plunderingthe country. They did not pass unpunished; for, in 8few days after, both the consuls, with their two armies,entering their country, and breathing nothing but ven­geance, made large reprisals.


Ai


CHAP. LXIV.
War with the Volsci. Device of Suinctius.


L.BOUT the end of the year, the city had some re­spite from war; but, as usual, it was disturbed by thecontests between the patricians and plebeians. Thecommons were so much incensed, that they would notcountenance the election of the consuls; so that it washeld by the patricians and their vassals, who made choiceof T. Quinctius and Q. Servilins.
The beginning of the year was disturbed by domesticfactions, but these were stifled by the eruption of a fo­reign war. The Sabines having made a hastv march,through the territory of the Crustumini, ravaged all thecountry about the banks of the Anio, with fire and sword;and, though they were repulsed, after they had pene­trated almost to the walls of the city, a'nd the gateColina, yet they carried off' a vast booty in men andcattle. But the consul Servilius pursued them with anarmy sufficiently exasperated; and when he could notget up with them, so as to bring them to an action onfair ground, he spread desolation in their country where-ever he went, insomuch that he suffered nothing to es­cape the calamities of war, and returned to Rome withprodigious spoils.







OCR Output








330 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV.


S'• •
CHAP. XIII.
i
Designs of Malius.—A Dictator created.
this time, one Sp. Mseiius of the equestrian order,who was very rich for these times, put a design in exe-cutiou, which, however serviceable for the present, iu itstendency and intention, was execrable. For, -havingbought up corn, at his own expence inEtruria, by meansof his agents and correspondents, (a circumstance whichrendered Minucius' endeavours to supply the marketsquite ineffectual)^ he began to distribute it. among tlienecessitous with a liberal hand. Touched with so muchgenerosity, the people attended him every where, aodformed a retinue for him, far above the condition of aprivate gentleman, and gave him great grounds to hope,that by their favour and good will, he would one day beraised to the consulship. But as ambition is ever insa­tiable, and still grasping; at something beyond its reach,he carried his views much farther, and quite out of bissphere. He considered, that he roust force himself intothe cbnsulship, in spite of every opposition from the fa­thers, and that therefore it was better to fix on sovereignpower for his object at once: as that alone was a prizeworthy-of the deep designs he must necessarily form,and the opposition he had to conquer.
It was just upon the eve of the Comttia for electingconsuls, a circumstance that gave him no small trouble,as his measures were not properly concerted, nor his de­signs ripe for execution. T. Quinctius Capitolinus waschosen consul for the sixth time, a man of all others, themost inconvenient to any person who wanted to play agame of this kind. Agrippa Menenius, surnamed La-natus, was given him for his colleague. L. Minuciuswas continued in his office, either as being re-elected-, orbecause his office did not expire, till the occasion of itwas superseded. For, we have no other proof of thematter, but that his name stands registered among tjiemagistrates of this and the preceding year, iu the linenrecords. The duty of the purveyor's office obliged luuito do the same in public, which M&lius took upon him­


 







OCR Output








336 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV'.


tlie Hernici; but the enemy haviugdisappeared, he tookFerentinum,* whither a great number of them had" re­tired. The booty there came shoft of their expectation;the Volsci, when they began to despair of making a pro­per defence, had packed up their effects, in the night­time, and departed the city. The next day it was taken;but it was almost desolate. Of its territory, the consulmade a present to the Hernici.
CHAP. LII.
'An l::jiiih:niail distemper, and a Famine. A. R. 341.
1. HE moderation of the tribunes rendered this yearpretty peaceable. But L. Icilius, one of the tribunes ofthe people, immediately upon the accession of Q. Fab i usAmbustus, and C. Furius Paulus to the consular fasces,as if it had been hereditary in his flame and family, en­deavoured to raise a sedition, by reviving the plea of theAgrarian laws.- A plague, however, which broke out atthat time, and gave more alarm than it proved destructive,diverted the people's attention from the forum and po­litical disputes, to look after their families, and talje careof their health. It is thought that the eilects of the plaguewere less fatal, than those of the sedition would havebeen. The city was all over oppressed with sickness,though no great mortality ensued; but the neglect ofagriculture, whilst the calamity prevailed, as it general­ly happens, the next year, when M. Papirius Atratinus,and C. Nautius Rutilus were consuls, produced a scarci­ty. This would have done much more mischief thanthe plague, if they had not found relief from their agents,whom they sent through all the nations upon the coastof the Tuscan sea, and the banks of the Tiber, to pur­chase corn. • .
The Samnites, who were then in possession of Capaaand Cumse, behaved insolently to the commissaries, andprohibited them from buying, whereas they were liberal­ly supplied by the tyrants of Sicily. The Etrurians, with
* A town which originally belonged to the Volsci, now Fioreo-tioo, situated iu the Campagna di Roma, 48 miles from Rome.







OCR Output








..CHAP.. IS. ROMAN HISTORY. '»,


fight or fly, the infantry drew back also. Upon this,the enemy's gates instantly flew open, and out they rushfrom every quarter. The Roman army fled before them;and by their eagerness to pursue, and harass them intbeir retreat, were decoyed to the place where the partylay in ambush. The Romans, starting up all of a sud­den, attack the enemy in flank; the guard which hadbeen left in the camp, advancing at the same time, withcolours flying, added to their consternation.—The Fide-itates being thus alarmed, from every quarter, took totheir heels, almost before it was possible for Romulus,and those who attended him on horseback, to wheelabout: and fled in earnest back to the town, much fasterthan before they had pursued the pretended fugitives.But all 'could not save them ; for Romulus keeping closeat their heels, before they could shut the gates, enteredamong them with his army, as if they had all belongedto the same corps,
CHAP. XV.
The Vejentes conquered.
J. HE sparks which issued from the war with the Fide-nates, set the minds of the Vejentes on fire. And, theirrelation, (for the Fidenates were also Etrurians,) addedto their vicinity, should this warlike disposition continuewith the Romans, to the molestation of their neighbours,blew it up into a flame. Wherefore, they made an in­cursion into the Roman territories; but it had more theair of a plundering match, than a regular expedition.F»r, without encamping, or waiting for an -enemy, theyreturned to Veii, loaded with their plunder.
Romulus, on the other hand, finding the enemy hadevacuated the country; being already prepared, and nowdetermined to give them a decisive blow, crosses theTiber. When the Vejentes were informed that he hadalready encamped, and was on the point of advancingto their city, they chose rather to risk a battle, thanshut up within, be obliged to fight from their houses andwalls. There Romulus, without the least stratagem, by
Vy







OCR Output








CHAP. 13. ROMAN'HISTORY. 331


self to do in private, and brought the sarae sort of peopleto frequent the houses of both. By their means, thewhole plot was discovered, and laid before ihe senate,by Minucius, who told them, that arms were carriedinto Maeliu.s', house, where he also held assemblies; andthere was not a doubt, but he was taking measures tomake himself king. That the time for the^execution ofhis design wa« not yet fixed, but every thing previous toit was concerted, and the tribunes being brought up tobetray their country, the leading men among the com­mons had the parts assigned them they were respective­ly to act. That he came with this information later,perhaps, than the safety of the republic required, bat hewished to advance nothing, of the certainty whereof hewas not perfectly assured.^
Upon this relation, heavy reproaches were thrown bythe principal senators, from every part of the house, onthe consuls of the former year, because they had sufferedsuch largesses to be made, and such meetings to be heldin a private house; nor did the present consuls escapethem, for waiting till so important a discovery shoufd bemade by a purveyor-general, whereas. it was the duty 01the consuls not only to have been acquainted with an.affair of such moment, but also to have punished the de­linquent.
Titus Quinctiu?, in answer, told them, that they hadno reason to blame the consuls, whose authority beingcramped, and in a manner annihilated by the laws ofappeal, whatever their courage and resolution might beto punish a crime .of that nature according to its enor­mity!" by no means furnished them with the power. i In"this case, that a man of resolution, was not sufficient, hispower must be unlimited, he must be above the law.That for this reason he would name L. Quinctius Dicta­tor, a .man whose soul was as capacious as the power- was extensive. All approved of this motion ; but Quin-tius wished to be off, asking them what they meant byexposing him, at such an advanced age, to so severe aconflict. ^ But when the senators, as it were with onevoice; declared, that not only more wisdom, but actuallymore real courage resided under his venerable form thancould be found'among them all put together, and loaded







OCR Output








CHAP. 25: ROMAN HISTORY. 315


Next day the law was accepted by the unanimousconsent of the people. 'To convince you, Romans, that'I am in earnest, when I express so great a dislike to'magistracies of long continuance,'! this instant resign'my own.' Having thus divested himself of his ownoffice,. and so put an end to one, and limited another, hewas conducted buck to his house by the multitude, withloud acclamations of joy. Mamercus's conduct, inabridging the duration of a Roman office, was highly re­sented by the censors, who degraded him from his tribe,and saddled him with a tribute eight times his usual pro­portion. It is said of /Emilius, that he bore all this witha remarkable degree of fortitude, disregarding the indig­nity, out of respect to the cause: and though the senatorshad no great relish for the new law, they were far frombeing pleased with this instance of despotism in the cen­sors, from a very natural reflection, that though theymight themselves be possessed of the same power, theymight be oftener, and much longer subject to it. How­ever, it is certain, that such was the indignation of thepeople, that butJ'or the interposition of Mamercus him­self, the censors would have been torn to pieces.
CHAP. XXV.
Complaints of the Tribunes, that they were neglected by thepeople. A pestilence rages.
X HE tribunes of the people, by the constant ha­rangue*, in opposition to the election of consuls, at lastcarried, that military tribunes, with consular power,should be chosen for the ensuing year, after matterswere almost brought to an inter-regnum. Nevertheless,they obtained none of the reward they expected, for nota single Plebeian was elected. They were all Patri-cions, namely, M. Fabius Vibulanus, M. Fossus, L. Ser-gius Ftdenas. A pestilence which raged this year, gateihem a respite from oiher troubles. A temple was vowedto Apollo for the health of the people. The duumvirstried many expedients presc-ibed in their books, for ap­peasing the anger of the gods, and'rescuing .the people
from the plague. But, after all, the distemper made







OCR Output








264 tit(JS LiVitrS' BOOK III.


ing their hatred to the decemvirs, passed a vote, thatguards should patrole the city, and that all who werecapable of bearing arms, should be posted to guard thewalls and the gales. They likewise decreed, that thetroops at Tuscuium should be reinforced, and a supplyof arms sent them; besides, they ordered the decemvirsto leave the citadel, and encamp the troops in the 'openplain, whilst the army at Fidenae should march iuto theSabine territories, that by carrying the war into the ene­my's country, they might be'diverted from all thoughtsof attacking Rome.


Bi


CHAP. XLIII.
Base treatment of Siccius.


lESIDES these calamities inflicted by the enemy,there were two very enormous actions committed by thedecemvirs, the one in-thecamp, and the other in the city.In the army sent against the Sabine*, L. Siccius, instigat­ed by his aversioirto the decemvirs, had, in private con­ferences with the soldiers, mentioned the expediency ofcreating triburres, and making a secesssion, for which rea­son, he was sent before the army by the generals, to lookout for a place proper for their camp. The soldiers whoattended him in this expedition, had secret ovdt-rs, when­ever they had got to a convenient place, to fall upon Sic­cius and dispatch him.
He sold his life dear. For, being strong and vigor­ous, he made a noble resistance; and though surroundedby the assassins, he defended himself with a courage equalto l)is strength, so that some of the ruffians lay deadaround him. The survivors returned to the camp, wherethey reported, that Siccius had inconsiderately fallen in­to an ambuscade, and that he had lost his life, fightingvaliantly, as did also some of his party. This account ofthe matter was ut first believed; but afterwards, when,by permission of the decemvirs, a cohort was detachedto bury thttdead; and finding, on their arrival none ofthe bodies stripi, Siccius lying in the middle in his ar­mour, all the dead with their faces towards him, not anenemy among them, nor any vestige of their leaving th*'


 







OCR Output








viii THE TRANSLATOR


more. With what diffidence does he disclose his design?and with what distrust of his abilities to support withpropriety so great an undertaking? But his fears are aproof of his wisdom; and he promises little, that his read­ers might be agreeably disappointed: So true it is, thata man's modesty is generally in proportion to his judg­ment. This is one reason why Livy attracts our admira­tion whenever we read his works: for, having promisednothing, we soon discover the clearness of his composi­tion; the depth of his penetration; the extent of hisgenius; the fertility of his imagination; and, in fine,numberless beauties, elegancies, and excellencies, pecu­liar to himself, which, in the modesty of his Introduction,we were not taught to expect. What fund of wisdom,what politeness of manners were requisite to depress thatpride, that self-appropriation, so natural to the humanmind, and yet to do justice to his character?
If Livy's sincerity could have been possibly stifled, therespect shown him by Augustus, the favour to which hewas elevated, and the estimation he was held in at court,might have corrupted him: yet none of these consider­ations prevented him from doing justice to the characterofPompey, and speaking respectfully of Brutus and Cas-sius, whenever an opportunity offered.* A conduct sogenerous, candid, and disinterested, Cremutius Cordus,according to Tacitus, thought he could never sufficientlypraise.:
Such was Livy in the qualities of his heart; and suchwere his personal endowments. And, without doubt,but for such an historian there would have been somethingdefective in the glory, or rather the good fortune of apeople, who by their military and political virtues, raisedthemselves to the highest pitch of terrestrial greatness.This gave rise to the Famous inscription found at Padua,Anno 1413, in the church of St. Justina. Ossa Titi LiviiPatavini unius omnium mortalium judicio digJK, cujusprope invicto calamo, invicti populi Romani res gesttE con-scribcrentur.
j/ The end and design of history is to instruct and im-'prove the present, by exhibiting a true picture of past
* Tac. Lib. iv. Anna'.


 







OCR Output








6« TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


&
Ancus. The number of inhabitants being so considerablyincreased, in such a multitude, to distinguish between agood action and a bad, was no easy matter; so that manysecret acts of villainy'were committed. Wherefore, tocheck such growing licentiousness, he built a prison inthe heart of the city, overlooking the forum.-«lJnder theauspices of Ancus, the city w^,not only enlarged, butthe Roman territories extended.\J
The forest Micsia was taken from the Vejentes, theRoman domain carried out to the sea, Ostia built at themouth of the Tiber, salt-pits dug about it; and, in grati^tude for his extraordinary success, he enlarged the tem­ple of Jupiter Feretrfts.
CHAP. XXXIV.
Luctano coma to Rome.
J.N the reign of Ancus, Lucumo, a man of great sub­stance and address, came to settle at Rome. Ambition,and the hopes of rising to honours in the state, a thinghe found quite impracticable in his native Tarquinii, asIiis father was a foreigner, were the leading motives tothis measure. He was the son of Damaratus of Corinth,who having fled from his country for seditious practices,.happened to settle at Tarquinii, where he married, andhad two sons, Lucumo and Aruns. Lucumo survived his4'ather, and succeeded to his estate; but Aruns died be­fore him, leaving his wife pregnant. The father did notlong survive him, and being ignorant of the circumstanceof his step-daughter's pregnancy, made no provision forjt in his will. The posthumous grand-child, having beendisinherited before he was born, was, from that very cir­cumstance, called Egerius:
Lucumo, on the other hand, having now become soleheir of his father's fortune, and his spirts rising with hiscircumstances, became still more elevated upon his mar­riage with Tanaquil, a lady of great distinction, whocould not easily bear the thoughts, that the rank of theman she had married, should be below what her birthand high connections entitled her husband to have. Inshort, disdaining to live in her native city, where her- nsband was not respected according to his merit, be­







OCR Output








82 TITUS L1VIUS* BOOK I.


prodigy, immediately repairs to the Tiber. In the meantime, the Romans sacrificed the heifer to Diana,' whichgave universal satisfaction to the king and all the city.


A.


CHAP. XLVI.
Tullita accused by young Tarquin.-


I.LTHOUGII hong possession had now establishedServius ou the throne; yet, because lie heard that you ui;Tarquin was sometimes giving out, that he had usurpedthe sovereignty, without the consent of the people, hav­ing first secured their good will, by dividing amongthem, impartially, the conquered lands, he then ventur­ed to put the question, " Whether they willed and com­manded him to be their king?" Upon which they re­cognized him king, with an unanimity scarce ever knownbefore. But this was so far from discouraging Tarquinor giving a check to his ambition, that it only confirm­ed his hopes: for, besides the impetuosity of his owntemper, he was constantly dunned with the solicitationsof his wife Tullia; he was not ignorant, that the divisionof the conquered lands among the people, was not agree­able to the fathers, and therefore, he concluded, that hehad a noble opportunity, in accusing Servius to the se­nate, of raking bis own reputation.
This produced a scene of the most inhumyi and savagecruelty in the court of Rome: That the people disgustedat monarchy, might the sooner enjoy the sweets of liber­ty, and that he should be the last king, who should usurpthe title, by the commission of the work of crimes, thisLucius Tarquinius, (whether he was the son or grandsonof Tarquiuios Priscus, is a question; but out of respectto most authors, I shall call him his sorr) had a brothercalled Aruns Tarquinius, remarkable for sweetness of.disposition. To these brothers, as we have formerly ob­served, the two Tullias, the king's daughters, who were'also very different in their tempers, had been married.It had so happened, by the good fortune, very probably,of the Roman people, that the two violent tempers werenot united, by which means the life of Servius was pro­longed, to form the morals of the state.







OCR Output








CHAP. 41. ROMAN HISTORY. . 165


C. Aquilins. The province of the Volsci fell to Sicinius;and the Hernici, who were also in motion, fell to Aqui--lius. The Hcmici were this year defeated j and with theVolsci, the Romans had a drawn- battle.
CHAP. XLI.
• .
Cassius condemned for affecting Popularity,
Jl HEN Spurius Cassius, and Proculus Virginius, weremade consuls: a treaty was concluded with the Hernici,by which they ceded two thirds of their lands, one ofwhich the consul intended to divide among the Latins,and the other among the commons. To this act of ge­nerosity, he added some ground unjustly held by privatepersons to the prejudice of the public. Many of the fa­thers, who were themselves possessors of these lands,were alarmed at their proceeding, thinking their propertywas in danger. And the senate was under no less con­cern for the public safety, being apprehensive that theconsul by his liberality, aimed at a power which wouldbe dangerous to their liberty. It was then that theAgrarian law was first mentioned, which, from that dayto this, whenever it came to be the subject of debate, ne­ver failed to raise great commotions in the state.
The other consul opposed the division, and was.sup-­ported by the senate and some of the people. At firstthey had begun to consider it as no great compliment,when their allies were to share equally with them; andthen they listened with great attention to Virginius, whenhe often prophesied in their assemblies, "That his col-"league's liberality had a most pernicious tendency:-" That whoever should be tempted with these lands,"would find that they were given them in exchange for"their liberty: That the very intention of them was to"pave the way for regal power: which was pretty evi-"dent from the scheme of division, in which the allies,"and LStin nations, are admitted to a share of the spoil."For what purpose was a third part of the conqueredil~ lands restored to the Hernici, who but lately had ap-"peared in arms against them, but that these nations"might have Cassius at their head instead of Coriolanus?"







OCR Output








208 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK III.


quality of pro-consul *, with an army of the allies, tothe relief of the camp. The Latins, Hernici, and co­lony of Antium, were ordered to make up his compli­ment with subitarii, for so auxiliaries raised on a suddenwere called in those days.
CHAP.V
Relieved by Suinctius. Great slaughter of the 2Equi.
AN the mean time, the enemy were every wherein mfc-tion. making different attacks in different places, at oneand the same time; for. being superior in point of num­bers, they endeavoured, by dividing the Roman forces^insufficient for the defence of every place at once, tocut them off in small parties: At the same time thatthey endeavoured to force the camp, they sent out partiesto lay waste the country, and to carry desolation to thecity itself, should they find a favourable opportunity.L. Valerius was left to guard the city, whilst the con­sul Posthumius was sent to drive the plunderers fromthe frontiers. Nothing was omitted, in any instance, inpoint of care or vigilance. Guards were placed in thecity, centinels at the gates, and strong parties to defendthe walls: and what became necessary in such confusion,a vacation of all courts of justice was appointed for se­veral days.
In the mean time, the consul Furiu?, although hehad suffered himself, without bustle, to be blocked upin his camp, made a sudden sally from the back gateiupon the unguarded* enemy; and although he mighthave pursued his advantage, he stopped short, fearinghis camp might be in danger from some other quarter.
His brother Lucius, who was also his lieutenant-gene­ral, went too far, his eagerness in the pursuit prevent­ing him from observing the return of his friends, or theenemy's atack on his rear. Being cut off in this man­ner, from the body of the army, after he had often at­tempted to open himself a passage to the camp, he fell,
* The pro-consul acted in all respects as consul, in the provinceCommitted to his care, but nowhere else.







OCR Output








'' • .


TITUS LIVIUS'ROMAN
TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH,


AND
ILLUSTRATED WITH NOTES,
CRITICAL, HISTORICAL AND GEOGRAPHICAL,
FOR THE
USE OF STUDENTS IN HUMANITY.


BY WILLIAM GORDON,
AUTHOR OF THE UNIVERSAL ACCOUNTANT.


"Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire Hoc sciat alter."
PER. Sat. I.


EDINBURGH:
«1NTSD TOR BELL & BRADFuTE, AND BOIO & STIRLINe,EDINBURGH.
1813.







OCR Output








394 T1TCS LIVIUS' BOOK IV.


them time to recede from a resolution in which theyhad discovered too much obstinacy; but as the dangersof war were too importunate to admit of delay, he wouldprefer the interest of the state to the favour of bis Col­leagues; and if the senate persisted in their resolu­tion, lie would name a dictator that very night; and ifany should oppose the senate's decree, he would con­sider their authority as sufficient for his purpose."When by this declaration, he ltad gained the just ap­plause and favour of all ranks, he named P. Corneliasdictator, by whom he was also .declared general of thehorse, which'may convince any one, who will comparehis conduct with that of his colleagues. that those who donot court respect and honour, are sometimes in the wayto both.
The war was not considerable. For the enemy wasrouted at Antium, in one engagement, and that a veryslight one. The victorious army laid waste the countryof the Volsci, and took a fort upon "the lake Fucinus,where they made three thousand prisoners; the rest ofthe Volsci being obliged to take refuge within theirwalled towns, and leave their country to be ravaged bythe enemy.
The dictator having finished this war in such a man­ner, as made it appear that he had neglected no oppor­tunity fortune put in his way, he returned to Rome withmore success than glory, and resigned his office. Themilitary tribunes, without the least mention of a consu-lar comitia, very probably out of resentment because adictator had been created, proclaimed the assembliesfor the election of military tribunes. The fathers werethe more sensibly piqued at this proceeding, as they sawthemselves betrayed by their own party. 'Wherefore asthey had, the preceding year, created a disgust amongthe Plebeians at the better sort of their order, by settingup for candidates mere tatterdemalions, so now, havingprevailed with those of the Patricians who were mosteminent for the popularity and lustre oftheir families,to appear as candidates, they secured all the places, andgave not the least chance to a Plebeian. There werefour elected, who had all filled that office before, L.Fiurius Medultinus, C. Valerius Potitus, Numerius Fa­







OCR Output








CHAP. 5T. ROMAN HISTORY. 09


CHAP. LVII.
A dispute about the excellency of Wives.
A HE Rutuli were considered as a very wealthy na­tion in that age and country, and were in possession ofArdea. It was their riches alone that gave rise to thewar: For Tarquin having drained his treasury to de­fray the expence of his public works, was speculatingfor a new supply to himself; * and that he might, by alarge booty, soothe the minds of the populace, who,besides their dislike of him for other acts of tyranny,were enraged at the oppressive manner in which theyhatl been obliged to serve the mechanics, and do otherservile work. He made an attempt to take Ardea bystorm; but having failed in the attempt, he tried to dis­tress the besieged by blockading their city, and raisingworks against it.
When an army is encamped, and the war rather tedi­ous than violent, it generally happens that they comeand go without restraint; though' that indulgence onlyextends to the officers. The young princes sometimesspent their leisure hours in visiting and entertaining oneanother.
One day, while they were enjoying themselves overa bottle with Sextus Tarquinius, where Collatinus Tar-quinius, the son of Egerius, also supped, the conversa­tion happened to turn on the merit of wives. Everyone was loud in the praises of his own; and the disputeturning hot, " What occasion is there for words," saidCollatinus, " since you can be satisfied, in a few hours,"how much my Lucretia is superior to the rest. If then"" we have yet the vigour of youth let us mount our horses,"and examine the conduct of our wives on the spot;"each of us will he able to judge with the greater pre-"cision of the employment of the ladies, surprised with"a visit from their husbands, of which they had not the"most distant expectation."
They were all heated with wine: "Come, let us go,"
* A. U. C. 243. .







OCR Output








CHAP. 6. 113 ROMAN HISTORY.


which some think, was so called from the circumstanceof his.name, which was Vindicius. Hence it has beena rule, that freedom obtained in this manner, has en­titled the receiver to all the privileges of a Roman ci .tizen.
CHAP. VI.
The Tarquins muster an army; are defeated; but Brutusis killed.
JL ARQUIN having been informed of these things,grief, rage, and hatred, all at once seized him, upon thedisappointment of his only hopes: and since now he hadno hopes in succeeding by stratagem, and that there wasno alternative but open war, he made the circuit of Etru-ria, humbly beseeching, particularly the Vejentes andTarquinienses, " That they would not suffer to perish"before their eyes, himself, and the prmces his sons,"of the same blood with themselves, who though now"an abject exile, was but lately possessed of a consider­able kingdom. That others had been sent for fromforeign parts, and invested kings of Rome, but Utathe, their lawful sovereign, whilst enlarging the empireby his arms abroad, was dethroned by a conspiracytif his nearest relations; that they, since no single oneamong them was judged equal to the honour of rulingalone, had split the regal -office into parts, and sharedthem among them, that they had given up all his ef­fects to be plundered by the people, that all ^mongthem might be somehow concerned in the' guilt.What he ardently wished for now, was to recover hiskingdom and his country, to take vengeance on hisungrateful subjects; that they were peculiarly inte­rested in supporting his pretensions, because in hisquarrel, they would revenge the injuries done them.before, when their armies had been so often slaugh­tered, and their lands wrested from them."These arguments were specious, and weighed with theVejentes, who felt themselves heroes in an instant, boast­ing with prodigious bluster, that now, with a Romangeneral at their head, they would wipe off every formcf







OCR Output








292 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK III.


"ed. It was their business now to evidence that Ro-"man bravery had neither expired with the institution"nor abolition of the decemvirate; and that the laws"which established an equality among the citizens, had"not diminished their valour."
Having thus harangued the foot, amidst their ensigns,he turns to the horse, addressing them to this effect:"Come on, my brave fellows, you are now to vie with"the foot, in support of your honour and superior rank."To the bravery of the foot the enemy gave way at"the first charge; Ho you complete the disorder, by"giving the reigns to the horses, and drive them out of"the field of battle. They will not stand your attack.* See,—they are too much at a stand, even to act on"the defensive." Now they put spurs (o their horses,and furiously charged the enemy, already put in confu­sion by the foot, and having broke through their ranks,penetrated even to their rear. Sonie of them rid ing roundthe open space, blocked up every passage to the ene­my's camp, and as they were flying on all sides, rode upto intercept them. The foot, with the consul-at theirhead, and, in short, the best part of the army turned uponthe camp, where many of the enemy fell, whilst the Ro­mans remained masters of their camp, and a considerablebooty.
The news of this victory was SoO11 carried to Rome,and the other army that acted against the Sabines. Inthe city, it was solemnized with great rejoicings, and inthe camp, it excited the greatest emulation. Horatius, byskirmishing and slight engagements, had accustomed histroops to confide rather in their present valour, than toremember their past defeat, under the decemvirs: andthese little encounters had made them confident of vic­tory, whenever they should come to a general engage­ment.
Nor did the Sabines, encouraged by the successes ofthe former year, fail incessantly to provoke them, askingthem reproachfully, " What they meant by wasting the"time in petty depredations, like a banditti, and thus"spinning out a war in skirmishes with straggling par-"ties, which might be determined in one decfsive ac­


 







OCR Output








CHAP. 23. 'ROMAN HISTORY. 137


were so charmed with the honourable behaviour of theLatins, that they sent home 6000 of their prisoners; re­ferring to the- new magistrates to conclude a treaty withthem, a suit, which till that time hadxbeen almost con­stantly refused. The Latins, however, exulted in whatthey had done; and they who had advised to peacewere highly respected. They sent to the capitol, a crownof gold, as an offering to Jupiter; and many of the pri­soners who had been sent home to their relations, came•in the retinue of the ambassadors who brought it. Theywaited on those whose slaves they had been, and verypolitely thanked them for their civilities and kindnessshewn them in their distress. Never, at any formerperiod, either in public or in private, had the Latins en­deared themselves so much to the Republic of Rome.
CHAP. XXIII.
Disturbances at Rome on account of Usury. A. R. 259.
JtjUT the war with the Volsci was still impending; andthe city, divided within itself, was inflamed with civildiscord between the senate and people, which originat­ed in the cruelties practised upon the debtors. Theycomplained bitterly, that they who fought abroad for li­berty and extension of empire, should be seized and op­pressed at home by their fellow-citizens: war to them wasmore salutary than peace, and foreign enemies less inimi­cal to the liberty of the populace than their countrymen.
This resentment, which naturally spread of itself, wasconsiderably inflamed by the unhappy circumstances of'. a single person. An old man appeared in the forum, withthe testimonies about him of ail he had suffered; hisclothes were greasy and ragged, and his person madestill a more wretched figure, being feeble, pale, and ema­ciated: a long beani, and .hair neglected and in disorder, .completed the hideousness of his figure. Through all hisuncouth outside, he was however known, and out of com­passion whispered about for a centurion, who had ac­quired many military rewards by his valour.
la testimony of the gallantry of his behaviour on se­veral occasions, he shewed the wounds cm his breast.







OCR Output








CHAP. 57. ROMAN HISTORY, . 285


"his conduct, when leave should be granted him of"making a legal defence: and in the present case he"only wanted permission, as a citizen of Rome, to make"his defence, and to have the judgment of the Roman"people: For he was not so much afraid of all thatmalice could lay to his charge, as to despair of theequity and clemency of his fellow citizens. If he wasled to jail, without the privilege of making his defence,he would again appeal to the tribunes, and would'advise them not to follow the example of those they'hated. That if the tribunes confessed they had con­certed among themselves to abolish the right of appeal,from them he would appeal to the people, and implorethe protection of the laws just made, by joint consentof consuls and tribunes, to confirm that privilege.What citizen of any rank can find his account in theselaws, if Appius Claudius cannot? Your conduct withregard to me, will really evince, whether the right of"appeal be only an empty name, or whether oppression"will find relief in them, against the cabals and injustice"of magistrates.
CHAP. LYH.
Appius imprisoned. War with the jEqui and Vbtscil''War with the Sabines.
V IRGINIUS in return said, "That Appius Claudius,"of all mankind, had nothing to do with laws, or anysocial compact, nor ought he to derive any benefitfrom them. Only look at yonder tribunal, where thisperpetual decemvir, the declared. enemy of the lives,fortunes, and liberties of the citizens, threatening allwith rods and axes; regardless of gods and men, andalways surrounded with hangmen, instead oflictors;"passing from rapines and murders to brutal lust, de­livered up to his infamous pander, in the presence ofthe Roman people, a maid of free condition, tearingher from the arms of her father, like a slave who hadbecome the perquisite of the conqueror: where, by a'cruel sentence, founded on the most flagrant injustice,armed the hand of the unhappy father against the life


 







OCR Output








CHAP. 12. ROMAN HISTORY. 123


whose backs they had seen more than once; and beingdetermined, by some great and noble adventure, to berevenged for this disgrace, had at first resolved to pe­netrate into the enemy's camp, without communicatinghis design to any body; but then, upon reflection, hewas afraid, tliat should he go without the knowledge, orconsent of the consuls, he might be seized by the Romanguards, and brought back as a deserter, especially at atime when the condition of the city would justify theaccusation. He therefore goes to the senate, a.nd tellsthem; " I intend, fathers, to cross the Tiber, and, if pos-"sibie, enter the enemy's camp, not with a view of mak-"ing reprisals, or taking revenge for their depredations"on us. No: My design, with the assistance of the"gods, is more noble and glorious."
He obtained the approbation of the fathers. Where­fore, concealing a poniard below his clothes, he sets outupon his adventure. After he had got into the enemy'scamp, he planted himself among the thickest of thecrowd, near the kino's tribunal.
It so happened, that the soldiers were then receivingtheir pay; and the king's secretary sitting by him, anddressed almost in the same-uniform, was much employedin dispatching business,, and receiving petitions. Afraidto ask, which of the two was Porsenna, lest his igno­rance in that particular should betray him; as fortuneblindly directed the thrust, he stabbed the secretary, in­stead of the king. Endeavouring to make his escape y.from thence, he opened a passage for himself, with his '*••bloody dagger, through the trembling crowd; when thecry was given, the king's guards gathered about him,and seizing him, brought him back to the royal presence;there too, threatened with fortune on every band, witha look that struck more terror, than it expressed fear, headdressed the king as follows; " I am a citizen of Rome;.my name is Cains Mucius. As an enemy, I wouldhave killed my enemy: nor am I less determined toreceive, than I was to give the fatal blow. A Romanhas not only spirit to act, but to suffer. Believe me,I am not the only person you have to fear; there is along list after me, candidates for the same honour.i' Wherefore, prepare for their attempt?, if you please;







OCR Output








CHAP. 3. ROMAN HISTORY. 315


'latter had before them ! Do you imagine we are so ig-
* norant of our own history, that we never heard that
* Numa Pompilius, who was neither a Patrician, nor'even a Roman citizen, was called from his farm in the
* country of the Sabines, and by order of the people,
* and the authority of the fathers, made king of Rome?« —That, thereafter, L. Tarquinius, by birth so far from'being a Roman, that he was not even an Italian, the
* son of Demaratus of Corinth, a temporary citizen of'Tarquinii, was nevertheless, in the life-time of Ancus'*'children, placed upon the throne? That Servius Tullius'after him, the son of.a captive woman of Corniculum,'whose father no mortal knew, whose mother was a
* slave, attained the sovereignty, by his excellent quali-'ties and extraordinary merit. Why should I mention
* Titus Tatius the Sabine, whom Romulus, the founder
* of this city, thought proper to associate with himself in'the administration? Wherefore, whilst no man in whom'virtue shone conspicuous was despised on account of his
* descent, Rome flourished and grew great. You may'now, if you please, blush at the very idea of a Plebei-'an consul, but our .ancestors were not ashamed to have'strangers for their kings, nor has this city been shut
* against foreigners who had merit to recommend them,.'even since the extinction of regal power. Have we'not since that time, received the family of the Claudii'among us, from the country of the Sabines, and not'only admitted them to the freedom of the city, but also'into the order of the Patricians? Shall a foreigner be-
* come a Patrician, and afterwards consul, and a Roman.
* citizen be excluded the consulship, because he is aPle-
* beian? Do we believe then, in the name of wonder, that
* it is impossible for the people to produce a man of
* merit and courage, qualified to discharge the duties of
* the cabinet and the field, resembling ISfuma, Tarquin,
* and Servius? And if one of this character happen to
* be born among us, .shall we never suffer him to ap-
* proach the helm of state! Shall we rather choose to
* have men for consuls of the complexion of decemvirs,
* the most wicked of mankind, and all of them Patricians,.
* rather than men resembling the best of our kings, wha'could not boast of their high descent I







OCR Output








194 TITUS LIVIUS' Book II.


hoarded tip. Peace and plenty soon produced dissipa­tion; and now when they had no disturbance abroad,they began to revive their old contentions at borne.
The tribunes set the populace in a ferment, by theirfavourite topic, the Agrarian law. They inflamed themagainst the senators in the opposition; and in this, theynot only pointed at the whole body, but at individualsalso. Q. Confidius and T. Genucius, who revived theplea of the Agrarian law, at this time cited T, Meneniusto take his trial. He was charged with the loss of thegarrison at Cremera, when his camp lay but a smalldistance from it. They condemned him, although thefathers had interested themselves, no less for him, thanthey had done for Coriolanus, and the popularity of hisfather Agrippa, not yet totally forgot. The tribunesrestricted his punishment to a fine; for though they hadsentenced him to die, after his condemnation, they onlyfined him in two thousand asses of brass.* This costhim his life: for, it is said, that being unable to bear thedisgrace, and the grief it occasioned, he soon fell a vic­tim to a distemper, brought on him by it.
Another senator, Sp. Servilius, was also impeached,immediately on the expiry of his office, in the consul­ship of C. Nantius and Publius Valerius; the tribunesL. Caedicius and T. Statius, having, in the beginning ofthe year, appointed him a day for his trial. He did not,like Menenius, by himself, or the fathers, descend tomake mean supplications to the people; but confidingin his own innocence and personal interest, he boldlyopposed himself to all the attacks of the tribunes.
The charge against him, was the action with the Etru­rians at the Janiculum. But, being a man of a daringspirit, he was as intrepid before their tribunal, as heused to be on a day of action, confuting in a bold speech,both tribunes and commons, upbraiding them with thecondemnation and death of Menenius, by the good offi­ces of whose father, the populace were brought back tothe city, and enjoyed these laws and those magistrates,the ministers now of their illiberal prosecutions; andthus by his bold and determined behaviour, outbraved
* Fire poundi sterling.







OCR Output








CW 45. ROMAN HISTORY. 467


'sequence, they carry with, them more terror than'force to the battle. Can there be a stronger proof than
* their victory over the Romans? The city was open to'.them when they took it. From the citadel and capifol'. they have been repelled by a handful of men. Now
* wearied out with the length of the blockade, they
* abandon it, and disperse themselves all over the coun-'try; glutted with meat and drink, which they.greedily'devour, as soon as night conies oh, they ly down like'beasts along the sides of rivers, without intrenchments,'guards, or sentinels; and their late success serves only
* to augment their usual negligence. If, therefore, you« would defend your walls, and prevent this whole coun-'try from falling into the hands of these barbarians, arm'by midnight, and follow me, not to a battle, but to'a certain slaughter. If I deliver them not into your« hands, fast asleep, to be butchered at your pleasure,*, like so many beasts, I consent to he treated at Ardea,f as I have been at Rome.' -• . .'
CHAR XLV.
A parly of the Gauls surprised, by Camillus. Tlie Soldiersat Veii surprise the Tuscans. ,.
JtLVERY body, whether well or ill affected.to Camillus,was fully convinced that he was the greatest captain ofhis time; so that after the assembly broke up, they tookthe necessary refreshment, and set themselves to watch,where the signal should be given,, when Camillus, afteral) was dark and sileaf, found them ready at the gates,and put himself at their head. When they had gonea little out of town tiiey foinyl the camp of the Gaulsopen and unguarded on all sides, jus', as he had told themwould be the case; and attacked \t with prodigious shouts.There was no fighting, but a terribleslaughter everywhere.Naked as they were born, and fast asleep, they were allbutchered without resistance. Those that lay at thegreatest distance slatted up in a fright, and being totallyignorant whence or by whom they, were attacked, sometook to their heels,- whilst others threw themselves inad­vertently into the enemy's way. A great part of them: ,-v i-H.-:!' -,. -: .(•-•* ,• '': •- -< --. - /•







OCR Output








CHAP. 4. ROMAN HISTORY. 317


birth nor your families, but to your. admission into theorder of senators, an honour, to which you were eitherpromoted by the kings, or after their expulsion, by thesuffrages of the people. Why do not you lay yourwise heads together, to preserve ihe pretended purityof your blood, by chnsing neither wives among us your­selves, nor permitting your female line to marry anyman, but a Patrician? No Plebeian will force a Patri­cian lady. That is an orbit in which a Patrician canonly move. Nobody will force you to enter into amarriage contract, unless it be agreeable to yourselves.But to prohibit it by law, and to make the marriage ofa Plebeian with a Patrician felony, is affronting us inthe highest degree. Why have you not passed thesame interdiction with respect to the rich and the poor?At all times, and in every nation upon earth, it has beenleft to the choice of parties, to settle upon the family,into which a woman should be disposed of in marriage,and upon that, out of which they should take a \vife;but this liberty you restrain by the sanction of a lawthe most insulting in the world, that you may make abreach in .civil society, and split one community intotwo. Why do not you also forbid the Plebeians tolive in the neighbourhood of the Patricians, to walk inthe same streets with them, to eat at the same table,or to assemble with them in the forum? And what isthe difference pray, in all these things, in the mar­riage of a Patrician with a Plebeian, or of a Plebeianwith a senator's daughter? Would the privileges ofthe orders be invaded or infringed by an instance ofthis kind? Not at all. For the children will alwaysbe of the rank with the father. In short we have noother view in moving this affair, but to be treated asmen and citizens; and the man who will set up his faceto oppose so just a requisition, can have no other mo­tive, but to make us appear in the light of scoundrelsand vagabonds.







OCR Output








CHAP. 21. ROMAN HISTORY. 135.


The dictator, attentive to every "thmg that could con­ciltate the assistance of gods and men, is said to havevowed a temple to Castor, and also to have promisedrewards to the tir>t and second man, vrfio shoutd enterthe enemy's camp: And such was the ardour of the Ro-ntans, thntihey coi.t tiued the charge with unremittedvigour, till they became masters of the enemy's camp.Such was' the event of the battle of Regillus. "The dic­tator and general of the horse, returned to the city intriumph. . J
CHAP. XXI.Mws of Tarquitfi death. A temple dedicated to Mercury.


the three succeeding years, there was neitheropen war, nor settled peace. Q. Clseiius and TitusLartius, and then A. Sempronins and M. Muratius wereconsuls. Durmg their presidency, a temple was dedi­cated to Saturn, and the Saturnalia* appointed to bekept as a festival.
I find in Some authors that ihe battle of Regillus hap­pened (his year; and that A. Posihumius having resign.ed his office of consul, because his colleague's1 fidefitywas suspected, was afierwards made dictator. Suchgross errors in chronology are blended with the historyof these times, some ranking the magistrates in one or­der, and some in anoiher, that according to some writers,it is impossible to say with any degree of precision, whowere consuls, or what year was distinguished by any re­markable event, by reason of the antiquity of the tactsand the historians who relate them.
This year was remarkable at Rome, for the news theyreceived of the death of Tarquin. The intelligenceraised the spirits of the senate and people to a very hi<*hpitch. The joy of the faihers was rather extravagant -for, from that moment, they began to behave very in­solently to the commons, whom to that day, in every
* Durine the celebration of this festival in honour of Saturnwhich tasied three, five, seven, and sometimes nine days, friend­ship was cultivated to a high degree, aud there was a total rac*.tion from all butinws.







OCR Output








CHAP. t.' ROMAN HISTORY. 415


CHAP. IX.
Suspension of the old, and election of new Magistrates.
JL HE" principal of the senate were of opinion, that theyought not to wait tor the usual time of etections, but in­stantly proceed to the election' of new military tribunes,who should enter upon office on the first of October.The opinion met with general approbation; nor did theother military tribunes make the leas.t objection. But Ser-gius and Virginius, on whose account alone, it wasevidentthe senate were displeased with that year's magistrates,first intreated that they might not be disgraced, and atlast entered a protest against the decree of the senate,declaring they would not quit their office till the thir­teenth of December, the usual time for the election of newmagistrates. ,
During these disputes, the tribunes of the people, who,much against their inclination, bad been quiet, whilstharmony prevailed, and the affairs of the republic werein a prosperous train; began all of a sudden to assumean imperious tone, and threatened the military tribuneswith instant imprisonment, if they did not obey the or­ders of the senate. Then C. Scrvilius Ahala, tribune ofthe soldiers, addressing himself to the tribunes: ' As toyou and your menaces/ said he, ' I should not be dis­pleased with an opportunity of proving, that you havenot more courage to execute, than right to threaten.But the decrees of the senate must be obeyed. Where­fore, tribunes, let us have no more of your interferingin our disputes, to make that a pretence for doing in­justice; and my colleagues shall submit themselves tothe pleasure of the senate, or if they should persist inbeing refractory, I shall instantly name a dictator, whowill know how to oblige them to quit their office.*This discourse was applauded by the whole assembly,the senators being very much pleased, that a more cer­tain and consistent method was found out for keepingmagistrates in order, than the thunder of the tribunitianpower. Sergius and Virginius being thus reduced toobedience, the military tribunes, with common consent,held the Comitia, and elected successors, who were to







OCR Output








123 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


honourable of that order were commissioned for the pur­pose; telling him, " That the answer to his embassy"might have been very short; that monarchy would"never be re-established at Rome, but they rather chose"to depute the most illustrious of their body to himself,"than give that answer to his ambassadors at Home."But that the affair of the Tarquins might be for ever"buried in oblivion, and no anxiety arise on that score,"to interrupt the perfect union and amicable footing"they were on at present, by making a requisition, en-"tirely inconsistent with the liberty of the Roman peo-"pie, and putting them under the disagreeable necessity"of refusing him a request, to whom they would wish"to be ail compliance, or subscribing voluntarily to their"own destruction. That the Roman people were not"uow under the government of kings; their motto was"Liberty, and they were resolved to open their gates to"any of their enemies, sooner than to kings; nay, there"was not a citizen of Rome, but was firmly determined,"that the existence of '.heir liberty, and that of the city"should have the same period. Wherefore, they ear-"nestly intreated, if he wished them well, he would per-"mit them to be free."
Overcome by the modesty of their arguments, theking answered; " Since you are so irrevocably fixed"and determined, I will give you no farther trouble, by"repeating the same request to no purpose; nor will I"amuse the Tarquins with the hopes of assistance I am"not disposed to give: but whether they choose to live"at peace, or have recourse to war, they must find some"other retreat in their exile, that nothing may interrupt"the peace subsisting between you and me." To theseexpressions of friendship he ad'ded very signal acts ofgenerosity: For he restored the hostages that had beenleft with him, and the lands of the Vejentes, ceded tohim by the treaty of Janiculum. Tarquin despairingnow of a possibility of being re-established, retired toMamilius Octavius, his son-in-law, at Tusculum. ThusWas the peace with Porsenna inviolably observed.







OCR Output








446 tirUS-LIVIUS' BooKV.


rinus were chosen consuls. In the beginning of thisyear, whilst the tribunes renewed their intrigues with allimaginable zeal, to get their bill passed, as they had nutone opponent in all the college, the consuls for that veryreason, were equally active to prevent it; and whilst thewhole city seemed to be intent upon that point alone,the /Equi made themselves masters of the Veteleian co­lony which had been planted in their courrtrv- Thegreatest part of the planters escaped unhurt, bv the backgates of the city, through which, favoured by the dark­ness of the night, when the city was taken by treachery,they had a free passage, and fled to Rome.
L. Lucretius got that province by lot. He marchedwith an army, chastised the enemy, and returned victo­rious to Rome, where a more obstinate engagementawaited him. A day was appointed for the trial of An-lus Virginius, and Q. Pomponius, both tribunes of thepeople for the two preceding years j in whose defence,by conseDt of the father?, the honour of the senate wasengaged. They could be charged with no crime, eitherwith respect to their morals, or the discharge of theiroffice, but that they had, to gratify the Patricians, op­posed the bill brought in by their colleagues. The peo­ple's resentment prevailed over the interest of the fathers,aod innocent men, in this shocking instance, were con­demned in a fine of 10,000 asses of brass,*. . A sentencewhich gave great offence to the fathers. • '•
Camillus openly accused the people of the most scan­dalous partiality. 'Their rage, (said he,) is now turnedagainst their own party; not perceiving, that by theiriniquitous sentence, thay had given a mortal btow totheir tribunitian power, by depriving their iribunes.ofthe privilege of intercessjpti: for if they. imagined,that the senate would endure an unbridled licentiots-ness iti any of 'these- magistrates, they were' dresdfiil^ymistaken. 'For if the violence of •some of the tribunescould not be checked by the opposition-bf':s6me of thecollege, the}' might be assured the Senate would finHanother method of restraining it;? "-'" He "tikewise-re?proved the consuls, for tamely srandmg'By, and sufferingthe two tribunes to be oppressed, who bad acted entirely
'"







OCR Output








U6 TITOS LIVIUS' BOOK IE


"dier, unless they performed the promise that had been"made them ;—that before they put arms in their hands,• ' it was highly proper they should restore them their li-"berty, that they might know whether they were to"fight for their country and fellow citizens, or for des-"potic tyrants."
The consuls knew well the extent of their commissionfrom the senate; but of all those bold declai'mers, whohad talked so high within the walls of the senate-house,not one appeared to share with them in the public odium.Besides, it appeared, that this contest with the peoplewould be a serious affair. Therefore, before they shouldcome to extremities, they judged it expedient to talkover the matter with the senate a second time, whichthey did accordingly. The young senators then crowd­ed round the consuls chairs, ordering them to abdicatethe consulship, and resign an authority they wantedspirit to support.
: CHAP. xxix.
Tlie Consular authority slighted. Various plans proposed.
J[ HE consuls having sufficiently tried both experi­ments, made this short reply: "Conscript fathers, re-"member, we tell you, that a terrible sedition is on the"point of breaking out, and we insist that they who"brand us with pusillanimity, may only assist us in"making the levies. Since you advise violent measures,•' we shall act with all the spirit the keenest of you"would desire." With these 'words, they returned totheir tribunal, and cailed upon one of the most factious,whom ihey had in their, view, to come and be inrolled.As the man stood still, without returning an answer, anda crowd got about him, to protect him; in case of need,the consuls sent a lictor to seize him. The lictor beingrepulsed, such of the senators as were present with theconsuls, exclaiming against the indignity, came downfrom the tribunal to support the lictor. But the mob,who had only preventer! the officer from seizing the man,now turned upon the senators. The consuls interposed,and the tumult was appeased. Neither stones nor darts







OCR Output








«2 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK V,


.. -. ,
sharing in the plunder of \Vii, might repair to the dicta­tor's camp. The other was the opinion of Ap. Claudius,who spoke warmly against this bounty, as being an un­precedented prodigality, and inconsistent with equity amisound policy. That if it was not judged proper, thai themoney taken from the enemy should be lodged in thetreasury, exhausted as it was by so many wars, he wouldadvise, that it should be appropriated to the payment ofthe soldiers, which would be an ease to the people, in re*gard to the taxes. That thereby every family would beequally sensible of the benefit of this largess, and therapacious hands of idle citizens would not deprive thesoldiers of the rewards so justly doe to their labour, it be­ing usually observed, that the bravest and most forwardin battle, were the least active and expert at plundering.Liciniu;, on the other hand, insisted, that the money*o reserved and appropriated, would be a source of end­less discontent, and occasion impeachments, and seditions,and new laws. 'It was better, therefore,' pursued he,to conciliate to the senate; the good will of the multi­tude, by a bounty which would relieve their presentindigence, exhausted as they were, by the contributionsof so many years; and make them sensibl<: of the fruits•tof persevering in a war, in Which they might almostbe said to have grown old. That what each man shouldtake with his own hand from the enemy, and bringhome, would give him more pleasure and satisfactionthan a gift of much greater value, at the pleasure ofanother. That the dictator, in referring the matter tothe senate, had no other view on earth, but to sparehimself envy and reproach. That the senaie also ought,from a like regard to themselves, to refer the whole tothe disposal of the people, and suffer them to take theplunder, as chance should throw it in their way.' Thisadvice, which was the most popular for the senate, ap­peared to be the safest: wherefore, proclamation wasmade, that such as wanted to share in the plunder. ofVeii, had only to repair to the camp, which, in conse­quence, was soon filled with prodigious numbers thatflocked thither.







OCR Output








396 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV.


diately leave the city and dominions of Veil, they wouldtreat them as Lars Totomnius had treated the Romanambassadors on a former occasioh.
The fathers could not put up with so daring an ineoti,and therefore decreed that the tribunes should forthwithlay before the people a motion for declaring war againstthe Yejentes. The moment this motion was mentiouedin the assembly, the youth began to murmur, insisting,That the war with the Volsci was not finished j thatit.'was but lately that two 'garrisons had been put tothe sword, and though they had been since recovered,were not supported without danger; not a year pas­ses without a battle: and yet as if they had not toilenough, we must begin a new war against powerfulneighbours, -who may engage all Etruria in theircause.'
Thus they talked of their own accord, and the tri­bunes did not fail to encourage'them in their opposition,by represent ing, ' That the chief war they had to sustain'was that which the senate carried on against the com-'mons. That they were'sent into the field only to be'slaughtered, or to be kept at a distance, and in a mau-'ner Vanished from the city, that they might not, were• they allowed repose at home, turn theit minds upon'liberty and colonies, or concerting measures for expe-« diting the Agrarian law, and voting with freedom in'their assemblies.' Then taking the veterans by ibehand, counted the years they se'sved, examined theirwounds and scars, asking them whether they bad yetany room for more wounds, or any more blood to spareto the Republic? By these arguments, which they tookevery opportunity to enlarge upon in private conversa­tions and public assemblies, they prepossessed the peopleagainst the war, so that the bill was deferred to a future .day; because it appeared plain, had it been proposedunder so many prejudices, it must have been rejected.







OCR Output








CHAP. 28. ROMAN HISTORY. 415


CHAP. XXVIII.
Further contests, and the levies opposed.
JL HE new consuls, were A. Virginius and T. Veturius.The commons, in the mean time, uncertain how thesenew magistrates would act, began to hold nocturnal con­ventions, partly on the Esquiline, and partly on theAventine hiHs, for the purpose of concerting such mea­sures, as exigencies should require, to prevent their beingsurprised into hasty resolutions in the forum, or takingmeasures inconsiderately, before they were properly di­gested. The consuls considering how dangerous the con­sequences of these cabals might turn out, made a reportof them to the senate.
But the affair could not be taken regularly under con­sideration, so much tumult and clamour arose from everypart of the house, upon this representation, agamst theconsuls, who, instead of doing the duties of their office,were for ridding themselves of the odious part of it, bytransferring it to the senate. "Were there really ma­gistrates in Rome," said they, " there would be onlyone public council: but the republic now was splitinto a thousand senate-houses and assemblies, some ofwhich were held on the Esquiline, others on the Aven­tine hill. One man of spirit, such as Appius Claudius,but that is of more consideration than a consul, wouldsend all these cabals a packing in an instant."The consuls, nettled at this reprimand, asked the se­nate, in what manner they would have them to proceed,assuring them, at the same time, that they should notwant resolution to act agreeable to their pleasure. Itwas therefore determined, that they should proceed tomake the levies with all possible severity, as the peoplewere become insolent, for want of employment. Thesenate being dissolved, the consuls ascended their tribu­nal, and cited the younger citizens to enlist by name;when nobody made answer, and the people crowdinground, as if they had been summoned to an assembly,told them, " That the people would be no longer im-"posed on, and that they should not have a single sol­







OCR Output








CHAP. 65. ROMAN HISTORY. 201


the top of the eminence, when the enemy took to theirheels; and scattering in their flight, the pursuers and fu­gitives entered the camp much about the same time,when, in the midst of the contusion, the camp is taken,such of the Volsci as could make good their escape,.fled to Antium, whither Quinctius followed with hisarmy, and after it had been invested a few days, it sur­rendered previous to any assault, so much were theyaffected with their late defeat, and the loss of theircamp.


L







OCR Output








33* TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV-


all, who is this Maelius? For, though neither nobility ofbirth, nor dignity of office, nor even personal merit,ought to open a way to the tyranny, yet Claudius Cas-sius and the rest, at the time they aspired to so crimi­nal an elevation, were sustained by their consulships,their decemvirates, the honours of their ancestors, aswell as their own, and the splendour of their families.But for Sp. Maelins, to whose wishes "rather than hishopes, the office of tribune might have become an ob­ject; a victualler, who had amassed a fortune from the.corn trade, to have carried his speculations so high, asto think of purchasing the liberty of Roman citizensfor a morsel of brer.d; that a people victorious over alltheir neighbours, would subject themselves to slavery,for the temptation of a dinner; as if the Romans wouldhave put up with a king, whom they would scarcehave admitted to the rank of a senator; to be investedwith the authority, and adorned'with the ensigns ofRomulus their founder, who was descended of thegods, and at his death received into their number, wasfolly to an extravagant pitch, full as much as a crime.It was not sufficient that he had expiated his guilt withhis blood ; th'e house and walls wherein such a mailattempt had been projected, ought to be demolished,and all his effects confiscated, as having been intendedto be laid out in the purchase of regal power: and'thattherefore he ordered the quaetors to expose these goodsat vendue, and lodge the proceeds in the treasury.'
CHAP. XVI.
Mctlius' house demolished, and his effects confiscated.
.LiIS house was.instantly ordered to be demolished;and that th'e place on which it stood might be a monu­ment of the disappointment of his criminal hopes, itwas called ./Esquimaelium. L. Minucius had the ho-nourto be presented with an ox with gilt horns, withoutthe gate that leads to Ostia; to which the people madeno objection, because he distributed Maelius' corn amongthem at an ass the bushel. Some authors affirm, thatMinucius went over from the Patricians to the Plebeians,


 







OCR Output








ISO TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


ried at the public expence. The ladies mourned for hint,as they had done for Brutus.
This year too, two Latin colonies, Pomttia and Cora-,revolted to the Arunci, against whom war was commen­ced, and a numerous army of them being defeated, whohad the boldness to make head against thVconsuls enter­ing their country; the whole weight of the war fell upouPometia. After the battle, the Arunci were spared nomore than in the heat of action. For many more wereslain than taken; and the prisoners were put to the swordwithout distinction; nor did even the hostages to thenumber of three hundred, escape the rage of war. Thisyear also, there was a triumph at Rome.


Ti


CHAP. XVII.
Defeat of the Arunci, and capture of Pometia.


HE following consuls, Opiter Virginias, ai)d Sp..Cassius, first endeavoured to take Pometta by storm, andafterwards by a close siege, by raising Vines,* andother works.
But the Arunci, instigated more by irreconcileablehatred, than any. hopes of succeeding, or the advantageof a favourable opportunity, made a sally, and armedwith lighted torches rather than swords, scattered fireand slaughter every where. Having burnt down theVineae, and killed and wounded many' of the besiegers,one of the consuls, but which of them is not said, wasthrown from his horse mortally wounded, and left almostdead m the field. Upon this disaster, the Romans re-'turned home, and the consul was left among many whowere' wounded, with but very little hopes of his re­covery.
Having employed a short jime injuring their wounds,and reet u it ing their army, against Pometia theyvmarched,with a more numerous army, and 'hearts more keenlyset on revenge. The Vineae and other works were re­paired, and the siege so far advanced, that the soldiers
* This was a warlike'engine made of timber and hurdles, under., hi.-ii- in an assault they came safely under the vails of a town,and so scaled them.







OCR Output








24S • TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK III. *'


CHAP. XXX.
Fire added to the college of Tribunes. The Sabina de­feated. A. R. 295.
J[ HESE were the memorable events of the year. Theconsular fasces were now transferred to Horatius Pulvil-Ius, and Q. Miuimus. The beginning of their adminis­tration was disturbed by no commotions abroad, but thetribunes and their bill found them sufficient employmentat home: and so violent were they on the head, thatthey would very probably have pushed it to the utmost,if news had not been brought, in the very nick of time,that the JEqui in the night, had surprized the-Romangarrison of Corbio, and taken the place by assault.
The senate assembled, and without delay ordered anarmy to be raised and led to the Algidus. Wherefore,waving all disputes about the law for the present, thewhole bustle turned upon the levies. Here the com­mons, supported by their tribunes, prevailed over theauthority of the consuls, when they were still morealarmed from another quarter. The Sabines had made adescent upon the Roman territory, and were advancingto the wails of the city.
The terror struck by these motions had such weightwith the tribunes that they suffered the levies to go on,but upon the express condition, that their number should.be augmented to ten, because they had been constantlybaffled for five years successively, which was a certainproof that their number was not sufficient for the pro­tection of the people. The necessity of the times oblig­ed the senators to comply, but conditionally, that forthe future, the same tribunes should not be re-chosen.The comltia were immediately held for this new election,for fear it might not, as they had learned from expe­rience, be put in execution, if delayed till the end of thewar.
Thu?, in the thirty-sixth year of the tribunitian pow­er, ten tribunes were created, two out of each olasu, amethod observed ever after. Troops were then raised,and Minucios marched to chastise the Sabines, but found


 







OCR Output








16 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


Paphlagonia*, were in search of a settlement and aleader, for their king Palymenes had fallen at Troy:—That the Trojans, in Conjunction with the Heneti,having driven out the Euganei, who inhabited the coun­try between the sea and the Alps, took possession oftheir lands. The place where they first landed was calledTcoy, and from thence the Trojan district. The peoplein general were called Venetians.—TThat ./Eneas, drivenfrom his country by a similar disaster, but conducted byhis fates, to enterprises more important, landed first inMacedonia, and moving thence in quest of a settlement,was carried to Sicily, whence he steered for the countryof Laurentumf. This place was also called Troy.There the Trojans disembarking, and having nothingleft, after their tedious and troublesome voyages, buttheir arms and vessels, fell to plundering the country.To put a stop to this violent proceeding in the strangers, \Latinus and the Aborigines, who were then the proprie­tors, flocked out in arms from town and country.
The event of this affair is differently retated. Ac­cording to some authors, Latinus bemg defeated in battle,first made a peace with jEneas, which was afterwardsconfirmed by a matrimonial alliance: but others con-tend, that when both armies stood drawn up in order ofbattle, before the signal was given, Latinus advancingamong his nobles,-invited the leader of the foreignersto an interview. He then enquired who they were,whence they came, what had obliged them to leave theircountry, jano. what they wanied in the territory of Lau-rentum? After he had been informed that the peoplewere Trojans, who under the conduct of .ffiueas, theson of Anchises' and Venusi after their country was de­stroyed, had wandered in'Tjuest of a settlement, and aspot upon which they might build a city; admiring tfiemajestic appearance of the'man, the dignity of his fa­mily, and withal a suul equally prepared for peace orwar, he confirmed to him a promise of future amity, bygiving him 'he hand of friendship.
* Bounded by the rivers Partbenius and Halys, part of Pallo-griecia and the Euxine sea.
! San Lorcn i».







OCR Output








CHAP. 39. ROMAN HISTORY. 459


made too on the banks of the Tiber, whither the wholeleft wing had retreated, after they had thrown down theirarms: many who knew not bow to 8vyim, or could not,being weighed down by their coats of mail and other ac­coutrements, were swallowed up by the waves. Thegreatest part, however, got safe to Veii, from whence,•they were so far from sending relief to Rome, that theynever once thought of dispatching a courier with thenews of their misfortune. The right wing, which wasposted nearer the hill, and at a great distance from theriver, marched all to Rome, and took refuge in the cita­del, without staying to shut the gates of the city behindtneiii. : .'
CHAP. XXXIX.
The Gauls enter Rome. The flower of the Romans fy to.the Citadel and CapiteL
.T\. VICTORY so suddenly obtained, astonished theGauls so muchj that they considered it as something mi­raculous. At first, awed by fjear,. they stood motionless,as if they had known nothing of what had happened.They stil'l dreaded stme ambuscade, but at last began tostrip the slainj and pile up the arms, according to theircustom. After all, when they saw nothing like an ene­my appear, they set out for Rome, which they reacheda. little before sun-set. When the horse that were de­tached before theni, brought back word that the gateswere open, no guards posted before them, nor any sol­diers on tire walls, they considered it as a continuationof the same miracle; and. not .knowing what the nightmight bring forth, at the same time that they were utterfi "angers to the situation of the city, they encamped be­tween the Anio and the city, and sent out scouts roundthe walls and the gates of the city, to bring intelligenceof the enemy's designs, now that their situation was ex- .tremely critical.
At Rome, as the greatest part of the army had fled toVeii, nobody imagining that one of them had escapedbut those who had made good their retreat to Rome, and .the whole city lamenting the loss of the living, as wellas the dead, there was nothing to be seen but tears a.nd







OCR Output








CHAP. IV. ROMAN HISTORY. 335


and that he was made the eleventh tribune, and by thathieans quieted the tumult occasioned by the death ofMaelius. But it is hardly probable, that the fatherswould have suffered the number of tribunes to be aug­mented, or allowed such a precedent to beset by oneof their own order; nor that the people, once a con­cession had been made them, would tamely have givenit up again. But what proves the inscription on Minu-cius'a statue to be entirely fictitious, is the law made afew years before, whereby it is provided that the tri­bunes could not choose a colleague by co-optation.
-D. Caecilius, Q. Junius, and Sextus Titinus were theonly tribunes that opposed the law for conferring ho­nours op Minucius, whom, or Servilius", they were con­stantly accusing to the people, and complaining of theunmerited fate of Maelius; and so carried that militarytribunes, in preference to consuls, should be elected for. that year; being fully persuaded, if six military tribunes,the number allowed by law, were elected, some of thePlebeians, by promising to revenge the death of Mslius,would be among the, number. However multiplied anddiversified the distractions of the city that year; no morethan three tribunes were elected with consular authority,and among them too, L. Quintius, the son of that Cin-cinnatus, in odium of whose dictatorship, the confusionwas projected. Marcus .SLtnilius, a man of singularmerit, was first in the nomination, Quintus second, andL. Julius third.
CHAP. XVII.
Tlie Roman ambassadors murdered at Fidena.
JL/URING their administration, Frdenae, a Romancolony revolted to Lars Tolumnius, king of the Ve-jentes. This rebellion was attended with a crime of amore heinous nature : For, by order of Tolumnius, theyput to death C. Fulcinius, Clcelius Tullus, Sp. Ancius,and -L. Roscius, who had been commissioned by theRomans to enquire into the reason of their conduct.Some authors, in extenuation of the king's guilt, alledge,that upon occasion of a lucky throw of the dice, some







OCR Output








. 28. ROMAN HISTORY. 443


annihilation with theVejeotes, to an accommodation withtbe Capenatesi were unanimously determined to sue forpeace. Nothing was talked of in the forum, or senate-house, but the virtue of the Romans, and the probity oftheir general; and accordingly, with one consent, am*bassadors were dispatched to the camp to Camillus, andby his permissioni to the senate at Rome, to surrenderFalerii.
When they had leave of audience, it is said, they ad­dressed the senate in the following terms: Illustrious'fathers, conquered by you, and your general, in a
* manner that can give no offence to gods, nor men, we'are-come to surrender ourselves to you, convinced that
* we shall live more happy under your government, than'under our own laws, a circumstance that reflects a pe-'culiar honour on the conqueror. The event of this
* war furnishes mankind with two excellent examples^
* You, fathers, have preferred justice in war, to imme-
* diate conquest: and we,'excited by that justice, do vo-'luntarily present you the victory. We are now en-'tirelv yours. Send commissioners to receive our arms,'our hostages, our city, the gates of which stand open'to you: You will have no reason to complain of our'fidelity, nor we to regret our present submission.' Ca-millus luul both the thanks of the enemy and of hiscountry. To exempt the people from taxes, a year'spay to tte army was exacted from the Falisci; and peacebeing granted them on these terms, the army returnedhome.
CHAP. XXVIII.
War with the jEqui: various successes.
JL HE applauses now given to Camillus upon his re­turn to Rome, and the conquest he had made over the. epemy by his justice and integrity, were far more sin­cere, than those lie had formerly received, when .thewhite horses drew his triumphal chariot through thecity. The senate made honourable mention of his mo*desty, and in order to.discharge his vow with all possibledispatch, L. Valerius, L. Sergius, and A. Manlius, weredeputed to carry a golden cup to Delphos, as a present







OCR Output








CHAP. SO. ROMAN HISTORY. 353


also sirnamed the imperious, but Posthumius was neverdistinguished by any mark of baseness.
C. Julius the consul, whilst his colleague was absent,dedicated the temple of Apollo,- without casting lots.Quini-tins did not take it well; and for that reason, afterbe had disbanded his army, and returned to the city, helaid a complaint before the senate, but without effect.—It is observed, though at that time the Romans seemedto have little concern in the matter, that in this year, soremarkable for great events, tor the first time, the Car­thaginians who were one day to be such terrible ene­mies to the Roman people, taking advantage of the divi­sions which prevailed in Sicily, sent an army thither t»the assistance of one of the contending parties.
CHAP. XXX.
The Vejentes in motion. A terrible drought followed by aplague. A. R. 323.


HE Tribunes of the commons made a bustle in thecity to get military tribunes with consular power electedfor the ensuing year, but they failed in the attempt.Lucius Papirius Crassus, and L. Julius were made con­suls. The JEqui sent ambassadors, requesting the senateto treat with them; and when instead of a treaty, asubmission at discretion was mentioned, the envoys ob­tained a truce for eight years. The Volsci, after thecheck they had received at the "Algidus, were dividedinto parties; and from disputes and reproaches betweenthose who had declared for war, and those who had ad- .vised peace, came at last to an open rupture ; so that theRomans were now at peace with all their neighbours.
The consuls having discovered by means of one of thetribunes, that the college were preparing a law for fix­ing the extent of fines, which would be highly agree»able to the people, they took the start of them, by movingit themselves. These consuls were succeeded by L. Ser-gius Fidenas, for the second time, and Hostus LucretiusTricipitinus. During their administration, nothir-g me­morable occurred. Aulus Cornelius Cossus, and TitusWuintius Pennus, a second time were their successors inoffice. A. R. 324. v , .
V







OCR Output








CHAP. 8. < ROMAN HISTORY. 413


• volunteers should receive pay, as if they had been le-'vied in form.'
On this occasion too, a certain pay was instituted forthe horse; and it was at this time that the cavalry ingeneral began to receive pay out of the treasury. Thenew army of volunteers were conducted to Veii: theworks that had been destroyed by the enemy were notonly restored, but new ones constructed. Provisions wereconveyed from the city with more care and diligencethan ever, that nothing necessary might be wanting to.an army that deserved so well of the RepubIic.
CHAR VIII.
The Falisci and Vcjentes support Veil, and beat the Romans.Misunderstanding of the Generals. A. R. 351.'
J. HE military tribunes, for the following year, wereC. Servilius Ahala, for the third time; Q. Servilius, L.Virginius, Q. Sulpicius, A. Manlius, a second time, andManius Sergius, a second time also. Whilst those tri­bunes were totally intent upon the war with the Vejen-tes, by the negligence of the governor of the fort atAnxur, in giving furloughs to the soldiers, and admittingthe Volscian merchants without reserve, the centinels atthe gates were betrayed, and the fort surprised. Fewof the garrison fell in it; as all of them but such as weresick, followed the business of sutlers in the adjacentcountry and neighbouring towns. Neither did they suc­ceed better at Veii, where the whole care of the publiccentered. For the Roman generals hated one anothermore heartily than they did the enemy; besides that thesudden appearance of the Capenates and Falisci had ren­dered the Vejentes more formidable.
These two Etrurian nations were not without their fears,that were Veii to fall, they would be the next whom theRomans would attack, as lying most contiguous for that. purpose. The Falisci had laid themselves open to theresentment of the Romans, by taking part,«on a formeroccasion, with the Fldenates, when at war with the Re­public; and now having sent deputies up and downamong the neighbouring states, they bound themselves.







OCR Output








CHAP. 20. ROMANy HISTORY. 339


Thus the enemy's cavalry, who alone had kept thevictory in suspense, were broke and put to flight. Thedictator, in the mean time, pursued the flying legions,and drove them back to the camp with prodigious slaugh­ter. Many of the Fidenates being acquainted with thecountry, escaped to .the mountains. Cossus crossed theTiber with his cavalry, and returned to Rome loadedwith spoils from the territory of the Vejentes. Duringthe battle, there was also a skirmish at the Roman camp,with the party, which, as was formerly observed, hadbeen detached thither by Tolumnius. Fabius Vibulanusfirst defended the works by posting his men round them,but afterwards made a sally at the gate on the right ofthe Principia,* with the Triarria, and surprised theenemy, wholly intent upon forcing the lines. Terrorand confusion, on the part of the enemy -was the con­sequence of this manoeuvre; but the slaughter was notconsiderable, as there were but few engaged, thoughthe'rout was as general, and no less confused, than inthe field of battle.


Ti


CHAP. XX.
COSMS presents JOpima Spolia to Jupiter Feretriia.


HE Roman army having thus been everywhere vic­torious, the dictator, by decree of the senaic, and orderof the people, entered Rome in triumph; but what prin­cipally attracted the public attention in the procession,was Cossus bearing the spoils of the king, killed with hisown hand. The soldiers sung rude verses to his praise,comparing him to Romulus. He hung up these spoils inthe temple of Jupiter Feretrius, near those of Romulus,at that time the only spoils that bore the name of Opima,presenting them with a solemn dedication. All thewhile, he drew the eyes of the citizens from the dictator'schariot, and fixed them on himself, so that he engrossed
* The Roman camp was a quadrangle, divided into two prin­cipal parts, between which was a spot of ground, about 100 feetlong, called the Principte The camp had four gates : in the front,the Praetorian; in the rear the Decumena; in the right, thePrincipals Dextta ; and on.tlie left, the Principal Lseva. ^







OCR Output








CHAP. 13. ROMAN HISTORY. 421


nourable station. Some believe-that it was in coaapli-njent to his brother Ch. Cornelius, who had been mili­tary tribune the vear before, and had given triple payto the soldiers. Others ascribe it to a very seasonablespeech, in which he recommended unanimity to both or­ders aittl na'l tne thanks of senate and people. Thetribunes elated with this victory at the election, passedfrom their opposition to the tax, which had greatly clog­ged the wheels of government. Wherefore, the mo­ney was collected without any trouble, and remitted tothe army. . ,
CHAP. XIII.
An epidemical distemper. Introduction of the Lectistcr-nium. Defeat of the Faliici, Capenatcs, Ifc.


LNXUR, in the country of the Volsci, was soon afterretaken, owmg to the negligence of the city guards upoua holiday. This year was remarkable for the severity ofthe winter, ami a prodigious fall of snow; insomuch thaithe roads were impassable, and the river ijuite frozen up,It had n<i influence, however, with respect to provisions,as a sufficient stock had been laid in before. As P. L\~cinius had obtained his office without noise, and withgreater joy on the part of the people, than vexation onthe part of the senate, so he executed it without offenceto either: which engaged. the commons in a peculiarmanner to raise Plebetans to the military tribuneship,next election.
Of all the Patricians who offered their service, nonewas accepted but M. Veturius. The centuries in gene­ral voted Plebetans for ihe remainmg places of militarytribunes, with consular power; namely, M. Pomponius,C. Duilius, Volero Publilius, Cn. Genutius, and L. Ati-lius. Whether it was owing to the intemperance of theair, changing. suddenly from cold to heat, or to someother came, the severe winter was succeeded by a sum*mer gross and pestiferous to all kinds of animals. Asno prescription was effectual in removing a distemperthat seemed incurable, the senate ordered the Sibyllinebooks to be consulted.
T







OCR Output








47* TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK V.


'then, my fellow-citizens, abandon al! these gods, both'public and private? How very different does this'scheme of yours appear, from what was acted by the'noble youth, C. Fabius, to the admiration of the ene-'my as well as yours, who came down from the citadel,
• amidst the darts of the enemy, and performed a reli-'gious ceremony upon the Quirinal hill, peculiar to'the Fabian family? Is it criminal in a private family
• to neglect the performance of religious duties in time
• of war ; and do you think it can be lawful for a whole
• community to abandon their public sacred rites, and
• their gods in time of peace? For the priest and fla-
• mens to be less strict in the performance of the public
• ceremonies of religion, than for a private person, of
• those peculiar to his family?
'But, perhaps it may be alledged, that these cere-
• monies may be performed at Veii, or priests sent from'thence to perform them. But neither of these can be
• done, without a violation Of our ceremonies. For, not'to mention all the sacred ceremonies, or the gods, spe-'cifkally: in the festival of Jupiter, can the bed be
• spread any where else, but in the capitol ? Need 1 roen-'tien the eternal fire of Vesta, and the statue safely pre-'served in her temple, as a pledge of empire? Need 1'mention your Ans-ilia, or Mars Gradivus, and father'Romulus? And would you, have all these sacred thing*,'which were coeval with the city and some of them of
• a date much more ancient, to be abandoned in a pro-
• fane place? Only mark the difference between our an-'cestors and us. They transmitted to us a tradition,'that some of our solemnities should be performed upon
4 Mount Alba and Lavinium.
'Now, was it an act of devotion to bring religious
• ceremonies from hostile cities to ourselves at Rome,
• and shall we, without involving ourselves in the guilt'of sacrilege, carry them hence to Veii, a hostile city?'Will you only call to mind, how often our sacred ce-'remonies have been performed a-new, because some'ancient regulation, either through carelessness or ac-'cident, had been omitted. What other circumstance,'was it of late, after the prodigy of the Alban lake, but
• the renewal of the sacred auspices, that relieved the
5 commonwealth, oppressed as it was with the war with







OCR Output








CHAP. 34. ROMAN HISTORY. &7


cause he was the son of an exile, she persuades him toleave Tarquinii. Rome, of all others, seemed te be themost eligible retreat. In a new state, where nobility isthe perquisite of merit, and but of short standing, a manof courage and address would bid fair for distinction.Tatins, though a Sabine, was raised to the throne. Nu-ma was called to-the same dignity from Cures. Ancus-was born of a Sabine mother, and had no other badge ofnobility, than a single statue of Numa.
Her arguments prevailed with Lucumo, who wasnaturally ambitions, and attached to Tarquinii, from noother consideration-, but (bat it gave birth to his mother.Wherefore, having sent oil" their ertects, tliey set out forRome. They happened to stop at the Janiculum, where,as he sat in the chariot with his wile, an sagle, fallinggently with spread wings, took of!' his cap, and flutteringover the chariot with a prodigious noise, as if sent downfrom heaven on purpose, replaced it orderly on his head,-and then soared aloft. It is said, that Ta'naquil receivedthe omen with raptures, being much versed in celestialprodigies, as the Etrurians generally are, and embracingher husband, encourages him to look up for great honoursand preferment; assuring him, "That the bird had"come from a quarter of the heavens peculiar to ^Tu-•* piter himself, whose messenger he was. That it had"taken the omen from the vertical point of man, and"lifted the ornament of the human head, to replace"it there by command of the gods."—Full of thesethoughts and expectations, they entered the city; andhaving purchased a house, he went under the. name ofLucius Tarquinius Priscus. Being a foreigner and veryrich, be soon became conspicuous at Rome; where, bythe affability of his demeanour, frank invitations, andobjiging manner of conferring favours, he procured him­self friends, and promoted his interest; insomuch, thatat last, he came to be mentioned at court, where, bydischarging his duty about the king with assiduity andpoliteness, he soon became.a very great favourite, andwas admitted a privy counsellor: Aiid having, on alloccasions distinguished himself by his integrity and abi­lities, he was at last appointed guardian to the royal fa­mily, by the king's last will.







OCR Output








102 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


"honour, and plead Lucretia for a precedent."—Upon.this she drew a knife which she had concealed below hergown, and plunged it into her breast. The husband andfather crying out, as she dropt expiring at their feet.
CHAP. LIX.
The Tarquins banished.
JjRUTUS, whilst the rest were absorbed in grief, drawsthe knife out of Lucretia's wound, and holding it out allbloody before him; "Yes," said he, " I swear by thisblood, once so pure, that nothing but royal villainycould have polluted; and. I call the gods" to witnessthis my oath, that I will pursue Lucius Tarquin, theproud, his wicked wife, and all their race, with fireand sword, and every other act of violence in mypower; nor will I ever suffer any of that, or any otherfamily whatsoever, to be king in Rome." This said,he presented the knife to Collaiinus, then td Lucretiusand Valerius, who were not a little astonished at the sur­prising revolution in the intellects of Brutus. However,at his desire, they all took the oath, and their grief be­ing now converted into rage, they all followed Brutus astheir leader, from that moment, incessantly employinghis interest to overturn the regal power.
The body of Lucretia was brought from Collatia andlaid in the Forum. As it is usual, in such cases, greatmultitudes assembled, drawn together by their wonder atso extraordinary a spectacle, or their indignation at theauthor. Every one, from his own experience, had somecrime or act of violence, to lay to the charge of the Tar-quins. They were moved by the father's tears; butBrutus insisted that they should dry up their tears, anddrop their unavailing complaints, and show themselvesmen and Romans, in taking up arms against those whooared to act a villainous part against them.
The most resolute of the youth appear in arms, volun­teers in the service, and the rest soon follow their exam­ple. Then having left a sufficient guard at the gates ofCollatia, and placing sentries, that the Tarquins mightget no notice of this insurrection, the rest, headed by







OCR Output








CHAP. 31. ROMAN HISTORY. 355


ed; but though they were sworn as usual, and demand­ed restitution in form, no regard was paid to what theysaid. After all, a contest arose, whether war should bedenounced by order of the people, or whether a decreeof the senate might be sufficient. The tribunes, bythreatening that they woutd stop the levies, carried thatthe consuls should lay before the people, what respectedthe war. All the centuries voted for the war. The peo­ple had the better in this dispute, having also obtained,that no consuls should be elected for the succeeding year.
CHAP. XXXI.
* . i
Miscarriage of the Military tribunes. A Dictator named.
.17 OUR military tribunes were chosen with consularauthority, Titus Quinctius Pennus, who had been consul,C. Furiu*. M. Posthumius, A Corneilius Cossus. Ofthese Cossus staid at Rome to preside in the city; theother three, having completed the levies, marched di­rectly to Veii, where they gave a signal proof of thepernicious effects in war, of a plurality of commanders ii\chief; for, as they differed in opinion, and each of theminsisted to have his own plan adopted, they gave theenemy an opportunity of taking them at a disadvantage.For while the army had no distinct orders, one command­ing the signal to be given for battle, another, a retreatto be sounded, the Vejentes seized that opportunity ofattacking them. They were put in disorder, and fledback to their camp, which was hard by, so that theywere more disgraced than hurt.
• The city, unaccustomed to defeats, was greatly afflict­ed ; they, hated tribunes, and cried out for a dictator:there the whole hopes of the city seemed to centre. Buthere again, religion threw an obstacle in the way, that adictator could not be named but by a consul. With re­spect to this point, the augurs were consulted, who sa­tisfied their scruples. A. Cornelius named Mamercus^Emilius dictator, who in return named him general of thehorse. Consequently whenever the circumstances of thestate required exalted merit, the censors degradation hadno influence to prevent the people from vesting the admi­nistration in a family which had been unjustly disgraced*.







OCR Output








CHAP. 53. ROMAN HISTORY. 387


the utmost dispatch, sent great quantities of grain downthe Tiber. While the sickness prevailed in the city, theconsuls had a demonstration of the desolate state of the'city ; for they could not find above one senator, for every. particular embassy, for which reason, they were obligedto associate two knights with each of them. Exceptingthe effects of the plague and the famine, for two succes­sive years, the Romans had nothing to trouble them athome or abroad. But, the moment they had got overthese difficulties, all the miseries which had been theusual attendants on civil dissensions and foreign war, at­tacked them at once.
CHAP. LIII.
Opposition of the College to Mxnius. Valerius humbles thejEqui, but is unpopular in the army.
_L HE former consuls were succeeded by MamercusJEmilius, and C. Valerius Potitus, in whose consulate, thejEqui renewed their preparations for war; and althoughthe Volsci did not take up arms by public authority, theyjoined the /Equi as volunteers, and served for pay. Upon* advice of the progress of these enemies, who by this timehad entered the frontiers of the Latins and Hernici, theconsul Valerius began to make the levies for raising anarmy; but M. Mocnius, one of those tribunes who hadproposed the Agrarian law, opposed him; and while thecommons were supported by this tribune, none of themcould be compelled to take the military oath.
During this contest, they were surprised with the ac­counts that the fortress of Carventum was in the hands ofthe enemy. As this disgrace exposed Mcenius to theodium of the senators, it furnished the other tribunes anoble pretext for opposing their colleague, being previ­ously determined to declare against the Agrarian law.Wherefore, after long altercations on both sides, the con­suls called gods and men to witness, that whatever da­mage or disgrace the enemy had or would bring uponthem, it was all chargeable upon Mfenius, who had ob- ' .structed the levies. Maenius, on the other hand, exclaim­ed, that if the violent possessors of the property of the







OCR Output








474 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK V.


revenged. He then drew up his army in the best orderof battle possible, amidst the ruins of the city, and onuneven ground, and took all the precautions that mili­tary skill could suggest to insure success.
The Gauls, confounded at this revolution, ran to theirarms, and rushed against the Romans with more fur:than prudence. Affairs now wore quite a different as­pect, for the protection of the gods and human wisdomunited in favour of the Romans. For which reason theGauls were defeated at the first charge, with the sameease they had conquered at tho battle of Allia.
They were a second time routed stilt more completely•under the conduct and auspices of the same Camillas,eight miles from Rome, on the Gabinian way, whitherthey had fled. There the slaughter was total, their camptaken, and not a man escaped to carry home the melan­choly news of their disaster.
Thus the dictator having recovered his country fromthe enemy, returned in triumph to Rome, and the sol­diers in their rough jollity, recognized him a second Ro­mulus the founder of a new Rome, eulogiums which beroost certainly deserved. But this was not all. Hiscountry, which he rescued from the enemy, he a secondtime saved from its friends. For he prevented the peo­ple from removing to Veii, though the tribunes madegreater effors to promote that emigration, after the citywas burnt, and the people themselves more devoted tothe project, than ever they had been before. . For thisreason, he did not abdicate the dictatorship after his tri­umph, but at the importunity of the senate, deserted notthe republic, whilst its unsettled state required his super­intendence.
CHAP. L.
Regulations after the eitmbian of the Gauls.
F'IRt>T of al!, as he was exceedingly strict in whateverregarded religion, he took under consideration, what re­lated 10 the worship of the gods, and obtained a decreeof the senate; ' That all the temples, as they had beea* in the enemy's possession, should be re-established,« .bounded, and purified; and that the duumvirs, who had







OCR Output








416 ... TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK V.


enter upon office the first of October, previous to whickthey gave in their own resignation.
CHAP. X.
Exertions qf the Tribunes to prevent Levies and payment ofTares.
JJlJRING the administration of L. Valerius Potitus, afourth, M. Furius Camillus, Manius jEmilius Mamercinus,a third, Carius Cornelius Cossus, a second time, CaesoFabius Ambustus, and L. Julius Julus, who were electedmilitary tribunes with consular power, at this time, therewas sufficient business both at home and abroad. Wanwere multiplied upon their hands, all at the same time,with the Vejentes, the Capenates, the'Falisci, and theVolsci, in order to recover Anxur. Moreover .at Rome,they had no small difficulty in making the levies and col­lecting the taxes. The co-optation of two tribunes, be­came another bone of contention, and the trial of the twomilitary tribunes, who had just divested themselves ofconsular power, raised no small contention.
To raise the levies however, was the first business ofthe military tribunes. Nor were the young men onlyinrolled, but the old were also obliged to give in thennames, to serve as a city guard. The more numerousthe levies, the more money became necessary for theirpay, which, as it fell upon those who remained at home,it was paid with no good will, as they too did the duty ofsoldiers, and served the state, when they acted M qualityof city guards.
These things sufficiently hard in themselves, weregreatly aggravated by the seditious harangues of the tri­bune? , who insisted, that pay .had been established forthe soldiers, with no other view, but to ruin one half ofthe citizens by the hardships of war, and the other, byimpositions they weie hot able to support, 'Why,' pur­sued they, ' one war has already been spun out to the
* third year, and designedly mismanaged, to protract it'still longer. ,At one single levy, armies have been
* raised for four separate wars, and both boys and old'men mustered to complete them. Now, they no Ion-
* ger make any difference between winter and summer:







OCR Output








346 TITUS LIVJUS' Book IV.


isuch havock in town and country, both among the in­habitants and their cattle, that fearing the losses the far­mers had sustained would bring- 6n a famine, they sWitto Etruria, Pomptinum, Cumae, and last of all to Sicily,for corn. '.
No motion was made for a consular Comitia at thistime; so that L. Pinarius Mamercinus, L. Furius Me-dulinus, and Sp. Posthufnius Albus, were chosen, mi­litary tribunes, with consular power; all of them Patri­cians. This year the plague began to subside, nor wasthere any danger of famine, as measures had been takento prevent it. The Volsci and /Equi, however, in theircouncils of state, and the Etrurians in a general diet,held at the temple of Volumna, were talking in a stilewhich shewed their views were not pacific. The scheme,however, was put off for a year, and it was provided bya decree, that there should be no general diet sooner,notwithstanding all that could he urged by the Vejentes,that Veii would soon share the fate of Fidense, which wasnow in ruins.
In the mean time, at Rome, the wealthy Plebeians,who had long, but to little purpose, waited at the poolof promotion, now that they had a respite from foreignwars,, began to hold meetings at the tribunes houses.There they had private consultations, complaining, 'That'the people were ill affected to their interest, insomuch,'that the military tribunes, with consular power, had« been elected for a great many years, yet never one< Plebeian had been admitted to that honour: their an-'cestors surely had seen a great way before them, who'had wisely provided, that no Patrician should enjoy an« office among the Plebeians; or, long before this time,» they would have been tribunes of the people! so des"'picable now were the commons, to their own order,« that they were held in no greater contempt by the se-i nators, than the people.' Others excused the people,and laid all the blame upon the Patricians: alledging,« That it was owing to their intrigues and -cunning ad-'« dress, that the gate to promotion was shut against the« commons. For, were these false lights extinguished,'and -the people neither flattered nor bullied by the'Patricians, they would not, in their suffrages, forget their







OCR Output








206 TITUS LIVIUS' Book III.


greater. Luckily, indeed, the consul Quinctius had justreturned from the Algidus, which served to allay theirfears. Having brought them to reason, he rebukedthem for being afraid of conquered enemies, and postedguards at the gates. Then having convened the senate,and proclaimed a general vacation in the courts of justice,by the authority of the fathers, he consigued the govern­ment of the city to Q. Serviiius, and marched out toprotect the country, but then no enemy was to be found.The other consul had been very alert Having gotintelligence of the enemy's rout, he fill upon them load­ed with booty, and by that means, encumbered in theirmarch, so that this plundering match cost them verydear: tew of the enemy escaped the trap he had laid forthem, and all the booty was recovered. Upon Quinctius'sreturn to the city, the courts of justice which had beenshut for lour days, were opened again. Then a censuswas held, and when Quinctius had finished the lustrums,the number of citizens enrolled is said to have amount­ed to one hundred and twenty-four thousand two hun­dred and fifteen, besides orphans of both sexes. Afterthis, the iEqui made no great figure. They kept them­selves within their walls, whilst their effects were burntor plundered with impunity. The consul Fabius, whenhe had repeatedly spread desolation in the enemy'scountry, with fire and sword, returned to Rome, full ofglory, and loaded with spoils.


Ai


CHAP. IV.
Fabius over-reached by the JEqui.


L.FTER this, A. Posthumius Albus and Sp. FuriusFusus, were elected consuls. The Furii, are by someauthors, called Fusii. I mention this, that none may beled into a mistake, as to the persons, by this change of, names. It was fully expected, that one of the consulswould prosecute the war against the .Squi; for whichreason, the iEqui solicited aid from the Volsci, who ,o-habited Ecetra. Their request was cheerfully granted,so inveterate wa- the hatred of these states against theRomans; wherefore, they made the most vigorous pre­parations for war.







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








CHAP. M. ROMAN HISTORY. 327


the sedition, and confiscated their estates for the benefitof the public treasury. The Ardeates, by so importanta service, thought themselves sufficiently indemnified forthe unjust award of the Roman people. But the senti­ments of.the senate were more generous, they thoughtthere still remained something more to be done to effacethe remembrance of the shameful avidity which had somuch dishonoured the Roman people, The consul en­tered 'Rome in triumph; Chiilius, the general of theVolsci, being led in chains before his chariot, togetherwith the spoils of the enemy, whom he had disarmed,and obliged to pass under the yoke.
The consul Quinctius, equalled by the virtues of peace,the glory his colleague had acquired in arms, which wasno easy matter. For, he applied himself in such a man­ner to preserve the peace and union of the city, and act­ed with such perfect impartiality between great andsmall, that by a just mixture of severity and mildness,his administration was thought by the senate rathersti'ict, aftd by' the people sufficiently gentle. He kept'the tribunes in awe, not by violent disputes, but by akind of ascendancy his known merit gave him over them.In five consulships, through which he had passed withthe same character for probity, or rather the consulardignity of his whole life, rendered his person more ve­nerable, if possible, thaji the office he bore; for this rea­son, not a syllable was hinted about military tribunes,during the whole course of this consulship.
CHAP. XI.
Reparation made the Ardeates, for the selfish award of theRoman People.
T,HE consuls elected for the ensuing year, were M.
Fabius Vibulanus and Posthumus ./Ebutius Cornice/i.These magistrates, when they reflected upon the gloriousadministration of the preceding year, both at home andabroad ; (for the Romans had shown such attention andalertness in relieving the Ardeates, when their affairsvverel in a most dangerous situation, that among theirneighbours, allies, and enemies, they were considered in







OCR Output








CHAP. 49. ROMAN HISTORY. 381


of bankruptcy, now fled to the protection of that college : .aml it would tend much to their ownjionour, as well asto the dignity of their office, if it should appear, thai tliepower with which they were invested, was not so muchcalculated for harassing the sentate, and sowing discordamong the different orders of the state, as to oppose themalevolent designs of their colleagues. There was nowa noise all over the senate-house, oecasioned by the'members, who, from every corner, appealed to the col­lege of tribunes.
When silence was ordered, they who had been pre­viously prepared by the application of the principal sena­tors, declared, that they would oppose the bill preferredby their colleagues, since it was the judgment of the se­nate, that it tended to the subversion of jthe state. Thesenate renrned thanks to the dissenting tribunes j andthose who had preferred the bill summoned an assembly,where, having inveighed against their colleagues, astraitors to the interest of their constituents, creatures ofthe consulars, and other opprobrious appellatives, theydronped from their motion.
CHAP. XLIX. ;••
* *' ~ r* •'
The jEqui humbled. Pride of Posthumius checked byL, Sextius.
1 HE next year, P. Cornelius Cossus, C. ValeriusPotitus, Q. Quint-tins Cincinnatus, and Numerius FabiusVibulanus were created military tribunes with consularpower. Whilst they were in office, the Republic wouldhave had war, with two of its restless neighbours, if thatwith the Vejentes had not been put off by a religiousscruple among their chiefs, whose estates an inundationof the Tiber had lately damaged, by demolishing their'seats and villas; and the jEqui been diverted from assist­ing the inhabitants of Volse, a people belonging to theirown nation, by the blow they had received three yearsbefore. Incursions had been made from thence upon theterritory of Lavicum, bordering with theirs, and hostili­ties committed upon the Roman colony lately planted"there. They thought, by the assistance of all the /Equi,







OCR Output








CHAP. 2. ROMAN HISTORY. 2oS


making his court to the peop'e at the expence of others,and turned the whole odium from the tribunes upon theconsul.
The contest would have been very warm, had not hiscolleague, Fabius, proposed an expedient which seemeddisagreeable to neither party. That Titus Quinctius,who commanded the army against the Volsci last year,had taken from them some lands: That a colony mightbe sent to Antium, a neighbouring and commodious city,situated on the sea-coast; by which means, the peoplemight be provided in lands, without interfering withthe possessions of others, or giving any disturbance tothe state. This proposal was received with applause;and T. Quinctius, A. Virginius, and P, Furius, wereCAtnmissioued to settle the partition accordingly. Thecandidates were called to give in their names: But, as itgenerally happens, what can be easily attained, has nocharms. Wherefore, so very few appeared to be enrol­led, that to make up the complement, they were obligedto admit the Volsci, the people chusing rather to con­tinue their clamours for lands at Rome, than be put inpossession of them elsewhere. Q. Fabius led an armyagainst the .^Equi; and, at their request, granted thema peace; but it was of no long standing, for they soonafter made an irruption into the territories of Latium.
CHAP. it.
The jEqui drfeated.
JL HE next year, Q. Serviiius, who had been electedconsul with Posthumius, was sent against the .2Equi, andencamped in the country of the Latins. A distemperwhich raged among the troops, confined them to thecamp, so that the war was protracted till the third year,when Q. Fabius and T. Quinctius were consuls. Byan extraordinary commission, the province of the JEqmVvas assigned to Fabius, who had conquered, and at theirrequest granted them a peace. He set out accordingly,not doubting in the least, but the very mention of hisname would bring them to submission, and accordinglysent deputies'to represent in their supreme council,







OCR Output








398' TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV.


ed, the three armies plundered the city together, whichby a long train of prosperity, had now become opulent.This liberality of the generals, began a reconciliationbetween the people and the Patricians; but what com­pleted it, was a decree of the senate, very seasonablyobtained by means of the whole Patricians, without somuch as a hint from the people or their tribunes, ordain­ing the soldiers to be paid out of the treasury, whereas.before they had served the state at their own expence.
iCHAP. LX.
Joy of the people on this occasion. Envy of the Tribwiei.


1 O circumstance, we are told, ever gave the peoplea more sensible pleasure, than the news of this decree ofthe senate. They ran in crowds from all quarters tothe senate-house, and taking the senators by the bandas they came out, called them fathers, in every sense ofthe word: declaring, at the same time, that after such aninstance of goodness, there was not a single citizen, whoto" the last moment of his life, would not be ready to ex­pose himself to every danger, for so generous and bene­ficent a country. The people's satisfaction in this de-,cree, did not only arise from the advantage it promisedthem, in having their estates liable to no expence, whilst.they were personally engaged in the service of the pub­lic, but also because it was a voluntary deed of the se­nate, neither thought of by their tribunes, nor such a de­mand even surmised by themselves. It was this con­sideration which augmented their joy, and enhanced the^alue of the favour.
The tribunes of the people were the only persons who•had no share in the general joy and harmony that reign­ed all over the city on this occasion. 'They insisted,'that this was a stroke in politics, which would not be
* agreeable to all the fathers, nor would they find their
* account in it so much as they imagined. That at first
* sight, it had a specious appearance, but experienceM would shew it in a different point of view. For hoiv
* could the money be raised, but by imposing -a tax upon« individuals? It was plain, therefore, that the senate was«• liberal at the expence of others. That though othen







OCR Output








CHAP. 20. ROMAN HISTORY. , 133


Regillus, in the territory of Tusculum, came up withthe enemy, and getting intelligence that the Tarquinswere among the Latins, could no longer suppress theirfury, but charged them immediately. For this reason,the battle was more bloody and desperate than usual;the generals not only giving orders, and seeing them.properly executed, but exposing their persons in thehottest of the action; so that scarce an officer on eitherside, excepting the Roman dictator, escaped without awound. .'•'
Whilst Posthumius was drawing up and haranguing hismen, Tarquin the proud, although weak and unwieldybv years, rode up with great fury to attack him; butreceiving a blow on the side, he was carried off safe bya party of his own people. In the other wing, ^Ebutiusgeneral of the horse, had singled out Octavius Mamilius,who on his part, observing his motions, did by no meansavoid him, but put spurs to his horse to meet him.With lance in hand, they pushed against each other soimpetuously, that .ffibutius was run through the arm,and Mamilius wounded in the breast. ^Sbutius, inca­pable of holding his lance fcny longer, by means of thewound in his arm, .left the field; whilst the Latin gene­ral was received into the second line, and returned soonafter to the charge, without regard to his wound. Ob­serving his troops in disorder, he made the cohort of theRoman exiles advance, commanded by Titus. Stima-lated by revenge against enemies who had deprived them'of their fortunes and country, they fought desperately;and, by that means, in some measure, restored die battle.
CHAP. XX.
Battle of Regillus. A. R. '258.
W HEN the Romans began to give ground on thatside, Valerius, brother to Publicola, perceiving youngTarquio, who shewed/himself at the head of these exileswith haughtiness and deftance, eager to acquire his fa­mily the honour of putting to death, as it had already ofexpelling the Tarquins, he spurred his horse full speedagainst him, in order to pierce him through with h'sG







OCR Output








CHAP. 68. ROMAN HISTORY. , 30i


'quisite of the commons. You have the protection of'your tribunes: the privilege of appeal, and ydur de-« crees wreathed about ihe necks of the Patricians. Un-'der pretence of equal and impartial laws, you have'invaded our rights: we have.suffered it, and still suffer
• it. Shall we never see an end of civil discord? When'shall we have one common interest, and one common
• country? Victorious and triumphant as you are, you, shew less temper than we under our defeat. Is it not
enough, thai we are afraid of you? When you are to
'contend with us, you can seize the Aventine hill, you
'can retire to the sacred Mount. The enemy is at your
'gates, the Esquiline is almost in the hands of the enemy,
'and the Volsci scaling your ramparts, yet nobody stirs
• to oppose it: but, against us you are valiant: against'us you can arm with all diligence.'


G


CHAP. LXVIII.
In continuation.


/OME on then, besiege the. senate-house, make, anhostile camp of the forum, fill the jails with the prime'nobility, and when you have performed these mighty
• feats, then sally out at the Esquiline gate, whilst your'.courage is up against the enemy. If this be too much'for such spirits as yours, go and behold from your walls,'vour lands ravaged, your houses plundered and in'flames, and the whole country laid waste with fire and'sword. But the public interest by these means, is
• still in a more deplorable state: the whole country it'in flames, the city is invested, and the enemy tri-'umphanjt.
'In the name of the gods, what will be the conse-
'queace with respect to your private concerns? There
'is not one of you, but will hear soon enough of his
-.*. losses. And what have you here to repair them? Will
• your tribunes make up and indemnify you, for your'losses? They will give you words, as many as you'please:—bring impeachments against the first men iu
• the republic, in great abundance ;—heap laws upon'laws;—assemblies u.rxm assemblies.—But, will air*
O







OCR Output








174 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IL


about their invectives, and challenge those who had beenso. ready with their tongues, to shew what they can do.with their swords. All that day the fathers and com­mons signalized themselves with prodigious acts of va­lour; but of all others the Fabian name and family dis­tinguished themselves most, determined in that battleto recover the affections of the commons, which theyhad lost in their disputes at home. The army is drawnup: nor were the Vejentes and Etrurians backward toengage.
CHAP. XLVL
A battle. 2. Fabitti killed.
W ITH the enemy it amounted almost to a certainty,that they would be no more in earnest in fightingagainst them, than they were against the /Equi: nor didthey doubt, but something still more gross would ensue,when their minds were in such a ferment, and at a junc­ture so very critical. But they were dreadfully disap­pointed; for in no former action did the Romans en­gage with greater spirit, so much had they been exaspe­rated by the enemy's insults, anil the consuls delays.The Etrurians had scarcely time to draw up, when theRomans, in the first hurry, having thrown their javelinsat random, rather than with any aim, rushed in with!their swords, which of all other wenpons make thebloodiest work.
Among the Patricians, the Fabian family distinguishedthemselves by their extraordinary gallantry, and set anoble example to their fellow citizens. Quintus Fabius,who had been consul three years before, was the firstwho rushed among the thickest of the Vejentes; but be­ing exposed to enemies on every side, a Tuscan, full ofhis strength, and skill in arms, run him through thebreast with his sword; when he was not aware of him.Fabius, having extracted the blade, and falling forwards,expired of the wound. Both armies were sensible of thedifference made by the fall of this single officer; and theRomans had begun to give ground, when M. Fabiusthe consul, skipping over thu dead body, and covering







OCR Output








178 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


derahly thirmed; for trusting to the superiority of num­bers, they had detached the corps-de-reserve, to stormthe Roman camp. There, meeting with little resistance,they carried it at the tirst assault: but whilst they weremore intent upon plunder than fighting, the Triarii,*who could not sustain the first charge, got time to sendadvice to the consuls of what passed in the camp, andputting themselves in a body, returned to the general'stent, and of themselves renewed .tlie engagement. Theconsul Manlius too, posted back to the camp, plantedguards at every gate, and left the enemy not an openingto retire through. Despair threw them into a fit of rage,rather than inspired them with courage. For, whenthey had often attempted to force their way, withoutsuccess, a body of youth attacked the consul, whom theyknew by the splendour of his arms. The first volley ofdarts was received by the soldiers who supported him;but the fury of the assailants at last prevailed, for theconsul having received a mortal wound, fell from hishorse, when all his party were routed. ,
This inspired the Etrurians with fresh courage, andspread universal terror throughout the Roman camp,and it would have ended in the total loss of the day, hadnot the lieutenants carried off the bady of the consul, andopened one of the gates of the camp, for a passage to theenemy. Through it they rushed out with the utmostprecipitation; and by the way, fell in with the otherconsul, who had been victorious, and by his party werealmost all cut to pieces. Thus a glorious victory wasobtained, but the joy was damped by the loss of two oftheir bravest officers.
Wherefore, the consul, after the senate had decreedhim the honour of a triumph, declined it, with this apo­logy, " That if the army could go through the ceremony*' of a triumph, without a general, their generous exer-<' tions in the war entitled them to that honour, and he"would subscribe to it with pleasure; but for his own"part, whilst his family were in mourning for the loss
* So called from their position, beinir marshalled in the thirdrank, as ttie strength and hopes of their party. They were com-roonjy veterans of experience and known valour.







OCR Output








CHAP. 9. ROMAN HISTORY. 325


guardians expatiated publicly, on the injustice of thesentence, among the people of their own order, in theforum; and, having made up a party, seized the younglady, and carried her off' from her mother's house. Inopposition to them, a party of the nobility, still moreformidable, joined the injured youth, and bloody workensued.
The people, who bore no resemblance to the peopleof Rome, were worsted, and marched out of the city inarms* posting themselves upon an eminence, whencethey laid waste the lands of the nobility with fire andsword: and having, by the hopes of plunder, drawn agreat many mechanics to their party, they made prepa­rations for besieging the city, which hitherto had sus­tained no damage from the insurrection. War now ap­peared in all its dreadful shapes and colours : the wholecommunity being as it were, infected with the distrac­tion of two young men, who were contending for a mar­riage, fatal to themselves, and destructive to their coun­try.
Neither thougTit their internal resources sufficient forthe conflict; for which reason, the nobility applied tothe Romans for relief, while the city was besieged, andthe commons called in the Volsci, to assist them in thereduction of the city. The Volsci appeared first beforeArdea, under the command ot Cluiiius, an ./E^uian ge­neral, and shut up the city by a line of circumvallationdrawn round its walls. When these accounts werebrought to Rome, the consul Geganius lost not a mo­ment in marching with his army, ami encamped withinthree miles of the enemy; where, as the day was farspent, he ordered the troops to refresh themselves. Atthe fourth watch, he proceeded and carried on his workswith such expedition, that at sun-rising, the Volscifound themselves blocked up by a fortification, superiorin strength to that wherewith they had invested the city;whilst, at another quarter, the consul had carried hisworks to the walls of Ardea, that his army might havea free communication with the town.
P







OCR Output








CHAP. 54.' ROMAN HISTORY. 389


CHAP. LIV.
Three plebeian quecstors cboten.,
J. HE consuls elected upon this occasion were Cn. Cor­nelius Cossus, and L. Furius MeduMinus, for the secondtime. At no time were the people more highly pro­voked than at this, when they were not permitted toehuse military tribunes. But they both consoled andavenged themselves on that account, in the election ofquEestors. This was the first time that Plebeians wereadmitted to the Quaestorship; and of four places, therewas only one reserved for Caeso Fabius Ambustus, a Pa­trician, Q. Silius, P. jElius, and P. Pupius, were prefer­red to the sons of the first families in Rome. I find that'three of the Icilian family, who had been chosen tri­bunes that year, and noted for the inveteracy of their fa-'mily against the Patricians, were the principal instfga-tors of the people to assume this freedom in giving theirsuffrages, promising them innumerable advantages, ofwhich they were excessively fond; but declaring at thesame time, that they would not move a step towards theexecution of them, if at the Comitia for electing quaes­tors, the only officers whom the senate had left them atliberty to choose indiscriminately out of either order,theyhad not resolution enough to effectuate what they had solong inclined, and what the laws left them at liberty to<Io. The people considered this as a very great victory;for they did not estimate the quaMtorship from the in­trinsic privileges of the office, but as it opened a doijr bywhich men of low birth might enter to the consulshipand to triumphs.
On the other hand, the fathers murmured, not be­cause the honours of the state were to be shared withthe commons, but because they were in a fair way tolose them altogether. They insisted, that if they wereto go on at this rate, it was needless to train up childrenfor exalted stations, if they were to be supplanted in theoffices of their ancestors, and see others in possession ofthe honours due to them, whilst they were left in theobscure offices of priests and Salii, with no other em­







OCR Output








112 TITUS LIVIUS' . BOOK II.


ed it unlawful to use iti after it was reaped, the peopleflocked in numbers to carry it away with the straw inbaskets, and then threw it into the Tiber; the waters ofwhich being low, as it is usual in the heat of summer,the heaps of corn sticking in the shallows, were coveredwith mud: by these, and other materials carried thitherby the stream, an island rose by degrees^ which by theaddition of banks as I imagine, and the assistance of art,was so raised and consolidated, that temples and porti­coes were built upon it.
After the tyrant's effects were plundered, the traitorswere condemned and executed. What rendered theirpunishment particularly remarkable was, that Brutus'soffice, as consul, laid him under. the necessity of punish­ing his own children: and the man who ought to havebeen removed from beholding such a melancholy spec­tacle, fortune obliged to stand by and see the punish­ment inflicted. Young men of the first quality stoodtied to a stake; but from all the criminals, as from per­sons unknown, the consul's sons drew the eyes 'of thespectators, pitying them not more on account of theseverity of their punishment, than the horrid crime forwhich they suffered; in the very year of their deliver­ance from slavery, that they should have conspired tobetray into the hands of Tarquin, who had been ahaughty tyrant at Rome, and now an hostile exile, theircountry after it was freed from his despotic sway, theirfather too, its deliverer, the consulate which originatedin the family of the Junii; the fathers, the people, andwhatever belonged to the gods, or the citizens of Rome.The consuls seated themselves in the tribunal; and thelictors being dispatched to inflict the punishment, striptthem naked, whipt them with rods, and struck off theirheads. All the time, the eyes of the spectators werefixed upon Brutus, to observe his deportment as a fatherand a patriot:—in love for his country, he stood distin­guished during all the tragical scene.
After the execution, to set an example of rewarding,as well as punishing, the slave who made the discovery,got a sum of money out of the treasury, his liberty, andthe freedom of the city. He was the first, according totradition, that was made free by the Rod Vindicta,







OCR Output








CHAP. 60. ROMAN HISTORY. 289


of their tribunes, gave a very seasonable check to theimmoderate stretch of power; " declaring, that enoughhad been done, both for the security of their liberties,and the punishment of their enemies; and thereforehe wouM sutler no person to be cited to a trial, norcommitted to prison, during the remainder of the year.With respect to the past, to revive the remembrance ofold faults, which ought to be buried in oblivion, nowthat the decemvirs, in their punishment, had expiatednew ones, would be highly improper. With respectto the future, the steady and unanimous zeal of bothconsuls in guarding the liberty of the people, would besufficient security that nothing will happen to requirethe interposition of the tribunes."This moderation of the tribunes, served in the firstplace to dispel the fears of the senators, but on the otherhand increased their aversion to the consuls, who haddeclared so openly and so entirely for the people, that aPlebeian magistrate should see cause to take upon himthe interest and safety of the senate before a Patrician;and that their enemies had been satisfied with revenge,before the consuls took any measure for opposing theirlicentiousness. Many blamed their own negligence andfacility, in giving their sanction to the laws passed bythose consuls in favour of the people; and it was suffi­ciently obvious, that nothing but the distracted state ofthe Republic had obliged them to comply with the*times.
CHAP. LX. .
An action with the JEqui and Volsci.
X HE domestic troubles being thus settled, and the li­berty of the people firmly established, the consuls wenteach into his respective province. Valerius, by a master­ly stroke of policy, supported the war against the 55quiand Volsci, whose armies were joined at the Aigidus.Had he immediately risked a battle, it is hard to say,considering how the courage of the parties stood aflect-ed, after what happened when the decemvirs command­ed, whether it would not have been of dangerous con­sequence. He kept the army close within their lines,







OCR Output








X:HAP. 45. ROMAN HISTORY. . 171


not so much from any prepossession in their favour, asthey were impressed with a notion, that the Roman statewould be brought to perdition by its intestine broils.
In a general convention of all the stales of Etruria,the leading men were constantly bawling out; "That"of the power of the Romans, there would be no end,•' were they not by their seditions to turn their fury"against one another.—That this was the only poison,"the only blot found in states, by which the most"powerful were exposed to ruin.—That this evil, the"bad effects whereof had been lately suspended, partly"by the wisdom of the senate, and partly by the peo-"pie's patience, was at length come to such an excess,"that Rome might be said to form two cities, of which"eaclvhad its own laws and magistrates.—That though"at first they showed themselves refractory in giving in"their names to be enlisted, yet in the field they obeyed"their officers, and whatever divisions were in the city,"while their military discipline could be maintained,"their animosities could be quelled; but now the re-"bellion had passed from the city into the camp.—That"in the last war, when drawn up in order of battle,"and in heat of action, the Roman soldiery had volun-"tarily resigned the victory to the vEqni, after it was"obtained, having quitted their standards, abandoned"their general in^time of aciion, and returned without"his orders into the camp.—That it was an undoubted"truth, that with proper exertions, Rome might be re-"duced by its own forces.—That it was only necessary"to make a declaration and show of war, and that fate"and the gods would do all the rest." Roused by thesehopes, the Etrurians armed; and by a variety of fortune,during the course of the war, were often defeated, andoften victorious in their turn.
CHAP. XLV.
War with the Vejentes and Etrurians.—Eagerness of theRoman army.
1 HE Roman consuls too, dreaded nothing so muchas their own forces,—their own arms: The retrospect







OCR Output








90 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


permit them to hide a great quantity of arms in hismaster's lodgings. Tarquin, having completed all hisscheme, in the course of one night, sent for the La­tin chiefs, a little before day, and as if he had- beenalarmed with some extraordinary discovery, told them,"That his absence yesterday, had been ordered by the"wise providence of the gods, both upon their account"and his own: That Turn us he was told had concert-"ed measures to dispatch him, and the principal of"the Latins, that he alone might have the supreme"power over the nation: That the attempt would•' have been made yesterday in the convention, had it"not been delayed, because he who had called thecouncil, and whom he particularly pointed at, wasabsent: That for this very reason, he had spoke soilliberally of him, in his absence, because his lateappearance had disconcerted his measures. He hadno doubt, if his intelligence was good, but by day­break, when the assembly meets, he will come inarms, with a band of conspirators; that he was also-informed, that a great number of swords had been se­cretly conveyed to him, which, whether true or false,"could be discovered in a moment. Upon this, he re-."quested that they would go along with him to Tur-"nus."
The violence of Turnus's temper, his speech the daybefore, and Tarquin's late appearance in the assembly,.because it seemed as if that circumstance had delayedthe intended massacre, all put together, made the thinglook suspicious: wherefore, although they accompaniedTarquin, disposed to give credit to his report; yet theywere of opinion, that should the swords not be foundwkh him, it would all go for nothing. When theycame to his lodgings, they awaked Turnus, set a guardupon him, and seized his domestics; who, out of affec­tion for their master, began to" make opposition, whenthe arms that had been concealed, were brought fromevery corner of the apartment. The truth of the matternow seemed indisputable, and Turnus was clapped inchains. Immediately a council of the Latins was calledin a prodigious hurry, where the swords, produced incourt, exasperated them so much against him, that







OCR Output








*06i TITUS UVIUS' BOOK IV.


those who have got an extraordinary emolument, aretaxed with an adequate service? There will be no greatexertions without a view of returns, nor much profitwiiliout a great deal of pains. Pain and pleasure,'however contrary in their nature, seem to have an in-timate connection with each other. The soldier, in.former times, grudged excessively to serve the publicat'his own charge, whilst, with pleasure, he employeda part of the year in cultivating his farm, to get a sub­sistence for his family at home, and for himself whenhe took the field. He is now happy in the reflection,that the public must support him, and receives his paywith pleasure. As he is at no great expence, he canbear with patience to be kept a little longer from hisfamily, and family affairs. Besides, were the republicto reckon with him, it might justly be urged, youare paid for a year's service, why would you scrupleto serve out your year? Do you think it would bereasonable to exact full pay, for half service? It iswith reluctance, gentlemen, that I touch upon thesethings. These are arguments proper only to be used
• with mercenary troops. With you, we would wish'to act as with fellow citizens, and think it but reason-'able you act with us, as with your native country.'Either we should not have undertaken this war, or we'should certainly support it in a manner worthy the'Roman people, and bring it to a conclusion, as quick-'ly as possible. This we can accomplish, if we press'the besieged with vigour, and not quit the siege, till we'have crowned our hopes, by making ourselves masters'of the city. If we had no other motive for our perse-'verance, by Hercules, the shame of raising the block-1 ade, ought to be more than sufficient. For the sake
• of one woman, a city, in former times, was besieged
• for the space of ten years, by the united power of
• Greece; and pray, how far were they from home?
• What countries, what seas intervened? Shall we then'scruple to carry on a siege for twelve mouths, within'twenty miles; nay, almost within sight of Rome? It
• cannot be alledged, that the cause of the war is a triC-
• ling affair, or that we had not a sufficient provocation'to persist in the prosecution of it. Seven times have
»hey rejievred hostilities. • In time of peace they never







OCR Output








9* TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


CHAP. LIV.
Sexttts admitted into the Gabinian council. Gabii reduced.


PON this he was admitted into the council of state,where, with respect to other matters, he said he wouldyield to the old counsellors of the Gabini, as they hadaccess to know more about them; but with respect to thewar, which he took every opportunity of advising, hepretended to be a better judge, being intimately acquaint­ed with the resources of both nations: and, moreover,such was the intolerable pride of the Roman king, thatit not only subjected him to the odium of the people, butto the aversion of his own family.
As he thus insensibly stirred up the Gabini to renewthe war, he went in person, with the most alert of theiryouth, upon pillaging; parties; and, in all his words andactions, acted his part so much to the life, that his creditwith the Gabini was quite established. Insomuch, thatat last, he was chosen general, to prosecute the war.Upon this, some skirmishes happened, between the peo­ple of Gabii and Rome, in which, for the most part,the Gabini had the better, who never yet could discoverthe cheat; but, from the highest to the lowest, werepositive to a man, that Sextus Tarquinius had' been sentthem by the gods to. lead them on to victory. Amongthe soldiers too, the cheerfulness with which he exposedhimself to the dangers and fatigues of war, and the ge­nerosity he discovered in dividing the plunder, so endear­ed him to the soldiers, that Tarquin had no more to sayat Rome, than he had at Gabii. Therefore, when he sawthat he could be sufficiently Supported for any attempt,he dispatches one of his confidents to Rome, to ask hisfather, what were his futther commands, for the gods hadgiven him an unlimited power at Gabii.
To this message, the king, 1 suppose, diffident of thefidelity of the bearer, returned him no answer in words,but as if he had meant to consider of the matter walkedinto the garden, whither his son's messenger followedhim. As he walked in the garden for some time insilence, he struck off, it is said, the heads of the tallest







OCR Output








123 TITUS LIVIUS' Book IL


ed with admiration, he said, that this was an action su­perior to the Achievements of Codes and Mucins, and hewould make a point'Oi it, if the hostage was not return­ed, that lie would consider himself no longer Ooinid bythe treaty; but if she were, he ivould send her back toher parents inviolate.
Bith parlies acted honourably; the Romans restoredthe hostage, according to treaty, and her virtue was notonly safe wiih Porsenna, but her bravery greatly honour­ed. After many encomium-; he offered to present herwith some of the hostages; and she might choose whomshe pleased. When they were all brought out, it is said,that she made choice of the young men under age, bothbecause it was most consistent with her character, andapproved by the hostages themselves, as their time oflife required, that they should be first at liberty, as be­ing less able to bear the rigours of slavery.
The peace being renewed, the Romans distinguishedthis extraordinary bravery in a lady, by an extraordina­ry honour, namely an Equestrian statue, which theyerected for her, on the top of the Via-Sacra, represent­ing a lady on horseback.
CHAR XIV.


Ti


Arms, Porsenna's son, roughly handled at Aricia.


HE custom handed down to us from the ancients,and still retained among the other solemn usages at thisday, when goods are exposed to vendue, of calling thata sale of goods of Porsenna, does not at all accord withthe peaceable departure of that king from Rome. Thisusage must either have originated during the war, andbeen continued after the peace, or must have been found­ed on principles of greater humanity, than the title ofselling an enemy's effects, seems to import. The mostprobable reason that has been assigned, seems to be, thatPorsenna, when he marched from Janiculum, made apresent of his camp, richly stocked with provisions con­veyed to him from the adjacent fruitful plains of Etruria:that the city, at that time, being in great distress, occa­sioned by the length of the'siege; these effects left in







OCR Output








CHU-. 56. ROMAN HISTORY. 189


Tlie consuls attempted to dispel the storm; but theysoon found, that the dignity of their ofljce was but a fee­ble support without force. Their Iictors being beat, andtheir fasces broke to pieces, thcv were driven out of theforum into the senate-house, uncertain how far Volerowould carry his victory/
When the storm had blown over, the consuls orderedthe senators to be summoned to the house, where theymade loud complaints of the bad treatment they had re­ceived from the people, and the intolerable insolence ofVolero. After many .violent speeches, the elder senators,prevailed, who by no means approved that the Patriciansshould oppose passionate measures to the rashness of thecommons.
CHAP. LVJ.
Great disputes about the mode of electing Tribunes.
V OLERO became a mighty favourite with the people*who, at the next election, created him tribune. L. Pi-narius and P. Furius, were consuls that year. Evervbody imagined, that by his means the whole weight othe iribunitian power would have fallen upon the consulsof the preceding year; but forgetting his private resent­ment, in order to. promote the public interest, used not asingle expression to their prejudice, and only preferred abill, that the plebeian magistrates should be chosen inthe Comitia by tribes.
This, though at first it did not seem to affect the se­nate much, was a motion of no small importance, as inthat case, the. Patricians could not choose whom theypleased for tribunes, by the votes of the client. The fa­thers strained every nerve in the opposition of a law thatwas so acceptable to the commons: but neither the autho­rity of the consuls, nor the interest of the Patricians,could prevail on any one of the college of tribunes to en­ter their dissent, though that was the only valid obstruc­tion against it. The weight, however, and importanceof the bill itself, created disputes, Which put it off forthe course of the year.
Volero was chosen tribune a second time; and the







OCR Output








980 BOOK IV. TITUS LIVIUS'


Appius, who was created decemvir for compiling a bodyof laws, at this time the youngest of all the senators,represented, as it is related of him, ' That he would laybefore them an old political maxim, hereditary in hisfamily, which his great grandfather Appius Claudius,had convinced the senate, was the only expedient foropposing the tyranny of the tribunes^ and that wasby stirring up an opposition among themselves. Per­sons who had but lately emerged from obscurity, wouldeasily be induced by the influence of ihe great, to takethe other side of the argument, would the senatorsonly deign sometimea to speak of them in terms moreagreeable to the times, than to the dignity of theirrank. The pride of such generally kept pace witbtheir condition; and therefore the moment they wereconvinced that their colleagues who took the lead inthis affair, had engrossed the favour of the people, andthat themselves had only a blank in reversion, it wouldbe no difficult matter to bring them over to the side ofthe senate, whereby they might attract the attention ofthe whole order, as well as the principal men in it.'All of them approved of this plan, especially C. Servi-lius Priscus, who run out much in praises of the youngnobleman, because he had not degenerated from the vir­tue of his ancestors; and recommended in a particularmanner to the order, to employ their interest respective­ly, to engage as many of the college of tribunes as pos­sible, to join in opposition to the bill.
After the senate was adjourned, the principal mem­bers applied themselves to gain the tribunes, and bypersuasion, remonstrating, and assuring them that theywould not only lay every single senator, but the wholebody under a particular obligation; they engaged sixtif them to dissent from their colleagues. Next day asit had been concerted, a motion was made in the senate,relative to the sedition excited by Maecilius and Metilius,about a largess of a most dangerius tendency: and eacbof the senators, in giving his opinion of the matter, tookcare to declare, that for his own part he was at a lossto say, nor could he see the least prospect of relief fromany quarter, but from the opposition of the tribunes.The hepublic, oppressed as it was, and reduced to a stata


 







OCR Output








373 TITUS UVRTS' - BOOK IV.


The consuls had moved, that besides the two city (juie*-tors, there should be. two others created to attend thearmy, and assist the consuls in time'of war. This motionwas highly approved of by the fathers, bat the tribunesof the commons were determined to oppose it, unless theconsuls added a clause, that some of the qucestors, whotill then had always been Patricians, shoutd be chosen- out of .the Plebeiaji order. J The consuts, and a:so thesenators, at first, opposed TlSis-*u^endment with all theirmight; but afterwards yielded so far, that in the electiotiof quaestors, as in that of-military tribunes with consularpower, the people should be at liberty to cliuse whomthey thought proper. When this proposal was not ac­cepted, they dropt the design of increasing the numberof quaestors entirely.
The tribunes took up the affair where the senators leftit, and soon after introduced other seditious claims, andamongst t'he rest, that of the Agrarian law. Upon ac­count of these commotions, the senate wanted, that con­suls rather than military tribunes should be chosen; butas they could not, by reason of the opposition of the tri­bunes, pass an act for that purpose, from consuls theadministration returned to an inter-regnum, and eventhat cost no small contest, as the tribunes were indefa­tigable in their endeavours to prevent a meeting of thesenate.
The best part of next year was spent in disputes be­tween the new tribunes and the gentlemen who actedsuccessively in the capacity of inter-rex; the tribunessometimes preventing a meeting of the senate, for elect­ing an inter-rex, and when one had been cho«en, raisinga dust to prevent an act of senate from being passed, forholding the consular romitia; till at length, L. PapiriusMugilianus, then inter-rex, commenting vt.ry sharply onthe conduct of both Patricians and tribunes, told them,That the republic, abandoned as it was, and neglectedby men, was yet under the peculiar care and protec­tion of the gods, who had provided for its satety in thetruce wiih the Vejentes, and the inaction of the jEqui.But should the motions of any of these "nations raise analaVm, it was evident, that they were determined tosuffer the state to be ruined, without a Patrician magi­


 







OCR Output








368 BOOK IV. TITUS LIVIUS'


come to an engagement, supported his line of battlewith reinforcements, or discharged any of the dutiesof a good consul?—When you'saw the legions routed,did you not, of your own accord, prevail on the ca­valry to dismount and reinstate the battle? Whenyou and your followers were separated from the mainbody of the army, did the consul come in person, orsend any other to your relief? Were you joined byany reinforcement next day? Did not you and yourbattalion nuke good your way to the camp, by meansof your own bravery atone? Did you find the consulor any armv there? Was not the camp abandonedand the wounded soldiers left in it? These question*you are to answe/ this day, as a man of honour and asoldier, by whose bravery alone the republic has beensaved in this w:ir. To conclude; where is C. S«n-pronius ?—What is become of our legion*?' Did .theconsul and the army abandon you, or you them? arewe the conquerors or the vanquished?
CHAP. XLI.
Tempanius1 sensible and modest answer.
J. EMPANIUS's answer to these interrogatories, is saidto have been simple, but sensible, and in the stile of asoldier, neither swelled with encomiums on himself, norenlivened with censures upon others. He said, ' That itdid not become him as a soldier, to decide with re­spect to the military abilities of his general: It was thebusiness of the Roman people to have been satisfiedas to these, when at the general' election they chosehim consul. Wherefore, it was highly improper to in­terrogate him upon the plans and designs of a comman­der in chief, or the political virtues of a consul, pointsthat required experience, and the penetration of theablest heads to discuss; that for his own part he couldonly speak what Be saw; that before he was separatedfrom the army, he observed the consbl fighting at thehead of his troops, encouraging the soldiers, and al­ways in the midst of the Roman ensigns exposed tothe darts of the enemy. That afterwards he lost sight


 







OCR Output








262 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK lit


"pie; nor would they regard their imaginary fasces,"and pretended authority.
Appius now finding matters come to that pass, thatif he did not oppose impudence on his part, to-spirit ontheirs, there would be an end of decem viral authority:"you had better be silent," say? he, "than drop a-sin-"gle word deviating from the question upon which we"ask your advice." When Valerius refused to he awedinto silence by a mork magistrate, Appius ordered alictor to seize him. Valerius then,' from the porch ofthe senate-house, called oat to the Romans-for assistance,but L. Cornelius took Appius in his arms, not out of re­gard to Valerius, as he pretended, which put an end tothe dispute. By this interposition of Corneliu.% Valeriuswas at liberty to speak his sentiments; but as this libertyextended only to words, the decemvirs still gained theirjiointi Moreover, the consular gentlemen, and elder se­nators, from an aversion to tribunitian power, which wasnot yet eradicated, as they saw the people more attachedto it than to consular government, rather wished that thedecemvirs should afterwards resign their office uncom-pelled, than that- the people, from their abhorrence todecemvirs, should get head again. For should the go­vernment, without a bustle, or popular commotion, re­turn into the hands of consuls, it was not impossible, buteither by the intervention of wars, or a mild exercise ofthe consular government, the people might be broughtto think no more of their tribunes.
Thus was an edict issued for levying an army, with­out farther interruption from the fathers; and as therehad- been no appeal from the decemviral authority, theyounger citizens answered to their names. After the en­rolment was fmished, the decemvirs concerted amongthemselves who should go out to the war, and who shouldhead the armies.
Q. Fabius and Appius Claudius were at the head ofthe decemvirs; and as there appeared more danger fromthe citizens at home, than the enemies abroad, theythought Appius, from the violence of his temper, wasbest calculated to quell any commotions that might arisein the city. The. disposition of Fabius prompted himrather to be active in a bad cause, than steady in a good







OCR Output








CHAP, ISi ROMAN HISTORY. • 229


<t cing their zeal and attachment to so powerful a neigh-'" bouring city." They cheerfully consented to send'them assistance, and their youth were immediately mus­tered nnd armed.
They reached Rome early next morning, and at a dis­tance were taken tor the jfequi and Volsci, coming a-- gainst them. When they were convinced of their mis­take, they received them mto the city, where the}Tmarch-ed in a body to the (arum and joined Valerius, alreadydrawing up his troops, having left the guard of the gatesto his colleague. • •
The character of Valerius had great weight with thepeople, when he assured them, " That whenever the oa-"pitol should be recovered, and the tranquillity of the"city restored, if they would permit him then to in-"form them of the artful, self-interested views, con-"cealed under-the specious law-in question, he would"neither be forgetful of his ancestors, nor his sirname,"entailed upon him by his progenitors, as an hereditary~" obligation to support the interest of the people, and"for his own part, would give no .interruption to their•' assemblies." Accordingly they followed him, in spiteof all the tribunes could urge, and gained the declivityof the Capitoline-hill, in conjunction with the Tusculanauxiliaries.
Here a noble emulation of being foremost in thecharge, animated the Romans and allies. They wereencouraged by their leaders on both sides. The enemythen began to be afraid, having no other resource, hutin the strength of the place. The epnfederates took ad­vantage of their disorder, and 'charged them briskly, andhad already broke mto the -porch of the temple, whenP. Valerius, who fought at the head of his troops, waskilled. P. Volumnius, a con'sul.ar gentleman, saw himfall, and ordering his men to cover his body, fiewto take-bis place. The ardour and fury with which they fought,kept them insensible of the melancholy eveut: so thatthey had gained the victory before they perceived thatthey had fought without a general. The temple waspolluted with the blood of many of the exiles, manywere takjen alive; but Herdonius himself was among theslain. Thus then was the capitol recovered. The pri-•. -'







OCR Output








CHAP. 70. ROMAN HISTORY. . 303


quarter from an enemy. from whom they had so often re­volted.


CHAR EXX.
'- /The jEqui and Volsci severely chastised:
HEN both consuls are in the same Roman army,


VV
they are vested with equal powers. But Agrippa, atthis time, yielded his authority to' his colleague, con­vinced, that nothing is: more contrary to the prosperityof great undertakings, than a divided command. Quinc-tius repaid this compliment as he ought to have done,by communicating to his colleague all his counsels, act-­ing in concert with him in every instance, giving him ashare of the glory in all successes, and making him hisequal in all things without exception.
In the action, Quiuctius commanded the right wing,Agrippa the left, Sp. Posthumius Albus, the lieutenant,.the centre, and Ser. Sulpicius, another lieutenant-gene­ral, commanded the cavalry. The foot on the rightfought with extraordinary bravery, and found a vigorousresistance On the part of the Volsci.
Ser. Sulpicius, with the horse, broke through the ene­my's main body, and might have returned the sameway, before the enemy had time to rally and put them­selves in form, but he thought it better to charge themin the rear: and had not the Equian and Vohcian ca­valry come up, and attacked him in his own way, andby that means suspended the fortune of the day, hewould, in a. moment, have put them to flight, as by hisattack they were greatly disconcerted both in front andin rear. Sulpicius then cried out to his troops, ' Thatnow was their time; — that they would be immediatelysurrounded, and all communication with their ownarmy would be cut off, if by a vigorous effort, theydid not dispatch the enemy's horse. To put them toflight, and let them live, was doing nothing; theymust dispatch both men and horses, that neither mightreturn to renew the battle. They will never be ableto stand before you, now that you have already broke -through the main body of theiv foot.'







OCR Output








CHAP. 48. ROMAN HISTORY. 271


of matrons, be was received with doleful wailings, andVirginias shaking his fist in the face of Appius, criedout, " It was to Iciliu.s, not to thee, Appius, I promised"my daughter. To. honourable marriage I have brought"her up, and not foe the brutal passion of an infamous"ravisher. What! is the lawless and promiscuous lust"of wild beasts to be introduced amongst us! How the"citizens here will bear this, I will uot pretend to say,"but I hope those who are in arms will never endure"it." The claimant was repulsed by the crowd of wo­men, and friends that stood round Virginia, when silencewas proclaimed by a herald.
CHAP. XLVIIt
• Virginius stabs his Daughter, to save her virtue,
J. HE decemvir, now intoxicated with his criminalpassion, told them, " That he had sufficient reason to.suspect, from Icilius' invectives yesterday, and Vir­ginius' insolence to day, whereof the Roman peoplehad been witnesses, that they only sought to excite atumult; but that was not all, for he had got certaininformation, that they had been forming cabals in thecity all the night long, for that purpose: That, there-fore, being apprized of the design, he had not come"thither without a guard. Not that he meant to giveV the least trouble to those who were peaceably dispos-"ed, but to keep those in awe, in virtue of his office,"who should dare to interrupt the peace of the city."For which reason, they had better make no further"disturbance. Go lictor," pursued he, " put aside the"crowd, and make way for themaster to seize his slave."When swollen with rage, he had expressed himselfthus, with a tone of authority, the crowd gave way oftheir own accord, leaving the poor girl standing alone,a victim to lawless lust.^—Virginius then, when he sawno appearance of relief, intreated Appius, in the firstplace, " To impute 'it to a father's grief, if he had un-"guardedly expressed himself unbecoming the dignity"of Appius; and, in the second place, to indulge him.',' with. a moments conversation with the nurse, in the,







OCR Output








886 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK HK


This minister of the decemvir's pleasures, laid bold ofher as she was going into the forum, where schools werekept in a kind of shops,.and calling her his slave, as hav­ing been born of one of his bond-women, desired her tofollow binr immediately., otherwise he would oblige herto do so by force. The poor. girl was struck with amaze­ment, and trembled with fear; but her governess raisinga great cry,. imploring the assistance of the people,brought a great crowd about them..
The names of her father Virginius, and of Iciiius, herintended husband, ware heard' on all sides. Regard tothem brought their acquaintance to the place, and thescandal of the action engaged the most indifferent in herquarrel. This secured her against violence.—The claim­ant then cried out, that there was no occasion for so muchnoise, for force was entirely out of the question with him-,since the usual steps of law were open to him; and im­mediately cited her before the magistrate, whither, bythe advice of those about her, she followed him.
When they came to Appius' tribunal, the plaintiff.opened his claim to the judge, in a-story with which hewas previously acquainted, having himself instructed himin the plan or prosecution. He said, that'Virginia wasborn in his house, whence she had been stolen and car­ried to Virginius', where she passed for his daughter.This, he insisted, he would prove, by incontestible evi­dence, to which, were Virginius judge, who had beenthe greatest sufferer, he could have nothing, to object. Inthe mean time, it was but reasonable, that the girl shouldfollow her master. The counsel for the young ladypleaded, that seeing Virginius was ab'roail in the serviceof his country, and might, if he were advised; be presentwithin two days, it was unfair, in his absenee( 10 raiseany dispute about his children; and insisted, that judg­ment should be suspended till Virginius should be pre­sent. And agreeable to the law made by Appius him-self, she should be allowed to continue in the possessionof her freedom, till a definitive sentence in the case; thatbeing a virgin, arrived at maturity, she might not run.the risk.of her honour, before she had lost her liberty.


 







OCR Output








. 47. ROMAN HISTORY. 175


it with his shield, cried put, " Was it to this purpose,•' you swore, gentlemen, that you would fly back, with"the enemy at your heels, to the camp? Are you so"much more afraid of these your most dastardly ene-"mies, than of Jupiter and Mars, by whom you have"sworn? I, who have not yet sworn, shall either return"victorious, or fall here, with my sword in my hand,"near thee, O Quint us Fabius." -
Theji Ci«so Fabius, who had been his predecessor inoffice, steps up to the consul, and asks him, " Is it withthese words, brother, that you think to succeed withsoldiers? No. The gods by whom they have sworn,will give them resolution. As for us, for the creditof the rank we bear, and fhe honour of the Fabianname, let us animate our fellow-soldiers, more by thegallantry of our actions, than the force of our argu­ments." With these words, the two Fabii flew withtheir lances, to the foremost ranks, and drew the wholebattalion after them.
CHAP. XLVIl.
Defeat of the Vejentes, Ifc. Manliut killed, Fabiutbecomes popular.
T'HE battle being thus restored in one wing, the con­sul, C. Manlius, with no less gallantry began the actionin the other, where fortune almost took the same turn.For, as in the other, the soldiers nobly supported Q. Fa­bius, so in this, they kept close by Manlius, driving theenemy before him, -as if they had been totally routed,but receiving a dangerous wound, he retired from thefield, and thinking he was killed, drew back; and theywould have retreated, had not the other consul galloppingup with some squadrons of horse, cried aloud, that hiscolleague was alive, and that he himself having routedthe other wing of the enemy, was come to their assis­tance, and by that means recovered the fortune of theday. Manlius too, to re-animate his troops, placed him­self again at their head.
The sight of the two consuls gave the Romans newcourage. The enemy's ranks, were at this time, .const.







OCR Output








CHAP. $. ROMAN HISTORY. 451


aid against the Gauls. The tradition is, that the Gauls,charmed with the excellent fruits, and especially with.the'delicious wines of Italy, which they had never tastedbefore, crossed the Alps, and seized upon lands whichhad formerly been in possession of the Etrurians; andthat Arunx, a Clusian, had imported wine into Gaul, toentice that nation to make the invasion, out of resent­ment that Lucumo had debauched his wife, in return forhis attention as his tutor, and from whom he could getno satisfaction, his interest being very considerable, un­less he was supported bv foreign aid: in consequence ofi.which, that he conducted the Gauls over the Alps, and*^advised them to the siege of Clusium.
I will not pretend to say, that the Gauls might haveLeen brought to Clusium by this Arunx, or some otherinhabitant of the place; but it is very certain, that thosewho laid siege to Ciusium were not the first who hadcrossed the Alps: for the Gauls had found the way toItaly, two hundred years before the siege of Clusium,or the capture of Rome. .Nor was it these Etrurianswhom the Gaulic troops first encountered, but long be­fore, who inhabit the country between the Appeninesand the Alps, with whom they were frequently at war.. The Tuscan dominions were of considerable extent, \both by sea and la,nd, before the Roman empire existed.'From the upper to the lower sea, by which Italy is sur­rounded in the form of an island, their very names as­certain the mighty power of this people, the nations ofItaly calling the one the Tuscan, from the general nameof the people, and the other the Adriatic sea, from Adria,a Tuscan colony. The Greeks call them the Tyrrhe­nian and Adriatic seas. This people, in twelve cities, in­habited the countries-along the coasts of both seas, andby sending out colonies equal in number to their mo-/ -t.her cities, first on this side of the Appenines towards^the lower sea, and afterwards as many on the other side,possessed all the country beyond the Po, excepting a cor­ner belonging to the Venetians, who dwelt round & bayof the sea, as far as the Alps. Nor can it be doubted,but this too was the origin of the Alpine nations, espe­cially the Rhetae, whom the situation of their countryhath rendered so wil;{, that they retain nothing of their.


 







OCR Output








44 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


CHAP. XX.
Nuata teaches religious rites.
AN the next place, he set about the creation of priests*.
although many of these offices he performed tUperson,particularly in the department of priest of Jupiter. Butas in a military state, he foresaw there would be morekings of the disposition of Romulus, than of Numa, whowould head their armies in person; that the religiousduties incumbent on the king might not suffer, in themean time, he instituted a priest who should constantlyattend on the service of Jupiter, and distinguished himty a rich robe and royal curule chair. To him he addedtwo other priests, one for Mars, and another for Romu-Jus. He likewise made an election of vestal virgins, aninstitution of Alban extraction, with which the founderof the city was materially connected. To these he ap­pointed salaries out of the treasury, because their atten­dance in the temple admitted of no avocation. Theirvirginity, which was perpetual, and ceremonies attend­ing their ordination, rendered their order venerable a'ndsacred.
He likewise appointed twelve Salii,* for Mars Gradi-vus,f whose badge of distinction"~was an embroideredcoat, and a breast-plate of brass to be wore above it.The business of this order was to carry the celestial arms,called Ancilia,\ and to walk through the streets singingin concert, and dancing in the comic and serious stile.Then from the Patrician order he chose Numa Marcius,the son of Marcus, for hjghjgriest, to whom he delivereda system of religious'ceremonies in manuscript, signedand sealed, ascertaining the sacrifices, the days when,and temples where they should be offered ; and the fundsn;hence money to defray the expence should be drawn.
AH other things, public and private, respecting theworship of the gods, he submitttd to the judgment ofthe high priest; that the people might never be at a loss
* From SaKus, the leader of a band of musicians, brought byEvander.
f From Gradient, denoting the regular inarch to an attack.I From'







OCR Output








2S4 , TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK III.


petition to the fathers, who therenpon enacted, " That"the tribunes should give no more trouble about their"bill for this year, and that the consuls should not"lead an army out of the city; moreover, that in the"judgment of the senate, to continue magistrates in"their office, after the expiration nf their year, and to*• re-elect the same tribunes, were unconstitutional, and"dangerous to the state."" The consuls submitted to thesenate's award, but the tribunes were re-elected, in spiteof all the consuls remonstrances.
The Patricians, to be even with the Plebeians putQuinctius in nomination for the consulate: but on nooccasion, throughout the whole year, did he exert him­self with more force and vehemence, than in opposingthe measure. "Is it any wonder," says he, " conscript"fathers, that the plebeians make light of your autho-"rity, when you trifle with it yourselves? Because the"people violate your decision, in contmuing their nia-"gistrates, you want to do so too, that yo» may not be"surpassed in impropriety, as if the passports to power"in the commonwealth, were inconsistency and licen-"tiousness; for certainly there is more of both, in"counteracting your own decrees, than infringing those"of others. Do you, conscript fathers, set up the head-"strong multitude, as a pattern for your imitation, and"wiil you, who ought to be an example to others, fol-"low the crowd to do evil, rather than engage them to"follow you, by the propriety of your conduct? For"my own part, I am determined, that I shall not imi-•' tate the tribunes, in contempt of your decree; I will"not suffer myself to be re-eIected consul; and I con-"jure you, C. Claudius, to prevent the Roman people•' from "acting so unconstitutionally; at the same time,"be assured, that so far from taking offence at your"opposition, as a bar to my additional honour, I shall"always consider it as a mark of your friendship, as en-"hancing my own glory in the proof of my disinterest-"edness, ancl an escape from much envy a.nd shame,"which the continuation in the consulship would un-"avoidably draw upon me." Upon this, the fathersissued an edict, " Forbidding all persons to name L."Quinctius, at the next elections for the consulate;







OCR Output








CHAP. 24, - ROMAN HISTORY." 2S>


•
their arms, and such provisions as were ready dressed.Cornelius, the oilier consul, sent them provisions fromRome.
The campaign before Tusculum lasted several months.With part of th'e army, Fabius invested the enemy'scamp, having dispatched the rest to assist the Tusculansin the recovery of their citadel, which was deemed im­pregnable by any force. Famine, however, at lastobliged the enemy to abandon it, who being reduced tothe last extremity, were, by the Tusculans, obliged topass naked and unarmed under the yoke. The Romanconsul pursued them in their shameful flight, and com­ing up with them at the Algidus, put every one of them.to the sword.
The victorious consul led back his army to Columen,for so was the place called, where he encamped. Corneliuslikewise, now that the city was'in no danger, the enemybeing defeated, marched out of Rome with his army:and the two consuls entering the enemy's territories, intwo different divisions, contended who should do thegreatest execution, the one in the country of the Volsci, •and the other in that of the ^Eqiii. Most authors seempositive, that the Antiates revolted this year, and thatthey were reduced by L. Cornelius, who took their town.Bat I do not choose to mention it for a truth, as themore ancient historians are silent with respect to it.
CHAP. XXIV.
Volscius impeached for perjury. The Census finished.
J. HIS war being over, a contention with the tribune*at home, discomposed the fathers. They exclaimed,that the army was kept in the field by artful manbeuvres,with a view to stave off the bill; and declared, that no­thing should hinder them from going through with whatthey had undertaken. Nevertheless, Lucretius, prefectof the city, prevailed with them to defer the business tillthe arrival of the consuls.
There arose likewise, a new ground of contention:A. Cornelius and G. Serviiius, who were at that timequaestors, appointed M. Volscius a day to stand trial, for







OCR Output








194 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


there was the greatest reason to conclude, from manyconcurring circumstances, too evident to be doubted,that some remarkable calamity was ready to fall uponthem.
Compelled at last by necessity, he put off the assembly,which did nothing more to the army, than procure thema reprieve from punishment; he gave orders for marchingthe next morning, and accordingly gave the signal, bysound of trumpet, the moment light began to appear.
When the troops were drawn out of the camp, theVolsci, who had been put in motion by the Roman sig­nal, fell upon their rear guard. Terror and tumultspread like lightning, and reached the foremost ranks,so that neither the orders of the commanders could beheard, nor the troops be drawn up in order of battle.None thought of any thing, but how to escape, so thatthey tied in the greatest disorder over heaps of dead bo­dies and arms, nor did the Romans cease to fly, evenwhen the enemy gave over the pursuit.
At length, when the soldiers were drawn together, af­ter this scattered rout, the consul who had stuck close bvthem, calling upon them in vain to do their duty, en­camped where there was no danger of aij attack, andsummoned the assembly. He reproached them with.great reason, for their perfidious cowardice and criminaltreason, asking the soldiers and ensigns, one by one,what had become of their arms and colours? The cen­turions and Serjeants, who had quitted their ranks, hescourged and beheaded; and one out of every ten, towhose lot it fell, of the rest of the army, was put to death.
CHAP. LX.
Quinctius more successful and beloved. Voleio's law passed.
X HIi conduct of the other army, sent to chastise theJEqui, was very different. Between the consul and thesoldiers, there was a generous emulation in courtesy andacts of kindness. Quinctius was formed by nature togentleness and mildness ; and the fatal effects of his col­league's ferocity, gave him reason to congratulate him­self on his own turn of mind. In consequence of the







OCR Output








286 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK III .


"of his child. Nay, when her uncle 'and intended"husband were taking up the body of the expirmg vir-"gin, he ordered them both to prison, being much more"affected for the loss of his game, than the tragical"scene before him. And he saw no reason, why the"prison which he had built, an-d insolently called the"Habitation of the commons of Roaie, should not also be"a mansion-house for himself. Where he might appeal"as often, as he pleased, and so offen would he impeach"him on this single article, that tie had unjustly con-"denmed a person free born, and in free condition, to sla-"very. And if lie does not instantly plead, I order him"to jail as a criminal condemned."'He was therefore conducted to prison ; and though no­body opposed his commitment, yet it made a very strong'impression upon the minds of.the populace, who thoughtthat the rigorous treatment of so great a man was an ex­cessive stretch of tribunitian power. The tribune ap­pointed him a day for making his defence..
In the mean time, ambassadors arrived from the La­tins and Hernici, to congratulate Rome on the reconcN1iation between the two orders of the state; on accountof which, they lodged in the capito) a crown of gold asa present to Jupiter, the best and greatest. Their financesdid not permit them to go far as to the weight; but theceremonies of religion were more regarded in those daysfor their piety, than their pomp. They likewise broughtadvices, that the JEqui and Volsci were making mightypreparations for war: upon which the consuls were or­dered to share the provinces between them. It fell toHoratius to march against the Sabines, and to Valeriusto march against the confederate forces of the .5Lqui andVolsci.
When they were making the enrolments for theseservices, such respect did the people pay to there patriotconsuls, that not only the vouth, but those who hadserved the legal time, were ready to give in their names,and most of them, too, as volunteers: by which means,the army was not only increased, but rendered muchmore formidable, by the mixture ot those veterans amongthe new raised recruits. Before they left the city, thetwo last of the twelve tables of laws were engraven on


 







OCR Output








142 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


I


CHAP. XXVI.
The Sabincs and Arunci defeated.


IMMEDIATELY after this, a war with the Sabinesmenaced Rome, but it was father a tumult than a war.The city was alarmed in the night, with an account, thatthe Sabine army was ravaging the country, and had ad­vanced as far as the Anio, plundering and burning allthe (arm-houses in their «ay. A. Posthufnius, who hadbeen dictator in the war with the Latins, was immedi­ately sent against them with the cavalry, and the consulServilius followed him with a select body of infantry.Most of the stragglers were cut oil' by the horse, and theresistance the Sabine legions made against the foot, whenthey came up with them, was not vigorous. Exhaustedwith their march, and plundering the country in thenight, and many of them overcharged with eating anddrinking in .the houses as they had come along, had notstrength enough Heft to carry them away.
The war with the Sabmes being begun and ended thesame night, the next day, when the Romans thoughtthey had now secured peace with all their neighbours,• he ambassadors of the Arunci came to the senate,threatening them with an immediate declaration of war,if they did not withdraw their troops from the territoryof the Volsci. At the same time that the couriers tooktheir departure for Rome, the army of the Arunci begantheir march, The report that it was seen near Aricia,occasioned such hurry and confusion at Rome, that thesenate could not be properly consulted, and whilst theywere arming themselves, they could not give a deliberateanswer to those who had laid them uuder that necessity.They immediately march for Aricta with a hostile army,nor was it far from thence, that they came' up with the-Arunci, whom they discussed in one battle.







OCR Output








CHAP. 44. ROMAN HISTORY. 375


strate at its head. At present there was no army, "norgeneral to raise one. Will a civil war at homer beany defence against the incursions of a foreign enemy?On the contrary, should we be attacked by both thesecalamities at once, the power of all tlie gods would bebarely sufficient to save us from destruction. Oughtnot then the contending parties to abate something oftheir high pretensions, and meet each other halfway,to restore harmony to the state? Let the senate per­mit military tribunes to be elected instead of consuls,and the tribunes lay the people under no restraint inthe choice of four quaestors, out of either order, as theyshall think proper.'
CHAP. XLIV.
Trial of Sempronius and a Vestal.
HE Comitia for the eleciion of tribunes met first,When L. Quincttus Cincinnaius, for the third time, L.Furius Medullinus, for the second, M. Manlius, and A.Sempronius Atratinus, all Patricians, were chosen. Sem­pronius presided in the election of Quxstors, when,among some other Plebeians, Antistius and Sextus Pom-pilius, both tribunes, recommended, the first his son, andthe last his brother, as candidates for the quasstorship;but they had neither interest, nor a sufficient number ofvotes to prevent the people from preferring those, on ac«count of their high-birth, whose fathers and grand-fa­thers they had seen vested with the consulate.
The tribunes, upon this repulse, and particularly An­tistius and Pompilius, enraged almost to madness, criedout, ' That they could not conceive how the people couldbe so insensible to the services they had done them,the ill treatment they had received from the senators,and the pleasure of putting in practice a new rightthey had not before, as not to honour one of their ownnumber, if not with the dignity of a military tribune,at least with that of a quaestor' What! two tribunesof the commons, vested with that sacred power, insti­tuted for the support of liberty, the one recommend­ing and soliciting for his son, and the other for hisR







OCR Output








P. 36. ROMAN HISTORY. 253


They durst not however, oppose his ambitious viewsin a direct manner, but ihey endeavoured to counterplothim by a feigned compliance. As the youngest amongthem, by one consent, they choosed him to preside inthe assembly at the general election. The design of thiswas, to put it out of his power to put himself upon thelist, a thing quite unprecedented, except among thetribunes, and even then, considered as an instance of thegrossest impropriety. However, he declared he wouldhold the Comitia, which he hoped would prove fortu­nate, and turned the obstacles laid in his way into theme<-us of success. For, having by his intrigues got thetwo Quinctii set aside, with Capitolinus, Cincinnatus hisuncle, C. Claudius, a man, who had shewu himself alwaysin the interest of the nobility, and other citizens of thesame distinction, he created men decemvirs, who weretheir interiors in every respect; having, moreover, puthimself first in nomination, a circumstance that to everygood man, appeared so shameful, that nobody imaginedhe would have carried his impudence to so extraordmaryan height. The other nine were M. Cornelius Malugi-nensis, M. Sergius, L. Minucius, Q,. Fabius Vibulanus,Q. Pretelius, T. Antonius Merenda, Caeso Duilius, Sp.Oppius, Cornicen, M. Rubuleius.
CHAP. XXXVI.
i • iVillainy of the Decemvirs. A. R. 305.
JTIERE Appius threw off the mask: frora this date, bebegan to aci more consistently with' his real character,and took care, that his new colleagues, even before theyentered upon office, should all be formed upon his ownmodel. They had private meetings every day, in whichthey concerted schemes of tyranny, which they conceal­ed from all mankind, and now far from dissembling theirpride, they became accessible to few, and even thosethey treated with the utmost reserve, till the ides of May;at that time,, the usual term of entering upon office. Thevery first day, they made their official parade, filled thewhole city with terror and consternation. They appear­ed in the forum, each with twelve lictors before hirri,M







OCR Output








CHAP. 11. ROMAN HISTORY. 31


army, and being now distinguished by his gallant actions,'to which, in the representation, he could do great justice,bearing before him the spoils of the enemy's general,suspended on a frame nicely contrived for the purpose,goes up in state to the capitol, where he laid them downat the foot of an oak, sacred among shepherds. Withthe present, be delineated with his eye, the limits of atemple to Jupiter, giving him, at ihe same time, a sir-name; "O Jupiter Feretrius,*" says he, " to thee do I,"the victorious king Romulus, bear tiiese royal arms;"to thee do I dedicate a temple, on that spot, which I~J- have this moment traced out in my mind, to be the," repository of these opima spolia.-l- which my successors,/•' following my example, shall offer to thee when iaken/*' from kings, or generals of the enemy, whom they~°~" may have the honour to kill in battle." This was theorigin of that"temple, the first that was consecrated atRome; and irttath pleased the gods, that neither shouldthe words of the founder be uttered in vain, as to thisrepository of the opima spolia, nor that the glory of thatatchievement, should lose ought of its lustre by thenumber of those who should have the honour to attain it.Twice only.J in the course of so many years, and somany battles, were the opima spolia obtained, so rarewas the acquisition of that honour. .


CHAP. XI.


The Antemnates and Cruttumini defeated and brought toRome.
JL HEN, whilst the Romans were thus employed, a bodyof the Antemnates,.taking the opportunity of this avoca­tion, make an incursion into their country. A Roman
* From fcrire, to strike.
f Some derive opima from ops, the earth; others from opus.
J Once by Cornelius Cossus, who killed Tolumnius king of (heVejentes in the year of the city 318; and again by Ctaudius Mar-cclhis, who killed Verdumaris, a king oi the Germans, in theyear of tfce city, 532.







OCR Output








6BAp. 2- HOMAN HISTORY. 403


•see pretty, plainly, what were the views in the paygranted to the soldiers; that they had not been deceiv­ed, when they asserted, that wiih this.instance of ge­nerosity from their enemies, was conveyed a secretpoison.—Thatthey had received it in exchange for theirliberty.—That the youth were removed and banishedfrom the city and public-affairs for good anc) all; and'without regard to the rigour of the season, were to bekept in the tield all the winter, without the liberty ofvisiting their families or looking into their own atl'airs.And after all, what reason can be assigned for continu­ing the campaign? Why, that the youth in whomthe strength of the people consists, may be preventedfrom doing any thing in fuU assemblies, for their com­mon interest. That besides, they were subjected tomuch more fatigue, and had greater hardships to en­counter, than the Vejentes, who, whilst they defend­ed their town, which was secured by excellent walls, •and the natural strength of its situation, passed thewinter in their own houses: whereas, the Roman sol- •diers, amidst toil and hardships, rvere exposed to frostand snow, were obliged to lie in'tents, without layingaside their arms, even during the w'mter, a se.:son ofrest and respite from war, all the world over. A yokeof servitude; which neither the kings, nor before theexistence of tribunitian power, the consuls, haughtyas they were, nor the despotism of a dictator, nor eventhe cruelty of the decemvirs, had ever imposed; whichthe military tribunes now exercise without mercy overthe commons of Rome, in obliging them to serve inthe field, the whole year round. What then wouldthey do, were the consuls, or dictators, who being onlyinvested with the shadow of consular dignity, to lord itwith such tyrannical rigour? But even in this circurn-•stance, there is hardly any room for complaint; amongeight military tribunes, there was not a place for asingle Plebeian. That formerly the Patricians, with­out a very hard struggle, could not fill up three of theseplaces; but now eight at a time jump at once intopowej, and yet among all that number, a single Ple­beian could not be smuggled in, who, if good for no-tbing else, might have put his colleagues in mind, that.







OCR Output








458 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK V.


to fortify it with an entrenchment, to which they mightretreat in case of a defeat: and equally regardless of thegods, 33 they had been deficient in human precaution,without auspices, without sacrifices, they drew up theirarmy, extending the wing? , that they might not be sur­rounded by their enemies numbers. But, although byextending their wings in that manner, they had thinnedand weakened their centre to a great degree, yet rfHltheir front fell short of that of the enemy's. Upon theirright was a small eminence, where they thought properto post a corps-de-reserve; that circumstance occasionedtheir first fear and flight, and was the only means of se­curing their retreat.
Breonus, the Gaulic general, having a strong "appre­hension, that some design lay concealed in the smallntssof the enemy's numbers; and imagining that they hadtaken possession of the height, with a view to attack himwith this body of reserve, both in rear and flank, themoment the front lines were engaged, thought it ne­cessary to begin with charging the reserved troop; con­vinced, if they were once dislodged, with so great a su­periority in point of numbers, that he could easily obtainthe victory in the open plain. Thus the Barbarians no^only had fortune on their side, but the prudent conductof an able commander.
-In the other army, neither generals nor soldiersshowed any thing of the Roman character. A suddenpanic, and the thoughts of escaping, had arrested all theirfaculties: nay, so much were they lost to all reflectionwhatever, that by far the greater part fled to Veil, anenemy's capital, with the Tiber in their way, rather thanstraight to Rome, to their wives and children. The situ­ation of the place, for some little time, contributed-to thedefence of the corps-de-reserve. But, whenever the restof the army heard the shouts of the Gauls, which seem­ed to those who stood next, to have been raised from theflank, and, to the most remote, from their rear, they fledin a body without striking a stroke, or even returning theenemy's shout, and so far were they from feeling, thatthey had but barely seen this strange enemy. Noneof them fell in battle; but in the rout, where the crowdand hurry of the fugitives incumbered the flight, thoseID the rear were cut to pieces, A great slaughter was







OCR Output








CHAP. 71. ROMAN HISTORY. 307


As far as conjectures can be formed at this distance dftime, I am apt to imagine, that as the senate, some timebefore, had refused the honour of a triumph to the con­suls Valerius and Horatius, who, besides the war withthe .SLqui and Votsci, had the honour of finishing th"ewar with the Sabines, the present consuls had too muchmodesty to demand a triumph; lest, if they had obtain­ed it, men would have been apt to conclude, that the se­nate paid more respect to persons than to merit.'
CHAP. LXXI.
'- * • *
The Roman people made Arbitrators. •
A HIS victory, so honourably obtained over their ene­mies, was disgraced by a selfish award of the people, re.lative to some contested lands of their allies. The Ar-cinii and Ardeates, had long disputed the right to a smallterritory, for which they had fought many a battle.Tired at length of the calamities of war, they agreed tosubmit the whole to the decision of the Roman people.When the cause came 10 be pled, both parties exertedtheir utmost in an assembly of the people, authorised bythe magistrates. The proof was taken, and the vote-ready to be put round, when P. Scaptius, an aged ple­beian, rose up, and addressing himself to the consuls,said, ' That were he only allowed. to speak in behalf of'the state, he could set the Roman people to rights in'this matter.' When the consuls refused to listen tohim, and ordered him to be removed, as a troublesomefellow; he still insisted, that the public interest was be­trayed, and appealed to the tribunes. These gentlemen,rather governed by the multitude, than the multitude bythem, gave him permission to speak what he pleased tothe people, who were very willing to hear him.. He then told them, 'That he was now eighty-threeyears of age; that he had carried arms on that veryspot which was now the bone of contention; that hewas not then a young man, having made twenty cam­paigns before the battle of-Corioli; that, therefore, hewould give a candid account of the matter, which at'so distant a period might have escaped others, but was


 







OCR Output








CHAP. H. ROMAN HISTORY. 219


in opposing the levies, did the Patricians exert in oppos­ing the law, which wasconstantly proposed every comi-tial day. A quarrel arose, when the tribunes ordered thepeople to leave the forum, from which, the Patnciauswould, by no means, suffer themselves to be removed.
As the debates in these assemblies were not managedwith temper, the aged senators seldom appeared there,leaving the conduct of the opposition, to the rash andaudacious young nobles. For some time, too, the consulskept away, for fear of exposing the dignity of their officeto insult, in such a mixed convention. There was oneCaeso Quinctius, a young nobleman of high spirit, withwhich, his high birth, extraordinary size, and greatstrength, inspired him. To these advantages the godshad bestowed upon him, he had added many honoursgained in war, and was an excellent speaker, so that the. republic could not boast of a better soldier, or a greaterorator.
This youth, when enriched by his band of nobles,was always most conspicuous; and as if his strength andeloquence had mvested him with all consular, and evendictatorial power, he boldly sustained the storms of thetribunes, and fury of the mob. Under his conduct, thetribunes had been frequently driven out of the forum,and the rabble dispersed and put to flight Whoeveroffered to resist, did not fail to be roughly handled andstripped naked. Hence, they easily saw, that unless hegot a severe check, their exertions to promote the lawwould signify nothing.
When the other tribunes had given over all for lost,one of their number, A Virginius, summoned Caeso,against a certain day, to be tried capitally. This step,far from abating, served only to enflame the courage ofthis impetuous youth. He still persisted in opposing thelaw with more vehemence than ever, redoubled hisin-sblts of the plebeians, and attacked the tribunes withoutany reserve, as having then a just cause for making warupon them. His accuser, after his impeachment, suf­fered him to go every length, that by his outrages, hemight increase the odium against him, and furnish themwith new matter of grievance.
In the mean time, he continued to push the law, notso much from any hopes he had of carrying it, as to







OCR Output








Chap. 39. ROMAN HISTORY. 73


disappeared with the child's sleep. Then Tanaquil tak­ing her husband aside, "See you that child," said she,"whom we educate so meanly; Let me tell you, he will"one day be a light to us in our distress, and a protec-"tion to our house, when we need it most. Let jis,"therefore, from this moment, train up this youth with"the-utmost care, for whom, in a public as well as pri-"vate capacity, great honours are reserved."
From that moment he was treated as their own, andinstructed in every science, calculated to excite men ofspirit to aim at high fortune. What Heaven is pleasedto countenance, requires little cultivation from man. Ser-vius soon discovered a princely disposition; and when,they looked about for a son-in-law to the king, was thereone among all the Roman youth, who could in any qua­lification, bear a comparison with him. The king there­fore gave him his daughter in marriage.1" ': ' -;
Whatever it was that raised him to this honouraMedistinction, it certainly discredits the conjecture, that hewas either born of a ^lave, or that he himself, when achild, had ever been in the servile line. I am rather -ftheir opinion, who think, that after the capture ofOr-uicolum, the wife of Servius Tullius, who had been agrandee in that city, was left pregnant, when her hus­band was killed; and that when she came to be knawnamong the rest of the prisoners, in consideration »fherrank, was rescued from slavery by the Roman- queen,and was delivered at Rome in the royal palace.-—Thatthe child, having been brought up at court, from his in­fancy, had been much caressed and- esteemed there;' anextraordinary friendship between the ladies having takenplace upon so signal an indulgence; and that the mo­ther's estate, which, after her country, was taken, becamethe perquisite of the conquerors," gave rise to the surmisethat he was the son of a slave.


- - J


&&*~•'







OCR Output








182 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


and the more they were pressed by the enemy, they wereobliged to contract their own circle in proportion; whichat once discovered their weakness, and the enemy's vastsuperiority in point of numbers, when their ranks werecrowded into so narrow a space. Then giving over anattack, which they made with equal vigour on all sides,they directed all their force to one point. Thither, draw­ing up in a wedge, by the weight of their bodies, andthe points of their swords they opened a passage forthemselves, that led by an easy ascent to the side of ahill, where they first halted.
As soon as the advantage of the ground had giventhem leisure to respire, and recover from the shock of sogreat a surprise, they beat back the assailants; and bythe convenience of their post, small as their party was,were getting the better of them, when the Vejentes, byfetching a compass, possessed themselves of the top ofthe hill. Thus the enemy became again superior. TheFabii were all killed to a man, and the fort taken. It isuniversally admitted that three hundred and six fellthere; and, that there only remained a youth of aboutfourteen years of age, as a stock to the Fabian family,which in future times, was to be the prop and stay ofthe Roman people, both by their counsel and their sword,upon the most trying occasions.
. CHAP. LI.
The Vejentes punished.
J. HIS disaster happened in the consulship of C. Ho-ratius and T. Menenius. The latter was immediatelydispatched to chastise the insolence of the Etrurians,which their .victory had created; but he was defeated,and the Janiculum taken. Moreover, as the city was inwant of provisions, and the Etrurians already on thisside the Tiber, the city would certainly have undergonea siege, had not the consul Horatius been recalled fromthe expedition against the Volsci. So close to the wallsof Rome was this war brought, that the first battle wasfought at the temple of Hope, with no advantage on. , either side, and the second at the gate there: although







OCR Output








298. TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK 111


posed a bill, importing, " That whoever should here-"after hold the Comitia for electing tribes, should not"dissolve the assembly, till the number of ten tribunes"be completed by the votes of the tribunes." He passedhis whole year in crossing the senate, which procuredhim the title of crabbed.
Then M. Geganius Macerinus, and C. Julius succeed­ed to the consulate. They quelled the cabals of the tri-'bufies, which they were beginning to form against theyoung Patricians, without inveighing against the excessof their power, or sinking below the dignity of their or­der. They kept the people quiet, by decreeing leviesfor the war against the jEqui and Volsci, which prevent­ed any sedition from taking place, assuring them, thatthe only way to secure peace abroad, was to be quiet athome; for nothing contributed so much to raise thespirits of foreign nations, as domestic broils.
Thus, -by their care to secure peace abroad, they hadthe good fortune to maintain tranquillity at home; thoughthe one order never failed to take the advantage of themoderation of the other. When the young Patriciansbegan to be petulant, the people were giving no trouble.When the tribunes began to support the weakest, theywere little regarded at first, and at last, did not them­selves escape without insults, especially about the closeof the year: when, during the meetings of the nobility,licentiousness prevails, and the exercise of magisterialauthority generally becomes more languid.
The people's whole hopes centered in choosing tribuneslike Iciiius; for, during the two last years their tribuneswere no more than a name. The elder senators, on theirpart, were not insensible, that their youth. were turbu­lent, ami carried things too far; but if the bounds of mo­deration were to be exceeded^ they thought it better tohave pride and spirit on their side, than on 'that of theopposition. So difficult is it to act with moderation insupporting liberty, as every one, under pretence of level­ling, raises himself in proportion, as he depresses another.While we endeavour to have~nothingfb apprehend fromothers, we render ourselves terrible; to avoid oppression,we oppress, as if we could not help doing, or sufferinginjustice.


 







OCR Output








336 ', TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV.


equivocal expression he generally made use of, was con-strueO by the Fidenates 11110 an order to murder the aru-bassuviiM.-. But it is hardly possible, that the kingwould have been so very intent on his game, as not tobe diverted by the arrival of his new allies the Fidenates,to consult him concerning a murder, contrary to the lawof nations; or that afterwards, he should not have ex­pressed his detestation of so horrible a deed. It is moreprobable, that it was a digested plan, to secure the Fide-nates fftectaally to his interest, by the guilt of so blacka crime; which must make a breach betwixt the Ro­mans and them never to be made up.
The statues of the ambassadors, who were murderedat Fidenae, were erected in the Rostra at the public ex-pence. The prospect of a bloody battle, won with- theconfederate troops of the Vejentes and Fidenates, whobesides their living in the neighbourhood, had in effectcommenced hostilities, in au instance of the most shock­ing barbarity, kept the people and their tribunes fromraising a disturbance, or clogging the wheels of govern­ment, so that M. Geganius for the third time, with L.Sergius Fidenas were chosen consuls without opposition.It is very probable that Sergius got the sirname of Fi­denas, from the war which he conducted afterwards.For he was the first who measured swords with the kingof the Vejentes, on this side the Anio, and came off vic­torious: bu| it cost him dear: for which reason, Romewas more afflicted for the loss of many citizens, thanelated with joy for the defeat of the enemy.
Upon this event, as was usual in cases of danger, thesenate ordered Mamcrcus .SSmilius to be created dictator.For master of the horse he named L. QuinctiusCincinna-tus, a young nobleman worthy of so great a father,who the year before had been one of his colleagues inthe office of military tribune with consular power. Atthe levy made by the consuls, the old centurions, ofgreat valour and experience, entered themselves for theservice, and the places of those who fell in the last ac­tion were totally filled up. The dictator ordered Quin-tius Capitol in us , and M. Fabins Vibulanu? , to atiend himin quality of lieutenants. The enemy fmding they ha.1now to do with a general invested with unlimited power,


 







OCR Output








144 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


dantly evident, they did not raise him to an office somuch above bis rank, with a view to his particular ho­nour, as to offer an open insult to the consuls. This af­front set Appius and the senate'in a terrible rage; butthe people, who had now acquired more spirit, actedvery differently from what they had done at first. Fordespairing now of any redress from the consuls and thesenate, when they saw any debtor dragged to the tribu­nal, thither they crowded from all quarters. Wheneverthe consul passed sentence, they raised such a noise andclamour that it could not be heard; nor if it had, durstany one attempt to put it in execution. Force now uni­versally prevailed. Insomuch, that when a single debtorhad been seized by a posse of officers in presence of theconsul, danger and fear of servitude shifted sides, andfrom the debtors flew upon the creditors.
Add to these intestine calamities, the terror of a warwith the Sabines; for which, when a levy was decreed,not a man would give in his name, whilst Appius was allfury, loudly complaining of the complacency of his col­league, who, by a popular silence, betrayed the interestsof his country, and besides, that he had not done justice,in respect to the debts, had neglected to make the leviesdecreed by the senate. "Yet, that the commonwealth"was by no means abandoned, nor the consular dignity"without force, whilst he alone remained to support his"own authority and the honour of the senate,"
When the mob, hardened in licentiousness by constantuse, stood about him, he ordered a remarkable ringleaderof the sedition to be seized, who,, after he was in thecustody of the lictors, appealed to the people. The con­sul would not have suffered this appeal to pass, beingwell aware what the people's judgment would be, had benot, though with difficulty, been overpersuaded, ratherby the wise remonstrances and authority of the senate,than compelled by the seditious clamours of the people.The evil grew every day more serious. The multitudeconfmed themselves no longer to mere outcrie? , but whatwas of a much more dangerous tendency, they retired inparties to hold secret committees. At length, the con­suls quitted their office, bofli hated >)y the people: Ap­pius was, however, much in the good graces of the senate,but Servilius neither of senate nor people.







OCR Output








CHAPJ 63. ROMAN HISTORY. 295


from their allies, as in the camp at the Algidus, but thebooty which had been taken from themselves, in ravag­ing their own lands.
For both these victories, gained over diffefeiHeneroieSjthe senate, out of a grudge to the consuls, decreed onlyone day of supplication and public thanksgiving; butthe people, by their own authority, acquitted thejnselvesof the same duty, the day following, with more pompand solemnity, and with a much greater concourse ofpeople, than the day before. The consuls, by concert,came to Rome, the one on the first, the othef on the se­cond of these days, and assembled^the senate in the Cam­pus Martius, where they were rendering an account ofthe success of the. campaign. The principal senatorscomplained, that they were assembled in the midst of thesoldiers, on purpose to over-awe them; and the consuls,to save reflections, adjourned it to the Flaminian Mea­dows, "where a temple of Apollo now stands, aml at thattime called the Circus Apollinaris. Here they were re­fused a triumph, by almost the unanimous voice of tin;senate; upon which, L. Icilius the tribune, carried it be­fore the people. Many of the senators appeared on theside of opposition, but none more warmly than C. Clau^iiios, who exclaimed against it to the following purpose:It is not over the'enemy, but overthe senate, that theconsuls would triumph : it is for a gratification of somesignal service done the tribune, and not an honourablereward of their bravery, that they sue for. To submitthe merit of a triumph to the judgment of the people,had no precedent, as that had always been a preroga­tive of the senate alone. The privileges of that highorder had never been abridged, even by their kings.Why then should the tribunes pretend^ to engross allpower to themselves, even to the excluding a councilof state? In short, the state will never be at peace, novenjoy liberty, till the two orders forbear to encroachupon the rights and privileges of each other." Manymore of the old senators spoke to the same effect, but thetribunes unanimously agreed to the motion. This wasthe first triumph voted by the people, without aof the senate.







OCR Output








488 CONTENTS.


Chap. Page
xlvi. A battle. Q. Fabius killed 174
xhii. Defeat of the Vejentes, &c. Manlius kil­led. Fabius becomes popular 175
• xlviii. Proposal of the Fabian family 177
xlix. The Fabii leave the city to kee,) the Ve­jentes in awe, who sue for peace...... 179
1. The Fabii fall in an ambuscade, ami are
cutoff 181
li. The Vejentes punished 182
lii. Trial of Menenius and Servilius ............ 183
liii. War with the Vejentes and Sabines......... 185
liv. A new check to the tribunitian power 186
Iv. The Senators exult on their victory, but
meet with a check 187
Ivi. Great disputes about the mode of electing
tribunes , 189
Ivii. Peace restored by Quinctius. Obstinacy of
the arrny under Appius 191
Iviii. Claudius, being chosen Consul, is sent
against the Volsci 192
lix. Appius decimates his army for cowardice, 193ix. Quinctius more successful and beloved.
Volero's law passed 194
Ixi. Trial and death of Appius 195
Ixii. The country of the /Equi and Sabines plun­dered 190
Ixiii. War witu the Volsci and 2Equi 197
Ixiv. War with the Volsci. Device of Quiuctius, 198
Ixv. The Volsci defeated, and their camp taken, 200
BOOK III.
1 Containing the disputes between the Orders—Foreign Wart—the Creation and expulsion of Decemvirs, -and th«Re-establishment of Consular Government and PopularMagistrates, down to the year 306.
Chap. i. Contests about the Agrarian law. War
with the ^Equi 202
ii. The jEqui defeated 203
iii. New attempts of the j*Equi, who are dis­charged '205
iv. Fabius over-reached by the jErjui ........ 206







OCR Output








CHAP. 48. ROMAN HISTORY. "37?


The senate, before the tribunes had time to speak ofa distribution of the territory of Lavicum,* and by thatmeans revive the disputes about the Agrarian law; at afull meeting, very judiciously voted, ' that a colony'should be planted at Lavicum,' Fifteen hundred citi­zens went thither, to each of whom were assigned two-Roman acres.f After the capture of Lavicum, for thefirst year, Agrippa Menenius Lanatus, L. Servilins Struc-tus, and, P. Lucretius Tficipitinus, all for the second'time, and Sp. Rutilius Crassus ; and for the year follow­ing, A. Sempronius Atratinus,- for the third time; andM. Papirius Mugilanus, with Sp. Nautius Rutilius, forthe second time, presided in quality of military tribuneswith consular power. During these two years, all wasquiet abroad; but the domestic tranquillity was greatlydisturbed with disputes about the Agrarian law(
CHAP. XLVII I.
Contests about the Agrarian law. Advice of Appitis.
J. HE tribunes wlio at this time kept the people in a -ferment, were Sp. Maecilius and Metilius, who had beenboth elected in their absence; the former for the fourth,and the latter for the third time. They had preferred abill, for an equal .distribution of the conquered landsamong the citizens, f But as the city itself stood on con­quered ground, ana- scarce any land about it, but whathad been the perquisite of their valour, which, by thebye, excepting what the people had in possession, had-neither been exposed to sale, nor distributed by publicauthority, by this bill,) the greatest part of the estates ofthe nobility must hSve been confiscated, which of con­sequence seemed to lay the foundation of very warm,contests between the senate and people. Nor could themilitary tribune.', although they often convened thesenate, and ha'd private conventions of the principal menof the Patrician party, fall on any expedient to" obviatethis dilemma, till Appius Claudius, the grandson of that
* A city of the Latins, about 15 miles from Rome,f Jugcrum, 240 by 120 feet, or 5-Tihs of an English acre,'







OCR Output








218 BOOK III. TITUS LIVI US'


the forum, " That the war with the Volsci was a mere
"bugbear, and that the Hernici had been previously
"instructed to act their parts. That, at present, no
"open attack was made upon the liberties of the people,
"but they were undermined by artifice. That the
"Volsci, who had been almost exterminated, should,
"in conjunction with the jEqui, without any provoca-
"tion, put their troops in motion, was inconsistent with
"common sense, They must, therefore, look for new
"enemies. A faithFu.1, a neighbouring colony, is de-
"famed. War must be denounced against the innocent
"Antiates, but carried on against the commons of Rome,
whom they were dragging headlong out of the city,
loaded with arms, that by banishing the citizens, or
sending them out of the way, they might have the
tribunes at their mercy. But, that they might not be
deceived, they could assure them, there was no other
point in view, but to evade the law, which would be
the case, if now, whilst it was on the carpet, and whilst
they were in their gowns, they did not take care, how
they were dragged out of the city, or received a yoke
of slavery. If they had only resolution, they should
find assistance. The tribunes were unanimous. There
was no fear of an invasion, nor prospect of danger.
The gods had last year taken care, that their liberty
should be safely protected."
CHAP. XI.


Struggles of the ynwt; Patricians •with the Tribunes.Impetuosity of Caso, who is appointed a day.
IjUCH were the remonstrances of the tribunes. Onthe other hand, the consuls erected their tribunals in theirpresence, and began to make the levies." The tribunesrepaired thither wi'.h all haste, and the whote assemblyin their retinue. A few were called on by way of expe­riment, which produced a tumult yi an instant. When­ever by order of the consul, a lictor laid hold of any one,that moment a tribune ordered him <o be released. Nei­ther party took their measures trom .'he laws, their soleimpendence lay in force and violence, to compass theirdesigns. The same activity which the tribunes showed







OCR Output








256 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IH.


.immediately followed the murder of the proprietor. Theyoung nobility, debauched by this sort of gain, not onVy
.connived at these scenes of injustice,. but openly prefsr-: oil a life of liceutiousness to public liberty.
CHAP. XXXVIII.
The Sabines renew the war. The Decemvirs at a loss.
.1 HE ides of May came, and not the least appearanceof any comitia, fur an election of new magistrates. Thetyrants then, who were in tact but private persons, shew-.ed themselves bare-faced, and retained their authority,without any other title but rapine and violence. Thiswas a manifest usurpation of regal tyranny. Every onedeplored in secret the loss of liberty, but not oue in thewhole republic had the spirit to attempt to break her.chains. The Roman people now seemed to have lost allcourage, and the nations who had submitted to their do­minion, began now to despise them as disdaining to be•subject to a state, whose liberty subsisted no longer.. The Sabines, in formidable parties, dispersed them­selves over the Roman territories, and having made agreat booty in prisoners and cattle, collected their scat­tered forces, and encamped at Ereturn, placing all theirhopes in the anarchy at Rome, which they imagined,•would be an effectual bar to the levies.
The news of these disasters were confirmed by thepeasants who fled from the neighbourhood, and spreadterror through the whole city. The decemvirs now de­liberated upon the measures proper to be taken, andwhilst the hatred of the senate and people had shut everydoor of resource against them, one storm followed closeon the back of another. The jEqui, on the other side,\vere encamped at the Algidus. Messengers were dis­patched from Tusculum to Rome, with advices that de­tachments from their army were ravaging tlie Tu?culanterritories, at the same time, requesting assistance. Theseaccounts threw the decemvirs into the utmost consterna­tion, seeing themselves obliged, amidst the dread of twowars, of necessity to assemble the senate. They there­fore, gave orders, to cite the fathers to assemble in the


 







OCR Output








*<fo TITUS LIVIUS' - Book V


sorrow; but when they were advised of the enemy's ap­proach, public fear soon suppressed all p-t8Bc concern.It was not long before they heard the barbarians roaringout their howlings and discordant notes, as they strolledin troops round the city walls. During all the time after,till next morning, they were in the utmost suspense,every moment expecting an attack would be made uponthe city, after the first approach of the enemy to it: as itwas highly probable, they would not have stirred fromAllia, but with that intention. At sun-set, as little lightthen remained, they were fully persuaded, that theywould take the advantage of the little they had beforethe night came on, and when all was quiet during theevening, that they had deferred their design to strike thegreater terror during the darkness of the night. At lastthe approach of day doubled their panic, which keptpace in progression with the evil itself, till they saw theenemy's ensigns enter their gates. However, duringthat night, and the day following, the citizens acted withmuch greater propriety than the army had done at Allia.For, when they found that to defend the city, with sosmall a force as had been left in it, would be quite im­practicable, they resolved, that all the youth, fit to beararms, and the flower of the senate, with their wives andchildren, should retire into the citadel and capitol; andhaving carried arms and provisions thither, defend theirgods, their fellow-citizens, and the Rornan name, fromthese strong-holds;whilst the priests of Romulus and thevestals carried off the sacred things, and placed them outof the reach of fire and sword, being firmly resolved ne­ver to give over the worship of the godsi whilst a singlesoul remained to perform it. For they thought, that ifthe citadel and capitol, the august body of the gods,the senate that formed the public council of the state,and the youth of age to bear arms, survived the ruinthat impended the city, the loss of the old men, an use­less number left in the city, and who in course of naturewould die at any rate, was not much to be regretted.To encourage those of inferior rank to acquiesce in thisresolution, without murmuring, the superannuate consu­lar and triumphant generals declared publicly, that theywould die with, them; for, since their bodies were tooweak to support the weight of arms, for the defence of







OCR Output








CM AH. 12. ROMAN HISTORY. 419


And yet these men, convicted and -damned as theyhave been before so many tribunals, have the assur*anoe to #j*pear before the people, expecting to be ac­quitted," mtagining they have been sufficiently punish­ed in losing the fasces two months before the time.They do not seem to know the difference between dis­arming them for fear of further mischief and punishingthem for what they have done. Were not their col­leagues broke who had committed no fault? Upon thisoccasion, the Romans ought to recal those dispositionsthey felt on their late defeat, when they saw theirarmy covered with wounds, flying, affrighted, and fal­ling down at the gates of Rome, accusing not fortune,ftor the gods,-but'these two generals. They may restassured, that there is not a soul in this assembly, whothat day did not heartily curse and detest L. Virginiusa<id M. Sergius, their families, and all that belonged tothem. Is it fit then, that after invoking the gods topunish these crimmals, that they should receive the
least indulgence from those who have them in theirpower, which they ought to exert against them? Forthe gods are never the executors of vengeance them­selves; it is enough that they furnish the injured with
an opportunity of revenge.'
. CHAP. XII. .
Sergius and Virginius condemned. A Plebeian elected tothe military Tribuneship for the first time


T


HE people, irritated by these harangues, condemnedthe criminals, each in a fine of 10,000 asses of brass,*nor would give any ear to Sergius's plea, of the chanceand fortune of war, nor to Virginitis's intreaty, not to ren­der him more unhappy at home than he had been in thefield. The resentment of the people being turned totallyagainst these two generals, quite cancelled the remem­brance of the co-optation of tribunes, and of the treacher­ous attempt upon the Trebonian law. The tribunes, afterthis victory, to give the people an immediate return for
their sentence, published the Agrarian law, and forbade
• , *
» j£ 32: i : 9|.







OCR Output








4is TITUS LIVIUS' Boon V.


tcrest, to divert the public odium from themselves, ranopen mouthed against Sergiusand Virginius, the mititarytribunes of the former year, and cited them to take theirtrial.
They made open proclamation, ' That to such asgroaned under the burden of taxes, levies, a tediouscampaign, and the prolongation of the war; who la­menied the loss of their children, brothers, kinsmen,and friends, that fatal day at Veii, they offered a fairoccasion to avenge themselves and the public, uponthe heads of two persons, Sergius and Virginius, whowere equally culpable and responsible.for all the mis­fortunes that had happened. Nor did this appear moreevidently from the indictment laid against them by theprosecutor, than the confession of ihe criminals, whobeing equally conscious each of his own guilt, had laidthe blame upon one another, Virginius reproachingSergius with cowardice, and Sergius retorting on Vir­ginius, his treachery.' That it was impossible theycould have acted a part so shamefully inconsistent,without the concurrence of the fathers, who were inconcert, and equally fraudulent with them. With aview to protract the war, they had before that timegiven the Vejentes an opportunity of setting fire totheir works; that now they had sacrificed the army,and delivered up the Roman camp to the Falisci. Thattheir whole plan was to keep the youth, till they grewgray, before Veii, that the tribunes might not have itin their power to bring in a bill about the partition oflands, or any thing else respecting the interest of thecommons, as they had not a sufficient number of citizensto support their bills, and make head against the in­trigues of the nobles. That these delinquents hadsentence already passed against them by the senate,the Roman people, and by their own colleagues. Forby a decree of the senate, they were set aside as magi­strates, and when they refused to abdicate in terms ofthat order; they were compelled to do it by their col-leagues, for fear of a dictator. Nor was this all, forthe Roman people proceeded to make a new election,not as usual, on the 13th of December, but iostautly onthe 1 st of October; because, had they continued anylonger in office, this republic must have sunk at »nce.







OCR Output








CHAP. 43. ROMAN HISTORY. 169*


have cemented the jarring parties at home, but they on­ly served to render the people more insolent and untract-able. They were now put upofli the old scheme of re­fusing to iulist. Sp. Licinius, a tribune of the people,thinking that now was the critical moment, when theslate was in the utmost difficulty, to cram the Agrarianlaw down the throats of the fathers, had set himself toobstruct the levies. But the whole load of envv, towhich the college of tribunes was exposed, fell upon theauthor of this project. For the consuls were not keenerin disappointing bis design, than his own colleague?,who, to a man, were in concert against him; and, bytheir assistance, the consuls got the levies completed.
Against the two hostile powers, two armies were raisedat the same time; the command of the one was given.to Fabius, to be led against the jEqui, and of the otherto Furius, to march against the Vejentes. With theVejentes nothing remarkable occurred; and Fabius hadmore trouble in managing his army, than in defeatingthe enemy. This man alone supported the common­wealth, while the army from their hatred to him asconsul, did all in their power to land it in perdition.For, after the consul, in his preparations for, and ma­nagement of the war, had given, in every instance, themost signal proofs of his abilities as a general, he drewup his army with such judgment, that by means of thehorse alone, be put the enemy to flight; and yet, whennothing was left for the foot, but to pursue the flyingenemy, they absolutely refused it. Nor could sharnefor their criminal conduct, their present disgrace m theface of the sun, their future danger, had the enemy re­covered spirit, to say nothing of the entreaties of a ge­neral whom they hateJ, prevail on them to move onefoot faster, nor even to march. in good order. But they
, retired without orders, and went back to the camp, with.looks so expressive of their dejection, that one would
- have imagined they had been heartily drubbed. Some­times cursing their general, and sometimes the horse, fortheir gallant exertions. The general gave himself notrouble about fmding out an antidote for so- dangerous aprecedent, so true it is, that great men, who excel inother respects, more frequently want address to govern .their citizens, than talents to conquer enemies. The







OCR Output








CHAP. 2-. ROMAN HISTORY. 311


of the meanest commoner, but would effectually wrestevery shadow of power from them, to entail it upon thecommons.
Wherefore, they received the news with joy, that theArdeates, in resentment of the judgment given againstthem in the property submitted, had abandoned thepartvof the Romans, that the Vejentes were laying waste thefrontiers of the Roman domains, and that the Volsci andJEqui were in motion, on account of the fortificationsraised at Virrugo: so much did they prefer even an un- ,successful war, to a dishonourable peace.
Wherefore, upon these advices, which were much ex­aggerated, to drown the clamours'of the tribunes, withthe alarms of so many wars, the senate ordered the le­vies to be made, and preparations for war, with morekeenness, if possible, than in the consulship of T. Quinc-tius. -Then C. Canuleius declared, in a few words, infall senate, that they might save themselves the troubleof imposing on the people, by the terrors of war, to di­vert their attention from the new laws; for, while hehad breath, they would not enlist a man, until the law?proposed by him and his colleagues, were received; andthen went out directly and assembled the people.
CHAP. II.
, The Consuls remonstrate.
./\T this time,.the consuls used every argument to ex­asperate the senate against the tribune; who, on his part,inflamed the people against the consuls. The consulscontended, • That the madness of the tribunes was no• longer to be endured. That matters were now come'to an extremity. That the enemies without doors were'nothing, compared to those in their bosom. That thi*'evil was not to be imputed to the people, and their tri-'- hunesonly; the senators and consuls were even morecul-'pable.—That whatever is countenanced and rewarded ire•.' a city, gains ground and increases prodigiously. That'it was in this manner, our greatest statesmen and« generals were formed.—That in Rome, nothing was"now considered or rewarded but sedition, which. never







OCR Output








230 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK III.


\
soners were punished according to their quality, as free­men or slaves. The Tu.-culans had the public thanks.The capitoi was cleansed and purified, and the peopleare said to have cast farthings into the consul's house,that he might be buried with the greater pomp.
CHAP. XIX.
The Tribunes over-ruled, by the noble efforts of Cinrinnattu.
J. HIS affair was no sooner happily terminated, thanthe tribunes became importunate with the senators, toperform the promise made them by P. Valerius. Theypressed Claudius, to deliver the manes of his colleagues,from the imputation of treachery, by suffering them,without interruption, to go on in the affair of the law.Claudius told them that the question was inadmissible,till once they had given him a colleague. They con­tinued to wrangle upon this point, till the Comitia wereheld for the election of a new consul. In the month ofDecember, L. Quinctius Cincinnatus, Cseso's father, ow­ing to the indefatigable application of the father? , wasap-pointed to the consular fasces.
This choice was a thunder-stroke to the people, asthey were now under the government of a magistrate ofgreat abilities, great credit in the senate, and higblv ex­asperated against them, and besides had three sons; inmagnanimity not inferior to Caeso, and in prudence farsurpassing him, when they had occasion to display it.
He no sooner entered upon office, than in the speecheswhich he daily made from his tribunal, he applied him­self no less to rouse the senate from their lethargy, thanto check the licentiousness of the people. Addressinghimself to the senators, he told them, " That it wasowing to their constant facility, and wantof resolutionthat the same men were continued in the tribuneshipfrom year to year, men, who by their impeachmentsami toul language, lord it over the state, as a set ofbullies do over a brothel. That courage, constancy,in fine, every virtue, civil and military, ih.it adornyouth, was driven from Rome, with his son Caeso.Babblers, batchers of sedition, and divisions in the







OCR Output








CHAP. 7. ROMAN HISTORY. 1-13


CHAP. VII,
The Ladies mourn for Brutus a whole year.
./\FTER this desperate engagement, Tarquin and hisEtrurians were seized with such a'panic, that giving overhis design as impracticable, the two armies ofthe Yejen-tes and Tarquinienses, made the best of their way, in thenight-time, to their respective homes.
Or this battle also strange stories are reported; that aloud voice, which they imagined to be Sylvanus's, washeard frdm the forest of Arsia, in the dead of night, pro­nouncing these'words, " The Etrurians Dave lost one"man in the battle more than the Romans: The Ro-"mans are masters of the field." One thing, however,is certain, that the Romans left the field as conquerors,and the Etrurians with all the marks of a defeat. For,after the light appeared, and not a man of the enemyto be seen, rublius Valerius, ,the consul, gathered up thespoils, and returned in triumph to Rome. He buried'his colleague, with all the poiup, at that time, possible.But a much greater compliment was paid to his memory,in the public mourning of the city, particularly remark­able from this consideration, that the ladies mourned forhim a complete )'ear, as for apparent, to shew their re­spect for the bold avenger of their sex's honour. -
Though the surviving consul had been very popular,yet so fickle are the minds of the muttitude, that he notonly fell under their jealousy and resentment, but waseven charged with the most odious crimes. Reportswere spread, that he aspired at sovereignty, because he"had not chosen a colleague in the room of Brutus, andwas building a house on the upper Velia, where, fromits height and situation, it would be an impregnable for­tress.
As these things were become common topics of con­versation, and gaining credit, they gave the consul nolittle pain; wherefore having called a council of the peo­ple, he came down to die assembly with his fasces low-"ered. Nothing could have pleased the people mere, 'hanto see the ensigns of authority lowered to them; as it


L







OCR Output








38 , TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


the dint of superior strength, and the exertions of hisbrave veterans, obtained a complete victory; for herouted and pursued the enemy, to the gates of' their city,which, however,. as it was strongly fortified by natureand art, he did not attempt to take. In his return, helaid waste their country, not for the sake of plunder, butfrom motives of revenge. The Vejentes, no less hum­bled by these depredations than their tate defeat, sentdeputies to Rome to sue for peace. They were fined iaa part of their territory; but obtained a truce for anhundred years.
These are the most remarkable transactions that hap­pened in the reign of Romulus, both in peace and in war;none of which seem to discredit his divine original, orthe divinity ascribed to him after his death: neither hiscourage in recovering his grandfather's kingdom, thewisdom of his ptan in building, nor .his (Economy inestablishing his new city by arms and good policy. Forby the strength/it acquired, and the progress it madeunder him, it enjoyed profound peace for the space offorty years after. /He was, however, a greater favouritewith the people than the senate; but above all, particu­larly dear to the soldiers; of them, he chose three hun­dred to attend him in arms as a body guard, in peace aswell as in war, and called them Ceteres or light horse. •


R


CHAP. XVI.
Romulus is carried out of sight, and deified.
.OMULUS having thus immortalized his name by theglory of his actions, as he was haranguing his army, ata review of his troops, :n a plain beside the Goat's pond,a storm of hail and thunder rising all of a sudden, hid theking in so thick a cloud, as carried him quite out of sight.Hot did he ever after make his appearance among thepeople, The Roman youth, having at last got the bet­ter of their panic, and the day recovered its former calm­ness and serenity, when they observed the king's chairempty, although ihey had no doubt that he had beencarried up m the air by the hurricane, as they bad heard
. II': ', '• •- •'''







OCR Output








CHAP. 69. - ROMAN HISTORY. 303


* of the people, who will neither suffer you to live in'peace at home, nor do yoursetves justice abroad, hav-'ing nothing at heart, in using their mfluence with you,'but your interests. You are grossly mistaken.—You
* are only their tools to promote their own interest and'honour.
'When domestic peace and unanimity prevail, they'fmd they have no business,—no credit; and they had'- rather lead to tumult and sedition, than be taken no'noiice of at air. If then you can at length be unde-'ceived, and feel in what manner you have been led by'the noses; only resume your wonted spirit and man-
* ners, instead of this new plan of operation, and there is'no punishment to which I will not submit, if I do not
* in'a few days, disperse and drive to perdition, these
* sanguinary depredators, and carry all the terror of this'war, which gives you such pain at present, from the
* walls and gates of Rome, to their own cities.' • .
CHAP. LXIX.
Good effects of Quinctius' speech.
J.\ EVER were the commons better pleased with theembellishments of a sweet-lipped tribune, than they werewith the severe commentary of this generous consul.The youth, whose refusal, iu contests of this kind, wasa powerful resource against the endeavours of the se­nate, breathed nothing but arms and war. The sightof'the farmers, who had fled to the city for refuge, manyof them despoiled o, their lands, and their wounds stillbleeding, whilst they p&inted scenes of distress stillmore affecting, filled all the citizens with a just desire ofrevenge.
When Quinctius entered the senate, the eyes of allwere fixed on him, admiring him as the only asserterof the majesty of the Roman name. The principal se­nators observed, ' That his speech did honour to the'office he filled, to the former consulships he had held,
* and in fine to his whole life, illustrious by the most'glorious offices of the state, which he frequently had'bore, and more frequently deserved. That other con­







OCR Output













OCR Output








162 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


iuperiority over their neighbours, than to the bravery oftbeir troops. Having marched to Circei, he first drovethe Roman colony from thence, and delivered to theVolsci. the city which he had freed from the Romanyoke. Then crossing the country by marches andcounter-marches, he made himself master of the townslying on each side of the Latin road, as Satricum, Lon-gula, Polusca and Corioli, which had been lately con­quered by the Romans. After this he retook Lavinium,Corbio, Vitellia, Trebia, Labici, and Pedum. From Pe-dum he led his army toward Koine, and encamped atthe Cluilian ditch, 'five miles from it. From whence hedetached pillaging parties to plunder the Roman lands:having sent out guides, however, with the parties, to savethe lands of the Patricians, either because his resentmentwas chiefly pointed at the commons, or that he mightwiden the breach between the senate and them: which-certainly would have been the case, so unwearied werethe tribunes in inflaming the people, already sufficientlyirritated, by bringing accusations against the first men ofthe state, had they not been united by the fear of ene­mies from without, the greatest bond of harmony within,however jealous of, and incensed against each other.
In one point they differed, however; the consuls hadall their confidence placed in arms, and the commonspreferred any terms to the chance of war. Spurius Nau-tiiH and Sex. Furius, were at that time consuls. Whilstthey were mustering the legions, placing guards uponthe walls and other posts, where they thought them ne­cessary, they were alarmed with a turbulent noise of amultitude bawling out for peace. Then they obligedthem to convene the senate, and lay before (hem the ex­pediency of sending deputjegJaJC^Marciaa. The se­nate agreed to the motion, after they observed the des­pondency of the people.
Deputies were accordingly sent, who brought backthis haughty answer: If the lands they had taken"from the Volsci were first restored to them, they might"then talk of peace: but if they chose to sit at their"ease, and live upon the spoils of former wars, that hr,"who was neither insensible of the injuries done him at"Rome, nor the civilities shown him by the Volsci,"would endeavour to make them sensible] that banish­







OCR Output








CHAP. 19. ROMAN HISTORY. . '• 231


"state, prevail by their vile intrigues, to be continued"in the office of tribunes, for two or three years, and to** act in it wiih tyrannical wantonness." What!" con­tinued he, " has this Aulus Virginius, because he was"not in the capital, deserved less punishment, than Ap-pius Herdonius, who seized it f I affirm if the circum­stances be properly attended to, it will be evident, 4hathe deserved it more. Herdonius, in declaring himselfyour enemy, did in some measure, put arms into yourhands; but this tribune, in maintaining with effrontery,that there was no war,—no enemy, wrested your armsfrom you, and gave you up defenceless to your slavesand exiles; and did you march your troops, (with de­ference to my colleague, C. Claudius, and the dead""Valerius, be it spoken) did you march, I say up to"the capitol, before you had cleared the forum of these"wretches, the more dangerous enemies of Rome?"What a shame in the sight of gods and men! Whilst"the enemy were in possession of the capitol and cita-"del, and a captain of a banditti composed of exiles and"slaves, after they had profaned every thing, and taken-"up their quarters in the temple of the most high Jupi-"ter, the Tusculans should have armed in our defence,"before we did it ourselves! There is still reasoji to," doubt, whether it was L. Mamilius, the general of"Tusculum, or the consuls, Valerius and Claudius, that"delivered the citadel of Rome. And, that we, who"would not even permit the Latins to arm in their own"defence, even when the enemy was in their country,"should, upon this occasion, have been struck out of ex-"istence, as a state, had not these same Latins, as a pure"efl'ect of their good-will,-armed for our relief. And is"this what you, tribunes, call aiding ttie plebeians, to"give them up unarmed to be slaughtered by the enemy?"If any one, the lowest of the people, with whom you"herd, and of whom you have formed a country and"republic, distinct from the state, peculiar to yourselves,"should come and inform you, that his house was in-"vested with a body of armed slaves, you might think"it incumbent on you to run to his relief: but the most"high, the most benevolent Jupiter, was not worthy to"be rescued by human aid, when beset with armed







OCR Output








400 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV.


C. Valerius Potitus, for the third time, Manius Ser-gius Fidenas, P. Cornelius Maluginensis, Cn. CorneliusCossus, C'-ESO Fabius Ambustus, and Sp. Nautius Rutilas<a second time, were elected military tribunes with con­sular power for this year. The Volsci gave them an op­portunity of coming to an action wi-th them, betweeuFerentinum and Ecetra, in which the Romans bad theadvantage; after which, the military tribunes formedthe siege of Artena, a town belonging to the Voisci,where the besieged having attempted a sally, were dri­ven back to the city, with such precipitation, that theRomans had an opportunity of entering with them pellmell, and 'of taking every thing but the castle, intowhich, as it was naturally strong, a body of armed menhad thrown themselves. Under this fortress many wereput to the sword, and many fell into the hands of thevictors. The fort itself was then besieged: but to stormit would have been impracticable, being, for-the extentof the place, sufficiently defended, and there could be nohopes of a surrender, as all the corn in the public maga­zines had been conveyed thither, before the town wastaken, so that at last, the Romans must have been so tir­ed out as to have raised the siege, had not a slave be­trayed the fort into their hands. The soldiers having-been admitted by his means, through a very intricatepassage, took the place, and having put the guards tothe sword, the rest of the garrison were all at once sostruck with terror, that they immediately surrendered atdiscretion. The city and citadel were both demolished,and the legions withdrawn from the Volscian territory,to push on the siege of'Veii, with all the force the Ro­mans could muster.
The slave, besides his liberty, had the effects of twofamilies assigned him, as the reward of his treason. Hewas called the Roman Servius. Some think, that this'Artena belonged to the Vejentes, and not tin: Volsci. Acity of the same name, situated between Caere and Veii,leads them into this mistake; but this Artena was 'de­stroyed by the Roman .kings, and besides, was not theproperty of the Vejentes, but of the Caeretes. This otherArtena, the destruction whereof hath been just now de­scribed, lay in the territory of the Volsci.







OCR Output








4d TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


wife Egeria might meet in sweet council together. Tothe goddess Faith, he also instituted an annual festival,To that solemnity he ordered the priests to be carriedin an arched chariot, drawn by two horses, having theirhands, during the service, muffled up to the fmgers; im­porting that Faith ought to be protected, and her seatmade sacred, even in thex right hands of men. He insti­tuted many other sacrifices, and places where they wereto be offered, which the priests call Argei* But nothingshowed him greater in his political abilities, or patriotvirtues, than his address in preserving the honour of thecrown, as well as the peace of the kingdom, during thewhole course of his reign. Thus two successive kingsimproved and enlarged the state by different maxims,the one,by force of arms, and the other by the arts ofpeace. /"Romulus rigned thirty-seven, and Numa forty-three years; during which, the state had not only ac­quired vigour, but a firmness of constitution, by warlikeexercises, and wise- regulations. "*>
CHAP. XXII.
Tullus Hestilius succeeds Numa, and makes war •with theAlbans.


PON the death of Numa, the administration oncemore returned to an interregnum. Then Tullus Hos-tilius, the grandson of that Hostilius who distinguishedhimself so nobly in the action with the Sabines, at thefoot of the citadel, was declared king by the people,and the fathers confirmed their choice. Tullus was sofar from resembling his predecessor Numa, that histurn for war was even stronger than that of Romulus;his youth, his vigour, and his grandfather's glory, serv­ing as so many spurs to his native valour. Moreover,he thought the citizens, with respect to arms, had con­tracted a rust through dissuetude; and therefore wascasting about on all sides for an object on which hemight employ his arms. Very opportunely for his views,it happened that the Roman and Alban peasants hadmade mutual encroachments and reprisals on each other.
* From ArgUi, Greeks.







OCR Output








358 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV.


and, in the mean time, that he had only to think of theroyal combat, the royal spoils of Romulus, and JupiterFeretrius, in the time of action.
The armies charged each other with great ardour onboth sides. The Romans, exasperated to-the highest de­gree, insulted their enemies, with the opprobrious namesof villainous Fidenates, felonious Vejentes, truce-break­ers, the cruel murderers of their ambassadors, the inhu­man butchers of the Roman colony,' perfidious allies,dastardly enemies: and thus gave full vent to their in­dignation in words, as well as actions.l,
CHAP. XXXIII.Defeat of the Vejentes, and Fidenates.
JL HEY had already begun to give way upon the firstcharge, when the gates of Fidtnae, on a sudden, flewopen, and a strange kind of army sallied out, till thatmoment, never seen nor heard of. A huge multitude,armed with fire, and blazing all over with the flames oflighted torches, ran furiously against their enemies witha kmd of enthusiastic rage; and by this new mode offighting, put the Romans in some confusion, Then thedictator, to animate the baitle, having given the signalto the general of the horse, and called down Quiuctiusfrom the heights, he flew in person to the left wing,which, terrified at the appearance of a conflagration, ra­ther than a battle, had begun to draw back from theflames, and cried out with an audible voice, ' Will youthen be driven from your ground, with nothing butsmoke, like a swarm of bees. ami fly before an unarm­ed enemy? Will you uot extinguish these flames byyour swords? If you are to fight with fire, and not thesword; will not each of s'ou, for his own part, wrestthese torches from ihe enemy, and turn them againstthemselves? Go, remember the Roman name, andyour own valour, as well as the gallantry of your an­cestors; turn these flames against the enemy's capital,and destroy Fideive by its own fires, which yon havenot been able to conciliate by all your favours. Theblood of your ambassadors and colony, and the depre­


 







OCR Output








120 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


"enemy to pass, they would soon sec more of them in"the Palatium and capitol, than in the Janiculum; and,"for that reason, he advised and charged them to de-"molish the bridge by the axe, by fire, or by any other"means of destruction in their power, that, in the mean"time, he would singly sustain the enemy's attack, with"all the vigour he was master of."
He then advanced to the entrance of the bridge, andbeing easily distinguished among those who had turnedtheir backs and fled, facing about to engage with theenemy, hand to hand, by that surprising instance ofgallantry, he confounded the Etrurians. Two, however,Spurius Lartius, and Titus Herminius, men eminent fortheir birth and noble actions, were ashamed to leave himwith them: for a short time, he stood the first shock ofdanger, and the most disorderly part of the assault; andat last, upon a call from those who were employed incatting down the bridge, he'obliged his companions toretire, upon the little that remained. Then looking fierce­ly at the Etrurian officers, and with a threatening air, hechallenged them,one by one, and upbraided them all;telling them, "That they were the slaves of haughty"tyrants, who, regardless of their own liberty, came to"wrest it from their neighbours."
They hesitated for some time, and looked at one ano­ther, who should step out to begin the attack; shame atlength put the army in motion, who setting up a shoutthrew their javelins from every quarter at a single ene­my; all which, when he received on his shield, and stoodfirm and undaunted,* to keep possession of the bridge,they endeavoured to justle him off by force; when thecrash of the bridge, that was now broke down, and theshouts of the Romans, rejoicing that it was done, stunnedthem with the shock, and suspended their fury. ThenCocles, " O father, Tiberinus," says he, "earnestly do"I pray, that thou wouldst receive these arms and this"soldier, and that thy streams would be merciful."Wherefore he threw himself into the Tiber, armed aslie was, and amidst ten thousand darts, that fell abouthim, he swimmed across the river to his own party, with-
* Ingcns gradus, stately step.







OCR Output













OCR Output








«3S TITUS LIVIUS* BOOK III.


manifest perjury in his evidence against Cicso. For,from many concurring testimonies, it was evident thatVolscius's brother, from the time he had been confmed tohis bed, had never left it, far less been seen abroad;and after he had languished for several months underthe disease, it had at last carried him off. Neither was.Cseso at Rome, the time condescended on in the indict­ment; many of his camp companions affirming, that hehad been all that time attending his colours, withoutever leaving them; the truth of which was vouched bymany.
But he durst not venture to stand this trial; for, fromso many concurrmg circumstance?, the condemnation ofVoiscius was no more doubted, than Cseso's upon hissingle testimony. The tribunes, however, put off' thetrial, refusing to sutler the Quaestors to hold the Comitiafor that purpose, till they were first assembled for enact­ing the law. Consequently both these points were de­ferred till the return of the consuls.
When the consuls entered the city in triumph with,their victorious army, as no mention was made of the.law, it was generally- believed that the tribunes were over­awed by their presence. But, as the year was near anend, anxious to. get themselves elected for the fourthtime, they had dropt all disputes about the law, to leavethemselves at liberty to canvass for next election. Andalthough the consuls exerted themselves as strenuously tooppose the re-election of the sau <• tribunes, as if a billhad been preferred to curtail their authority, yet in thecontest the tribunes prevailed.
This year the /Equi sued for peace, which was grant­ed them; and the census, which had been begun lastyear, was finished in this. This was the tenth lustrationwinch had been made since the building of the city.One hundred and thirty-two thousand four hundred andnine citizens were enrolled-. The consuls, by their con­duct this year, both in peace and war, gained immortalhonour; for they made peace with all their neighbours;and the state, though the demon of discord was not to­tally expelled, was not so much embroiled as in ovheiconsulships.







OCR Output








896 ." TITUS LIVICS' BOOK III,


.CHAP. LXIV.
Aoo elections. Candour of Duilius.
J. HIS victory of the people, and their tribunes, hadalmost been productive or very serious consequences,owing to a combination amongst the latter, to get them­selves re-elected for the ensuing year, and to keep theirambition in countenance, to continue the same consuls inoffice for another year. In support of this scheme, theypretended, that the senate had engaged in a plot, out ofpique to the consuls, to destroy the rights of the people."For what would be the consequence, should the con-"suls, before the laws were firmly established, by their"factions, make an aitempt on the new tribunes! For,"they were not always to have consuls of the same dis-"position with Valerius and Horatius, who preferred"the liberty of the people to their own emolument."
It happened fortunately to fall to Duilius' lot, to pre­side at that election. He was a man of sense, who, fore­seeing the mischievous consequences that the proposedcontinuation would produce, declared openly that hewould make no account of votes in favour of any of hiscolleagues. He was warmly opposed, his colleaguescontending, that he ought either to leave the assemblyfree, or give up his presidentship to one of the college,who would make the law, and not the pleasure of thesenators his rule. He begged of the consuls, to favourhim with their presence at his tribunal; and asked them,what they intended to do at the next Comitia for elect­ing consuls? Their answer was, that they would createnew ones. The president, fmding that these magistrates,popular in other respects, but no friends to this scheme,advanced with them into the assembly, and introducingthem to the people, then begged they would declare,what they would do, if the Roman people, from a prin­ciple of gratitude, for the generous part they had actedin recovering the public liberty, and mindful of theirother services, both at home and abroad, should re-elect- them to the consulship. They expressed the same in­tention as before. Duilius then praised them highly for


 







OCR Output








CHAP. 16. ROMAN HISTORY. 225


tated with fear, ran precipitately into the forum, where"to arms,—the enemy is in the city/' was the univer­sal cry.-/. -
The'consuls, at a loss to determine, whether this sud­den blow was struck by foreign or domestic foes, whetherit originated in the discontent and enmity of the com­mons, or in a plot of the slaves, were equally afraid toarm the Plebeians, and to leave them unarmed. Theyendeavoured to settle the confusion, but their endeavourssometimes only increased it. The multitude, struck withconsternation and affright, could not be brought under•any government whatever. They however gave outarms.tmt not to all indiscriminately, only to such as theycould confide in most; and x)f these only, such a numberas were sufficient, to guard every place against the at­tacks of an enemy, of whom they had as yet no -idea.Therefore, being totally ignorant, what enemy, or whatnumber they had to oppose, they passed the remaindertif the night in great perplexity, posting guards whereverthey were thought necessary.
At. last day-light made the wished-for 'discoverv,whence the war proceeded, and by whom it was conduct-"ed. Appius Herdonius from the capitol proclaimedliberty to the slaves, declaring, " That he had under-"taken the cause of the miserable, to restore exiles, un-"justly banished, to their country; and to deliver slaves"from the oppressive yoke. That he had rather the*' Roman people would do this uncompelled; but if he"saw no hopes of relief from that quarter, he would"have recourse to the /Equi and Volsci, and leave no-"thing unattempted to effectuate his purpose."
CHAP. XVI.
Obstructions of the Tribunes. i
± HE mystery being now somewhat cleared up, theconsuls and senators, besides what was publicly threaten­ed, became very uneasy with the apprehension, thatthis enterprise had been concerted with the Vejentes andSabines; and whilst they had so many of the enemyalready in the xnty, the Sabine and Etrtirian legions







OCR Output








CONTENTS. 495


Pag«


Chap.
xiii. An epidemical distemper. Introductionof the Lectisternium. Defeat of the
Falisci, Capenates, &c. 421
xiv. Intrigues of the nobility, to engross the
offices of state .,...,.. 42S
xr. Prodigy of the Lake at Alba 424
xvi. The Tarquinienses take the opportunity ,. .});-, of the troubles at Rome to ravage the
country, and are punished 425
xvii. Expiation of the Alban prodigy. General
< v diet of Etruria ..; 427
xviii. . Titinius and Genucius receive a check. from the Capenates, &c. Great con­sternation at Rome 428
xix., The Dictator Camillas raises an armydefeats the Falisci, and carries on new
works at Veii 430
xx. The works completed. Disputes about
dividing the spoil 43I
xxi. Veii taken and.plundered by the soldiers 433xxii. Murmurs against Camillus. Juno brought
to Home 434
xxiii. Camillus returns in triumph. The peo­ple disgusted 430
xxiv. Inrollment for a colony to be planted inthe Volscian territory. Motion for
transferring it to Veii 437
xxv. Disputes about Veii. Generosity of the
• . ,. Roman ladies 438
xxvi. Camillus marches against the Falisci.
Drives them iuto their city, which he
. besieges 440
xxvii. Villainy of a schoolmaster. Generosity of
..Camillus. Its effect on the Falisci 441
xxviii. War with the jEqui. Various success 443
xxix. Motion of the JEqui. Trial and condem­nation of two tribunes 44-5
xxx. Disputes about settling at Veii. The Fa­thers prevail 447
xxxi. New enemies start up against Rome 44-8
xxxii. The Volsinienses chastised. A prodigy.
Camillus banished 449







OCR Output








CHAP. 59. ROMAN HISTORY. . 103


Brutus, marched in arms to Rome. After they had en­tered the city, the appearance of a body in arms, spreadterror and confusion, wherever it went; but when theprincipal men of the state were observed to be at thehead of it, they readily concluded, whatever it might be,it had been no rash nor unadvised undertaking. Nordid this barbarous action occasion less commotion atRome, than it had done at Collatia. From all quartersthey ran into the Forum; and the moment they wereconvened, they were summoned by the public crier, toattend the tribune of the celeres, with which office,Brutus happened to be invested at that time. Then heharangued the people, but with a force and energy verydirferent from that degree of wisdom and capacity, ofwhich the character be assumed had been expressive, tothat day. Then be inveighed against the violence andbrutal passion ofSextus Tarquinius, the rape of Lucretia,so infamous, that he blushed to mentiou it;—her unfor­tunate end.—The loss to Triclpitinus of his daughter,the cause of whose death, was more afflicting and dis­tressing than her death itself.—To these, he added theking's haughtiness;—4he miseries and servile labours ofthe people, oppressed with ditching and draining commonsewers; and that the Romans, conquerors of all the na­tions around them, of soldiers were now become commonmechanics and hewers of stone. He mentioned the in­human murder of their king Servius Tultius, and his ac­cursed daughter riding in triumph over the body of herexpiring father: he invoked the gods, the avengers ofparents.
By a lively representation of these horrid scenes, andothers, I fancy, still more glaring, dictated by the ca­lamity of the times, which a modern historian cannoteasily collect, or narrate, he had the address to engagethe people, already enraged at the Tarquins, to abolish.the regal authority, and by their suffrages to confirm adecree of the senate, condemning Tarquin, his wife,and all his posterity, to perpetual banishment. Havinglevied, and armed a body of youth, who voluntarily listedthemselves, he put himself at their head, and marched tothe camp of Ardea, to persuade the army to join in therebellion against the king. He left the government of







OCR Output








CHAP. 14. ROMAN HISTORY. S3


"of the other;—that they would not entail the reproach"of parricide upon their offspring, children of the one,"and grand-children of the other. If, (continued they)"you dislike the connection, or choice we have made,"let the weight of your resentment fall upon us. It is"we who are the cause of the war; it is we who have"shed the blood of our fathers and husbands. We had"better be dead, than left widows without the one, oi'"orphans without the other."
This moving scene very sensibly touched the feelingsof the army and generals. All was hush in a moment,when both leaders advanced with proposals for an accom­modation. Matters were quickly adjusted, and an unionof both cities and kingdoms effected. Rome tvas madethe seat of the united government. By this coalition, thenumbers of the cities being doubled, the Sabines werecalled Suirites, from Cures, by way of distinction.—As amonumSnl of that battle, the place where Curtius's horse,springing out of a dry swamp, set him upon shallowwater, was called the Curtian lake. This quick and• happy transition to peace, from a very unnatural war,endeared the Sabine women to their fathers and hus­bands, more than ever; and most of all to Romulus,who, when he divided the people into thirty Curia, dis­tinguished them by their names.
Though doubtless the number of the women exceededthat of the Curiae, yet it is not said, whether they whogave names to the Curiae were selected to that honour,for their seniority, superiority of their own, or husbands'rank, or by lot. At the same time, three hundred knightswere enrolled, and from Romulus, were called Ramnenses;and from Tatius, Tatienscs. Why, or how they they werecalled Luceres, is yet a question. From this date, theassociate kings ruled in common, on the most amicablefooting.
-
CHAP. XIV.
The Fidenates routed.
OOME years after, the relations of Tatius behaved rude-!y to the femlrassadors of the Laurentes, who when they







OCR Output








+66


TITUS LIVIUS'


 


them to Ardea, whiiher Camillus had retiregreat man, more affected with the calamities otry, than its ingratitude to himself, after he haed himself, accusing geds and men, wonderindignation what had become of these men, whocommand had taken Veit and Falerii, and wh<wars, had never been deficient in point of braiever unsuccessful, was surprised with the nevarmy of the Gauls were on their way thitwhich the Ardeates, in the utmost consternadeliberating upon the measures proper toHitherto he had not appeared in their publi<but upon this occasion, excited, as it were, b}impulse, he presented himself in the heart of ihbly, and spoke to the following purpose;


•


••


CHAP. XLIV.


"P


Camillus addresses the Ardeans.


EOPLE of Ardea, my old friends, though'my fellow-citizens; to your kindness I owe tl'my fate I owe the last; I hope none of you
• that l forget my condition, when I appear thi
• assembly: but the present occurrence aud th
• danger, calls upon every one to do bis utmost'against it. And, indeed, when will it be iu'. to evidence my gratitude, for the ioiporta
• yeu'have conferred on me, if not at present •
• war alone I can be of use to you. It was'supported my credit in my own' country.
'war I was invincible, I. was banished by mj'ful countrymen in time of peace. As for« friends of Ardea, fortune presents you with'portunity of making a suitable return to the'Rome, for the obligations you lie under to thei'as you remember them well, it would be'-ill to recapitulate; at the same time that yo'quire immortal glory, by giving a check tc'mon enemy. On that people, who are adva'way in straggling parties, nature has besto'mity of size, and impetuosity.of courage, n^firmness of body, or constancy of mind; ar







OCR Output








CHAP. 31. ROMAN HISTORY. 61


mentation of the horse. It was by a vigorous charge ofthe Roman horse, that the ranks of theSabines were firstbroke; after which, they could neither fight nor fly,without being exposed to a most dreadful slaughter.


 


J~ CHAP. XXXI. .
^r^
*^ Tullus killed by lightning.


^
./\.PTER


.PTER this defeat of theSabines, when the administra­tion of Tullus was in high repute, and the Roman affairsin a most flourishing state, news were brought to court,that it rained stones on mount Alba. As the thing seemedincredible, proper persons were sent -to examine into itmore minutely, who saw them fall thick from heaven,like hailstones driven by the wind in balls along theground. Moreover, they thought they heard a voicethundering from the grove on the summit of the hill,enjoining the Albans, in sacred matters, to observe thefiles of their country, which they had totally overlooked,as if they had abandoned their gods with their country;having either conformed to the religion of Rome, or,being dissatisfied with fortune, had given themselves notrouble about religion, as often happens in such cases.. Upon account of this prodigy, the Romans too, eitherinstigated by the voice thundering from mount Alba, forthat is also alledged; or by the advice of the Aruspices,instituted expiatory sacrifices, which lasted nine days:Certain it is, that the same kind of solemnity is yet inuse; for, whenever the city has been alarmed with anysimilar^jrodigy, nine days have always been employedin such expiations.
Not long after, the plague raged among them; which,though it checked their military ardour, Tullus, whobreathed nothing but war, gave them no respite fromarms: pretending, that the youth had a better chancein action abroad, than in idleness at home; till, at length,he was himself seized with a lingering distemper. Thenhis spirits, great as they were, fell so low, and his bodyso weak, that he, who hitherto had thought it a weak­ness unbecoming a king, to mind the ceremonies andobservances of religion, all at once became a slave to the
D







OCR Output








CHAP. 6. ROMAN HISTORY. 409


* that must be consequent on the measures prescribed
* by your tribunes. The loss of works constructed with
* so much labour, the impending devastation of our
* country, and all Etruria about our ears, in place of the
* single state of Veii. These, tribunes, are your wise
* maxims, very like the prescriptions of an empiric by
* Jove, who by administering palatable meat and drink'to his patient, lengthens out the disease, and perhaps
* renders it incurable, whereas by the application of'stronger medicines, he might have quickly recovered.'
CHAP. VI.
Appius in Continuation.
SUPPOSE a winter campaign were not essential in-
* deed to the success of the present war, it must certaiu-
* ly be of the highest importance with respect to mili-'tary discipline, to accustom the soldiers, not only to
* enjoy the victories they acquire, but also, when ob-
* staples come in the way, not to be overcome by their'continuance, but wait the issue of their hopes, though'it may be deferred beyond'their expectation; to con-
* tinue the war during the winter, if it cannot be ended
* in summer, and not, like birds of passage, look round'for'houses and a safe retreat, as soon as autumn comes
* on. Shall keenness for sport, and the pleasure of hunN
* ing, pray, draw men over mountains and through fo-'rests, amidst frost and snow; and shall we not shew the« same patience in a necessary war, that we chuse to'discover in our sport and parties of pleasure ?—Do we
* believe that our soldiers are so soft and enervated, ei-'ther in body or mind, that they cannot stand a single'winter in the camp, nor stay so long from home? Like
* those who carry on a war by sea, must they watch the'changes of the weather, and observe seasons, being in-'capable of bearing heat or cold ? Were any one to tell« them so, they would certainly be put to the blush, and'answer with indignation, that they were effeminate
* neither in mind nor body; and to them a , winter's'campaign was no greater hardship than a summer's:'that they never commissioned the tribunes to be advo^
* cates for their cowardice andeffeminacy j and that they







OCR Output








290 TITUS LIVRTS' . , BOOK IR.


which he had formed at the distance of a mile from theenemy. The vacant space between the camps servedthe enemy for ranging themselves in order of battle.
When the enemy advanced to bid them defiance, theywere answered with silence. At length the JEqoi andVolsci, wearied with standing under arms, and expectingbattle to no purpose, thought the victory was fairly givenup to them; and accordingly, sent out detachments oftheir troops to ravage the country of the Latins and Her-nici: In consequence of which, the few that remained-might rather be considered as a guard to the camp, thana force sufficient for a general engagement.
The consul perceiving their weakness, gave them thealarm i.n his turn; and his trcfops being drawn up in or­der of battle, challenged them to come out. Consciousof their inferiority, they did not accept, which inspiredthe Romans immediately with ap extraordinary degreeof courage; concluding their enemies, now tremblingwithin their camp, already in their power. They con­tinued the rest of the day under arms, but night obligedthem to retire, full of hopes, to rest and refresh them­selves.
Very different was the situation of the enemy's spirits.Expresses were posted away in all haste, to recal thosewho had been dispersed to plunder. The parties at nogreat distance returned; but they who had made agreater excursion, were not found. Early next morningthe Roman army marched out of their camp, in orderto attack the enemies lines, should they decline comingto battle: and* when the day was far spent, and no ap­pearance of the enemy's stirring, the consul gave thesignal for the attack. Seeing the Roman army in mo­tion, the jEqui and Volsci ashamed, that victorious asthey had been, they should now defend themselves ra­ther by their works than their swords, they applied totheir generals, and with much importunity obtained thesignal.
When some of 'their battalions had already njarchedout at the gates of the camp, and others foUowed in pro­per order, each man in his rank, -the consul advancedagainst them, before they could be supported by thev. hole army. Wherefore, charging them before all the


 







OCR Output








1<88 TITUS LIVIUS' . BOOK If.


which, the tribunes having lost all courage, the consulscompleted without any interruption. The people weremore provoked at the silence of their tribunes, than theimperious behaviour of the consuls, crying out, "That"there was an end of all liberty now: That they were"fallen again intd their ancient state.—That the trihu-"nitian power had expired, and was laid in the grave"with Genntius.—That they must now fall upon other"measures to oppose a barrier to the violence of the"senators.—That they had still one resource left, and"that was in themselves, since every other means of"protection had failed them.—That the consuls had no"other guard, but twenty-four lictors, and these too,*' plebeians: a weak and contemptible aid indeed, if"there were but men who knew hov.' to despise them."Such was the power wl.ich imagination only magni-"lies, and represents as terrible."
By such discourses, as they were spiriting up eachother, a lictor was sent by the consuls, to one VoleroPublius, a plebeian, who'insisted, that he could not becompelled to serve as a single centinel, having formerlyhad the rank of centurion. Votero called to the tribunes;but none of them moving to protect him, the consuls or­dered the lictors to strip and scourge him with rods "I"appeal," says Volero, " to the people, since the tri-"bunes choose rather to see a Roman citizen scourged"before their eyes, .than be strangled in their beds by« you."
The more vehemently he cried out, the more eager thelictor was to tear and take off his clothes. But Volero,being robust of himself, and having got others to assisthim, beat off the lictor, and got into the thickest of thecrowd, where he saw the greatest ferment and indigna­tion raised on his account, crying out, "I appeal to the"people;—I implore their protection! stand by me citi-"zens! stand by me fellow soldiers! you .have nothing"to expect from your tribunes; alas! they have occasFon"themselves for your aid."
The ferment spread among the people; they preparedas for a battle; and there seemed not a doubt, but mat­ters would be carried to the most violent height, withoutregard to birth* age, or dignity."







OCR Output








CHAP. 45. - ROMAN HISTORY. 3<75


had Treated suspicions,* to her disadvantage. Where­fore, her trial was put off" for want of evidence.f and shewas afterwards acquitted: but the high priest, with theconsent and approbation of the whole college, admonish­ed her, to behave with more prudence and less gaietyfor the future, and to have more regard to modesty, thantaste and elegance in her dress.—This year also, Cumsc,a city till then possessed by the Greeks, was taken bythe people of Capua. In the following year, the mili­tary tribunes with consular power, were Agrippa Mene-nius Lanatus, P. Lucretius Tricipitinus, and Sp. NautiusRutilus.
CHAP. XLV.
Conspiracy of the Slaves. Motions of the jEqui andLavicans. Obstinacy of the Military Tribunes.
JL HIS year was more remarkable for a lucky escapethe Roman people had from a dangerous plot, than anyevil consequence that attended it. The slaves.had form­ed a conspiracy to set the city on fire in several places,at a distance from each other, and with arms in theirhands, to seize the citadel and capitol, whilst the peoplewere employed in saving their houses. But Jupiterfrustrated the effect of their criminal intentions; for theplot being discovered by two of their number, the con­spirators were secured, and punished with death. Theinformers, for so Important a service, were rewardedwith their liberty, and 10,000 asses of brass,t weighedout ai the treasury. A capital sum in those days.
After this, the JEqui began to make preparations forwar; and besides, advices were received at Kome, thecertainty of which was not to be doubted, thai the peo­ple of Lavicum, who cm no former occasion had been atwar with the Romans, were associating themselves withthese old enemies of the stale^ The war with the jEquiwas in a manner become annual; but ambassadors were
# 06 suspic'umem,—rather ab fu pkione.
•f- Ampliatwn, ab amplius censendo, adjourned, sisted, for a newbearnj. % .£32:5:9f.







OCR Output








TITUS LIVIUS'
ROMAN HISTORY,


FROM


THE BUILDING OF THE CITY. i


BOOK I.
CONTAINING THE HISTORY OF THE REGALGOVERNMENT OF ROME.


INTRODUCTION.


writing the history of the Roman people, from theTery foundation of the city, whether I may offer tothe public a work of merit, is a question I cannotwell resolve; nor if I could, would I venture to do it,sensible as I am, that it is a trite and common thing,for every new author to imagine to himself, that hewill state facts with a greater air of authenticity titanhis predecessors; or by the colourings of his style, throwa new light upon the shades of more ancient productions.Whatever may be in that, to me the reflection will be,however, agreeable, that I too have contributed my part,to perpetuate the memory of the atchifevements of apeople who have become lords of the universe: Andshould I, in such a groupe of writers, appears less con­spicuous, I shall still rind some consolation in the lustreof those characters, who are superior tome in the annalsof fame. Moreover, to write the history of so great aB







OCR Output








x THE TRANSLATOR


trating into the motives of every action, and cause ofevery event? Can there be a greater incitement to virtue,than from the example exhibited to us in the history ofthe antient Romans, for modesty, frugality, generosity,disinterestedness, patriotism, and all those shining vir­tues, which have rendered them the admiration of suc­ceeding ages? It was in this view that Livy consideredhis subject, in which he saw so many opportunities ofdisplaying his genius, and which he knew so well howto improve.*
In short, in the manner he has handled his subject,nothing seems to be above his merit. The beauty andelevation of his style, is equal to the glory and greatnessof the people whose history he writes. He is everywhereluminous, intelligible, and agreeable: but when he en­ters into important affairs, he rises even above himself,to treat them with peculiar attention, and a kind of self-delight and complacency. The actions he describes, herenders present; he sets them before the eyes; he doesnot relate them, he shows them. He paints the geniusand character of his dramatis persona, from nature; andputs words iuto their mouths, which are always conform­able to their sentiments and situations. In one word, hehas the wonderful art of keeping his readers in so pleas­ing a suspense, by the variety of his events, and of en­gaging their curiosity so strongly, that it is impossible toquit his relation of any incident/ till it is entirely at anend.f
It is reported of the celebrated Scotch historian, GeorgeBuchanan, that he read Titus Livius's history ten timesover, to fix in his mind the stile and manner of that greatauthor, before he attempted the work, which has justlyplaced him at the head of all the writers who havetransmitted their sentiments to posterity in the Latinlanguage, since the Augustan age. Nay, some havenot scrupled to affirm, in drawing a comparison betweenLivy, and the celebrated Roman orator, Cicero; that ifthe latter had turned his whole attention from the bar, to
* Les Oenvres du P. Rapin.f Rolling Roman history.







OCR Output








CHAP. 29. ROMAN HISTORY. 245


such respect and ready submission did people pay to su­perior merit and superior authority, that the army, lessaffected with the disgrace they had suffered, than thebenefit they had received, decreed the dictator a crownof gold, of a pound weight, and at bis departure salutedhim their preserver. •
The Roman senate having been convened by Fabius,the city prefect, decreed, that Quinctius, with the army'he" commanded, should enter the city intriumph. Thegenerals of ,ihe enemy walked in chains before his cha­riot; the ensigns taken from them,. were carried beforehim, and the army loaded with booty, closed the proces­sion. Tables were covered at every door, w.here thesoldiers stopping to regale themselves, again followed thechariot, making the whole city resound with songs oftriumph, and revelling as at their annual feasts.
The same day, by the unanimous consent of the peo­ple, the freedom of Rome was conferred on L. MamiliusofTusculum. Quinctius would have abdicated the dic­tatorship immediately," had it not been for the trial ofVolscius for perjury, which the tribunes would have putoff long enough, had not the authority of the dictatorbeen interposed. Volscius was condemned,- and after­wards banished, when he retired to Lanuvium; ThoughQuinctius might'have "retained his high office for sixmonths, he resigned on the sixteenth day after his pro­motion.
During these transactions, the consul Nautius was car­rying all before him at Eretrum, against the Sabines,whom he had not only distressed by ravaging their coun­try, but had also routed in a general battle. Fa'bius wassent to the Algid us, to succeed to Minucius. In the endof the year, the tribunes began to stir again in the affair"of the law: but as two armies were abroad, the senatecarried it, that n<3 bill should be preferred to the people.Nevertheless, in the election of tribunes, the commonsprevailed, to have the same men continued in office, forthe fifth time. About this time, it was reported, thatwolves had been seen in the capitbl, and that they weredriven away by the dogs, for which reason it was pu­rified.







OCR Output








382 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV.


they would escape with impunity for this insult; butbemg thus abandoned by their countrymen, the warwith them was very inconsiderable, for they lost boththeir citv and its territory, by one slight engagement anda short siegeyL
L. Sextos, one of the popular tribunes, attempted tobring ki a bill for sending a colony to Volse, as hadbeen done to Lavicum. It ended in nothing, by reasonof the dissent of his colleagues, who declared that theywould sutler no bill to pass in the assembly of the com­mons, without the con'sent of the senate. Next year, thejEqui having recovered Voice, peopled it anew, andstrengthened the fortifications of the place, during thepresidency of Quinctius Fabius Vibulanus for the secondtime, Cn-. Cornelius Cossns, L. Valerius Potitus, andPosthumius Regillensis*, in quality of military tribuneswith consular power.
To Posibutnius was committed the management of thewar against the 2Equi. He was a man of a vile disposi­tion, which became more visible in his victory, thanduring the dependence of the war: For, having raisedan arniy with great expedition, and marched againstV<-lie, in several skirmishes he humbled the 55qui, andat last made himself master of the city, when he turn­ed the insolence of his temper from the enemy, uponhis fellow-citizens; and though whilst he was carryingon the siege, he had published that the soldiers shouldhave the plunder after it was taken, he broke his word.
I rather think that the resentment of the army origi­nated in this circumstance, than because the city, whichhad been lately plundered, and peopled -with a new co­lony, did not produce so large a booty as this tribunehad given out. From whatever source this disgnst pro­ceeded, he inflamed it much, upon his return to ihe city,being recalled by his colleagues on account of the dustraised by the tribunes. An expression of his was takennotice of in the assembly, equally ridiculous and extra­vagant. As Sextius, one of the tribunes, was proposing
* Regillensiswasa.sirname common to two families; theClsn-dian and Posthumian to the first, because they came from Regil-tum; to the last, in honour of the victory gained by Posthumiusover the Latins at the lake Regiilns.


 







OCR Output








CHAP. 40. ROMAN HISTORY. 367


~ T"


of the wounded Romans as he could, and marched straitto Rome.
CHAP. XL.
Tempanius returns to Rome, and examined by the Tribunes.
J. HE news of this unfortunate battte and desertion ofthe camp had already reached the city. The loss ofthe cavalry was particularly deplored by the public ingeneral, as well as their connections. The consul Fabius,to prevent surprise, the whole city being alarmed., post­ed troops At the gates. When the cavalry appeared ata distance the consternation was still greater, as beinguncertain who they were. The moment it was discover­ed that these troops were the horse returned safe andvictorious, their fear was converted into such an excessof joy, that the acclamations of those who congratulatedthem, were heard over all the city: and those families,that but a little before were in the deepest concern, cry­ing out,.that their friends were gone, ran- out to thestreets in transports, and the mothers and wives, quiteout of their senses, forgetting decency in their presentextasy, ran out to meet the troops, each embracing herown, with such expressions of tenderness and tears ofjoy, as almost approached distraction
The tribunes- of the people, who had impeached M.-Posthumius and T. Quinctius, on account of the battleofVeii, lost by then- means, thought this a noble op­portunity, in the present resentment of the peopleagainst Sempronius, for reviving tlie odium against them.Wherefore, having called an assembly, they bawled outwith great warmth, thai because the commonwealth hadbeen betrayed by its generals at Veii, and their faulthad remained unpunished, the army had again been be­trayed by the consul in the country of the Volsci, thebravest of ihe cavalry given up to destruction, and thecamp shamefully abandoned. One of the tribunes, C.Icilius, ordered the knight Tempanius to be cited beforethem, and interrogated him as follows:
Sextus Tempanius, I ask you, 'Whether you think• that the consul Sempronius chose a proper time to







OCR Output








TO THE PUBLIC. ii


the writing of history, his appearance, as a historian,would rather have eome short of Livy's.
Our author's Roman history originally consisted of142 Books, extending from the foundation of Rome tothe death of Dausus, A. U. C. 744; but the lamentabledepredations which have been committed on the literarytreasures of antiquity, by Goths and Vandals, Monks,worms, and that notorious belluo librorum, time, havedeprived us of above 170 Books, the value of which maybe estimated from the expectations which have beenformed, the searches that have been made, and the re­wards that have been proposed for recovering all theBooks of this inimitable historian, which are wanted inour printed copies. Once indeed it was fully expected,that all the works of Livy would have been restored en­tire to the world. One Justinian!, a Greek merchant ofthe island of Chios, happening to be m France, in theyear 1685, offered the French king all the works ofLivy.He pretended, that at the great fire, which happened atConstantinople in the 1665, this valuable work was, a-mong other books, thrown out a window, and pickedup bv a Turk, who sold it privately to a merchant, bywhom he was commissioned to sell it. The bargain wasstruck ; by which Justiniani was entitled to receive atthe rate of 10,000 crowns instantly paid him, for everytwo Decades he could produce. But he never returnedwith the copy, which was an universal disappoint­ment*.
Thus in all ages, since the works of Kvy made theirfirst appearance in the world, have they been universal­ly admired, and sought after with the greatest avidity;and such was the veneration paid to their illustrious au­thor, by Alphonso king of Naples, that he sent, in theyear '452, Panormita as his ambassador to the Veneti­ans, in whose dominions the bones of Livy had beenlately discovered, to beg a relic of this celebrated-histo­rian. They presented him with an arm bone; and thepresent is recorded in an inscription preserved at Padua,to this day f.
* Marhoff de Patavin. LIT.f Vosiiu* de biitoricis Latinis.







OCR Output








288 TITUS UVIUS' BOOK III.


compassion on him and his daughter; and to have re­gard to the prayers , not of the Claudian family, whichhad exercised a cruel tyranny over them, but of Vir­ginia's relations, and three tribunes, who being createdfor the protection of the people, were now imploringtheir aid and protection."These tears prevailed. Appius in consequence havingIost all hopes, put an end to his own life, before the dayappointed for his trial arrived. Sp. Oppins, who afterAppius, was of all the decemvirs most detesied, was pro­secuted soon after, at the instance of Numitorius, as anaccomplice of Appius in the affair of Virginia, becausehe was in the city when that infamous judgment waspassed. But a crime charged personally against himselfcat deeper in his condemnation, than his conniving atAppius's baseness. A witness was produced who hadserved twenty-seven years, and had been eight times ho­noured with military rewards, which.he had with him.—Stripping off his robe, he exposed his shoulders whichhad been torn with rods by the decemvirs' lictors, offeringto submit himself to the same treatment again, if Oppiuscould assign any good reason for his cruelty. Oppiuswas.also sent to prison, and before the day of his trial, hewas no more. The estates of both were confiscated bythe tribunes. The rest of the decemvirs were banished,and their estates confiscated. Claudius, who hail claimedVirginia, was condemned on the day appointed for bistrial; but Virginius remitted his execution, and convert­ed the sentence into banishment, when he retired to Ti-bur.—Thus the manes of Virginia, more happy after herdeath than in her life, having wandered through so manyhouses in pursuit of just vengeance, were at length ap­peased, by the punishment of ull the guilty.
CHAP. LIX.
Seasonable interposition of Duillus. The Fathers dissatis­fied with the popularity of the consuls.
.l HE senators were now under no small apprehensions,seeing the tribunes had become as sanguinary as the de­cemvirs had been before, when Duilius, who was orre


 







OCR Output








29+ TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK III.


victory. The Sabines, however, were not so confidentof their strength, as to exclude stratagem. For, indrawing up in battalia, they reserved two thousand menwithout their ranks, who were to charge the left wingof«the Romans, in the heat of action. This corps-de-reserve, charging furiously in flank, had almost sur­rounded the left wing, when two squadrons of Romancavalry, consisting of about six hundred, dismountmg,flew toi the van, to support those who seemed already-tobe giving way, and boldly charging the enemy, theynot only shared the danger in common with the foot,but inspired them with ardour, through a sense of shame.They blushed to see the cavalry doing double duty; andbehaving more gallantly, when dismounted, than theythemselves had done.
CHAP. LXIII.
Tlie Sabines beat. The Consuls voted a triumph by thepeople.
LJ PON this they rallied, and returned to the post they'had abandoned, when the battle was not only renewed,but the opposite wing of the Sabincs gave way. Thehorse, covered by the foot, remounted, and galloping tothe other wing of the army, informed them of the vic­tory; at the same time, charging the enemy, who werenot a little confounded, to find that the flower of theirarmy was broke. Thus the Roman horse distinguishedthemselves by prodigies of valour. The consul was allalertness; he neglected nothing. The brave he com­mended ; those whose ardour seemed less conspicuous, hereprimanded, which had a proper effect, for they did notfail to redouble their effort?, a sense of shame operatingon the one, as much as commendations did on the other.Now, loud huzzas were raised, and charging on all sidesin close battalia; the enemy, who were no longer able tostand the impetuous ardour of the Romans, were put toflight.
The Sabines, thus routed, and scattered through thefields, left their camp a prey to the enemy, where theRomans found, not only the spoils which had beep tnteo


 







OCR Output








CHAP. 8. . ROMAN HISTORY. f\S


voured by the plague. The senate, destitute of all hu­man aid, recommended to the people to look up to thegod,s, and have recourse to prayer, ordering them to gowith their wives and children in procession, and suppli­cate the divine mercy. Called upon thus, by public au­thority, to act a part, which every one's distress, as anindividual, made his bounden duty, all the temples werecrowded, where the matrons prostrating themselves onthe floors, which they brushed with their hair, deprecat­ed the divine wrath, and implored the gods to put anend to the plagae. ti -
CHAP. VIII.
The plague abates. Great slaughter of the Vokei.
X* ROM this time, the sickness gradually abated; whc-• ther it was the effect of their prayers, or that the sicklyseason was past, all signs of disease began to disappear,and give place to health and vigour. Now they direct­ed all their attention to public affairs; and after severalinterregnums, P. Valerius Publicola, the third day, afterhe had been chosen inter-rex, nominated L. Lucretius-Tricipitinus, and T. Veturius Geminus,consuls. In somehistorians, the last is called Vetusius. They enteredupon their oflicc on the ninth ef August; at which time,the citizens were so much recovered, that they were inft condition not only to act upon the defensive, but tocarry the war into, the heart of the enemy's country.
In consequence of advices from the Hernici, that theircountry was invaded, the Romans readily promised them -assistance. Two consular armies were levied. Veturiuswas sent to attack the Volsci in thoir own country, andTricipitinus havkig posted himself so as to prevent thecountry of the allies from- being plundered, went no far­ther than the territories of the Hernici. In the very firstaction, Veturius obtained a complete victory over theVolsci. The pillagers escaped the vigilance of Lucre­tius, as he lay encamped in the country of the Hernici;.and marching along the tops of the hills of Praneste,rnade a descent upon the plains. There they'Tavagedthe lands of Prseneste and Gabii; and from Gabiimarched round the hills of Tusculum.







OCR Output








CHAP. 20. ROMAN HISTORY. 431


and the success as usual, was answerable. He not onlyrouted the enemy in the engagement, but took theircamp, where he found considerable spoils, of which thegreatest part was remitted to the quaestor, and the re­mainder given to the soldiers. From thence he led hisarmy to Veii, where he increased the number or forts onthe lines, and prohibiting by proclamation, all fightingwithout orders, which bad often happened between thewalls of the town and the lines, in inconsiderate skir­mishes, he employed the people in useful works.
He then began the most important and laborious workof all, which was to carry a mine into the enemy's cita-Jel. That there might be no intermission in the workrand at the same time to ease the workmen, that theymight not be oppressed with continual labour underground, he divided the pioneers into six bauds, each ofwhich was to work six hours at a time. Thus the workwas carried on night and day without intermission, till apassage was opened to the citadel.
CHAP. XX.
Tlie works completed. Disputes about dividing the spoil.
J. HE dictator, when he saw that he must now infal­libly conquer, and that the richest city of Italy was onthe point of falling into his hands, where, of consequence,more considerable spoils would be taken than had beengained in all their former wars together; that he mightneither draw the anger of the soldiers upon himself, fordividing them with too much parsimony, nor the envyof the fathers, for distributing them with too much pro­fusion, wrote to the senate to inform that body, 'That bv• the favour of the immortal gods, his own conduct, ahii'the perseverance of the soldiers, Veii would soon be in'the hands of the Roman people. That, therefore, he'. would be glad to have their opinion with regard to the'disposal of the spoils.'
The senate .were divided into two opinions. The onewas that of Licinius the father, who being first asked byhis son, answered, that he thought proclamation shouldbe made, that whoever of the citizens was desirous of







OCR Output








CONTENTS.


Chap. Page
Ivi. The consuls offended with the Senate, for
proposing a dictator. The tribunes
refuse to interfere ..................... 392
Itii. A dictator created, who dispels the storm
at Antium .............................. 395
Iviii. The people refuse their assent to a war
with the Vejentes ..... .'..... ......... . 395
lix. Anxur taken and plundered by the sol­
diers, 'who are appointed pay by a
decree of the senate .................. 397
ix. Joy of the people on this occasion. En­
vy of the tribunes ............... ...... 398
Ixi. Arteua taken, the fort havipg been be­
trayed by a slave ...... ..... ..... ..... 399
BOOK. V.
Containing the Reduction of Veii. — 'Banishment and rec&lof Camillta. — Descent of the Gauls. — Destruction of". — Restoration of Camillus. •


Chap. i. War with the Vejentes .. ................ 4O1
ii. A winter campaign determined on, and
opposed by the tribunes ........ . ...... 4O2
iii: Appius enters the lists with the tribunes 404-IT. Appius hi continuation ... .................. 405
v. Appius in continuation ... .................. 407
vi. Appius in continuation ........ . ........... - 409
vii. The works of Veii in flames; — repairedby the Romans. Extraordinary una­nimity between the Orders ........ . 411
Tiii. The Falisci and Vejentes support Veii,and beat the Romans. Misunder­standing of the Generals ....... ..... 413
ix. Suspension of the old, and election of new
magistrates .................... .. ......... 415
x. Exertions of the tribunes to prevent levies
and payment of taxes .......... . ...... 418
xi. Prosecution cl Sergius and Virginius .... 417
«ii. Sergius and Virginius condemned. A9 Plebeian elected to the military tri-
buneship for the first time ....... ..... 419







OCR Output








TITUS LIVIUS'
ROMAN HISTORY.


BOOK II.
CONTAINING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE CONSULAR GO­VERNMENT, AND OF THE TRIEUNITIAN POWER; THEIRCONTESTS AT ROME, AND WARS ABROAD, TILL THE. YEAROF KOME, 286.


CHAP. I.
Brutus binds tJte people by oath, never to suffer a King atRome.
J.N the subsequent part of this work, I am to write thehistory of the Romans, considered as a free people, andto give an account of their annual magistrates, and theirgovernment, under the jurisdiction of the laws, superiorto that of men. The insolent behaviour of the late kinggave them now a greater relish for the sweets of liberty:for with so much moderation had their former princesruled, that they may be justly stiled, the founders of thoseparts of the city, which each of them successively hadadded, for the accommodation of the people, whose num­bers were increased by their care.
But, it is an absolute certainty, that had this veryBrutus, who distinguished himself so gloriously in theexpulsion of the Tarquins, through an unseasonable zealfor liberty, wrested the sovereign power from any oftheir former prince«, he would have done an irreparable







OCR Output








212 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK III.


'CHAP. VII.
t .
Ill success of the Hernici. Tlie plague rages. Recourse to• deration.


Wi


HILE thus abandoned, without a head to conductor strength to execute, the tutelar gods and fortune of thecity preserved it, and converted the hostile intention ofthe JEqui and Volsci'into a plundering scheme., Fopthey were so far from entertaining hopes of carrying thecity, that they never once thought of marching up to it&walls. The sight of the houses at a distance, and thethreatening tombs, had such an effect on their feelings,that they began to murmur throughout the whole camp,That they were wasting their time without plunder, in.a wild and depopulated country, where they couldmeet with nothing but rotten carcases of men andbeasts, while they might have gone to healthy places,to the rich plains of Tusculum. That they ought im-"mediately to pull up their standards, and, by march-"ing thro.ugh the Lavican territories, proceed to the"hills of Tusculum." Thither therefore did they carryall the force and fury of the war.
In the mean time, the Hernia and Latins, not only•from a principle of humanity, but of shame, that theyhad suffered their common enemy to march to Romewithout the least interruption, and had brought no assis­tance to their allies when besieged, marched with theirconfederate army to Rome. When they found the ene­my had disappeared, they got intelligence of their mo­tions, and pursued their track, till they met them com­ing down from the Tusculan hills into the valley of Alba.There they fought with great disadvantage, and for thepresent, their success was not equal to their fidelity totheir allies.
The havorlf was no less at Rome by means of theplague, than of the allies by the svyord. The only con­sul that had hitherto survived, and with him other menof distinction, as M. Valerius, T. Virginus Rutilus, theaugurs; Ser. Sulpitius, the arch Curio, were all sweptaway. Great numbers of the lower people were also de,'







OCR Output








CHAP. 59. ROMAN HISTORY. 193


encourage the work, every thing slackened that instant.When he was present, all held dpwn their heads, and ashe passed them, they muttered curses against him: hishaughty soul, till now, proof against the popular odium,began to be sometimes affected. Having spent all hisill-nature upon the soldiers t6 no purpose, he said thearmy had heen corrupted by the centurions, whom, inderision, he sometimes called tribunes of the people, andsometimes Voleros.
CHAP. LIX.
Appius decimates his army for cowardice.
A HE Volsci had information of every thing that pas­sed in the camp, for which reason they pressed the Ro­mans mote closely, expecting their army would behaveto Appius, as they had done before to Caeso Fabius. Buttheir hatred to Appius, was much more inveterate thanto Fabius: For the army under Fabius had only resolv­ed not to conquer, hut they carried matters farther, andresolved to be conquered. The moment they were ledon to battle, they shamefully fled back to their camp,and did not stop till they saw the Volscians ready toforce their entrenchments, and making prodigious havockon their rear. Then it was, that they were obliged tofight, to drive the exulting enemy from their lines. Butit was evident, .they meant no more than to save thecamp. To some of them, their defeat and disgrace gavepleasure.
Notwithstanding all this, the ferocity of Appius' spiritcontinued inflexible; and being determined to chastisethe whole army without mercy, he summoned an assem­bly. The lieutenant-generals and Tribunes, made hasteto wait on him, and cautioned him, not to make an un­seasonable experiment of his authority, because its wholeforce depended on the consent of those who obey; thatin general, the soldiers refused to attend the assembly,and many of them insisted, that he should decamp fromthe territories of the Volsci. That the victorious enemy,•had a very little before, not only advanced to the gatesof the camp, but made an attack upon their lines; and


'







OCR Output








64 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK 1.


"you to witness, (naming the people, whoever they"are,) that this is an unjust people, who act not agree-"ably to the principles of equity. But we will consult"the fathers in our own country, how we may best"compel them to make restitution."
Upon this he returns to Rome for advice; when theking lays the matter before the senate, in words, nearlyas follows: " Concerning such matters, disputes, andquarrels, as the Pater Patratus of the Roman people,hath declared to the Pater Patratus of the ancient La­tins} and such things, as ought by the ancient Latins'to have been yielded, granted, and done; and the'which, by them, have not been yielded, granted, nor'done. Say," continued he, addressing himself to theperson whose opinion he first asked ; " give me your opi-"nion. I think, (returned the other,) that they should"be compelled to make restitution, by fair and open"war; for this I declare myself, and give my vote ac-"cordingly."—Then the vote went round in order.
When the majority present declared themselves of thesame opinion, war was then said to have been unani­mously determined on; when the herald, bearing a lanceheaded with iron, or dipped in blood, and burnt at theend, went to the confines of the offending power, and inthe presence of three witnesses, each at least fourteenyears of age, cried out, " Because of the injuries done"to, and committed on the people of Rome, by the peo-"pie of the ancient Latins, and the ancient Latin men."Because the people of Rome have' commanded that"war should be made upon the Latins; and the senate"of the people of Rome hath voted, agreed, and deter-"mined, that war should be denounced against the an-"cient Latins; I and the people of Rome do hereby war"proclaim, denounce, and make upon the people of the"ancient Latins, and ancient Latin men:" and withthese words, he darted a lance against the enemies lands.—This then was the mode of demanding restitution, andproclaiming war against the Latins, which posterity have'ever after adopted.







OCR Output








104 . TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK!.


the city to Lucretius, who had before been appointed tothe office of praefect, by the king.
During this uproar, Tullia made the best of her wayout of the city; both sexes, -wherever she went, pursuingher with curses, and calling on the furies of her parentsto overtake her. ,
CHAP. LX.
Brutus and Collatinus created Consuls.
JL HE news of these transactions having reached tliecamp, the king alarmed with this sudden revolution,goes to Rome to quell the commotions. Brutus beingS'lvised of his motions, turned out of the way, that heraight not meet him. Brutus reached Ardea, much about•he time that Tarquin had got to Rome. Tarquin foundthe gates shut, and an act of banishment passed againsthim: But Brutus was joyfully received in the camp, asthe deliverer of Rome, and the young Tarquin expelled.Two of them followed their father! who retired to Caere,*a city of Etruria. Sextus Tarquinins, having gone toGabii, where he considered himself as king, fell by thehands of those who owed him a spite for the old feuds,. which, by. his murders and rapines, he had raised againsthimself.
Lucius Tarquinius Superbns, reigned twenty-fireyears; and the regal government prevailed at Rome,from the building of the city, to this period of its deli­verance two hundred and forty-four years. Immediatelyafter the expulsion of the Tarquins, two consuls, LuciusJunius Brutus, and Lucius Tarquinius Collatinus, wereelected, at the Commitia, by centuries, according to theregulations of Servius Tullius.
* A. U. C. 244,







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








CHAP. 12. ROMAN HISTORY. 329.


in the senate : and when after a mighty bustle, he pre­vailed so far as to get the opinion of the fathers, whetherthe comitia should be held for electing consuls or mili­tary tribunes; consuls were ordered to be elected. Histhreats, that he would obstruct the levies, were matter ofridicule, for, when there was neither war, nor prepara­tion for it, what occasion was there for levies?
This stat'e of tranquillity was followed by a year che­quered with a combmation of calamities, occasioned byfamine and sedition, during the consulship of ProculuaGeganius Macerinus, and L. Menenius Lanatns, whenthe people, by means of bribery, had almost been sad­dled with regal power. Had one foreign war been .thrown into the scale, the state must have inevitably sunkto perdition. The first of these calamities was a famine,either owing to a bad season, or the neglect of agricul­ture, for dancing attendance to assemblies, and the plea­sures of the city. For both these reasons are given.The senators reproached the people with idleness, andthe tribunes blamed the consu'-, sometimes for want ofhonesty, and sometimes for inattention.
At last, with the senate's concurrence; the peoplemade choice of L. Minucius as prefect, or snpeiinten-dant of provisions, who was more happy, while in office,in securing the liberty of the state, than in the executionof his office; although at last, he had justly the honourof lowering the price of provisions, and the thanks efhis country on that account: For, having dispersedagents, by sea and land, to no purpose, through theneighbouring states, excepting a stnall matter from Etru-ria, when no corn could be got, he turned hrs attentionto a frugal management of what little-was to be foundnt home, by obliging every one to produce h'rs corn, tosell above one month's provision, by reducing the dailyaljnwance to slaves, and by accusing the corn merchants,and exposing them to the resentment of the people, sothat by the strictness of his scrutiny, he rather exposedtheir penury, than relieved it; in consequence of which,many of the people, in a fit of despair, chose rather tothrow themselves blindfolded into the Tiber, than suffer •any longer the miseries of so cruel a famine.







OCR Output













OCR Output








TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV.


CHAP. XXXIV.
Fidenee taken and plundered, The Dictator returns in, triumph.
J. HESE having entered the gates of the city, pell mellwith the enemy, immediately got upon the top of thewall, and from thence made a signal to the rest of thearmy, that they were in possession of the town; whichwas no sooner observed by the dictator, who, by thistime, had taken possession of the enemy'* camp, by themjust abandoned, than he led his troops to the gate, impa­tient as they were to leave their ranks and rifle the camp,but now encouraged to hope for greater plunder in thecity; and being admitted within the walls, he marchedstraight t,o the citadel, whither he saw the enemy flyingin crowds.. The slaughter in the city was noihing shortof what it had been in the field, till the Fidenates laiddown their arms, and begijmg only for their lives, sur­rendered at discretion. The city and the camp wereboth plundered by tlie troops.
Next day, the prisoners were disposed of by lot, onebeing assigned to each of the knights and centurions,and to such as had distinguished themselves more parti­cularly, two a-piece. The rest were sold to the highestbidder: and then the dictator led back his artny, crown­ed with laurels, and enriched with plunder, and enteredthe city in triumph.
He then ordered the general of the horse to resign hisoffice, and abdicated his own the sixteenth day after hehad received it; leaving the city in the most profoundpeace and tranquillity, which he had found involved inwar, and in extreme consternation.
Some annals make mention of a naval engagement,which the Romans had with the Vejentes at Fidervee-; acircumstance as impossible, as it appears incredible; for,even at this day, the river is not broad enough for thatpurpose ; and if we may believe an<ient authors, it wasthen not so broad as at present. Perhaps the Romansmay have driven off'some boats which came to assist the• Vejantes in crossing the river, and that circumstance has


 







OCR Output








TITUS LIVIUS* BOOK V.


in a city taken by the enemy : either the Gauls had nointention to destroy the city entirely *, or by letting theRomans see part of the city in flames, the Gaulie chiefsmeant to terrify them, and so engage them to surrenderout of regard to their houses, and not to set the whole inflames, that the hopes of saving the remainder, ciigbtbend the proud hearts of the enemy. The Romans ob­serving from the citadel, how the city swarmed with ene­mies, and following all their motions with their eyes, ajthey ran dispersed all over the streets, were every mo­ment struck with new matter of regret, and unable tostand the sluirk of what they saw and heard, were quitedistracted.
Wherever the shouts of the enemy, shrieks of womenand children, tin. glare of the flames, or the crash of fal­ling-houses, denounced some new disaster, thither theyturned their eyes, their faces, and attention, as if fortunehad placed them on the top of an eminence, expresslytb be the sad spectators of the ruin of their country;having nothing left them now of all that belonged to.them, but their bodies jto defend. Their case was moredeplorable than that of any other besieged, for they were.shut up from Hie relief of their country, whilst, at thesame time, they saw every thing they could have calledtheir own, in the hands of the enemy.
The first day, so full of trouble, was followed by anight no less terrible. And when this resiles* nightgave place to a new day, some new tragical scene wasevery moment exhibited before them. However, over­whelmed and oppressed as they were, with such a com­plication of miseries, they still continued inflexible, andalthough they saw the whole city in flames and levelledwith the ground, they were determined to defend to theirlatest breath, the poor little hill, which they yet couldcall their own, being the only spot that was reserved forliberty. The continual view of so dreadful a scene,which was every day repeated before their eyes, badinured them, in a manner, to their calamities, so thatthey became insensible of their poignancy ; regardingonl% their arms, and the swords in their right hands, asthe only hope and resource, on which, from thencefotth,they were to depend.
* Read, Omait dilenda urbls, &c.







OCR Output








200 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


CHAP. LXV.
The Volsci defeated, and their camp taken.
W HEN the light appeared, the Roman army, quitevigorous and refreshed with sleep, marched out 10 bat­tle; and at the first charge obliged the Volsci to giveway, being already exhausted with standing under theirarms, and watching all night. They were not, how­ever, entirely routed, they only fell back to some steepplaces behind the centre, whither, without breaking theirranks, they retreated in safety. ,
The consul, when the army had advanced fo the risingground, gave orders to halt. These orders were obeyedwith the greatest relucmncy, the soldiers crying out,and urgently requesting, to be permitted to pursue theenemy already giving ground. The cavalry were par­ticularly urgent, crowding round the general, expressedthe greatest ardour, declaring loudly, that they wouldgo before the ensigns to the charge. While the consulwas balancing between the ardour of his troops, andthe disadvantage of the ground, they all, by a general.shout, expressed their resolution of going on, and im­mediately began to march. To help them over thesteep places, they fixed their javelins in the ground, andthese surmounted, run towards the top of the hill.
Whilst they were advancing, the enemy having spentall their darts atthe first attack, tumbled down the stones.upon them, which lay scattered among their feet, ofwhich they discharged such numbers, that their rankswere broke, and they forced to fall back from the emi­nence they had gained. The left wing of the Romanswas so overpowered, that it was on the point of givingway, when the consul reproaching them with their rash­ness, and want of resolution, made shatne get the bet­ter of their (ear. Upon this, then, they renewed theirexertions with the most determined ardour; and as theycould gain a little ground, still continued to advance,and setting up the other shout, encouraged the wholearmy, by repeating their efforts, they got over the diffi­culty of the place. They were now within a little of







OCR Output








158 TITUS UVIUS' BOOK II.


impelled by fresh resentment, they conferred togetherabout making war upon Home. They easily saw, thatthere would be some difficulty in engaging th« Volsci totake up arms, which they had done so often to their ownruin. Their spirits were broke by being so often en­gaged in war; and moreover, their youth had sufferedexceedingly by the late plague. Length of time had al­most extinguished the hatred between the two nations,for which reason, they judged that it would require,•some address to rekindle the flame, by means of somefresh indignity.
CHAP. XXXVI.
A strange Phenomenon.
Y ERY opportunely for their purpose, preparationswere gomg on at Borne, for renewmg the great gamesupon the following account. In the morning of thetlay, in which they had been represented, the masterof "a slave had obliged him to carry a cross, and whiptJhim severely through the middle of the Circus; notwith­standing of which, the exhibition went on, as if therehad been nothing ominous in the matter. After sometime had elapsed, Jupiter appeared in a dream to T.Atinius, a plebeian, and told him, " That he was not"satisfied with the person who led up the dance in the"last games, and unless they were renewed with mag-"niticence, the state would repent it.—Go, say* he,** and tell these things to youf consuls."
The man.. although he was not without a sense of re­ligion, yet he was so ashamed to approach men of thatdignified character, with a story that might expose bimto ridicule, tkut itls modesty prevailed over his fear,This hesitation cost him dear. In a few days, his sondropped down dead. That he might be at no loss tofind out the cause of this sudden disaster, whilst he wasmourning for his loss, the same vision appeared to himagain in his sleep, and seemed to ask him repeatedly,"If he had not been sufficiently punished for his con-•" tempt of the gods; but if he did not instantly go and"tell the consuls, something still more dreadful wouldJ< befall him."







OCR Output








199 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


When the people crowding about him, as if summonedto an assembly, asked him how he came to be in thosecircumstances; he told them, " That his land having"been ravaged by the depredations of the enemy, dur-"ing the war with the Sabines, in which he served, he"had not only lost the crop for a year, but his farm"had been burnt, his effects plundered, and his cattle"carried off. That to add to his misfortune, the pay-"meut of a tax had been exacted from him at a very"unseasonable time, which laid him under the necessity"of borrowing; that interest rising upon interest, he"had been obliged to sell his paternal estate, and after-"wards all his moveabie subjects. At length the disease"had spread to his body, and overspread his whole"person: That his creditors had carried him prisoner"from his house, where they had not been so generous"as treat him like a slave, but as a malefactor condemn-"ed to the torture." With these words he bared hisback, and shewed the still recent marks of the rods andwhips with which he had been tortured.
This histor}r, and the proofs that supported it, raiseda prodigious outcry. The tumult was no longer con­fined to the forum, but spread through all quarters ofthe city. All such as had been delivered up to theircreditors, and now at liberty, appeared in public, im­ploring the protection of the people. The mob wasjoined by volunteers from every quarter. Multitudesrepaired from all the streets to the forum, with furiousshouts. Such of the senators as happened to be on thespot, would have been in danger of their lives, had notthe consuls, PubliusServilius, and Ap. Claudius hastenedto quell the riot. The whole multitude turned towardsthese magistrates, showing them their chains, and othermarks of inhuman treatment; telling them that thesewere all the rewards of their past services in arms, everyone upbraiding them with the different campaigns theyhad made. With a menacing rather than suppliant air,they insisted that the senate should be assembled; anddetermined, as it were, to direct and over-rule their deli­berations, they crowded round the senate-house.
A small number of the senators, whom.accident hadbrought thither, joined the consuls; fear prevented the







OCR Output








260 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK III.


** To consider rather the natural obligation by which he"was bound to the country that gave him birth, than"the wicked and unjust compact he had engaged him-"self in, with his colleagues: That however much he"was concerned for the state, it was still more for his"own sake he made him that request. For he might"depend on it, the Republic would compel them to"restore its rights, should they be obstinate enough"to refuse it: But as great contests were generally"productive of mnch ill blood, he shuddered at the"thoughts of what the event might be."
However much the tlecemvirs were determined thatthere should be no opinion delivered, but upon the sub­ject of their meeting, yet they were ashamed to interruptClaudia?, who therefore gave his opinion, that the senateshould by no means pass a decree; which was declaringin plain terms, thai he viewed the decemvirs in no otherlight bin that of private persons. Many consular gen­tlemen declared themselves of the same opinion.
There was another opinion, in appearance, still moreharsh; but in effect less conclusive, viz. that the Pa­tricians should meet to choose an Inter-rex. For, bythis state of the vote, they who held the senate were ac­knowledged as magistrates; but by the other, which de-clnred for no decree, they were made privaie persons.The interest of the decemvirs being now visibly on thedecline. Lucius Cornelius Maluginensis, brother to M.Cornelius the decemvir, who had been reserved on pur­pose to deliver his opinion the last of all the consulargentlemen, stood up for his brother and his colleagues,by pnrending a mighty concern for the war. "He was"surprized, (he said,) by what fatality, men, who, them-"selves hail been candidates for the decemvirate, or"partners in it, should above all others be so keen in"their opposition to the decemvirs? And how it came"about, that during many months, when all was quiet,"nobody made I he least objection to the justice of their"title, who then acted as supreme magistrates, till now"that the enemy is near our gates, that they want to"involve us in domestic broils; if it be not, that they"imagine, their real designs will be better concealed in"the confusion. But it was extremely proper, while







OCR Output








480 tlTUS LIVIUS' BOOK V.


'B


CHAP. LIH.
In Continuation.


UT it may be said, that necessity obliges us to quita city in ruins, and reduced to ashes, and to take re­fuge in Veii, where we shall find all conveaiencies,without harassing "the poor people with rebuildingRome. Were I not to tell you this is a vain pretext,a mere allegation, I am certain, you must see it: Forsome of you, gentlemen, must remember, that beforethe arrival of the Gauls, when all the buildings, pub­lic and private, were whole -and entire, and Rome ir'absolute safety, this same affair of removing to Veiiwas in agitation. But to show you, tribunes, in whatdifferent points of view this matter appears to you and.to me. You think, though great objections might havebeen made at that time, that now there can be none.On the contrary, it is my opinion, nor need you besurprised till you have heard me out, although wemight have left the city before it had suffered from therude touches of the Gauls, that in honour we cannotleave these ruins now. For, at that time, our victoryfurnished us with some pretence for removing to a citywe had just conquered, as it was cause of boasting to-ourselves and posterity; but to remove thither now,would be for us mean and shameful in the extreme,but to the Gauls it would do singular credit. For itwould by no means appear, that we had left our coun­try when victorious, but that we had lost it when con­quered. To the defeat at Allia, the capture of Rome,and the blockade of the Capitol, may be justly ascrib­ed the sad alternative of abandoning our tutelary gods,of flying and banishing ourselves from a place \v<icould tot defend. Have the Gauls been able to de­molish Rome, and shall it be thought that the Romans,are not able to rebuild it! What then remains, but thatyou tamely suffer these very Gauls, whose numbers areincredible, to-return if they please, with a new army,and take possession of this city, which .they have takenami you abandoned?'But if the Gauls have no such intention, what if the







OCR Output








3I* TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV.


think I have frequently, upon former occasions, ob­served, O Romans, in what contempt the fathers holdyou, and how unworthy they think you of living with­in the same walls with them; but at no time so strong­ly marked as this day, in the violence and fury theydiscovered in their opposition to our laws; in which, to-what more do we pretend, but only to remind them,that we are their fellow-citizens, and though we havenot the same fortunes, we, however, have the honourto be inhabitants of the same country? By one ofthese laws, we demand the liberty of marriage withtheir order, a liberty seldom refused to neighbours;nay, even strangers. Nay more, we have given theright of citizenship, a circumstance of greater consider­ation than family alliance, to enemies,—even conquer­ed enemies. By the other, we claim nothmg new, butwhat has always been the prerogative of the people,.to bestow honours on whom they shall think proper.What occasion then for all this uproar, as if heavenand earth were falling to ruin, that they are ready totear me to pieces in their senate-house?—that theythreaten to have no regard to our persons, and to vio­late the power of the tribunes, all sacred as it is? Ifthe Roman people be allowed to vote as they please,and confer the consulship on whom they think proper,and if a Plebeian has room to hope, that by his merit,he may rise to the highest honours of the state; nftstRome of necessity sink at once? Must this empire beunavoidably overturned? And does the same idea of"impropriety attend the electiou of a consul fromamong the people, thai would attend the promotion ofa slave, or a freed man to that dignity? Have you anyconception, Romans, of the contempt in which you areheld? If they could, they would deprive you of thecommon light. You should not breathe, speak, nor ap­pear in the human form. Nay, but that a Plebeianshould become a consul.—Good gods! what a prepos­terous supposition! Though we are not admitted to in­spect the Fasti, and the annals of the pontiffs, pray, donot we know what every stranger knows, that the con­suls succeeded the kings in their office, and that iheybad neither power* nor pre-eminence,, but what thi







OCR Output








108 . TITUS LlVIffS' BOOK II.


Reflections' of this kind being at first artfully whisper­ed, and by degrees published all over the city, to soundthe inclinations of the people, Brutus summoned tjiem toa council, whilst they were anxious under these impres­sions .of jealousy; when first of all, he repeats to themthe oath which they had taken, "That they would suf-"fer no kings at Rome, nor any thing else that would"endanger their liberty. That this was a maxim ofwhich they were never to lose sight, nor were they tooverlook whatever in the least regarded it. That headdressed them in these terms much against his incli­nation, out of respect to a single gentleman, nor wouldhe touch on the subject, did not the love of his countryconstrain him. That it was tmpossible to convincethe Roman people, that they were yet in full posses­sion of their liberty: for as yet, not only some of the"royal family, but even some who bore the name of"Tarqum still resided in the city, and were even invest-"ed with the supreme power. It is this which obstructs"—it is this which stands in the way of their liberty."Then turning to Collatinus, "This fear, O. L. Tarquin,"do you voluntarily remove. We have not yet forgot,"nay, we openly acknowledge, that you expelled the"kings. Complete what you have so generously begun."Take hence the regal name. Your fellow-citizens, I"promise you, will not only give youl up all you can"call your own, but if you want any thing besides, will"generously supply you. Leave us in friendship. Free"this city from a fear that perhaps is groundless. But"the people arc fully persuaded, that tyranny will never"be totally extirpated, whilst any of the Tarquin family"remains in the city."
The consul was at first so confounded at this suddenand unexpected motion, that he could not open hiamouth. When he was beginning to speak in his owndefence, he was surrounded by those of the first distinc­tion in the city, ai;d with the most pressing intreatiesimportuned to depart. Their influence, however, wouldhave gone no great length, had not Spurius Lucretius,a man highly respected for his merit, and venerable forhis years, and who also was his father-in-law, used va­rious methods of persuasion with him, sometimes intreat­







OCR Output








CHAP. 31. - ROMAN HISTORY. 247


no enemy in the field. The /Equi having put the gar­rison of Corbio to the sword, and taken Ortona, wereattacked by Horatius at Alg.uus. Many of them fellin the action, and the rest driven from the Algidus, andthe cities they had taken. Corbio was levelled with theground, because its inhabitants had betrayed the garri­son. *
CHAP. XXXI.
Tlic consuls fined by the people. A code of latei proposed.
JV1. VALERIUS and Sp. Virginias succeed to the con­sulship, when Rome enjoyed peace, both at home andabroad; but the rainy season brought oh a scarcity ofprovisions. A law was likewise passed for making mountAventine common. The same tribunes were re-chosen,who, in the following year, when T- Romilius, and C.Veturius were consuls, proposed the law in all their as­semblies, declaring, they should be ashamed, now thatthe number of their college had been doubled, if theyshould be disappointed all the'two years of their tribune-ship, as their predecessors had been for the five last years.While the tribunes were wholly intent upon this matter,an express arrived from Tuscnium, with the alarming ac­counts, that the .ffiqui were already in the heart of theircountry. The late noble exertions of that people in fa­vour of Rome, challenged an immediate return; for whichreason both consuls were dispatched with an army, whofound the enemy, as usual, encamped at the Algidus.There they were charged with such vigour, that above70OO fell in the action, and the rest put to flight.
The spoils, which were considerable, were sold by theconsuls, and the proceeds put m the treasury, as it hadbeen totally drained. This measure was very unpopu­lar in the army, and in the end furnished the tribuneswith materials for censuring the consuls before the peo­ple. The moment they were out of office, both had a dayappointed for their trial, when Sp. Tarpeius and A.Aterius were consuls. C. Claudius Cicero appeared asprosecutor against Romilius, the ZEdile; L. Alienus,against his colleague Veturius. They were both co»*







OCR Output








•CHAP. 37. ROMAN HISTORY. 255


CHAP. XXXVII.
The Decemvirs introduce licentiousness,
J. HEY then began to turn theiv eyes towards the Pa­tricians, to see if possibly they could discover any hopeof liberty from those, from whom they had before ap­prehended slavery, the dread of which had precipitatedthe commonwealth into this deplorable condition. Theprincipal senators detested the decemvirs, but did notlove the plebeians. They were far from approving ofthe present proceedings, but they thought the peopleonly met with their deserts. Wherefore, they were inno haste to relieve those, who, through a blind passionfor liberty, had plunged themselves into slavery; norwere they sorry to see their chains grow every day moreheavy, in hopes that a feeling of their miseries mightawaken in them a desire of the re-establishment -of con­suls, and the ancient form of government.
The greater part of the year was already past, whentwo tables of laws were drawn up to be added to thetenth, as had been promulgated the year before: andthere now remained no pretext for continuing themselvesin the decemvirate, so that the ides of May were ex­pected with the utmost anxiety and impatience, whenan assembly should be held for the election of consuls.
How the tribunitian power, the bulwark of Plebeianliberty, after the interruption it had met with, was tobe resumed, was matter of great speculation to the peo­ple. In the mean time, not a syllable was mentioned ofa new election, and the decemvirs, who at first had beenattended by the tribunes, more effectually to gain thepeople, were accompanied now by a band of young Pa­tricians, who appeared in their retinue as a guard, andconstantly surrounded their tribunals, harassing andplundering the people; insomuch, that whatever occur­red worth having, became the perquisite of the strongestarm. Nay, they did not spare the persons of the citi­zens; some were whipped with rods like slaves, whilstothers perished by the axe like criminals; and thatcruelty might not-go unrewarded, a confiscation of estate







OCR Output








68 TITUS LIVIUS' . BOOK I.


CHAP. XXXV.
Lucumo succeeds Aucus.
XxNCUS reigned twenty-four years, inferior to none ofhis predecessors, in the arts of peace or war. His sonshad now almost reached the age of fourteen, for whichreason, Tarquin pressed tu bring on the election of a newking, with the utmost expedition. An assembly of thepeople being called, he sent out the~princes on a huntingmatch, at the time of their meeting. \ It is remained ofhim, that he was the first, who openly solicited for thecrown, and had a public harangue, calculated to securehis interest with the people; telling them, " That he.did"not ask a thing unprecedented or uncommon, as he"was not the first, but the third foreigner, who had as-"pired to the sovereignty of Rome, so that none need"wonder, or take offence at his presumption. That"Tatius was both a foreigner, and an enemy, when he"was made king; and Numa,l a stranger to the city,"was called without soliciting it, to that high office."That he, the moment he could dispose of himself, had"removed to Rome with his family and fortune, where"be had spent a greater part of his life, than where hedrew his first breath, and a part too best calculated forthe discharge of civil offices. That he had studied theRoman laws, both sacred and civil, in peace and iuwar, under king A'ncus himself, a master of whom hehad no reason to be ashamed. For loyalty and re-•' spect to his sovereign, he was second to none; and for'' generosity and beneficence to others, not even to the*' king himself."—Whilst he was enumerating these cir*cumstances in his favour, which, by the bye, could notbe disputed, he was declared king by a great majorityof the people.
The same ambition which actuated Tarquin, a manin other respects, of an unexceptionable character, incanvassing for the crown, he also discovered after .he hajlobtained it. For, being no less attentive to the esta­blishing of bis own authority, than the aggrandizementof the state, he created an hundred new senators, whofrom that time, were distinguished by the title of Sena­







OCR Output








156 TITUS LIVIUS* BOOK II.


instance, they had treated with all imaginable com­plaisance. , ,
This same year also, the colony which Tarquin hadsent to Signia was recruited by a new supply of planters.The tribes at Rome were increased to twenty-one, andthe temple of Mercury was dedicated on the 15th of May.
CHAP. XXII.
Honourable behaviour of the Latins.
PURING the contest with the Latins, the Volscicould not be properly said to have kept the peace, or tohave been at war with Rome. For they had mustereda force, with which they intended to have supportedthe Latjns, but the alertness of the Roman dictator pre­vented them; for he had made forced marches that hemight not be obliged to make head against both at thesame time. Full of resentment for ihis conduct, theconsuls led the Roman legions against the country of theVolsci, who suspecting BO evil consequences from theirintention, were the more alarmed at the unexpected mo­tion. Wherefore, without any thought of arms, theydeliver the children of the first nobility of Cora and. Po-metia to the number of 300, to remain as hostages fortheir good behaviour i upon which the legions werewithdrawn without striking a stroke.
Not long after, when the Volsci had recovered of theirfright, their natural disposition began to shew itself.—Once more having entered into an alliance with the Her-nici, they made secret preparations for war. They like­wise had embassies all ovier the country, soliciting theLatins to join in the confederacy. But the late over­throw at the lake Regillus stuck so deep in their sto­machs, that they could listen to no overtures relating tow,ar without indignation and.abhorrence at those whomade them, insomuch, that they did not even spare theambassadors themselves, but seized and sent them toRome There they were delivered up to the consuls,to whom also were the. warlike preparations of the Her-nici and Volsci communicated.
The matter being laid before the senate, the fathers







OCR Output








278 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK III.


CHAP. LI.
The Secession in continuation.
VV HEN the deputies were withdrawn, Virginius re­presented 10 the soldiers, " That they had juijt before'been at a loss in a matter of no great difficulty, only
for this reason, that they were a body without a head.
Thai they had indeed given an answer quite to the
purpose; but it was rather the effect of chance, than
the result of public deliberation. -That it was his own"opmion, they should elect ten person? , whom they"shoulu invest with the chief command, under the mar-"tial title of military tribunes." When they put himat the head of the list; "Reserve, (said he,) your gener-"ous intentions for me, for times more favourable to us"both. No dignity can sit easy on me, whilst my"daughter is unrevenged: and at this time of public"embarrassment, it would be imprudent to confer offices"of authority upon'persons most exposed to the barred"of those in opposition. If you think me capable of"serving you, my endeavours will be no less exerted in"continuing a private person."
Ten military tribunes were accordingly created. Theother army employed against the Sabines, soon took thehint, and at the instigation of Icilius and JS'umitorius,threw off all allegiance to the decemvirs.
The murder of Siccius now appeared to them in themost glaring colours, and incensed them no less, thanthe late accounts they had received of the base attemptupon Virginia's honour. Whenever Icilius heard thatmilitary tribunes were created on the Aventine hill, lestthe city Comitia should set a precedent, in electing thosewho were military tribunes, to be tribunes of the people,especially as he was a man much versaut in popular af­fairs, and had an eye to the tribunitian power himself,be took care, before they set out for the city, that thesame number of military tribunes should be appointedby that army, and invested with the same authority.
They entered the city with colours flying, by the gateCollina, and marched in a body through the middle of


 







OCR Output








 


 


H/
COLLEGELIBRARY


 







OCR Output








™x THE TRANSLATOR


which the spirit of the author would have evaporated, andthe freedom of a loose paraphrase, which would not haveanswered the purpose intended by it. In one word, Ihave endeavoured, as far as I could, to transfuse the sen­timents and fire of Livy into a British botly: but how farI have succeeded, I must leave to the impartial public.
To render the purchase easy, and that I may have theopinion of the public, before I should proceed farther, Ihave confined myself at present to five Books.—If thesealready translated be read with a proper degree of atten­tion, a translation for the rest will not be perhaps neces­sary: however, should this specimen be well received,the rest may soon follow.
Although the work of TITUS Livius have immortalizedhis name, he was too regardless of popular applause, orplaces of distinction, and too much delighted with philoso­phical retirement and humble privacy, to leave manyvestiges of his rank, employments, adventures, or fortune.It is, however, generally agreed, that he was born at Pa­dua, and descended p? no obscure family, since it had thehonour to give consuls to the Republic of Rome.—It is.also known, that he lived in the Augustan age;* thathe dedicated to Augustus, those Dialogues, which hepublished on the philosophical questions of the times, andthat this made him known, and recommended him to thefavour of that emperor: That he afterwards wrote aTreatise on Eloquence, inscribed to his son, of which.Quintilian makes honourable mention.—We also know,that he began to write his history at Rome, where hemight have recourse to such memorials and original pa­pers, that had been preserved in the capitol, as were pro­per to set him to rights concerning the origin of the city,and to remove those Intricacies and doubts, into which.fabulous traditions had involved it. That after he wassufficiently master of his subject, he retired to Naples,where his labours might meet with fewer interruptions.That some time after this, he read some passages of hishistory to the emperor Augustus and Maecenas, of which,they formed so favourable an opinion, that the emperor
* T. Liv. lib. 1. cap. 19.







OCR Output








Chap. 42. ROMAN HISTORY. 463


given time to^he fury with which they were agitated iiithe late action, to subside, and as they had met with littleor no resistance from the Romans, nor even now put tothe necessity of an assault to take the city, entered it next~day, without any signs of violent passion and resentment,by the gate Collina, moving on to the forum, and cast-;ing their eyes on all sides, to the temples of the gods,'and the citadel, where alone they could observe theleast appearance of resistance. Then posting a smallguard, to prevent any sally from the citadel or capitol,when they might be dispersed through the city, theywent about in plundering parties, arid finding the streetsquite empty, and not meeting a single soul, they rushedin bodies into the adjoining houses, whilst others flew tothe most remote, imagining they had never been touch­ed, and consequently full of booty. Struck with terrorat the general 4eso'at'on» tney returned in a body tothe forum, and the adjoining places, fearing they might,when dispersed, fall into some ambuscade. Here find­ing the houses of the Plebeians shut, but the halls of thenobility open, they hesitated more upon entering the lastthan the first, keeping at an awful distance from thosevenerable sages, sitting in the porches of their housesin dress and attitude appearing with an air of greatnessabove human, and in the awful majesty of their looks,and gravity of their deportment, perfectly resemblingthe gods. When they had stood some time gazing asat so many statues, one of these ancients, M. Papiriusis said to have provoked a Gaul, by breaking his headwith a smart blow of his ivory truncheon, for using thefreedom of stroking his beard, which was then permit­ted to grow to a great length. He was the first victim,-and the rest were all killed where they sat. The Gauls,after thi? massacre, gave no quarter; and having cleared'the bouses of their contents, immediately --set them onfire.
• CHAP. XLII.
Rome set on fire. Melancholy scene. ** •
X HE first day, the devastation- among the houses bythe lire, was not so general as might have been expected







OCR Output








CHAP. 52. ROMAN HISTORY. 479


'Veil? Add to all this, mindful as it were, of our ancient'religious institutions, we have both brought foreign
* gods to Rome, and also established new ones. Juno,
* queen of the gods, was lately brought from Veii; and
* how conspicuous was the day of her dedication render-"ed, by the meritorious zeal of the ladies? We have
* ordered a temple to be erected to Aius Locutius, on ac-'count of the miraculous voice heard in the New Street.'To other solemnities, we have added the Capitoiine
* games: and by authority of the senate have establish-
* ed a new college for that purpose: What occasion had'we for all this work, if we had been determined to'leave the city at the same time with the Gauls? if our'stay in the capitol, during a siege of so many months,'was not voluntary? If it was not fear that kept us'back from the enemy?
'But do I only mention rites and temples, and leave'the priests entirely out of the question? Do you not
* perceive how much we shall have to account for with'respect to them! The vestals are fixed to one parti-'cular residence,-from which, no consideration but the'capture of the city, ever moved them. The priest of'Jupiter, without the grossest criminality, dare not sleep
* one night out of the city. Would you make them'Vejentian, instead of Roman priests? And, O Vesta,
* shall any vestals forsake thee now? And will the priest
* of Jupiter, by residing among strangers, involve in so
* much guilt, himself and his country every night?
* Need I mention other things, which are performed by'auspices, generally within the pomcerium; must they'too be forgotten or neglected? The comitia by curiae,'who have the cognizance of military affairs; the co-'mitia by centuries, by whom our consuls and military
* tribunes are elected, can they be held any where un-'der proper auspices, but in the usual place? Shall we
* transfer them to Veii? Or, shall the people, under a'thousand Inconveniences, meet in a city abandoned
* by gods and men?







OCR Output








CHAP. 35. ROMAN HISTORY. 631


been magnified, which is not uncommon, by those whowere fond of,the empty title of a naval victory.


A,


CHAP. XXXV.Celebration of games. Complaints of the Tribunes.


L. SEMPRONIUS ATTRATINUS, Lucius Quinc-tius Cmcinnatus, L. Furius Medullinus, and L. HoratiusBarbatus, were elected military tribunes, with consularpower, for the ensuing year. The Vejeutes obtained atruce for twenty years, and the /Equi for three only,though they had insisted for a longer term. The citynow was at rest from civil dissensions'. The fotlowingyear, which was marked neither by a foreign war, nordomestic disturbances, was, however, rendered famous bythe games which had been vowed in time of war, the,preparations for them made by the military tribunes,and the vast concourse of the neighbouring people. Thetribunes with consular power, were Ap. Claudius Crassus,Sp. Nautius Rutilus, L. Sergius Fide'nas, Sextus JuliusJulus. What enhanced the pleasure of the entertain­ment to the strangers who had come, with the consent oftheir respective stales, to be spectators, was the kind andengaging manner in which they were treated.
After the celebration of these games, the tribunesmade seditious harangues to the people, reproachingthem severely, ' For their blind and stupid admiration'of those whom, at bottom, they hated, which kept them
• voluntarily in eternal slavery; that they not only durst
• not aspire to the hope of obtaining the consulship with
• the Patricians, but could not even think of themselves'or their friends, in the nomination of military tribunes,
• in which they had an equal right with the senate. It'was no longer a wonder, that nobody gave himself
• trouble about the interests of the people; for who would''expose himself to danger and fatigue, where neither
'honour nor profit was to be expected ? There was nothing
'on earth, but men would attempt, if their rewards were
-• proportioned to their endeavours. It was a thing, there-
'fore, neither to be expected nor desired, that any tri-
• bune of the people should plunge himself headlong in-







OCR Output








CHAP. 52. ROMAN HISTORY. &l


would not hear him in his own defence; but condemnedhim to a new kind of death, to be thrown in at the headof the spring of Ferentinum, with a hurdle laid on him,covered with stones heaped on it, and there drowned.
CHAP. LII.
Tarquin's address to the assembly.
.L ARQUIN having recalled the Latins to the assem­bly, and having commended them highly for the justpunishment they bad inflicted upon Turnus, for themtended massacre proved against him, to pave the wayfor a revolution in the state, addressed them in the fol-:lowing terms: " That he could plead an ancient right,seeing all the Latins came originally from Alba, thatthey were included in that treaty, whereby the wholeAlban state, with its colonies, had submitted to thegovernment of Rome, in the reign of Tullus. But,he thought it would be more for the common interest,if that treaty were renewed. And that the Latinsshould rather share with the Romans in their good for­tune, than either be in perpetual terror of, or subject­ed to the destruction of their towns, or devastation oftheir lands, as had been the case, first in the reign oAncus, and then in that of his own father."The Latins were easily persuaded, although they sawthat the balance of mterest lay upon the side of the Ro­mans, when they found that the leading men of the na­tion were disposed to coincide with, and stand by theking's motion. Besides, they were tauyht, in the exam­ple of Turnus, what they had to expect, should any ofthem be so bold as oppose him.
Thus was the treaty renewed, and the Latin youthordered by proclamation, in consequence of this treaty;to assemble in arms, on a certain day, at the grove ofFerentinum. When those of all the different tribes hadrendezvoused at the place appointed, agreeable to Tar­quin's proclamation, that they might have no leader oftheir own, no separate command, or ensigns of distinc­tion, he blended the Romans and Latins together in eve­ry company, making one of two, and two of o?.e. Hav­







OCR Output








Chap. 15. ROMAN HISTORY. . ISS


as he bad deforced the officer, and was endeavouring to'raise an insurrection among the people, he had receivedfrom him the punishment due to his crime. Bravelydone, returned the dictator, C. Servians; then Rome is yeta free state.
CHAP. XV.
The Dictator accounts to the people for the pimiihmcnt ofMalius.
A. HE Dictator then called an assembly of the people,who were in great commotion, and quite uncertain as tothe judgment they ought to pass on what they had seen.There the dictator tells them, ' That Mailius had justly'merited his fate, had he even been innocent of the high'crime charged against him, for having disobeyed the'dictator's summons delivered to him by the master of'horse. That he had taken his place on the tribunal,'on purpose to enquire into that affair, after which he'should have done Maelius the justice he deserved.'That as he had recourse to force, to screen himself'from judgment, violent measures were used in correct-'ing his obstinacy. He had no title to be treated as a'citizen, who, though born among a free people, in the'midst of its laws and regulations, in a city from whence'kings had been expelled ; who knew that in the very'year of their expulsion, the king's nephews, sons also'of that consul who was the deliverer of his country,'because they had conspired to receive the kings into'Rome, were condemned to suffer death by their own
* father: That in the same city, the consul Collatinus'Tarquinius, out of hatred only to his name, had been'obliged to resign his office as consul, and banish him-'self from his country; where Spurius Cassius, some'years after, had suffered death for a design, of esta-
* Wishing tyranny? and that very recently, the tyranni-'cal haughtiness with which the decemvirs lorded it'over the people, had been punished with confiscation'of their estates, banishment and death itself; and yet,'notwithstanding such examples, had the impudence to'lift his eyes to the sovereignty of Rome. And after







OCR Output








254 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK Ilk 4


whereas their predecessors had observed this rule, thatonly one should have the fasces at a time, which passedin rotation through them all, to each of them regularlyin his turn. One hundred and twenty lictors now filledthe forum, carrying axes tied up in their fasces. Nordid they think themselves entitled to withdraw the axe?,since by the decemviral constitution, there was no appealfrom their judgment. They had the appearance of tenkings, which not only filled the minds of the populacewith uncommon terror, but damped the principal sena­tors not a liittei from a persuasion, that they only want,ed a pretence to lay the foundation of their authority inblood. For, should any one> 'Cither in the senate, orassemblies, utter a syllable* serving to revive the re­membrance of liberty, he would run the risk of his skin>and perhaps his head, to intimidate others from usingthe same freedom.
The right of appeal to the people was taken away, sothat no relief could be expected from that quarter, andmatters had been so concerted among the decemvirs, thatone of them would not receive an appeal from the deci­sion of another^ which was very different from the prac­tice of last year, when they not only suffered appeals toone another, but also transferred causes to the judgmentof the people, that properly belonged to their own tri­bunal. For some time they were equally formidable toall ranks; but by degrees, the whole weight of theirpower began to be pointed against the populace.
They spared the Patricians, whilst their schemes a-gainst those of lower rank, were cruel and oppressive;regarding the person, not the justice of the cause, inte­rest with them constantly supplanting equity. Theyadvised all causes at home, and only pronounced sen­tence in the forum. In cases of appeals, the appellantwas handled so roughly, that he had reason to repent ofhis application fot a new verdict. A report too, beganto be spread, though no author was given, that they hadconspired among themselves, not only to exercise theirtyranny for the present, but had entered secretly into acompact, which they had confirmed by oath, never tocall a new -election, but now that they were once inpossession, to make their authority perpetual.







OCR Output








CHAP. 40. ROMAN HISTORY. 259


« the people, when invested with no authority, than in"your convening the senate, when divested of all au-"thority. Only put it to Ike test, and you will then see*' to your cost, whether the people's zeal in asserting"their liberty, or your ambition to maintain your usurp-"ed authority, will be most strenuously exerted. Youtalk to us of a war begun against us by the Sabines,as if the Roman people had a war more formidablethan with you, who, under the mask ot legislators, havesubverted all law and justice in the Republic. Youhave suppressed the assemblies both of the senate andpeople; you have abolished annual magistrates, theright of election and governing by turns, the only me-"thod which is consistent with liberty, and though but"private persons, assume the ensigns and the power of"despotism. Upon the expulsion of the kings, there"were only Patrician magistrates; after the secession,"plebeian magistrates were also created; pray, withwhich of these interests are you connected? Is it withthat of the people? What then nave you done withtheir concurrence? Are you in the Patrician interest?And yet for very near twelve months have neverconvened the senate, and now that you have doneit, pretend to debar them, the privilege of speakingconcerning the state of the Republic? Trust not, I ad-"vise you, too much to our want of courage; for wo"are now convinced that our present oppression within"the city, is more intolerable than any thing we have't. to fear without it."
CHAP. XL.
/
Cornelius Maluginensis vindicates the Decemvirs.
JT1ORATIUS haying thus expressed himself with grentvehemence, while the decemvirs could neither give ventto their fury, nor calmly put up with the treatment theybad met with; being quite uncertain how the affairwould terminate; C. Claudius, uncle to Appius, the de­cemvir, rose up to speak, but he employed rather en-treatie.s than reproach, conjuring his nephew, by theijtapes of his. brother Appius, the decemvir's father.,.







OCR Output








430 .' •x TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK V.


CHAP. XIX.
The Dictator Camillas raises an army, defeats the Falisci,and curries on new worki at Veit.


|Y this time, the games and the Feria; Latinae w«rerenewed, the waters drained from the AI ban lake intothe fields, and the destruction of Veii at no great distance.Wherefore, Furius Camillus, the general, for whom thefates had reserved the destruction of Veii, and the pre­servation of his country, was named dictator, who alsoappointed P. Cornelius Scipio general of the horse.The change of the general, in a moment gave a wonder­ful turn to all their affairs. New hopes, new souls, seem­ed to animate the whole bfidy of the republic, and fortuneseemed to have come over to the side of the city.
His first care was to punish those who had fled fromVeii in the sudden consternation, with all the strictnessof military discipline,. and thereby taught them, that anenemy ought not to. be the principal object of terror to asoldier.
Having fixed a.day for the levies, he in.the mean timeposted to Veii, in order to revive the courage of thetroops there, and then returned to Rome to raise a newarmy. Nobody refused to enlist; foreigners too, theyouth of the Latins*and Hernici, offered their service,and came accordingly, for which he thanked them infull senate. When every thing was ready for taking thefield, the dictator, by order of the senate, made a vow tocelebrate the great games,* when Veii should be taken,and to rebuild, and cledicate a-new, the temple of thegoddess Matnta,f which had formerly been dedicatedby king Servius Tulliujj^'Wherefore, leavmg the citywith his army, and thereby raising the expectation,, ra­ther than the hopes of |he people, he fell in with theFalisci and Capenates, in the territory ot Nepete.IEvery action of his was the result of prudence and reason,
* Those of the Circus.
f Juno, sister of Semele, aunt of Bacchus, and wife of Ath'-nas, was so called at Rome.t Ncpi.







OCR Output








CHAP. 2. ROMAN HISTORY. 17


Upon this, a treaty ensued between the chiefs, and asalutation between the armies. By Latinus, jEneas washospitably entertained ; who, in presence of his householdgods, us the publicjreaty added a family alliance, bygiving him hi?*claughter. in marriage. This transactionsecured to the Trojans a certain settlement,. and a finaladieu to roving-f Then they built a city, which, in ho­nour of his wife, fEneas,called Lavinium*. This mar­riage soon produced a~sori, to whom his parents gave the .name of Ascanius.
C HAP. II. .
*r -
• *
./ENEAS' grand Atchievements.
IN OT long after this, hostilities were commencedagainst the Aborigines and Trojans together. Turnus,king of the Rutulliansf, to whom. Lavinia had beenpromised, before the arrival of .ffineas, provoked to seea stranger preferred to him, made war upon Latinus,and jEneas at the same time. Neither army left thefield with much cause of triumph; for the Rutullistnswere defeated; and the Aborigines and Trojans, thoughthey gained a victory, lost their leader Latums. ThenTurnus and his RutuliansJ, despairing of success fromthetr own resources, applied to the Etrurians, a flourish­ing state ; and their king Mezentius, who, at that time,kept his court at Caere||, an opulent city: He behold­ing, with a jealous eye, the foundation of a new city;auil thinking, at that time, that the Trojan power wasadvancing too rapidly, for the safety of its neighbours,without much difficulty joined in a confederacy with theRutuiians.
jEneas, that he might secure the affections of theAborigines, now that he was threatened with such a for-
* Situated where St. Potronillus's chapel now stands.
f They possessed the maritim<: part of Campagna di Roma,between the rivulet Numicios, now Riodi Nimi, and the Tiber.
J The country of the Etrusci lay between the Magra and th<-Tiber, It was divided by the Arno.
|| Now Cereteri.







OCR Output








20* TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II


"That they had it in commission from Q. Fabius, the•• consul, to inform them, that he once carried peace• ' from the ^Equi to Rome, and that from Rome, he was"now carrying war to the jEqui, the same right-hand"being armed against them, which before he hadgiven them in token of peace. By whose perjuryand perfidious conduct, this reverse had happened,the gods were the witnesses now, and ere long wouldbe the avengers. For his own part, however, with­out descending to particular.-, he would even at thismoment, rather wish they would, by a voluntarysubmission, express a conviction of their error, thanoblige him to subject them to all the calamities ofwar. Were they only to repent, they should be re­ceived into the protection of that clemency, they"had formerly experienced: but, if they exulteS in"their perjury, they would do well to remember they"had the wrath of the gods, rather than the arms of"an enemy to contend with."
So far was this embassy from influencing the /E<jui,that the deputies were in danger of being insulted, andan army was sent to the Algidus,* to oppose the pro­gress of the Romans.
The moment advices of these transactions were trans­mitted to Rome, the other consul left the city, rousedrather by indignation, than any fear of danger. Thustwo consular armies approached the enemy, drawn upin form, determined to make an immediate attack. Butas it happened that the day was far spent, one of theenemy's advanced guard, cried out; " Romans, this is"not fighting, but an empty parade; vou draw up in"battalia, for the approach of night. More sun will"be necessary to render the action before us decisive."To-morrow, the moment light appears, return to the"field, and you shall have enough of fighting, I will"be bound for it."
Stung with this reproachful commentary, the Romansoldiers were led back to the camp, to wait till nextmorning; and -the hours of the night seemed to passheavity on, which kept them from measuring swordswith the enemy. They refreshed themselves with vie-
* A bill twelve miles from Rome,







OCR Output








CHAP. 53. - - . ROMAN HISTORY. 279


CHAP. LIH.
A coalition of the two Orders.
V ALERIUS and Horatius were then deputed withfull powers to 'conclude a treaty of pacification with-thepeople; and it was recommended to them, to take pro­per precautions, that the decemvirs might not suffer from.the rage and violence of the populace. As they wereapproachmg, they were met and ushered into the camp,with universal joy, as the deliverers of their country,by their exertions in this affair, both in setting it onfoot, and bringing it to a happy conclusion. For allwhich, they had public thanks returned them.
Icilius spoke for the multitude. When they came toan explanation, the deputies desiring to be informedwith respect to the people's demands; Icilius's answer,which had been concerted before their arrival, plainlyevinced, that the people founded their pretensions morein equity, than in the arms which they had in theirhands. They insisted on the re-establishment of tri­bunes, and the right of appeal, which had been the pil­lars of their liberty, before the creation of the decemvirs,together with an amnesty for all those who had beenconcerned in advising the revolt and the secession. On­ly they insisted to have the decemvirs punished withgreat severity, making it a point, that the decemvirsshould be delivered into their hands, and they threaten­ed to burn them alive.
The deputies replied; " Your claim, gentlemen,which we suppose has the general approbation, is sofair and equitable, that we come prepared to grant itof our own accord. For, it only tends to protect yourliberty, and not to promote licentiousness, to the pre­judice of others. Your resentment against the decem­virs, we must rather pardon than comply with. From.an abhorrence of cruelty, you want to give an exampleof it in your own conduct; and are for lording it overothers, before you have made sure of your own free­dom. Shall this city never see an end of our eitmity,and declared war between the senate and people?


 







OCR Output








TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK V.


by an oath, and marched with their armies to Veii, whenleast expected. They happened to attack that quarter ofthe camp where Mauius Sergius commanded, and caus­ed the greatest terror and dismay; for the Romans werepersuaded that all'Etruria was up in arms, and bad al­ready arrived in prodigious numbers. The same opinionprevailed among the besieged in the city, and encourag­ed them to make a sally.—Thus was the Roman campassaulted on both sides, and whilst they ran up and dovru,charging here and there, they could neither keep backthe Vi-jeute,« within their fortifications, nor defend theirown lines, so as to repel the enemy on the outside.
The only resource they had, was in the hopes of as--sistance from the greater camp, as some of the legionsmight make head against the Capenates and Fah'sci,.whilst others withstood ihe sallies of the townsmen; butVirgimus, between whom and Sergius there was a secretmisunderstanding, had the command of that camp. Whenhe was told, that most part of their redoubts were at­tacked, their lines broke through, and the enemy ad­vancing on both sides, he kept his troops under arrni,saying at the same time, that if there was any need ofassistance, his colleague would certainly .send him word.
The arrogance of the one, was equalled by the obsti­nacy of the other, who scorned to ask-assistance from onehe hated, and chose rather to be defeated by the enemy,than be obliged to his fellow eitizeji for victory. For aconsiderable time, the troops, thus charged on both sides,suffered exceedingly; at last having abandoned theirworks, a very few escaped to the grand camp, the great­est part, with Sergius himself, having made the best oftheir way to Rome. As he laid the whole blame on hwcolleague, Virginius was sent for, and the commandgiven to their lieutenants during their absence. Theaffair was laid before the senate, when the two colleaguesran into invectives against each other. Few of the >«-:!i-tors consulted the public interest upon this occasion, batstood up in defence of one or other of the delinquents, asprivate friendship or faxour.determined them.







OCR Output








IP2 TITUS LIVIUS' BooK.Il.


•' consul was hot wanting to the senate, but the senate"to the consul. That they were going to. accept laws"more pernicious than those of the Mons Sacer." Hewas prevailed upon at last, by the unanimous authorityof the senate, to he silent, and the law accordingly passedwithout contradiction.
CHAP. LVIII.
Claudius being chosen Consul, sent against the Volsci.
1 HEN, for the first time, were the tribunes chosen in-the Comitia by tribes. According to Piso, three addi­tional tribunes were added to the college, their numberhitherto, having been only two. He also mentions theirnames, viz. C. Sicinius^ L. Numitorius, M. Duilius, Sp.Icilius, and L. Maecilius
Encouraged by these disturbances at Rome, the Volsciand /*Et)ui, once more renewed the war. They had laidvaste the country, expecting, that in case of a secession,the people would fly to them for refuge; but fmdingevery thing was settled, they decamped, and led backtheir army.
Ap. Claudius was sent against the Volsci, and Quinc-tius against the JEqui. Appius discovered the samewildness in his temper abroad, as he had done at home;and he acted with the greater liberty, as he was underno restraint from the tribunes. He hated the people stillmore than his father had done.—They had triumphedover him. They had got a law passed during his con-suiaie, which, his predecessors in office, from whom thesenaie had not such high expectations, had the addressto get suspended, although he had been elected for thesole purpose of opposing it. This secret vexation thatengrossed and preyed upon him, set him upon torment­ing his army by the greatest severity of discipline: buthe was not able to break their obstinacy, so much wastheir aversion steeled against him. In all things, theyacted with slowness, indolence, carelessness, and a spiritof contradiction. They were neither affected with shamenor fear. If they were ordered to march with expedi­tion, they moved slower on purpose. If he stood by to







OCR Output








 


4


THE BORROWER WILL BE CHARGEDAN OVERDUE FEE IF THIS BOOK ISNOT RETURNED TO THE LIBRARY ONOR BEFORE THE LAST DATE STAMPEDBELOW. NON-RECEIPT OF OVERDUENOTICES DOES NOT EXEMPT THEBORROWER FROM OVERDUE FEES.
Harvard College Widener LibraryCambridge, MA02138 (617) 495-2413


 







OCR Output








CHAP. 32 ROMAN HISTORY. ( 449


I
conjunction with the Salpenates,* they made an incursionupon the Roman lands, without the least provocation.War was then declared against both nations. In themean time, C. Julius, one of the censors, was carried off,and L. Cornelius substituted in his place; a thing after­wards deemed inauspicious, because Rome was taken inthat lustrum. Nor after this time did the Romans ever-substitute, in the place of a censor who died in his office,another person to be colleague to the survivor. Theconsuls too falling sick,'the senate decreed that theyshould abdicate, and an inter-regnurii ensue. The con­suls having therefore demitted in terms of the senate'sdecree, M. Furius Camillus was created inter-rex, andsucceeded by Cornelius Scipio, and he again by ValeriusPotitus^-who held the comitia, for the election of six mi­litary tribunes with consular power, that in case any ofthem should be seized with the distemper, the Republicmight never want magistrates.
CHAP. XXXII.
Tlie Volsinienses chastised. A prudigy. Camillus banished..". A. R. 361.
V,/N the first of July, L. Lucretius, Servius Sulpicius, M..SLmilius, L. Furius Medullinus, a seventh, AgrippaFurius, and C. /Emilius, a second time, entered upon thatmagistracy. The war with the Volsinienses fed by lotto L. Lucretius and C. jEmilius; and with the Salpenatesto Agrippa Furius, and Servius Sutpicius. The first en­gagement they had was with the Volsinienses, who weremore formidable for their numbers -than their prowess.For they were routed and put to flight at the first onset,and 8000 men in arms being surrounded by the Romancavalry, laid down their arms and surrendered at discre­tion. The news of this battle cooled the ardour of the Sal­penates, so that they durst not appear in the field, but shutthemselves up, armed as they were, within their walls.The Romans pillaged both the Volsinran and Salpina-
*-The Volsinienaes and Salpenates were both nations ofEtrurivThe former inhabited a considerable city, Volsinium, the capitalof one of the twelve Lucumonies, situated near the modern Bo­logna. Of Salpiaum nothing certain can be affirmed.







OCR Output








124 TITUS LIVIUS' . BOOK If.


"for every hour you must run the risk of your life."You have the enemy and his sword drawn, in the very"door of your tent. This war, we, the Roman youths,"have denounced against you: and if you escape, you"need be afraid of no army,—no battle .again. It is"with you, and you alone, that we, one by one, have"to do.
When the king, at once boiling with passion, and ter­rified with his danger, in a menacing tone, o/dered fires.to be kindled about him, if he did not instantly discoverthe plots, which, by his threats he had darkly insinuat­ed were prepared against him. "Only see," says he,"how little bodily pain is regarded by those whose'' ambition is glory;" and with that thrust his righthand into the fire, that was lighted for the sacrifice.When he continued to broil it, as if insensible of pain,the king struck, as it were, with astonishment, at somuch intrepidity, jumped down from his throne, andordered the youth to be removed from the altar, at thesame time, addressing him thus: "Yes; get away from"hence, your adventurous spirit has hurt yourself more"than me. I would encourage you to persevere in"your virtue; had that resolution been exerted for my"country. Now, I discharge you from the right war"gives me over you, and I dismiss you without violence"or injury." Then Mucius, as if he would not be out­done in generosity, made the following return: "Since"you pay so great a respect for virtue, you will draw"a confession from me by your generosity, that you"could not have extorted by your threats: Know, that"three hundred young noblemen, of the first distinc-"tion in Rome, have conspired to take away yoor life,"ip the manner I have attempted. It was my lot to"make the effort: the rest will follow in course; and"each will asI,ail you, in his own time, as fortune shall"give him an opportunity."







OCR Output








410 , . TITUS LIV1US'- BOOK V.


had forgot, it was nbt in the shade, nor under the roof,that their ancestors had established the tribunitianpower. These are sentiments worthy your soldiers,worthy of the Roman name: not to have a view onlvto the siege of Veii, nor to the war we are carryingonat present, but to regard the establishment of our repu­tation, for other wars, and other enemies, in time tocome. Do you think that a judgment will not beformed of us from our behaviour on this occasion? Andthat it is a matter of indifference, whether the neigh­bouring nations have reason to conclude, that if a citycan only sustain the first ardour of the Romans, whichis of no long duration, there would be nothing more tofear? Will it not establish the terror of the Romanname, when it is remarked, that neither the long con­tinuance of a tedious siege, nor the rigours of winter,can induce a Roman army to give up a place theyhave once invested ; that they have not yet learned toput an end to a v7ar, in any other way, than by vic­tory ; and that they value themselves as much upontheir perseverance, as their impetuosity, in their at­tacks.? Perseverance is necessary in every kind of warwhatever, but in sieges indispensably so ; because mostcities are rendered impregnable by fortifications andtheir natural situation, they require time, and to be inwant of the necessaries of life, to compel them to asurrender. This will be the case with Veii, if the tri­bunes of the people go not over to the side of the ene­my, and give the Vejentes that assistance at Reme,which they look for in vain in Etruria. Could anything have happened more to the wishes of the Vejen-tes, than to see Rome first, and then the camp, havingcatched the infection, torn in pieces bv divisions? Such,at the same time, upon honour, is the firmness of theVejentes, that not even the pressures of a lon^ siege,nor the burthen of a new king, have brought aboutthe least disturbance among them. The refusal of aidfrom Etruria has not excited them to mutiny. To at­tempt a sedition there, would be punished with imme­diate death; no man dares mutter there, whai yjw speakout with impunity. Whoever deserts his colours, orabandons his post, is sure of the bastinado. But here,they who advise, not one or two "soldiers, but whole







OCR Output








CHAP. 32, ROMAN HISTORY. 357


and arms, the very same. That he too was the samedictator, Mamercus /Emilius, who formerly rooted theconfederate armies of the Fidenates and Vejentes, atNomentum, even when supported by the Falisci. ThatA Cornelius, his general of the horse, would exertthe. same bravery hi battle now, as in the former war,"when only a legionary tribune, that he- slew, LarsTolnnrnius, king of the Vejentes, in sigftt of both armies,and carried the opirria spolia to the temple of JupiterFeretrius.-\ That, therefore, they ought to remember,that on their side, they had triumphs, spoils, and vic­tory: that on the enemy's, there. was only the guilt ofmurdering ambassadors, contrary to the law of nations;the massacre of the colony of FidensB,-in time of pro­found peace ; the violation of the truce, and revolts,seven times repeated, notwithstanding their bad success.They should, therefore, fly to their arms; and he wasvery certain, so soon as the two armies were engaged,these impious enemies would have but a short time torejoice over the disgrace of the Roman army. Thenwould the Roman people be fully convinced, that theywho had chosen him dictator, for the third time, had•done ihe commonwealth much more important service,than they who had set a.mark of infamy on his seconddictatorship, because he had set bounds to the tyrannyof the censors.' Having then made proper vows to thegods, he took the field and eucarriped fifteen hundredpaces beyond Fidisnav supported on the right by themountains, and on the left by the Tiber. He ordered'Titus Quinctius Pennus, his lieutenant-ge'neral, to seizethe mountains, and gain the eminence in the enemy'srear, where he might Iy, concealed. The itetftday, whenthe Etrurians, highly elevated with their success on aformer occasion, which.they owed more to fortune thanvalour, offered him battle, he waited alittlc, till his scoutsbrought him intelligence, that.Quinctius had gained theeminence, near the castle of Fidenae, and then set up his>> standard, leading on his infantry already drawn up, bya quick march, 'against the enemy, at the same Jirneenjoining the general of the horse not to engage withoutHis permission; for that.he would give him the signal,whenever the assistance of the horse became necessary;







OCR Output








1*2 TITUS LIVIUS' BookV.


When the news of this 'disaster reached Rome, thefeelings of every citizen were discernible in. their looks,and the senate was greatly concerned, from a a appre­hension, that it would be impossible to prevent a seditionin the city as well as in the camp," for the tribunes wouldnot fail to crow over the commonwealth, as on a victoryobtained. But instantly those who, by their valuation,were in the rank of knights, though they had not horsesassigned them by the public, having previously concert­ed among themselves, applied directly to the senate; andhaving obtained an audience, offered to equip themselvesat their own expence, for the public service. For thisgenerous office, the senate thanked them in the politestterms; and the news being circulated throtigh the forumand the city, brought the people, in' a moment, to thesenate-house by the lump; declaring that 'they were ofthat order which now served on foot; and though it wasout of their turn, that they were ready to serve at Veii,or wherever the senate should be pleased to lead them;at the same time, were they led to Veii, they declaredthat they would not return before that city was taken.
The joy excited by a proposal so generous, was ex­cessive. The people were not ordered the thanks" of thehouse to be returned by the magistrates, as had beendone with respect to the knights; nor were any of themcalled into the senate-house, to hear their answer . Thesenators could not keep within doors; but out they ran,and from an eminence, every one in particular, by hiswords and gestures, expressed to the multitude that werestanding below in the coroitium, the general gladnessand exultation; such unanimity, they cried out, .wouldrender Rome happy,—invincible,—eternal. They prais­ed the knights, they praised the commons: nay, they ex­tolled the day,—the glorious day! They acknowledgedthe senate was now outdone" in kindness and benevo­lence. The two orders seemed to vie with each otherin weeping tears of joy, till at length the fathers warecalled back into the house, where they enacted, that'The military tribunes should, in an assembly of the'people, return thanks to both horse and foot, in name'of the Republic, and assure them that the senate would« never forget the regard they had shewn their country'on this occasion 5 aud, moreover, ordered that all Uu







OCR Output








52 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


Thus, though he was no match for them altogether,he was more than a match tor any-one of them singly.Therefore, to separate his opponents, he takes to flight,being persuaded they would follow him, with more orless expedition, as their strength, after so much loss ofblood, would permit them: Having now got a little wavfrom the seat of action, he turned and saw the Curiatiipursuing him at considerable distances from each other,and one of them not far behind him. Upon him heturns with all his force, and while the Alban army werecrying out to his brothers to assist him, Horatius havingalready dispatched his man, runs to a second engage^-raent. It was then the Rdmans animated their cham­pion with great shouts, such as generally proceed fromunexpected joy, whilst he, on the other hand, madehaste to finish his business; and before the other, whowas at no great distance, could come up to assist hisbrother, he laid him breathless at his feet%
The number on each side was now equal, but theirstrength and hopes very different. The Roman, yetwithout a wound, and flushed with his double victory,advanced with great spirit to the third combat. His an­tagonist, on the other hand, weakened with the loss ofblood, and spent with miming, could scarce stand uponhis legs; and being already vanquished in the fall of hisbrothers, encounters the victor. But this could not becalled a combat. The Roman then cried out with an airof triumph, " The two first I have sacrificed to the manes"of my brothers, the third I am now to sacrifice to the"honour of my country, that Rome • may give laws"to Alba." Curiatius could scarce stand up "under hisarms, so the other plunged hjs sword in his bosom, andstripped him as he lay dead, j . - •**
The Homans receive Horatius into their camp withexpressions of joy and acknowledgments, proportionedto the risk they had run. After this, both parties applvthemselves to bury their dead; but with minds widelydifferent; the Romans having acquired a considerableaccession of power, whilst the Albans were become theh-subjects. Their tombs are still to be seen on the veryspot where each of them fell: These of the two Horatii







OCR Output








438 TITUS L1VIUS' BOOK V.


to look upon this as no favour, imagining it was onlya bait to divert their attention from more lucrative ex­pectations. For why should the people be banishedamong the Volsci, when they had in prospect Veii, amost beautiful city, and all its domains, richer and moreextensive than even the territory of Rome? With Veiithey thought Rome would bear no comparison, eitherfor situation, or the grandeur of its buildings and accom­modations, public and private.
Moreover, a motion was made, which became moreserious after Rome had been taken.by the Gauls, of re­moving to Veii. But in this motion it was proposed,that part of the senate and part of the people should• settle at Veii, and that the two cities inhabited by Ro­mans, should constitute but one commonwealth. Butthis the nobility opposed so warmly that they declaredthey would sooner die in sight of the Roman people,than suffer such a bill to be tabled: ' If there, be suchdissensions in one city, what must there be in two?Would any man in his senses prefer a conquered city,to his own native city, that had conquered it? Or rea­der the captive town of Veii, more considerable afterits fall, than ever it had been before it ? In fme, thattheir fellow-citizens might leave them in their nativecountry, if they pleased, but that no compulsion shouldoblige them to relinquish the place of their birth, andtheir fellow citizens, m order to follow T. Sicinius, (itwas this tribune who had preferred the bill), the newfounder to Veii, and forsake our god Romulus, the soaof a god, and the father and founder of Rome.'
CHAP. XXV. '.
Disputes about Veii. Generosity of the Roman Ladies.
W HILST the disputes on this subject rose to a scan­dalous height, (for the fathers had brought over some ofthe college of tribunes to be of their side), nothing pre­vented the people from coming to blows, but that themoment a shout was set up as a signal to fall on,the principal senators first presented themselves to themob, desiring them to proceed, to strike, and to put themto death, A respect to age, and to the houour and dig­







OCR Output








CHAP. 58. ROMAN HISTORY. 101


ened her also with infamy; he told her, that he wouldkill one of her slaves, lay him naked by her when shewas dead, and then declare to all the world, that he hadkilled her catched in adultery with the slave. The dreadof infamy, was as powerful in overcoming her obstinatevirtue, as the most irritating inclination. Tarquin hadhis wishes; and set out in triumph, for having robbed alady of her virtue.
Lucretia sunk under the pressure of her misfortune,dispatches a messenger to her father at Rome, with or-. ders to go immediately from thence, to her husband inthe camp at Ardea, desiring them to meet her, and witheach a faithful friend ;-^-that no time must be lost, be­cause something very extraordinary had happened. Spu-rius Lucretius came, accompanied with Publius Valerius,the son of Volesus; and Collations, with Lucius JuniusBrutus, with whom he was returning to Rome, whenhe met his wife's messenger. He found Lucretia sittingquite disconsolate in her bed-chamber. The momentthey entered the room she burst into tears. When herhusband put the question, "Are you well enough?"*' Not at all," said she; " the woman who has lost her"honour, can, in no sense of the word be well. Ano-"ther, my Collatinus, hath defiled your bed. But though"my body is polluted, my soul is without stain. Of«« this my death shall seal the truth. But give me your<• right hands, and your promise, that the adulterer shall"not go unpunished. It is Sextus Tarquinius, who. v came hither last night with the air of a friend, but"with the heart of a fiend; and, in arms, obtained by"force, a pleasure, fatal to me,—and to him—if you"are only men."
All of them gave their promise, in order as they stood;and endeavoured to divert her melancholy, by excusingher who was forced, and loading him with the blame,who was the author of the guilt: arguing, that therecould be no crime, where there was no intention: for, itis the soul that sins, the body cannot. "I leave it to"my friends," said she, " to consider what is due to him;"for my own part, though I can justly acquit myself"from the guilt, I will not exempt myself from the pu-"nishment; nor shall any woman hereafter survive her







OCR Output








CHAP. 25. ROMAN HISTORY. 51


1
CHAP. XXV.
The combat of the Horatii and Curiatii-
J. HE treaty being thus concluded, the three brotherson each side take arms, according to agreement. Whilsteach party are animating their respective champions, byrepresenting that their gods, their country, their fathersand mothers, the whole city and army had their eyesfixed on their swords and actions; the combatants, braveof themselves, and still more invigorated by such press­ing exhortations advance to the centre between the twoarmies. The two armies were ranged on both sidesround the field of battle, safe from danger for the present,but anxious for the future, because empire was at stake,depending on the exertions and fortune of so few. Where­fore, agitated with these reflections, and solicitous aboutthe event, they turn their whole attention to a sight,which could not be very agreeable.
The signal is given, and the champions march boldlythree and three against each other, themselves alone in­spired with the courage of great armies. Both insensi­ble of their own danger, having nothing before theireyes but the slavery or liberty of their country; thefuture destiny of which, must entirely depend upon theirpresent exertions. The moment thes clashing of theirweapons is heard, and the glitter of their swords seen,the spectators seized with fear and alarm, whilst hopesof success inclined to neither side, continued motionless,and seemed to have lost the power of speech, and evenof breathing. When they were thus fairly engaged, notonly the motion of their bodies, and the brandishing oftheir weapons attracted the eyes of the spectators, butthe wounds and blood running from them. Two Ro­mans dropped dead at the feet of the Atbans, who werewounded all three. Thejpfall was instantly announcedby the loud and joyful shouts of the Alban army, whilstthe Roman legions remained without hope, but not with­out anxiety, trembling for the single Roman, who nowstood surrounded by the three Albans. Happily he wasnot wounded.


V







OCR Output








•228 TITUS LmiJS* BOOK 111


"might now command them to take arms against Va-"lerius the consul ; and he would not hesitate to act by"the tribunes, as the founder of his family had done by"the kings."
Matters seemed now to be in that train, that nothingbut the utmost violence would have been the issue, whena sedition of the Romans would have been exhibited as aspectacle to the enemy. The tribunes could not proceedin passing the bill, nor could the consul march againstthe capitol, till night came on and suspended the dispute.During the night, fear of the armed citizens, who wereat the consuls devotion, kept the tribunes quiet. Wtrere-fore, when these Daemons of discord were out of the way,the senators went round among the people, and mixingwith them in their crowds, entered into conversation withthem suitable to the times: conjuring them, "To take"care how they plunged the Republic into this extre-"mity of danger.—That the contest now w.as not be-"tween the Patricians and Plebeians, 'but that both alike,"the citadel of Rome, the temples of their gods, the tu-"telar gods of the state, the domestic gods of every citi-"zen, were abandoned to their enemies/'—Whilst thesenators were thus employed in bringing the multitudeto reason in the forum, the consuls in the mean time,posted guards at the gates and wall?, to prevent any sur­prize from the Sabines and Vejentes.
CHAP. XVIII.
O'
Kindness of (he Tusculeins. The Capitol relieved, butValerius killed.
_L HAT very night, the news of taking the citadel/sur­prising the capitol, and of the confusion that raged atRome reached to Tusculum, where Mamilius at thattime presided as dictator. He immediately convened thesenate-, introduced the messengers, and warmly remon­strated, "That they ought not to wait till Rome should"demand their assistance in form j that the danger and"hazard, their confederate gods, and the sacred obliga-"tion of treaties, required the utmost dispatch. The gods"could never give them a better opportunity of evkien-







OCR Output








110 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


"Considering the frailty of human nature, to depend on." innocence alone, will be found but a precarious si-"tuation." . \
While their minds were thus naturally chagrined, de­puties from the Tarquins arrived unexpectedly at Rome,who, without mentioning a syllable of their return,.only required that their effects should be given up.After they had been admitted to an audience in the se-, nate, it was debated for several days, whether their de­mands should be granted, as a refusal might be a pre­tence to the Tarquins for beginning hostilities, and acompliance afford them the means for carrying on awar.
In the mean time, however, they were otherwise em­ployed; for, while they openly demanded their effects,they were plotting in private for recovering the kingdom jand under pretence of courting the young patricians fortheir interest to support their claim in the senate, theywere sounding their inclinations. To those, whom theysaw disposed to listen to their proposals, they deliveredletters from the Tarquins; and concerted measures fortaking the royal family into the city, in the night-time.
CHAP. IV.
'The plot discovered by means of a slave, and the conspira­tors c.lapt in irons.
A HE conspiracy was first communicated to the Aquil-Iji and Vitellii, of whom there were several brothers.Brutus had married a sister of the Vitellii, and by herhad two sons, called. Titus and Tiberius, whom theiruncles engaged to be their associates in their design.There were other young Patricians concerned in theplot; but their names, in so long an interval, have beentotally lost. When it was carried by a majority of thesenate, that the effects belonging to the royal familyshould be restored, the ambassadors made it a pretencefor protracting their stay at Rome, as the consuls ha'd al­lowed them time. to provide carriages for their transpor­tation. This time they employed in conferences withthe .conspirators, upon whom they prevailed by their ur­







OCR Output








4++ TITUS LIVIUS' Book V.


to Apollo. The long galiey, in which these deputiesembarked, was intercepted by some pirates from the isleiil' Liparre, not fa# from the streights ot' Messina, and bythem carried into Liparae It was their custom to divideall their captures among the citizens.
Their principal magistrate this year was one Timasi-theus, a man, who resembled the Romans more in hismanners, than he did his countrymen. This magistrate,full of veneration for the god, and the present sent him,and out of respect to the character of the ambassadors,and the embassy on which they were sent, inspired themultitude, who generally follow the sentiments of theirleaders, with the same regard tor justice and religion.And having not only entertained them with great hos­pitality, but in person, with a squadron of ships, con­voyed them to Delphi, and from thence safe back toRome, the right of hospitality was conferred on him bya decree of the senate, and great presents were madehim at the public expence.
Throughout this year, the war with the i^qui tooksuch various turns, that it remained a question both atRome and in the camp, which side had the better. Thegenerals in the war, were C. iEmilius, and Sp. Posthu-mius. At first they acted in conjunction, and when theyhad defeated the enemy in a pitched battle, iEmwiusthought proper to go to garrison Vetrugo, and Posthu-mius to lay waste the enemy's borders. The lattermarching with his troops with too little precaution, afterbis late success, was surprised and driven to the adja­cent hills in great consternation by the JEqui. Theirfright commumcated itself to the other garrison at Ver-rugo.
Posthumius having rallied his men,' and got them intoa place of safety, reproached them severely with theirpanic and flight, telling them that they had sufferedthemselves to be beat by a most cowardly enemy, whoalways shewed their backs. The whole army acknow­ledged that there was too much truth in what they hadheard, and confessed the frfult of which they had beenguilty, bqt promised that they woultl make amends, andgive the enemy but short time to rejoice over them.They begged with earnestness to be instantly led to theattack of the enemy's camp, which Vas within sight, in







OCR Output








496 CONTESTS;


Gbap. Page
xxxiii. Digression relative to the Gauls ......«-..,. 4-50
xxxiv. In continuation ........' 4-.VJ
xxxv. In .continuation .,..>....... 453
xxxvi. Fatal errorof the Fabii .-... 455
xxxvii. The Gauls march to Rome 456
XMxviii. A-battle. The Romans defeated 457
xxxix. The Gauls enter Rome. The flower of -the Romans fly to the citadel and ca-
pitol 459
x!. The deep-distress which ensued this bat­tle , 461
xli. Resolution and massacre of the aged se­nators 462
x-lii. Rome set on fire. Melancholy scene ... 463xliii. The Gauls disappointed. Turn the siege
into a blockade. Camillus at Ardea 465
xliv. Camillus addresses the Ardeans 466-•
xlv. A party of the Gauls surprised by Camil­lus. The soldiers at Veii surprise the
Tuscans r 46T
xlvi. Resolution of a young Roman. Camillusrecalled and created Dictator, heads
the army at- Veii 468'
xlvii. An attempt of the Gauls frustrated by
the gallantry of Manlius 470
xlviii. Pestilence. Famine.- A Compromise ... 472
xlix. Camillus changes the face of affairs 473 •
I. Regulations alter the expulsion of the
Gaul* 474
li. • Speech of Camillus 476
lii. In continuation 477
liii. In continuation 4S0
liv. In continuation #&*'«
Iv. Camillus prevails 483


J. If C. Muirhtad, Printers,Edinburgh







OCR Output








CHAP. 30. ROMAN HISTORY. , 140


by putting arms in their hands, to allow them to defendthemselves. Vetusjus the consul was therefore sent totheir assistance, which put an end to the inroads of thejEqui, and obliged them to retire from the Champaigncountry, as their dependence was not on the strength oftheir arms, but the advantage of the ground, they se­cured themselves, by keeping on the tops of the moun­tains.
The other consul marched against the Votsei, andscorning to spend time in laying waste their country; hechallenged them to move their camp nearer his, and toceme to action at once. Both armies stood drawn upbefore their lines, in a plain between their camps. TheVolsci had rather the advantage in numbers, which en­couraged them to advance without order, as if they haddespised the enemy. The Roman consul did not ad­vance, nor sutler the soldiers to return the enemy'sshouts, but gav« orders to stand still, with their spearsfixed in the ground, and when the enemy advanced nearenough, to attack them sword in hand.
The Volsci, already exhausted with running and shout­ing, imagining the Romans were petrified with fear, be­gan the attack accordingly; but finding themselves vi-gorotfsly received, and seeing the swords glittering intheir eyes, they took to their heels in as great disorder,as if they had fallen into an ambuscade. But they hadalready been so much exhausted with advancing to thefield, that they had not strength enough left to carrythem out of it.
On the other hand, the Romans having had nothing tofatigue them m the beginning of the action-, were freshand vigorous; and quickly came up with the Volsci, al­ready exhausted, took their camp by assault, drove outthe enemy, and pursued them to Velitrse, which they en­tered peli mell with them. By the promiscuous slaugh-'ter of all ranks which ensued, there was greater effusionof blood in this place than the action itself. A few werepardoned, who laid down their arms and gave them-selves up.'







OCR Output








170 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK If.


consul returned to Rome, less distinguished for his mili­tary glory, than the inveterate and unrelenting hatred ofthe soldiers against him. The fathers, however, had in­fluence enough to continue the consulship in the Fabianfamily, for they elected M. Fabius consul, aud gave himC. Manlius for his colleague.
CHAP. XLIV.
Claudius' plan for defeating the tribunes.
\../NE of the tribunes brought the Agrarian law on thecarpet again this year. It was Tib. Pontificius, who go­ing to work the same way with Sp. Licinius, obstructedthe levies for a little. 'Whilst the fathers were oncemore disconcerted with this opposition, Appius Claudiustold them, "That they had baffled the efforts of tribuni-"tian power the year before; that at present they might"do it, by employing that power against itself, an ex-"pedient that would never fail of success, seeing they"had found, by experience, that it could be cut down"by its own force. That one of the number might al-"ways be found, who, proud of defeating his colleagues,"and gaining the esteem of the better part of the citi-"zens, would be disposed to promote the good of the"public. And no doubt, several of these, were it ne- ."cessary, would be found ready to assist the consuls,"but one was sufficient against the whole body. That"therefore the best conduct of the consuls and principal"senator.-, would be only to exert themselves to bring"over some one of these tribunes, and attach him to the"interest of the senate and commonwealth, if their in-"fluence did not extend to the whole."
The fathers, pursuant to Appius's advice, treated thetribunes in the most kind and obliging manner; andthose who had been consuls, and had private claimsagainst any of them, partly by their interest and partlyby their authority, prevailed on them to consent to makethe privileges of the tribunitian power beneficial to thestate. Wherefore, having four to one on their side, theconsuls were enabled to complete the levies. Upon thisthey marched agamst the Vejentes, who were supportedby auxiliaries from all parts of Etruria, flocking to them.







OCR Output








TO THE PUBLIC. tii


appointed him praeceptor to his grandson Claudius, after­wards emperor.*
It is recorded by the younger Pliny, that the reputa­tion of Livy had begun already to make so much noisein the world, -that he received an honourable visit fromthe extremity of Spain, occasioned by the fame of hisgreat and extensive genius which had found its way thi-ther-t
After the death of Augustus, he returned to his nativePadua, where he was received by his fellow-citizen*with every demonstration of joy and mark of honour;He died there in the fourth year of the empire of Tibe­rias. Whilst he staid at Rome, and had the countenanceand protection of Augustus, he had every opportunity ofattaining whatever knowledge was necessary to his design jto the study of which he was so much attached, that hesequestered himself in a manner from the world and thepursuits of ambition, so that his life became thereaftermore obscure: for, applying his whole attention to thegreat work he had undertaken, he shut himself up in hisstudy, and consequently had very little intercourse with.society. So vast and so great an enterprise, both in theplan and execution, certainly required the noblest effortof human genius; but the elevated and generous senti­ments which so remarkably distinguish and stamp an un­common beauty and excellency on Titus Livius' history,are derived from the nobleness of the heart, for whichour author seems to have been illustriously conspicuous.
Any one who has read the works of Livy with atten­tion, will be at no loss to pronounce him a man of worthand probity. The manner in which he speaks of him­self, is peculiarly modest: vanity is a foible to which heseems to have been a perfect stranger. Of himself per­sonally, he seldom or never speaks: nor in the wholecourse of his history does he mention the least thingthat concerns hirn, save only that the temple of Januswas shut in his time. Nothing can be a greater proofof bis natural turn of mind in this particular, than thestrain of modesty which runs through the preface to hishistory. No author ever promised less, or performed
* Suet, in Claud, cap. 41; t Lib. II. Ep. 3.







OCR Output








Chap. 8. ROMAN HISTORY. 323


w


CHAP. VIII.
Censors created..
HETHER military tribunes only, during thisyear, or consuls chosen in their stead, had the manage­ment of public affairs, it is admitted by all, that in thenext, M. Geganius Macerinus, for the second, and T.Quinctius Capitolinus, for a fifth time, were consuls.Under these consuls, the office of censor was instituted:*which, though it seemed but of small importance at first,rose in time to so great a height, that the morals anddiscipline of the Romans fell under its cognizance: itwas charged with the superintendance of the senate andcenturies of the kmghts i in it was vested the right ofpromotion and degradation, the disposal of all places,public and private, and an absolute jurisdiction withrespect to the revenues of the republic.
The following circumstance gave rise to this office.For many years, the people had never been rated, andthough the census couid be delayed no longer, by reasonof so many impending wars, it was out of the power ofthe consuls to overtake it. It was observed by the se­nate, that a matter which required so great attention, andat the same time, below the dignity of a consul, requireda peculiar officer, to whom the clerks ought to be ac­countable, who should have the conversation of the taxrolls, and should prescribe the mode of taking the census.
However insignificant this office might have appearedat first, the fathers grasped at it with joy, as it had atendency to increase the number of offices occupied bytheir order, with a view as I imagine, and a< it reallyhappened, that the influence and power of those whofilled it, would soon procure authority and respect to theoffice itself. The tribunes viewed4t rather in a neces­sary, than an honourable light, of which, at that time,it had no other appearance; and for that Teason madeno objection, that they might not seem to make opposi-
* A Censeo. This office, though at first it seemed contemp­tible, came at last to have so much power annexed to it, that theemperors took it upon themselves.







OCR Output








224 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV.


tion, when their only motive was the pleasure of couira-diction. As the principat men of the state looked onthis office with contempt, Popi-nus and Serupromus werenamed by the people, whose consulship, the precedingyear, was found doubtful, that the accession of this newhonour might make ihem amends for the imperfection ofthe former; and from the nature of their office, theywere called censors.


D


CHAP. IX.
Distractions at Ardca. Proceedings of Gcgamus.


"URING these operations at Rome, ambassadorscame from Ardea, requesting the Romans, on accountof their most ancient friendship, and of the treaty solately renewed, to assist the state, now brought to thebrink of ruin by a civil war,- which totally interruptedthat peace they had very wisely kept with them. Tlierage of parties, it is said, was the source of these civildissensions, which has been of more fatal consequenceto many states than foreign wars, famine, diseases, andplagues of whatever kind, ascribed to the anger of thegods, as being the severest strokes that can befal a na­tion.
Two young men had made their addresses to a voonglady of Plebeian extraction, but extraordinary beauty.One of the young gentlemen was her equal, and sup­ported in his pretensions by her tutors,, who were of thesame order. The other was a nobleman, regardless ofevery consideration, but the charms of his mistress. Hisaddresses had the countenance of the nobility, who car­ried the spirit of party into the young lady's family.Her mother ambitious of a title to her daughter, wasclear for the nobleman. The guardians even in thismatter, could not conceal their attachment to their ownorder. When the dispute became too high to be settledwithin doors, they went to law; and the judge havingheard the pleadings on the part of the guardians and themother, gave judgment in favour of the latter, whoseright to dispose of her child in marriage, was clearlyascertained: but the stoutest arm prevailed. For, the


 







OCR Output








CHAP. 24. ROMAN HISTORY. i 4S7


what was due to the god, was no easy matter. At lastthey had recourse to an expedient, which seemed to beleast troublesome. They ordered all those who wishedto have their consciences clear with respect to this vow,and to insure the safety of then families, to make a fairand candid estimate of the booty they had obtained,and lodge the tenth pair of that value in the public trea­sury, that it might be formed into a present of pure gold,worthy the august temple, and majesty of that god forsvhom it was mtended, and suitable to the grandeur ofthe Roman people. This contribution added to thepeople's disgust at Camillas.
.In the mean time .ambassadors came from the Volscito sue. for peace, which was granted them, not out of*respect to their merit, but to give the people some re-spite, from war, with which they had been so long and somuch harassed. *
CHAP. XXIV.
Inroltment for a Colony to be planted in the Volscian ter­ritory. Motion for transferring it to Veii.


L.FTER the reduction of Veii, six military tribuneswith consular power, were elected for the followingyear, the two P. P. Corne'ii, Cossus, and Scipio, M.Valerius Maximus, a second, Creso Fabius Maximus, athird, L. Furius Medullinus, a fifth, and Q. Servilius, athird time. Whilst the war with.the Falisci fell by lotto the Cornelii, that with the Capenates, to Valerius andServilius, they made no attempt upon their cities bystorm, or blockade, contenting themselves with ravagingthe country, and carrying off their implements of hus­bandry. JSot one fruit-tree nor.stalk of corn was left inthe country. This distress humbled the Capenates.They sued for peace and obtained it.
The war with the Falisci was carried on. At Rome,during these transactions, there were many seditions;to appease which, they had determined to send a colonyinto the country of the Volsci, for which 3000 Romancitizens were enrolled. The three commissioners chosento conduct this business, had assigned to each planterthree seven-twelfths Roman acres. The people began







OCR Output








420 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK V.


the tax to be collected, although they had so many armieito support, and their military affairs were in so successfula train, that they were like to come to a conclusion, with­out the etl'usion of blood. For the camp which bad beenlost before Veil, was recovered and secured by guards andredoubts.. The tribunes, M. .Kmilius and Caeso Fabius,commanded there. M. Furius led an army against theFalisci, and Cu. Cornelius against the Capeuates, butnot an enemy appeared; however, they carried off aconsiderable booty, and laid waste the country, by burn­ing theiv villages and consuming their corn, without.meddling with their towns, either to assault or besiegethem.
Having plundered the lands of the Volsci, they at*tempted to take Anxur by storm, but as its situation washigh, they were disappointed, and began to turn thesiege into a blockade, by surrounding it with a moat andrampart. The province of the Volsci had fallen to Va­lerius Potitus. Whilst these military affairs were in thistrain, an intestine division gave them much more'troublethan all the foreign wars in which they were engaged.As the tribunes would not suffer the tax to be levied, andconsequently no remittances having been made to thecommanders, the soldiers became importunate for theirpay, which almost had diffused the seditious sentimentsthroughout the camp which raged in the city.
Whilst the people were in this passion with the fathers,the tribunes of the people represented, that now was thetime for establishing their liberty, and transferring thehonours of the state from such wretches as Sergius andVirginias, to bold and manly Plebeians. However, theywent no farther, than just to ascertain their right, byelecting one of their order, P. Licinius Calvus, to thedignity of military tribune, with consular power: therest were all Patricians, viz. P. Maenius, L. Titinius,P. Mselius, L. Furius Medullinus, and L. PubliusVolscus.
The people, as well as the man of their choice, werereally amazed that they had carried so great a point.Licinius had never borne any public office before, onlyhe was an ancient senator, and now a very old man. ftdoes pot appear from what motives he was pitched onto be the first, and the pfoperest person to fill this ho­







OCR Output








TO THE PUBLIC.


.l O reconcile Youth, in the early stages of their ap­plication to the study of the CLASSICS, to facilitate andpromote their progress, and to enlarge their ideas in theEnglish, as well as Latin phraseology, the use of literaltranslations hath been, of late years, most successfullyadopted. The advantages arising from translations, con­structed on a more liberal plan, at a more advancedperiod,. after etymology, inflexion, construction, accent,and a sufficient stock of words have been acquired, willbe equally considerable. To lay a foundation for goodtaste, and true criticism, is a point, of which we mustnever lose sight, in classical studies. The observationsof a good teacher, in the course of his prescriptions, willbe very important; but the practical art of arranging,classing, and disposing a liberal stock of phrases, vvitl,taste and judgment, will receive a surprising improve­ment from imitation.
By comparing the original with an elegant translation,and that translation again with the original, the student'sstyle will be insensibly elevated, and he will quickly ac­quire a facility and readiness of expression in both lan­guages, without which, all the time and labour spent up­on study, would be in a great measure lost. But to onewhose only assistant is his dictionary, a good translationmust be still more necessary. The drudgery of scram­bling the sense of an author out of a dictionary, is notonly intolerably tedious, but requires an extraordinarydegree of penetration to succeed to any purpose: a goodtranslation, properly used, will render the study easy, ex­peditious, and effectual.
It was with this view that I employed some of my lei­sure hours in translating the first jive books of Liny, J.owhose writings I have always been mightily attached,on account of the beauty and dignity of his style, and hisluminous, intelligible, and agreeable manner. In trans­lating, I have endeavoured to be spirited and- faithful,equally avoiding the closeness of a literal version, iu­







OCR Output








CHAP. 50. ROMAN HISTORY. flfri


"It was their business to take care of themselves and• ' children."
These complaints of Virginias were followed by theacclamations of the whole multitude; who assured himthey would neither be wanting to avenge his grief, norto assort their own liberty. The citizens, too, minglingin the crowd with the soldiers, confirmed what they hadheard from Virginius; representing at the same time,that to be spectators of a scene so distressing was muchmore affecting than the minutest relation. At the sametime they told them, that the interest of the decemvirswas entirely suivk at Rome; and that those who badcome after them, brought accounts that Appius, havingnarrowly escaped with his life, had absconded. Suchan impression had these accounts on the soldiers, that toarms was the universal "cry; the standards were pulledtip, and thre troops took the route of Rome. The decem­virs, terrified with what they saw, and the accounts theyhad heard of what passed in the city, run to all sides ofthe camp to appease the tumults. If they spoke mildly,they were answered with silence; if they spoke with au­thority, the soldiers told them, '" that they were men*"and had their arms in their hands." They marchedto Rome in a body, and posted themselves upon mountAventine, m their way exhorting all they met, to re­cover their liberty, and to create tribunes; but they usedneither violence nor menaces.
Sp. Oppius assembled the senate. All violent mea­sures were exploded. The decemvirs themselves werethe cause of the sedition. Sp. Tarpeius^ Caius .lulius,P. Sulpicius, three donstilar gentlemen, were deputed tothe soldiers, to demand, in name of the senate, by whoseorders they had abandoned the camp, or what they pro­posed to themselves, by seizing the Aventine in arms?What they intended by turning their backs upon the ene­my, and their arms against their country? Their answerwas ready, but they wanted one qualified to deliver it.Having yet appointed no chief, nobody ventured to takeit upon himself, nor to expose himself to the danger withwhich it might be attended. Only there was a generalcry, to send Valerius and Horatius to them; and to themthey would give their answer.







OCR Output








160 TITUS LIVIUS' Book II.


and the attention of the citizens will be engrossed byit. I remember what happened on u similar occasion,by means of the Sabine youth, within this city, and Itremble lest our people should take some rash and in­considerate step, which I thought it my duty to lay .before you, O consuls, both on your account and ours.For my own part, 1 am resolved to go home imme-"diately, lest by remaining on the spot, my feelings"should be hurt, in what I might hear or see."
With these words he took his leave. The consuls im­mediately lay this equivocal hint, the manner in which,and the person by whom, it was communicated, beforethe senate, who, more out of regard fo the author's cre­dit, than any suspicion of danger, were induced to takesome steps by way of precaution, which might as wellhave been spared. Wherefore, by a decree of the se­nate the Volsci were ordered to evacuate the city, andthe public criers were dispatched to publish this order allover the city, that the Volsci might all be gone beforenight. Whilst they ran hither and thither to their quar­ters to fetch their things, they were in a terrible panic;but on -their. return home, their indignation rose to aprodigious pitch, when they began to reflect, that likeinfamous scoundrels, or persons tainted with some infec­tious disease, they had been driven from seeing thegames, upon the day of the exhibition, as unworthy toassociate with^gods or men.
CHAP. XXXVIII.
Resentment of the Volsci.
J. HEY returned from Rome, in almost one contibucdbody; and Tullus, who had gone before them, as far asIfle head of the spring of Ferentinum, accosting the fore­most of them as they came up, asked them many ques­tions, and expressed his displeasure at the indignity thathad been offered them. Fond of any thing that en­couraged their resentment, they gave great attention towhat he said, and followed him to a plain below the road,where the whole multitude were persuaded to join them.There, as if he had been haranguing them in an assem­bly, he spoke to the following effect: " Should you,







OCR Output








436 TITUS LIVIUS" BOOK V.


s
•
CHAP. XXIII.
CuHilllits returns in triumph. The people disgutted.
\\ HEN news of the reduction of Veii reached Rome,although the prodigies had been expiated, the responsesof the diviners, and of the Pythian oracle, a secret tonone; and to secure success by every device humanprudence could afford, they had chosen the greatest ge­neral of his age, Marcus Furius; yet because the fortuneof war had shifted so often, and they had met with somany defeats, the joy was incredible, as if the cause ofit had been beyond all expectation. Before the senatecouid pass any decree, the Roman ladies had filled allthe temples, returning thanks to the gods. Tbe senateordained solemn supplications for four days, a greaternumber than had ever been appointed in any formerwar. Never had any general such a retinue before, athis arrival; for all ranks and conditions ran in crowdsto meet him; and the magnificence of that day's triumph,far exceeded what was usual on such occasions. Hehimself was more especially conspicuous, having madehis entry into the city in a chariot drawn by four whitehorses; whence it was inferred, that he exalted himselfnot only above the condition of a citizen, but even ofhuman nature. They considered it as an act of impietyfor the 'dictator to be drawn by the same number ofhorses, and of the same colour too, with those of Jupiterand the sun; and this circumstance alone, however muchit might heighten the splendour of bis triumph, renderedit less agreeable to the spectators.
After this he drew the plan of the temple of <]ueenJunO on the Aventine hill, and dedicated that of thegoddess Matuta. Wherefore having thus performed hisduty to the gods, and done such signal service to thestate, he abdicated the dictatorship.
The present to Apollo came then under public con­sideration. When Camillas represented, that he hadvowed the tenth part of the spoils to the god, the priestsgave it as their opinion, that the people ought to per­form the vow. But to prescribe a method to make theneople bring in the spoils, so as to deduct from them







OCR Output








CBAP. 4.5. ROMAN HISTORY. 2&T


CHAP. XLV.
Appim is opposed by Icilius.
X\.PPIUS, previously to bis passing sentence, told thenii"That the law which had been cited by the friends of"Virginia, was a proof of his zeal for liberty; but ft"could only be a protection to liberty, when the per-"sons and circumstances answer the description. For,"with respect to those who are claimed as free, though"reputed slaves, the plea is tenable, because the law is"open. to every man.. But,, as far as the subject in"question was- in the possession of a father, to him"alone was the plaintiff obliged to yield the retention."Wherefore, he decreed, "That the father should be sent"for; and that the plainiiffs right, in the mean time,"might not suffer, he might take home the girl to his"house, on.condition, that he shall produce her in court"when her reputed father shall appear."
Though many were shocked at the injustice of thissentence, yet nobody ventured to speak out,. till her un­cle, Numitariuii, and Icilius her mtended husband, cameinto court. The crowd opened to receive them, imagin­ing, especially after Icilius appeared, that Appius' de­cree would not be put in execution.
But a lictor proclaimed, " That sentence was passed ;'-*and pushed back Icilius, who complained loudly of theinjustice done him. So injurious a treatment wouldhave provoked patience itself.—" You must remove me"from hence, Appius/' said he, " with the sword, if"you would stifle the knowledge of your infamous de­signs. Lam to marry this young lady; but I am tomurry her chaste and a virgin. Therefore, assembleall your liotors, and if you please, those of your col­leagues too; let them have all their rods and axesready, but Icilius' bride shall not stay out of her fa-"ther's house. No! though you and your colleagues"hav,e deprived the Romans of the protection of their"tribunes, and the right of appeal, the two pillars of"their liberty, we are not yet so degenerate, as to suffer"our wives and children to become the victims of your,







OCR Output








282 , .TJTUS LIVIUS' BOOK III.


transacted in an assembly of the people, in the Flami-nian meadows, now the Flaminian circus.
y,V . CHAP. LV.
;,.;,. . , 'Popular laws introduced by the new consuls.
LUCIUS VALERIUS and M. Horatio, were theoelected consuls, by an inter-rex, and immediately en-• tered upon the duties of their office. The popular ad­ministration of these consuls, though it did no hurt, gaveno small offence to the Patricians, who considered everyprecaution which was taken to secure the liberty of thepeople, as a derogation of their prerogative. In thefirst place, wherea's it was a disputable point in law,whether the senators were amenable to .the decrees ofthe Commons; the consuls now passed a law in the co-reitia by centuries, ordaining that whatever the com-ijions should enact in ithe comitia by tribes, should beVmdiug on the whole body of the people, by which law,the bills of the tribunes were armed with a very dan­gerous weapon. After this, thev revived the other con­sular law, concerning the right of appeal, the chief pillarof their liberty, which had been overturned by the de­cemvirs; but, for the time coming, gave it new force byan appendix: " Prohibiting the future creation of any"magistrate, from whom there should be no appeal, and"whoever should attempt it, might be put to death with"impunity, or even a prosecution, on that account."
The people being thus sufficiently secured by the rightof appeal, on the one hand, and the protection ef theirtribunes on the other; that the persons of the tribunesmight be sacred and inviolable, they revived some anicient ceremonies, now almost forgot. And, that theymight not only have religion for their defence, but anexpiess law in their favour, they enacted, " That who-"ever should maltreat the tribunes of the people, ^Ediles"and judges, or decemvirs, his head should be devoted"to Jupiter, and his family exposed to sale, at the tem-"pie of Ceres, Liber, and Libera." The lawyers con­tend, that by this law, no man's person is rendered sa­cred; but that the man who does any of them a manifest


 







OCR Output








TO HIS GRACE . .
ALEXANDER,
DUKE OF GORDON,
IN
TESTIMONY OF THAT VENERATIONAND DUTY, WHICH HE OWESTO HIS ILLUSTRIOUS PATRON''AND GENEROUS BENEFACTORj
THE FOLLOWING
TRANSLATION,
IS, WITH
GREAT SUBMISSION,
GRATITUDE, AND RESPECT,
INSCRIBED BY
HIS GRACE'S MOST OBEDIENT,MUCH OBLIGED,
AND
• VERY HUMBLE SERVANT,
WILLIAM GORDON.







OCR Output








28* TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK III.


following effect. "Speeches are only necessary to sup-"port causes that are doubtful; I shall not, therefore,"take up your time in enumerating the crimes of a man,"whose cruelty laid you under the necessity of taking"up arms, to rescue yourselves from it; nor will 1 give"him leave to aggravate his crimes, by the impudence"of defending them. I shall not, therefore, Appius"Claudius, touch upon your flagitious practices for the"whole space of two years. There is one crime only,"to which I shall confme my charge, and of which, if*' you do not instantly clear yourself, I order you to be"led to prison. Why did you, contrary to law, refuse"a person, whose liberty was brought into dispute, the"possession of that liberty, till the trial was over?" ,
Appius had no hope of assistance from the tribunes,noi- from the voices of the people; nevertheless, he cal­led upon the tribunes; and finding none of them inter­posing, when the officer laid hold of him to drag himawav. he called out, / appeal. That word, the pillar ofpopular liberty, from a man who had so lately violatedine laws of liberty, caused an universal silence. Thev.uiloquy of every one was,—" It is plain there are gods,"who make human affairs their care. The punishment"of cruelty and pride is slow, but severe. Is the man"who abolished all appeals, now reduced to have re-"course to them, and to implore the protection of that"' very people, of whose rights he was the subverter?—"Is the unjust judge, who gave up a free person to sla-"very, now himself abandoned to chains and prison,"without the least sOpport from his privilege of liberty';"'Amidst the murmurs of the people, Appius was heardimploring their protection. He enumerated the greatservices his ancestors had done to the state, both in peaceand in war. "He deplored his unhappy zeal for the"interests of the people, which had induced him tore-"nounce the consulship, to establish an equal right a-"mong all the citizens, by a scheme of new laws, though"by that mean's he had drawn the displeasure of the"whole senate upon him: and though the laws ihem-"selves he had lately instituted, were still in force, their*' author was now to be dragged to prison. With re—"spect to other matters, he would render an account of


 







OCR Output








4t2 TITUS L1VIUS' BOOK V.


to put many boys at th-e same time nnder the care ofone master; a practice among the Greeks at.this day.The master who hail the greatest character for erudition,as is generally the case, had the charge of the youth ofgreatest distinction. This man, in time of peace, usual­ly carried his pupils out before the city, to play aud ex­ercise themselves. Nor during this war did he discon­tinue it, sometimes carrying them a little, and sometimesa greater way from the city. Eut, at last, having foundhis opportunity, he decoyed them by play and enter­taining tales, farther from the gates than usual; first tothe Roman out-posts, then to the camp, till at last helanded them. quite at Camillas' tent. There he crownedhis villainous action with as villainous a speech, viz. thathe- now delivered Falerii into the hands of the Romans,putting these young gentlemen under his power, whosefathers had the principal sway in the city.
When Camillas had heard the scoundrel to an end,he replied, ' Execrable wretch, thou dost not approacheither a general, or a people, with thy impious pre­sent, like thyself. With the Falisci, we have indeedno express-and formal alliance ; but that which naturehath established between all men, both does and shaltsubsist between us. War has its rights, and so haspeace, and we have learned to make it with no lessjustice than valour. We are in arms, it is true, butnot against that age, which is spared even in citiestaken by storm, but against men, armed likeourselves;and these too, who without any injury or provocationfrom us, attacked the Roman camp at Veii: them*to the utmost of thy power, thou hast exceeded, by acrime of an extraordinary nature. But, as for me, Ishall conquer, as at Veii, by Roman arts, by valour,works, and arms.'
The traitor was then stripped, his hands tied behindhis back, and then delivered up to his pupils, who werefurnished with rods, to whip him all the way to the city.This spectacle brought prodigious crowds of people,when the magistrates convened the senate, to deliberateabout an affair that seemed so extraordinary. So greata revolution in their sentiments did this circumstanceeffect, that they who before had been so inflamed withhatred and resentment, that they would have preferred







OCR Output








CHAP. 50. ROMAN HISTORY. 475


« charge of the Sybilline books, should be consulted• about the proper mode of purification. That by publicauthority, a league of hospitality should be made withthe people of Caere *, who had given a safe retreat tothe Roman priests and sacred things, and by whosefavour, the worship of the immortal gods had sufferedno interruption. That the Capitoline games should becelebrated in honour of Jupiter, the best and greatest,who in all the misfortunes that had happened, had pre­served his august abode, and the citadel of Rome ; andthat the dictator Camiltus should constitute a college ofpersons, chosen from among the inhabitants of the ca-pitol and citadel, to superintend that affair.'It was also moved, that expiation should likewise bemade for the neglect of the miraculous voice heard inthe night, which gave warning of the impending calami­ty, before any war with the Gauis was thought of, and atemple ordered to be erected to Aius Locutius-^, in theNew Street. It was likewise ordered, that the 'gold,which had been rescued from the Gauls, and that whichin their greatest danger had been taken out of the othertemples, and conveyed to the chapel of Jupiter, shouldbe deemed sacred, and deposited at his shrine, becausein their confusion, they could not recollect the places towhich it ought to be returned.
The religion of the Romans had before been conspi­cuous, in the behaviour of the ladies, when the publicwas at a loss to make up the stipulated ransom to theGauls, in supplying that deficiency, that the sacred trea­sure might not be touched; for which act of generosity,they had thanks returned them, and moreover the ho­nour decreed them, of having funeral orations pronouncedover them after their death, as well as the men. Afterthe duties of religion, and such things as could be trans­acted by means of the senate, had been performed, thetribunes began, in their daily harangues, to resume the.old .plea, and urge the people to abandon Rome in ruins,and remove to Veii, a city ready built and furnished,when Camillas appeared in the assembly of the people,attended by the whole body of the senate, and spoke tothe following effect.
# Hence, Cxremonia, from Ccere and Mantre.f 1 be speaking god.







OCR Output








CHAP. 44. ROMAN HISTORY. 265


place, they brought back his corpse, affirming, that Sic-cius had not been killed by the ^enemy, but by his ownparty. The indignation of the army was inconceivable.They were determined to carry the body forthwith toRome, had not the decemvirs prevented them by hasten­ing to bury him, at the public charge, with all the ho­nours of war. The soldiers accompanied his funeral intears, and openly threw out the bitterest invectivesagainst the decemvirs.
- . . -. •"
CHAP. XL1V.
w I
The villainy of-Appius.
J. HE other act of villainy originated in a criminal pas­sion, which was perpetrated in the city, as deplorable in theevent, as the rape and murder of Lucretia, which expel­led the Tarquins, both from the city and kingdom; thatthe last blow to the power of the decemvirs, might notonly be similar to that of the kings, but that their catas­trophe might proceed from the same kind of cause.Appius Claudius was struck with the charms of a ple­beian beauty, and thought of nothing but the means ofgratifying-his criminal desires. Her father, L. Virginias,held an honourable pos^ia the army at the Algidus, andbesides was much respected as a man of integrity andcourage. His wife's priaciples had been strictly virtuou?,and his childrens education was completely so.
He had promised her in marriage to L. Icilius, who hadbeen a tribune, a man of spirit, and had given proofs ofhis courage, in the cause of the commons.
Deeply impressed with the exquisite beauty, and theblooming graces of youth, he discovered in this fair one,Appiu? attempted to make his way, by means of presentsami fair promises: But, fmding that her virtue was proofagainst these arts, he resolved to have recourse to force,however cruel and insolent it might appear. Thmkinghe never could have a better opportunity to execute hiswicked purposes, than when her father was absent, heordered M. Claudius, a creature of his own, to claim heras his slave; and by no means to leave her at liberty,upon bail, till the cause should be determined.







OCR Output








402 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK V.


This proceeding gave great offence to the other statesof Etruria, who not only had an aversion to monarchy,but a particular dislike to this king. His person andpride had formerly rendered him odious to the people,in having violently interrupted the yearly games, anyintermission in which was reckoned criminal. He hadstood candidate tor the office of high-priest, and by thesuffrage of the twelve Lucomonies, saw another prefer­red; in resentment of which affront, he took an oppor­tunity, when the games were at the height, to call offactors at a moment's warning, of which the greatestpart were his own slaves. For this reason, the Etrurians,of all the nations the most superstitious, and the mostprecise in the observance of every religious rite, weredetermined to suffer the Vejentes to stand on their ownlegs, whilst '.hey were subject to a king. The accountsof this resolution were suppressed at Veii for fear of theking, who would have treated the retailer of such intel­ligence as a disturber of the peace, whatever authorityhe had for the report he circulated. The Romans werenot without intelligence, that all was quiet in Etruria;yet as they had been advised that this affair had beendebated in all their councils, they raised fortifications tohave a double effect, and fronting different ways, to se­cure themselves against the city, and the sallies of thebesieged, and to prevent any succours that might comefrom Etruria.
CHAP. II.
A Winter . Campaign determined on, and oppoted by tlieTribunes.
j. HE Roman generals, thinking it would be morepracticable to starve the city by a blockade, than to carryit by assault, ordered barracks to be built to defend themfrom the rigour of the season, a thing absolutely unknownto the Roman soldiery, as they were determined to con­tinue the war during the winter. When the noise ofthis resolution reached Rome, the.tribunes, who had beenlong at a loss for materials to raise a combustion, imme­diately repaired to the assembly, with a view to exaspe­rate the people; representing, ' That they might now







OCR Output








CHAP. 55. .ROMAN HISTORY 483


CHAP. LV.
Camillus prevails.
V-/AMILLUS's arguments, in general, but especiallythose drawn from religion, are allowed to have left avery strong impression with the people; but a chanceword, seasonably spoken, determined them entirely. Forsome moments after, when the senate had met in theCuria Hostilia, to deliberate on these things, the cohorts,as they were returning from guard, passed in a bodythrough the forum, and a centurion called out in the co-mitium, 'Ensign, plant your colours, we shall be very welt'here:' upon which, the senators ran out of the temple,crying, We .accept the omen. The multitude standingaround, unanimously approved the motion.
The law being afterwards rejected, they began tobuild the city, without forming a plan, or regarding pro­perty. The public supplied them with tiles, and per­mitted them to take stones or other materials, whereverthey found it convenient; exacting security, however,from every one, that his house should be finished intwelve months. The hurry they were in prevented themfrom paying the least regard to regularity in the streets:For every man, without minding property, laid the foun­dation of his house in the first empty place that occur­red; for which reason, the old sewers, which had origi­nally run through the streets, now ran everywhere un­der the houses; and the city had more the appearanceof being populous, than of being regularly disposed.


FINIS.







OCR Output








448 . - TITUS IL1VIUS' BOOKV.


that it had been -better Veil had never been taken, thanRome be thus deserted.
As the Patricians abstained from all violence, and on-•lv.employed prayers and entreaties upon this occasion,which they mingled with frequeut mention of the gods,it became a point of'religion with most of the tribe? , sothat the law was rejected, though it was only by a ma­jority of one of the tribes. The senate were so overjoy­ed at this victory, that -the next day, upon a motionmade by the consuls, the senate enacted, that seven acres.of the lands of Veii should be assigned to each commoner;not only to every father of a family, but to every singleperson of free condition ia his family, as an inducementto them to marry and bring up children.
x "•".. CHAP. XXXI. .
New enemies start up against Rome. A. R. 36O.
J. HEpeople were so sensible of this obligation, that theysuffered the comitia to be held for electing consuls, with­out the least opposition. The fasces were accordinglytransferred to L. Valerius Potitus, and M. Manlrus, whoafterwards gotthe sirnanie of Capitolinus. These consulscelebrated the great games which M. Furius had vowed,when dictator in the Vejentian war.
This year also, the temple of queen Juno, vowed bythe same dictator, during the same war, was dedicated;when, by all accounts, the zeal of the Roman ladiesrendered the ceremony particularly splendid. With the.32qni there was an action at the Algidus, but of no greatconsideration, as the enemy were routed almost beforethey had struck a stroke: Valerius had a triumph decreedhim, because he pursued the enemy farther, and didmore execution than Manlius, who was only honouredwith an ovation. . ,
In this same year, anew war broke out with the Volsi-nienses, against whom no new army could be led, becausea famine and pestilence, occasioned by an excessive hotand dry season, then raged in the Roman territory.This gave the Volsinienses so much-assurance, that 11







OCR Output








CHAP. 24. ROMAN HISTORY. 139


rest from making their appearance, either in the senate-house, or forum. The thmness of the house preventedthem from entering upon business. This circumstancewas only considered by,the mob, as an evasion to gaintime. They exclaimed, that the senators had absentedthemselves not from fear, nor any accidental cause, butfrom design to elude their demand. That the consulsthemselves only trifled with them, and it was too evidentrthat they only insulted their miseries.
To so great a height did the ?edition rise, that therespect due to consular authority, could hardly restrainthe violence of the mutineers. At tength, however, thefathers, persuaded that it would be full as dangerous tostay at home, as to appear, came to the senate-house:but though by this time the house was full, the memberswere far from being unanimous; nay, the consuls them­selves were divided in their sentiments. Appius, a manof a violent temper, was of opinion, that this insurrec­tion should be suppressed by the authority of the con­suls; and that if one or two of them were seized, therest would be quiet of course. Serviiius, who was moremoderate, gave it as his opinion, that whilst the peoplewere in this ferment, it would not oniy be easier, but amuch safer measure, to bend, than to break them. Butamidst these debates and deliberations, something stiltmore alarming occurred.
CHAP. XXIV.
War with the Volsci.
V^OURIERS came post from Latium, with the disa­greeable advice that the Volsci had taken the field witha numerous army, and were in full march to lay siegeto the city; which intelligence, so much had those in­testine broils divided the city, produced very differenteffects in the senate, and among the people. The po­pulace exulted with joy, crying out that the gods werecoming to avenge the pride of the fathers. They ex­horted each other, not to give in their names for the war;if they must go to perdition, let it be in company withill the orders of the state, and not by themselves.—That







OCR Output








CUAP. 2. ROMAN HISTORY.


reasonable thain the former, they would, at the begin­ning, have fought it fairly, whatever their disadvan­tages, rather than have such laws wreathed about theirnecks. Because they had been indulged at first in tri­bunes, they must be again indulged. To see an endof their dissensions, was impossible, so long as senatorsand tribunes existed in the same state. Either the Pa­trician order, or these demagogues, must be kickedout of the community. It is better late than never atall, to stem the torrent of their insolence and temerity.Shall they sow dissension at home, and thereby armthe neighbouring nations against us; whilst, at thesame time, they prohibit the citizens from repelling aninvasion they had brought upon them, and not smartfor their impudence ? Shall they give every encourage­ment to the enemy, but the ceremony of an invitation,and not permit an army to be levied to make headagainst them? But this Canuleius has the effrontery todeclare in open senate, that if the Patricians will notreceive his laws, as those ot a despotic conqueror, hewill not suffer a single man to enlist. Ls not this anopen declaration, a plain menace, that he will betrayhis country ?—That he will suffer it to be invested, andcalmly stand by and see it takeu? Such a sentiment?with what courage must it inspire—not the Romanpeople—but their declared enemies, the JEqu\, Volsci,and Vejentes? Conducted by this demagogue, canthey look for any thing less, than the possession of thecitadel and capitol, if the fathers, together with theirdignity and civil rights, do not also surrender to thetribunes their courage and resolution? But they wouldhave them to know, that the consuls were determinedto take the lead in extirpating wickedness at home, be­fore they stirred to oppose the incursions of the enemy,'
CHAP. IIL
Speech of Canuleius.
Vv H1LST these things were warmly insisted on in thesenate, Canuleius, in defence of his laws, and in opposi­tion to the consuls, spoke to the following effect: 'I







OCR Output













OCR Output








CHAP. 57. ROMAN IllSTORY. . 393


tion, the senate, as the last resource in cases of imminentdanger, immediately ordered a dictator to be named; acircumstance, which, it is said, greatly oflended Juliusand Cornelius, and produced very warm disputes withthe senate; and when the principal of that order com­plained that the military tribunes refused to subject them­selves to the authority of the senate, and at last had re­course to the tribunes of the people, alledging they hadprecedents, where, in similar cases, consuls had beenover-ruled by the authority of the tribunes. The tri­bunes, far from being dissatisfied with this misunder­standing among the fathers, told them that it was ridi­culous to expect any assistance from them, wjiom theydid .not respect as citizens, nor regard as men. That ifever the honours and government of the state should becommon to both orders, they should soon be convinced,that the decrees of the senate should not become voidthrough the insolence of any magistrate whatever. Inthe mean time, the Patricians, who seemed amenable to-ueither laws nor Magistrates, might exercise the authori­ty of tribunes for themselves.
CHAP. LVII.
* f
A Dictator created, who dispels the storm at Antium.
i HIS dispute had engrossed the public attention at amost unseasonable conjuncture,.when they had so greata war upon their hands, whilst Julius and Cornelius hadIong held forth, in alternate harangues, the mjustice ofwresting from them the honours the people had bestow­ed on theni, as they were sufficiently qualified them­selves for doing their duty as generals, and conductingthe war; when Ahala Servilius rose up, and represented.That he had long been silent, not because he was at aloss how to act ,as the interests of a good citizen were* never separated from those of the public, but bi^-ausehe would have wished that his colleagues had volun­tarily submitted to the authority of the senate, ratherthan to have suffered them to apply 10 the power of thetribunes to compel them. That even then, did the si­tuation of affairs permit, he would most cheerfully give







OCR Output








456 , TITUS LIVKJS' BOOK V.


on the spot. Whilst he was stripping off his spoils, hewas known by the enemy, and the report immediatelyspread through the whole army, that it was one of thelioman ambassadors. From that moment, all hostilitiesceased against the Clusians. A retreat was sounded,and nothing was heard but threats of vengeance againstRome.
Some were of opinion, that they should instantlymarch thither; but the advice of the elder in the councilprevailed, who were of opinion, that they ought to beginby sending deputies to Rome, to complain of what badhappened, and to require that the Fabii should be deli­vered into their hands/ for having violated their charac­ter, and with it, the law of nations.
After the Gaulic deputies had thus delivered theircommission, and made their demand, the senate weremuch dissatisfied with the conduct of the Fabii, and madeno objection to the justice of what the Barbarians insistedon. But a vicious complaisance for young persons oftheir distinction, prevented the senators from determin­ing what they thought no more than reasonable, on thisoccasion. Wherefore, that they might not be charge­able with the consequences, with which a rupture withthe Gauls might be attended, they referred the affair to ithe decision of the people. There the power and influ­ence of the delinquents prevailed so much, that far frompunishing them, the people named them to the militarytribuneship for the following year: The deputies, full ofthat indignation which may be easily conceived, return­ed, breathing only war and revenge. With the threeFabii, Q. Sulpicius Longus, Q. Servilius, a fourth time,nnd Ser. Cornelius Maluginensis, were created militarytribunes.
CHAP. XXXVII.
• The Gauls march to Rome.
VV HEN Rome was threatened with such an inunda­tion of misery, she did not, as was usual, in the warsagainst the Fidenates, Vejentes, and other neighbouring •states, apply the last and most vigorous measure, in ap-"ointing a dictator; so much does fortune infatuate m en,







OCR Output








CHAP. 2. . ROMAN HISTORY. 10?


number of that order, which had suffered greatly fromthe king's butcheries, he drafted the principal of theEquestrian order, to make the number of the fathersthree hundred. Hence, it is said, arose the distinctionef fathers and conscript fathers; when they were calledto the senate, they who were added to the list to makeup the new senate, being called conscript. It is impos­sible to conceive how much this measure contributed tothe unanimity, and mutual friendship of senate and peo­ple.
CHAP. II.
Constrains Tarquinius Collatinus, on suspicion of an attach­ment to the Tarquins, to resign the consulship, and leaveRome.
IMMEDIATELY after these regulations they turnedtheir attention to matters of religion, and as some part ofpublic worship had belonged to the regal function, thatthe want of kings might not be felt in this respect, theycreated a magistrate for the purpose, and gave him thetitle of king of sacred things. This office they made sub­ordinate to the pontificate, that the specious title mightno way obstruct their liberty, which had now becometheir principal concern: and I am not certain, but theirzeal in securing it, even in matters of very little moment,carried them too far. For the very name of the otherconsul, to whose conduct they could have no objectionbesides, became odious to the state. They reflected,"That habit had made it constititutional in the Tarquins"to affect sovereign power. That this had originated"in Priscus, whom Servius Tullius had indeed succeed-"ed, but what then? During his whole reign, was not"Tarquin the proud claiming an exclusive right, though"he saw another in possession, and at last, by proceed-"ings the most villainous and violent, did he not seizeon the supreme power, as the hereditary domain of hisfamily? Tarquin the proud is banished, it is true; butis not the supreme authority vested in Tarquin of Col-Iatia? The Tarquins cannot exist in a private station—it is morally impossible ;—there is a harshness :i»the very name,—it will never chime with liberty."







OCR Output








CHAP. 51. ROMAN HISTORY. 385


CHAP. LI.
The Trial of the mutinous Soldiers. Contests between the, Orders.
Q- FABIUS VILULANUS, being declared inter-rex.held the comitia; when A. Cornelius Cossus, and L. Fu-rius Medullinus, were created consuls. In the beginningof their administration, the senate enacted, that the tri­bunes should, without loss of time, lay the affair of theenquiry into the murder of Posthumius, before the as­sembly of the people; and that it should be left to thepeople to appoint whom thev pleased to preside in thatenquiry. The commons, .with the concurrence of thewhole body of the people, committed the charge of thismatter to the two consuls. They executed their com­mission with great lenity and moderation; and the fewexamples thai were made, are generally believed to haveprevented the execution of their sentence by a voluntarydeath. Yet all these precautions did not stop the mouthsof the people, who complained bitterly, that the billswhich were brought in for their account, were sufferedto ly on the table neglected and protracted for so manyytars, whilst one for shedding their blood, and bringingthem to punishment, was put in execution directly, andwith rigour. Now was the time, after the punishment ofthe seditious soldiers, for soothing the minds of the peo­ple, by a distribution of the lands of Vola;. The senatorsin that case, would have diminished the ardour of thepeople, in pushing the Agrarian law, which was calcu­lated to dispossess the Patricians of the property of thepublic they had unjustly usurped. The people, at thattime, were much exasperated with this provoking con­sideration, that the nobility not only persisted' obstinate­ly in retaining the public lands, of which they were vio­lent possessors, but also prevented the distribution ofthose lately taken from the enemy, .now vacant, -whichwould also soon become the prey of a few Patricians, asthe rest had done before.
The same year, the consul Furius led the legionsagainst the Volsci, who were ravaging Ae territory of







OCR Output













OCR Output








42 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK. I.


Upon hearing the name of Numa mentioned, the Romanfathers, although they saw that the balance of powerwould be in favour of the Sabines, should they take aking of that nation; yet none of them had the assuranceto put himself or any of his party, or in fine; any ol thesenators or citizens in competition with him, so that to aman, they all agreed to confer the kingdom on NumaPompilius.
Being brought to Rome, in imitation of Romulus, whobefore the city was built, was raised to the throne byAugury, he made it a point that the gods should also beconsulted concerning his election. He was then led intothe citadel by an Augur, (who ever after had the honourto perform that ceremony on public occasions,) and set ona stone with his face to the south. The Augur sat downon the left, his head covered with a veil, and a crookedrod in his right hand, without a knot, which he called Li-tuus. Having from thence taken a cursory view of townand country, and prayed for him, he marked out thequarters of the heavens, from east to west, calling that tothe south, the right; and that to the north, the left; thenlooking forward as far as his eye could reach, he mark­ed the bounds in his mind. Then shifting the Lituus tohis left hand, his right hand being laid on the head ofNuma, he prayed thus: "O father, Jupiter, if thou ap-"provest of the choice of the Romans, in Numa Pom-"pilius, whose head I hold, to be their king, I beseech"thee, give us some sure and evident signs, expressive"of thy pleasure, within the bounds I have marked"out."" Then he mentioned the omens he wished toappear; and these being seen, Numa is declared king,and comes down'from the temple.
CHAP. XIX.
Numa builds tlie temple ef Janus.
UMA being thus raised to the throne, lays a planby justice, laws, and wise regulations, to give the city amore solid foundation, than that which was laid by forceof arms. But as he was extremely sensible, that it would







OCR Output








CHAP. 51. ROMAN HISTORY. 89


extorted by parricide, the Latins, being a distinct peo­ple, were under no obligation to follow the example.But if the Romans now repent of what they have done,being butchered, exiled, and robbed, one after another,by that rapacious wretch, can the Latins find in Tar-quin, a less cruel and covetous master? If they willtake my advice, they will immediately return home,"and mind the assembly day no more than he that ap-"pointed it."
Whilst this seditious and enterprising man, who hadby his address amassed a great fortune at home, wasproceeding in invectives against Tarquin, he made hisappearance in the assembly, which put an end to theharangue. Every one turned about to pay his compli­ments to Tarquin, who, when silence was made, beingput in mind by some that sat next him, that he ought tomake an apology for coming so late; he answered, " That"he had been engaged making up a difference between"a father and a son; and that his concern to see them"reconciled, had detained him so long." It is said, Tur-nus did not suffer this excuse to pass uncensured; for hetold him, "That no process on earth could be shorter"than between a father and son, nor required a briefer"sentence ;• if the son would not obey the father, he"would be considered as a worthless wretch."
'CHAP. LI.
Tarquin conspires against Turnus.
JL HE Arician, having thus cavalierly rated the R"p--man king, left the council; which sinking deeper in thestomach of Tarquin, than he choosed to express, he im­mediately plots against the life of Turnus, with a view,in his fate; to impress the minds of the Latms with thesame ideas of terror 6y. which he had over-awed theminds of his own subjects. And because he had noauthority to put him to death onenly, he procured hisdestruction/. though innocent, by a fictitious impeach­ment.
By means of some Aricians, of an opposite party, he-prevailed on Turnus's slave, for a sum of money, to







OCR Output








TITUS LIVIUS'
ROMAN HISTORY,


BOOK' IV.


DISPUTES WITH THE TRIBUNES, RELATIVE TO INTER-MAR­RIAGES BETWEEN THE ORDERS; THE PARTICIPATION OFSTATE.OFFICES, AND A DIVISION OP THE LANDS. InsTI-^TUTION OF MILITARY TRIBUNES WITH CONSULAR POWER,AND THE QUiSSTORSHIP. WARS WITH THE VOLSCI, THE
'Xq.VI, FIDENATES, &C.


CHAP. I,


New laws proposed by Canukius, not relished by theSenate.
JL H.E former consuls were succeeded in their office byM. Genutius and C. Curtius. They had a troublesomeyear both at home and abroad: format its commence­ment, C. Canuleius, one of the tribunes, proposed a lawfor permitting inter-marriages between the Patricians andPlebeians, which the Patricians considered as a pollutionof their blood, and a perturbation of family distinctions:and what was at first only hinted with some degree ofdiffidence by the tribunes, that the people should be atliberty to choose one of the consuls out of their ownorder, was afterwards carried so'high, that niue tribunespreferred a bill, ' Empowering the people to elect the* consuls indiscriminately out of the senate or people;'which, should it be passed into a law, the Patriciansimagined, would not only bring them down to the level







OCR Output








492 CONTENTS.


Chap. - Page
x. The Volsci beat. Peace restored to Ardea.
The consul triumphs 326
xi. Reparation made the Ardeates for the sel­fish award of the I'omun people...... 327
xii. A famine. A superintendant of provisions
chosen 328
xni. Designs of Maalius. A Dictator created, 330
xiv. Servilius cuts offMaetins 332
xv. The dictator accounts to the people for the
punishment of Msjius 353
xvi. Mielius's house demolished, and his effects
confiscated ., 334
xvii. The Roman ambassadors murdered at Fi-
denae . „ 335
\viii. Battle with Tolumnius 337
xix. Gallantry of Cossus:—defeat of the confe­derates 838
xx. Cossus presents Opima Spolia to Jupiter
Feretrius ., 339
xxi. An epideraical distemper rages amongthe Vejentes and Falisci. The Fide-nates attempt a descent on the Roman
territory 341
xxii. The Volsci and Fidenates beat, and Fide-
nse taken 342
xxiii. The conquered are again in motion 343
xxiv. The dictator passes a popular law, which is
highly resented by the censors 344
xxv. Complaints of the tribunes, that they wereneglected by the people. A pesti­lence rages 345
xxvi. The tribunes compel the consuls to name a
dictator 347
xxvii. The dictator marches against the /Equi and
Volsci 349
xxviii. Battle with the jEqui and Voisci 350
xxix. The Dictator returns in triumph 352
xxx. The Vejentes in motion. A terrible drought
followed by a plague 353
xxxi. Miscarriage of the military tribunes. A
dictator named 355
ssxxii. The Dictator addresses the people. Action
with the confederates 356







OCR Output








CHAP. 28. ROMAN HISTORY. y-1


CHAP. XXVIII.
Mettus Fuffetius punished,
1 HEN the Alban army, who had only been spectators.of the action, were led down into the plain. Mettus con­gratulates Tullus on his victory, and Tullus returns thecompliment with a good grace. He then orders the Al-bans to join their camp to his, and wishes much prospe­rity to follow the junction. Preparations are made for asacrifice of purification against next day.
All things being prepared, as usual, both armies aresummoned to an assembly. The heralds beginning atthe outmost lines, gave the first intimation to the Albans,who instigated with curiosity, crowded round the king tohear his speech. The Roman legion stood round theAlbans, as previously ordered, in arms; and the centu­rions were appointed to see the orders put in immediateexecution.
Then Tullus addresses himself as follows: "Ifever"O Romans, in any war, you had reason first to thank"the gods for their protection, and to congratulate your-"selves, on your own bravery, it was certainly in yes-"terday's action. For you had to contend not only"with your enemy's forces, but what is much more"dangerous and terrible, with the treachery and perfi-"diousness of friends. For, be no longer deceived, it"was not by my orders, the Albans retired to the hills."I suffered you to believe, and even declared aloud,"that it was my command, that you might not take the"alarm at being deserted, and to spread terror among"the enemies, who thought they were to have been at-"tacked in the rear. But all the Albans are not cul­pable. They followed their iertder as you wouldhave done, had I given yoa the like orders. It wasMettus drew them after him: It was Mettus who was'the contriver of this war: It is Mettus who is the vio-'later of the Roman and Alban treaty. Let any one'copy after him, if I do not make him this day a no­torious example to all mankind." At that instant,Mettus was surrounded by the Qenturions in arms, and







OCR Output








CHAP. 02. ROMAN HISTORY. 293


'•' tion? Why were they afraid of a general battle, which"would at cuice decide the controversy?"
CHAP. LXII.
Battle with the Sabines.
.l HE Romans had by this time sufficiently recoveredtheir coprage, and they were now fired with indignation.What! said they, shall the other army return with lau­rels to the city, whilst we are perpetually abused- and in­sulted by the enemy? If ever we shall be a match forour enemies,—it is now. The consul perceiving thesemurmurings of the soldiers in the camp, he called an as­sembly, and addressed them to the following effect:** 1 suppose, soldiers, you have heard of the battle atthe Algidus, where the behaviour of the army hasbeen such, as became the sons of liberty. The mas­terly conduct of my colleague, and the noble exertionsof the troops under his command, have obtained acomplete victory. With respect to me, I shall takesuch measures, and pursue such plan of operation, asshall appear most agreeable to you. We have it inour power, to protract the war with advantage, or tofinish it immediately. If the war must be protracted,I will follow the same plan 1 adopted in the begin­ning, for increasing youi- hopes and confirming yourvalour.' If you think that sufficiently done already,as a sign of your inclination" and bravery, raise such ashout, as you would do, were you instantly to make«. an attack.'"
The soldiers, with great cheerfulness, set up a terribleshout, when he assured them," He would comply with"their wishes, and lead them to battle next day, which"he prayed miglit be auspicious." They spent the restof that day in preparing their arms. Next morning, theSabines , who were no less eager to engage, the momentthey perceived the Roman army drawn up in order ofbattle, marched out likewise. The exertions on bothsides were such, as might be expected of two armies con­fident of victory, the one animated with theirancientandperpetual glory, and the othtr flushed with their recent


 







OCR Output








CHAP. 46. ROMAN HISTORY. 377


them in the city, their desire of commanding alone be­ing not in the least abated, broke out with still greaterfury in the camp. In sentiment they never agreed;and each stuck inflexibly to his own.; Each was for ,having no counsels followed, and no orders executed buthis own. The only point agreed in, was a sovereigncontempt for each other; till upon a remonstrance fromtheir lieutenant-generals, matters were so ordered, thatthey were to command each his day alternately-*''
\Vhen these accounts came to Rome, Servilins, whoseexperience was equal to his years, is said to have im­plored the gods, that the discord of the tribunes mightnot prove more fatal to the commonwealth, than it hadbeen at Veii: and as if he had seen that some great ca­lamity was at hand, he pressed his soji to make levies,-and be ready to take the'field. He was not mistaken.Sergius, on one of the days, when he' commanded inchief, was drawn by a feigned retreat of the ZEqui, intoa steep and disadvantageous ground close under theirlines, vainly imagining he would make himself masterof iheir camp. By a sudden sally from the canty, theJRqai drove them down the precipice, nudjmore of themwere dashed to pieces by the^weight of the fall down thedeclivity, than fell by the precipitancy of their flight.With much difficulty the Romans kept possession of theircamp that day; and the next, when they ^aw themselvesinvested almost on every side by the enemy, they madetheir escape out at a back gate and shamefully aban­doned it. The generals with thtir lieutenants, and thebest troops, that did not quit the ensigns, retired to Tus-culum, whilst the rest, dispersing- themselves about thecountry, came to Rome by different ways, and repre­sented their loss much greater than it really was.
At Rbme the alarm was less, both because in -theirfears they had anticipated all that happened, and youngServilius had got together a new body of recruits to as­sist them upon occasion. The inferior magistrates also,by his order quieted the commotions in the city; and thecouriers who had been -.lispatch«d to inform themselvesof the state of the armies, brought advice, that the ge­neral* and their troops were at Tusculum, and that theenemy still continued in their old-camp. But what re».







OCR Output








404 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK V.


the soTdiers were not slaves, but freemen and fellow-citizens, who ought at least, during the winter, to bepermitted to return to their houses and families, in or­der that once in the year, they might see their fathers,wives, and children, enjoy their liberty, and give theirvoice in the election of magistrates.'Whilst the tribunes were exclaiming in this manner,they found an antagonist in Appius Claudius, who hadbeen left by his colleagues, for the purpose of opposingthe seditious attempts of the tribunes, being highly qua­lified for the task: for from his youth he had beeo.trained to contend with the Plebeians, and had advised,some years before this, as we had occasion to observe, toblunt the edge of tribunitian power, by opposing it toitself,
CHAP. HI.
Appius enters the lists with the Tribunes.
.T\PPIUS, who was remarkable for quickness of con-ception, which too was greatly improve^ by his prac-tice, spoke to the following efi'ect: ' If ever, gentlemen,.there was a doubt, whether it was to promote yourinterest, or their own, that your tribunes are still onthe watch to raise seditions in the state, I am certainthis year must have cleared up every difficulty on thatscore. And whilst I rejoice, that there is now an endof the wild tedious goose-chase they have led you, Icongratulate you, and the republic on your account,that your prosperity hath, in a very peculiar manner,contributed to open your eyes. Is it not .evident to allthe world, that your tribunes were never so sensiblytouched with any injuries you ever received, if indeedyou ever received any, as with the generosity of thesenate to the people, in appointing them pay, whilstemployed in the service of the republic? What else,do you imagine, could have alarmed them at that time,orwhat is it they would wish to disturb now, but allunion between the two. orders of the state, as beingentirely repugnant to their seditious views? ftike ras­cally quack doctor*, by Hercules, they hatch employ-aent for themselves. "Their desire was to see some­







OCR Output








168 . TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


and Lucius Valerius, still more odious to the people, forliis impeachment ot'Sp. Cassius, to be consuls for the en­suing year.
During their consulate, the bickerings with the tri­bunes did not cease; but the law was thrown aside, andits patrons exposed to ridicule, for boasting of good offi­ces they had no power to confer. At this time the Fa­bian family was in high repute, owing to their noble andsteady exertions in opposition to the tribunes, in thecourse of three successive consulships. Wherefore, theconsular dignity was continued in that family for sometime, where it had been so judiciously placed.
After this, the Vejentes commenced hostilities, and theVolsci also take the field. Rome, however, was morethan a match for all her foreign enemies, had her strengthnot been exhausted in domestic wranglings. Moreover,whilst the minds of all ranks were tlrus afflicted, theywere alarmed with celestial prodigies, portending, almostevery day, some signal calamity to town and country.And the soothsayer?, when consulted in a private, as wellas public capacity, sometimes by the entrails, at othersby the flight of birds, could give no other reason whythe gods were displeased, but that the sacrifices had notbeen performed with the proper ceremonies. Their fearshad this effect, that the vestal Opia being convicted ofincontinence, was condemned, and suffered the usual pu­nishment.
CHAP. XLIII.
Great generalship <(f Fabius.
I HEN Q. Fabius and TIaius Julius, were made con­suls. During this year, the civil commotions were asviolent as ever, and the war with the neighbouring statesspread farther than before. For new the jEqu; were inarrri?, and the Vejentes were ravaging the Roman terri­tories. These wars growing still more serious, KJESO Fa­bius and Sp. Furius are chosen consuls.
The /Equi had laid siege to Onona, a Latin city,when the Vejentes, loaded with plunder, threatened tolay siege to Rome itself. Such terrors should no^doubt







OCR Output








CHAP. 53. ROMAN HISTORY. 185


tlie danger,. The testimony of his colleague Virginiustoo, had its own weight, as he generously shared withhim the honour of the success: but what turned the scaleentirely in his favour, was their shame for the sentencethey passed on Menenius, so much was their dispositionchanged upon reflection.
CHAP. LIII.
War with the Vejentes and SubintSi
\ O sooner were their domestic trouble.-, over, than a •war broke out wiih the Vejentes, with whom the Sabineshad joined in a confederacy. The consul,- PubliusValerius, having called in the Latins and Hernici asauxiliaries, was ser.t against Veii- with an army, andimmediately opened the campaign by attacking the campof the Sabines, which they had set down before the wallsof their allies. This struck them wiih such consterna­tion, thai whilst they run different ways in broken com­panies to repel the assailants, the gate where the grandattack began, was carried by the Romans. Within therampart, it was not a contest, but a massacre. Theconfusion from the camp, found its way to the city, andput the Vejentes in such terror, that they run to their arms,asif their city had been taken.' Some of them fly totite assistance of the Sabines, whilst others fall upon theRomans with all their force, who were totally engagedin Carrying the camp. They fell back a little in someconfusion; but recovering themselves, faced about, andforming a double front, made head against both armies.The horse too, by orders of the consul, charging theEtrurians, broke and routed them entirely,
Thus were two armies defeated, and two of the mostopulent and powerful of all the neighbouring states, sub­dued in the same instant of time. Daring these opera-tions at Veii, the .ffiqui and Volsci had encamped in the,Latin territories, and were ravaging the country. With-.out a general, or any other assistance from Rome, theLatins, in conjunction with the Hernici, forced theircamp, and possessed themselves of a va.t booty, besideswhat had been taken from them.. Tlie.consul-C, Nan-







OCR Output








CHAP. 11. ROMAN HISTORY. 121


out the least hurt; ah exertion, that to posterity will ap­pear rather matter of wonder, than of fact.
For such uncommon bravery, the public shewed everymark of respect. A statue was erected for him in theComitium, and he got as much land as he could encirclewith a plough in one day. Nor were private familiesless eager in expressing their gratitude than the public;foi though the scarcity of provisions was great, yet everyone, in proportion to what he had in his family, savedsome part of his own allowance, as a gratuity to him.
CHAP. XI.
Porsenna turns the siege into a blockade.
A ORSENNA being repulsed in his first attempt, re­solved to turn the siege into a blockade; wherefore,havmg garrisoned the Janiculum, he encamped withthe main army upon a plain, along the banks of theTiber. Then having collected boats from all quarters,to enable him to guard the river so effectually, that noprovisions could be conveyed to Rome, and at the sametime, to serve him as transports, when he should chuse,upon occasion, to send foraging parties to one place afteranother, on the other side of the river: in at short time,he so harassed Uie country about the city, that the peo­ple were not only obliged to remove every thing else,but also to drive all their cattle into the city, nor durstany body venture them without the gates.
The Etrurians were permitted to take these liberties,not more through fear, than good policy; for the cpn-^sul Valerius, watching his opportunity of falling on themunexpectedly when a numerous party, and stragglingwithout order through the fields, he suffered smalt par­ties to pass with impunity, reserving the weight of hisindignation for occasions more important.
Therefore to ensnare these ravagers, he ordered mul­titudes of his own people, to drive out the cattle nextday, at the Equiline gate, which lay farthest from theenemy, presuming they would get intelligence; becauseit was hardly possible, that with the closeness of the







OCR Output








CHAP. 17. ROMAN HISTORY. 39


from the senators that stood next him; yet struck as itWere, with awe, for the loss of their father, a mournfulsilence for some time prevailed. Then a few of themleading the way, the rest in one voice supported them,ordering Romulus, their king, and founder of their city,the son of a god, to be addressed as a god. With earnestprayers they invoke his favour and gracious protectionon all occasions, as they had the honour to be his owndescendants.
I know it has been alledged, that he was torn in piecesby the senators; but that report was only retailed inwhispers, and gained little credit. The present conster­nation, joined to the veneration they had for their king,stamped a currency on the first account of the matter,which was still more confirmed by the address of a singlewitness. One Proculus Julius, whilst the city was affect­ed for the loss of their king, and far from being satisfiedwith the fathers, enters the assembly, with a prodigiousair of gravity, as coming to deliver a message of singularimportance. "Romulus," says he, " O Romans, thefather of this city, suddenly descending from his ce­lestial mansion, appeared to me early this morning.Whilst filled with sacred horror and reverential awe,i stood beseeching his permission to look- upon him;Go, says he, tell the Romans, it is the will of the gods,that my Rome shall be the capital of the universe.Let them therefore cultivate the art of war: For they"must know, and they may hand it down to posterity,"that no power on earth shall be able to withstand the"Roman arms."—When he had thus spokeu, he ascend-~ed into heaven. The avidity with which this story wasreceived, and the joy diffused through all ranks, from abelief of the king's immortality, are equally inconceivable.
CHAJ'. .XVII.
i f
The Fathers and people agree to choose a King. ..
J.N the mean time, ambition and plotting about the sue-cession to the throne, entirely engrossed the fathers.They did not form parties for supporting the claim of any







OCR Output








300 TITUS L1VIUS' BOOK III.


Volsci, scarce a match ior the Hernici alone, came inamis to tlie very gates oi Rome, auit went away againunchastised I Our manners mdeed, and the situaiion ofour aiiiiirs, have long been in such a Irain, that I hadno reason to look for much good; but could I havedivmed, that so great an ignominy had been reservedfor this year, I would by death or banishment, if allother means hail failed, have avoided the office whichI now fill. What! might Rome then have been taken,had those who appeared at our gates in arms, not been.poltroons?—Rome taken, whilst 1 was consul!—Ofhonours, I had enough?—of life, enough,—Alas!—more than enough: I should have died in my thirdconsulship. But who are they, Pray> whom the das­tardly enemy have thus despised? Is it us the consul?,or you Romans? If we are culpable, depose us, asunworthy the office we bear; nay, punish us yet moreseverely. If you are in fault, may neither gods normen punish your faults! Only may you repent. No,Romans ; the enemy's confidence is not owing to thehigh opinion they entertain of their own courage, northe low estimate they make of yours. They have beentoo often vanquished?— driven out of their camp ;—amerced in their lands;—obliged to pass under theyoke, not to know themselves and you. Discord aloneis the ruin of this city. The dii-putes between thesenate and commons, while we set no bounds to ourdomineering, nor you to your liberty; while you areweary of Patrician, and we of Plebeian magistrates,raise the courage of the enemy, and make them pre­sumptuous In the name of the immortal gods, whatis it you would have ? You desired tribunes for I he sakeof peace; we granted them. You were keen to havedecemvirs; we consented to their creation. You grew*weary of decemvirs; we obliged them to resign. Yourhatred pursued them to their private stations; and wesuffered you to put to death, or banish.Patrician* ofthe first rank and distinction in the city. Then youwould have your tribunes again; you obtained them.We saw consuls elected of your own faction, and boreit, though to the prejudice of the Patrictans. \Vehave also seen Patrician magistracies, become a per-


 







OCR Output








yK\ TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK III.


CHAP. XLVU.
• The Opposition to the Decree.
VIRGINIUS arrived at Rome by break of day, wherelie was eagerly expected by the people, already assem­bled in the forum. Virginias, clad in mourning, led hisdaughter into the forum, in a tattered gown, accompa­nied by several matrons, and many friends. As he pas­sed along, he solicited the favour of all with an air ofdignity, that seemed to demand their assistance, ratherthan to implore it. He told ilium, " That upon no oc­casion, had he been backward in exposing himself todanger, when the safety of their wives and childrenrequired it; nor could any man in Rome, recount agreater number of great and gallant actions than him­self. But what did the noblest exertions signify tosave the city, if our tyrants exercise upon our childrenat home, all the violence that can be dreaded in a citytaken by assault ?". He went round the assembly ha­ranguing them to this purpose; and Icilius spoke to thepeople in much the same strain. But the silent tears ofthe women who accompanied them, spoke with morefeeling, than any words could express. In spite of allwhich, Appius, who had steeled his heart, now ratherdistracted with an extravagant madness, than overcomewith a spfter passion, mounted his tribunal. The plain­tiff then remonstrating, " That sentence ought to have"passed in his favopr the day before, had it not been"out of complaisance to the people;" before he couldproceed, or Vfrginius make any answer, Appius inter­fered. The preamble, w.ith which he opened his decree,may be justly enough taken down by ancient authors;but, as I can find none that appears even probable con­sidering the unaccountable nature of the sentence itself,I shall content myself with the bare words of the decree,since so much is certain.
"He adjudged her to be a slave." The injustice ofthis sentence, surprised and.confounded all present.—Forsome time there was an universal silence. But when M-.w.ent to seige Virginia, surrounded by a crowd


 







OCR Output








18 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


/m id able junction, united both nations under one nameas well as government, and called them both Latins:Nor from that moment did the Aborigines, in point ofzeal and loyality, chow themselves, in any instance, lessattached than the Trojans, to their king ./Eneas. Where­fore relying on the affections of his united subjects, whobecame more strongly cemented every day, although thepower of the Etrurians was so considerable, that their.fame was not only diffused all over the inland country,but also along the western coast, from the Alps to the• straights of Messina; and, though he could have defend­ed himself within his walls, he led his army out to thefield. The Latins here were once more victorious; but.SLneas was among the slain'. By whatever name he hasa right or title to be called, he was buried on the banksof Numicius *, and is invoked by the name of JupiterIndigei.
CHAP. III. .
Tht reign of Ascanius in Alba ; of JEneas Sylvius, and therest of the Sylvian family.
.A.SCAN1US, the son of /Eneas, was too young to takeupon himself the administration; notwithstanding ofwhich, his dominions came unimpaired into his hands,when of age. For such were the abilities and addressof Lavinia, that during his minority, Latium, andwhere-ever his grandfather's or father's sovereignty extended,stood firm in his favour, under her regency. I questionmuch, (for who would assert for truth, a circumstance ofa date so ancient) whether this Ascanius was the son ofLavinia, or one born before him, of Creusa, before thedestruction of Troy, which Julius Ascanius, his father'scompanion in his flight, the Julian family affect to callthe author of their name?
This Ascanius, wherever, or of whomsoever born, is
^by all admitted to have been the son of /Eneas. He('finding Lavinium was overstocked with inhabitants, left
'that city, flourishing and opulent as it was, considering
*Tlio de Nimi. It ran close by tavinium.







OCR Output








CHAP. 18. ROMAN HISTORY. 337


whose abilities were equal to the charge, left (he Ro­man dominions, and retired beyond the Anio, possessingthemselves of the eminences which lie between the Anioand Fidenae; nor did they venture down upon the plains,before they were joined by the legions of the Falisci.The Etrunans4hea encamped before the walls of Fidenae,when the Roman dictator posted himself at a small dis­tance from them, upon the banks of the two rivers,near their confluence, having drawn lines through theintermediate space, as far as the ground was capable offortification. Tbe next day he drew out his army tobattle, but the enemy were not unanimous in their opi.nioos.
CHAP. XVIII.
Battle with Tolumnius. ,""
1 HE Falisci, being at a distance from their own coun­try, growing weary of the fatigues of war, and havingsufficient confidence in their strength, were clear forfighting: but the Vejentes and Fidenates thought theironly chance lay in protracting the war. Tolumnius,although he approved of the sentiments of his own sub­jects, that the Falisci might not be disgusted with theservice so far from home, gave out that he would leadthem to battle next day. The appearance of hesitationin the enemy, gave new spirits to the dictator and hisRomans; and the next day, whilst the soldiers threaten­ed to storm the city and their camp, if they did not givethem battle, both armies were drawn out to a plain be­tween the two. camps.
Tolumnius being superior in numbers, detached aparty behind the mountains, to attack the Roman camp,during the heat of the engagement. Of the confederatearmy this was the disposition: The Vejentes were postedon the right, the Falisci on the left, and the Fidenatesiu the centre. On the right wing of the Romans thedictator was opposed to the Falisd, Quintius Capitoli-nus to the Vejentes on the left, and the master of thehorse advanced with his cavalry in the centre.
For a little, the armies remained without the least







OCR Output








CHAF. 16. ROMAN HISTORY. 129


CHAP, XVI.
War with the Sabines. Revolt of Pometia. Death ofValerius.
/\FTER this, M. Valerius and P. Posthumius, werechosen consuls. This year the Roman arms were suc­cessful against the Sabines, and the consuls received thehonour of a triumph. Upon this, the Sabines renewedtheir preparations with more vigour than ever. Thebetter to guard against them, and to prevent anv sur­prise from Tusculum, whence they were apprehensive ofa war, though no declaration had ensued, P. Valerius forthe fourth time, and Lucretius for the second time, weremade consuls.
The Sabines were split into two factions, one of whichwere for peace, and the other for war, by which meansa part of their strength was transferred to Rome. ForAtta Clausus, afterwards called Appius Claudius atRome, having always declared for peace, being for thatreason harshly treated, by those in the opposition, forwhom he Was by no means a match, fled from Regillumwith a considerable number of vassals in his retinue, andsettled in Rome. They were made citizens, and hadlands assigned them on the other side of the Anio. Theywent by the name of the old Claudian tribe, and wereafterwards increased with the addition of some smalltribes, which had come from that country. Appiushimself being brought into the senate, in a short timerose to the highest dignity of that order.
The consuls marched into the Sabine territory with anhostile army; and by ravaging their country, and after­wards by defeating them in battle, having reduced themso low, that they had no reason to dread an insurrectionfor a considerable time, returned to Rome in triumph.
The next year in the consulship of Agrippa Menenius,ami P. Posthumius, died P. Valerius, allowed by all tohave been the ablest roan in Rome, both in the arts ofpeace and war, full of glory, but so destitute of thepoods of fortune, that his funeral charges could not beiic frayed from his own estate, 'and he was therefore In* •
•
V-i.







OCR Output








258 TITUS LIVIUS* BOOK III.


had been told that the fathers were in town, but wouldnot acknowledge their authority. They were all order­ed to be sent for; and the meetmg was adjourned till thenext day, -when it was more numerous than the decem­virs themselves expected, which damped the people nota little, as imagining the cause of liberty abandoned bythe fathers, since they had submitted to the authority ofthose, who ought to have been out of office; as if theyhad had a legal title to compel them, who, but for theviolence of their measures, would be only private. persons.
CHAP. XXXIX.
The Decemvirs are told their real character.
.IJUT it seems they showed more submission in coming;to the house, than they did in delivering their opinions.for it is reported of Valerius Potitus, that after AppiitsClaudius had opened the cause of their meeting, and be­fore it came to his turn to give his opinion, be stood up,and demanded to be beard relative te the state of theRepublic. The decemvirs sternly ordered him to sitdown, and hold his peace, but he declared he would goout and lay the matter before the people, which raised aterrible storm. M. Horatius Barbatus also entered verywarmly into the dispute, and loudly called them " ten"Tarquins, the tyrants of their country: at the same"time, reminding them in direct terms, that the Valerii"and Horatii were at the head of the party that expel-'.' led the kings. It was not the regal title that gave"them uneasiness at that time: for there could be DO"harm in a title which was given. to. Jupiter; which,-" Romulus, their founder, and his successors had enjoy-"ed, and to this day retained in religious rites and so-"lemnities. But it was the pride and tyranny of a king"which they abhorred; and if these in a sovereign or"prince of the blood were intolerable, where is the man"that would tamely bear them in ten private persons?"Have a care then, (says he,) lest by restraining the"liberty of speech in this house, you draw not on your-"selves a more severe commentary without doors. lean"see no more impropriety in n>y calling an assembly of.







OCR Output








CHAP. 6. ROMAN HISTORY. 211


der the pressure of these calamities, advices all of a sud­den were brought from the Hernici, that the confederateforces of the /Lqui and Hernici had encamped in theircountry, and were proceeding with a huge army to pil­lage their lands. A thin senate easily discovered to theallies, how much the city had been reduced by the plague,and, besides, carried back this uncomfortabte answer:That the Hernici, in conjunction with the Latins, mustfor this time depend entirely upon their own internalresources, for the anger of the gods had depopulatedRome by a sudden plague. Should the rage of thepestilence subside, they would not be wanting to givetheir allies the assistance they had afforded them lastyear, and on other occasions." Upon this they de­parted more disconsolate than they had set out; for theycould not of themselves support a war, which they couldonly maintain with difficulty, sustained by the Romanensigns.
The enemy did not make a long stay in the countryof the Hernici, but marched in a hostile manner into theterritories of Rome, which were desolate enough withoutthe calamities of war. Meeting nobody with or with­out arms, and finding every thing defenceless and evenuncultivated, they penetrated by the Gabinian way,within three miles of Rome. /Ebutius, one of the con­suls was dead; Servilius his colleague was scarce alive,and most of the nobility were affected, as were the great­er part of the fathers, and also every one else fit to beararms; insomuch, that so far from having forces to stem.the torrent of the war, with which they were threatenedat present, they had not a sufficient number of guardsfor common duty. The senators, whose age and healthpermitted them, mounted guard in person, and stoodsentry. The .ffidiles went the rounds and gave orders:For on them the administration of government, togetherwith the consular authority, had totally devolved.







OCR Output








570 TITUS UVHIS* BOOK IV.


tor, he was acquitted by all the tribes. The memory ofhis venerable father Cincinnatus, is said to have been ofgreat use to him on this occasion, and the intercession ofCapitolinus Quiuctius, now spent with years, who in-treated the people, in the m«st humble manner, thatnow when his life was so near a close, they would notmake him the messenger of news so very distressing toCincinnatus.
CHAP. XLII.
Generous conduct of the four Tribunes, with respect aSeaipronius.
SEX. TEMPANIUS, A. Selling, L. Antistius, Sex.Pompilius, in their absence, were elected tribunes bythe people. The three last, the horse had chosen fortheir centurions, by the advice of Tempanius. The senatefinding, that the name of consul, out of odium to Seru-pronius, gave offence, ordered military tribunes, withconsular power, 10 be created; in consequence of which,the choice fell upon L. Maulius Capitolinus, (1. AntoniusMerenda, and L. Papirius Mugillanus. In the begin­ning of the year, L. Hortensius, one of the tribunes,cite: Sempronius, the late consul to take his trial; and'when four of his colleagues conjured him, in presence ofthe Roman people, not to harrass their general, who wasinnocent, and could be reproached with nothing but bisill fortune; Hortensius took it amiss, imagining theyonly meant to try his resolution, as the delinquent ratherdepended on the assistance, than -the mediation of thetribunes, which was intended only for show: wherefore,turning immediately to Sempronius, he asked him, • Whatwas become of his Patrician spirit, and that confidencewith which a consciousness of innocence would inspirehim, when he, a consul took shelter under the shadowof the tribunes?' Then turning to his colleagues: • Butif I should persist in my prosecution of this delinquent,what part will you act? Will you rob the people oftheir judicative privileges, and overturn the power ofthe iribunes?' They replied, that the Roman peoplehad indisputably a supreme authority over Seraprooni*


 







OCR Output








14. TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


people, for a period of more than seven centuries, mustbe a very laborious task; more especially as from a be­ginning the most inconsiderable, they raised themselvesto a pitch of greatness which they are now hardly ableto support. To the generality of readers, too, I doubtnot, but the origin of the city, and what immediatelyfollowed, will be less interesting, whilst they hurry onto these latter times, when, for several years past, thepower of this extraordinary people hath been engagedin working its own destruction.—On the other hand,should I have no other reward for my trouble, whilemy attention is totally engaged in reviewing those scenesof antiquity, I can at least withdraw mine eyes from be­holding the raging wickedness of the times, and conse­quently be void of care, which, though it may not influ- .ence the mind of a writer, with respect to truth, canvery sensibly hurt his feelings.
What happened before, and about the time the citywas built, as the accounts are rather embellished withpoetical fables than supported by incontestible authorities,I am resolved neither to affirm nor refute. It is an in­dulgence allowed to antiquity, the better to stamp a su­perior dignity on the original of cities, to blend thingshuman with divine: And if any people on earth canpossibly be allowed the privilege of consecrating theiroriginal, and ascribing it to the gods, such is the mili­tary g!"ry of the Roman people, that when they claima pecultar title to call Mars their author, and the fatherof their founder, all the nations bear it as cheerfully asthey submit to their yoke. But these circumstances,anj'mliers of the same nature, however taken or con­sidered, shall give me no concern. I shall only requestthe reader's serious attention to what respects the livesand manners of this people, the men and measures, inthe cabinet and the field, by which their empire wasfounded and exiended. Then let him still continue toobserve, whilst the strictness of their discipline graduallyrelaxed, first a corruption of their morals, then a con­stant progressive decay, and at last a total degeneracy,till he arrive at the present age, when we can neitherbear our political disorders, nor the application of a re*medy.







OCR Output








TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK III.


i . - j
"slaves ami outlaws. Shall they, to whom the gods are"not sacred, have the impudence to insist after this, that"their persons are sacred and mviolable? And, do you"flatter yourselves, that covered as you are with crimes,"hoth betbre gods and men, that you shall pass your"bill this year? By all that is sacred, if you even itffer"to prefer it, the day in which 1 was chosen consul, will"prove more unfortunate, than that on which the re-"public lost Valerius. But my colleague and I have"taken our measures; and first of all, we are to march'the legions against the ^Equi and Volsci. How it'comes about, I cannot say, but the gods are ever morefavourable to us in war than in peace.—What wouldhave been the consequence, had it transpired amongthese nations that the capitol was taken by exiles?However, it is better to form suspicions of what mighthave happened, when all is over, than to put it to the•" test by actual experiment."
CHAP. XX.
. • •The Senate encouraged, and the people depressed.
vigorous a discourse qnite stunned the people. Thesenate pulled -up their spirits, and began to think thatthe republic was restored. The other consul, a betterassessor than principal, easily suffered his colleague to.take the lead in this weighty business, .but claimed tohimself a share in the execution, which appertained hisoffice as consul. The tribunes treated all these me­naces as idle vapouring, asking with an air of contempt,"Where the consuls would get the army they meant"to lead out, for they might be assured, they would"not be suffered to make levies." "\Ve.have occasion"for none," replied Quinctius, " the citizens, when"they took up arms to recover the capitol, all swore to"Valerius, not to lay them down without the consuls"permission : wherefore, we strictly enjoin every sol-"dier, who took that oath, to appear in amis'to-morrow,"at Ihe lake of Rcgillus." The tribunes cavilled, al-ledging, " That the oath did not bind the soldiers to"his obedience, who was then only'a prirate gentleman,







OCR Output








CHAP. 40. ROMAN HISTORY. 16*


"ment, far from depressing, had only exalted his cou-"rage." The same gentlemen were sent back to him;but they were not admitted to his camp. We find also;that the priest?, dressed in their robes of ceremony, wentto wait upon him at the camp, humbly suing for peace;but they succeeded no better than the deputies haddone. . - •
CHAP. XL.
Rome relieved by the intercession of Vituria,.
I HEN the ladie?, in vast crowds, waited on Veturia,-Coriolanus's mother, and Volumnia his wife; whetherby adviee of the senate, or instigated by their own fears,is not said: But they certainly prevailed with Veturia,a very old lady, and Volumnia, carrying her two sons,by Marcius, with her, to walk to the enemy's camp, andtry if the tears and prayers of the women would defendthe city, since the men were no longer able to do it byarms. When they had reached "the camp, and wordcarried lo Coriolanus, that a great train of ladies hadcome to wait upon him: as neither the majesty of a pub­lic deputation, nor the respect due to religion and thepriesthood haJ been capable of moving him, he thoughtbe would be proof against the tears of a troop of women.But when he was told by one of his acquaintances, whohad distinguished Veturia among the rest, by her dis­consolate look, standing between her daughter-in-lawand her grand-children, " If my eyes do not deceive me,"your mother, wife and children are here." Coriolanusthrew himself from his tribunal, almost out of his senses,and run full of anguish to embrace his mother: "Stay,"says she, assuming an air and tone of resentment, insteadof intreaties, " let me know before I receive your em­braces, whether I speak to a son or an enemy; andwhether I am considered as your mother or your cap­tive? Was it for this purpose that my miserable oldage was reserved? Have I lived so long, ouly first tosee you banished, and then the enemy of your coun­try? Have you been capable of ravaging the land"that gave you birth, and brought you up irfits bosonr?







OCR Output








CHAP. 21. ROMAN HISTORY. 45


for advice, or redress, should any innovation be madein their religious ceremonies, either by the-neglect oftheir own, or the substitution of others of foreign growth.But, to preside over matters of religion was not the onlybusiness of the high-priest. He was also to instructthem in the- manner of performing funeral obsequies,and appeasing tiie manes of the dead: what prodigiesfrom thunder or other phaenomena were to be consider­ed as motives to action, or cautions against it. To gainthis divine intelligence, he dedicated an altar to JupiterElicius* on the Aventine mount, where he consulted himby augury, in what acceptation the auguries should betaken.
CHAP. XXI.-
Numa institutes an annual festival, and other sacrifices.
J. HE minds of the people were now so totally engrossedwith these deliberations and expiations, that arms andacts of violence were rather an aversion: and beingmade sensible that the deity presides over all humanaffairs, from their constant practice of religious duties,their sentiments of piety were so sincere, that promisesand oaths, in the government of the city, were as effec­tual as the terror of the laws- and punishment. Andnow since the Roman citizens formed their mannersupon the plan of their royal master, which all consider­ed as the most perfect model; the neighbouring nationsalso, who before had viewed Rome, not in the light ofa city, but a camp set down in the heart of the countryto oppress them, were now impressed with so high anopinion of its sanctity, that to give the least disturbanceto a state entirely devoted to the service of the gods theyreckoned the highest sacrilege.
There was a grove constantly watered by a springissuing from a dark cave, which ran through the middleof it. Because Numa often retired thither by himself,under pretence of meeting with his goddes? , he conse­crated the grove to the Muses, where ho, they, and his
* Prom Atic'.en 1-..







OCR Output








40 TITUS LJVIUS' BOOK I.


individual; for nobody among a people, so lately em?.bodied, was conspicuous enough to have pretensions; thecontest was among the orders. The Sabines contendedthat it was their turn to furnish a king, as on their partnone had succeeded toTatius as joint sovereign with Ro­mulus; and thereby, their constitutional right was indanger of prescription.
The old Romans could not think of swearing allegianceto a foreigner. But however much they differed in these•particulars, they were all agreed in one essential, thatthey must have a king; for they had not yet tasted thesweets of liberty. The fathers too were under no smallconcern, lest, whilst the city had no governor, and thearmy no head, they should be attacked by some foreignpower, especially as their neighbours bore them no goodwill. Therefore they were determined to have somehead, though in the choice neither party would yield tothe other. For this reason, the hundred fathers came toa resolution of sharing the sovereign power among them­selves. For this purpose, they divided their number in­to ten decuries, one being chosen in every decury, whoshould have the supreme direction of affairs^ and thoughten governed, only one of them was attended by the lie-tors and ensigns of government. Their power continuedfor five days, and regularly passed through the whole forthe space of a year, that they had no king.
This interval of regal government from its own nature,was called an interregnum, a name it still retains. Afterthis, the people began to complain, that their slavery wasincreased in proportion to the number of their masters,having now an hundred instead of one; and seemed de­termined, for the future, to obey but one king, and himtoo of their own choosing. When the fathers saw howmatters were like to turn, thought it most prudent tomake a voluntary resignation of what they must soonlose, and paid a compliment to the people, by yielding tothem the supreme power, with this special provision, thatthey should j'ot, by the concession, give up their ownprivileges. \ For they enacted, that the people shouldnave the nomination, but that should only be valid, whenratified by the fathers^ Upop this law, though it is now







OCR Output








32(5" TITUS^IVIUS' BOOK IV.


CHAP. X.
T7ie Volsci beat. Peace restored to Ardea. The consultriumphs.
JL HE general of the Volsci, who till then had trustedfor victualling his army, to the corn got from day today, in ravaging the lands of the nobility, having pre­pared no magazines for that purpose; when he saw him­self all of a sudden blocked up, and thereby deprived ofevery means of subsistence, invited the consul to an in­terview, and told him, That if he had come with an in­tention to raise the siege, that he was willing instantlyto withdraw the Volsci. The consul, in answer, gavehim to understand, that it was incumbent on the con­quered to receive terms, but^not to prescribe them:and, since they had come to besiege the allies of Rome,at their own pleasure, they must only depart at his plea­sure. Wherefore, he orders them to lay down theirarms, tor give up their general, acknowledge themselvesconquered, and submit to his orders. If they did not,they .might expect no quarter, whether they raised orcarried on the siege; as he would much rather return toRome crowned with victory, than with the terms of atreacherous capitulation.
The Volsci, now cut off from all hopes, except whatlittle they placed'in their arms, resolved to give it atrial;but, besides other disadvantages, having engaged in aplace improper for fighting, and still more so for flying,and being slaughtered at all quarters, they put »p theirswords and fell on their knees'; when after they had de­livered up their general, and laid down their arms, thevwere obliged to pass under the yoke, and dismissed withclothes only sufficient to conceal their nakedness, cover­ed, however, with s.hnme and disgrace. When they hadhalted at some distance from Tusculnm, the people thers-,who had long been their declared enemies, rose up on.them, fell upon them unarmed, and scarce left one tocarry home the news of their disaster.
The"Roma" consul re-established peace and tranquil­lity at Ardea, having beheaded the principal authors of


 







OCR Output








150 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IL


CHAP. XXXI.
Victory over the Sabines.
PURING these transactions among the Volsci, thedictator was at blows with the Sabines, on which side laythe weight of the war. He defeated them, took theircamp, and gained a complete victory. He had brokethe main body of their army by charging with his horse;and by drawing out the wings too far, their ranks wereweakened in the centre. In this confusion the foot charg­ed them warmly, and with a complete victory also forcedtheir camp.
Since the action at lake Regillus, there was not a morememorable battle than this. The dictator entered thecity in triumph; and besides other honours, a place ofdistinction, with a curule chair, was granted to him andhis descendants, at th<5 games of the circus.
The territory of Velitra was taken from the Volsciafter their defeat, and a colony sent from Rome for itscultivation. Soon after this, there was an engagementwith the jEqni, much indeed against the inclination ofthe consul, who easily saw the difficulty attendmg anattack, when the enemy was so advantageously posted;but the soldiers complained that the war was protracted,on purpose, that the time of the dictator's authority mightexpire before they should reiurn to Rome, which wouldrender his promises as vain and. ineffectual as Servilius'bad been; and so forced him rashly to march his army upthe bill. However imprudent this step, the enemy'swant of spirit crowned it with success: for before theRomans were come within reach of their darts, the .SSqui,struck with astonishment at their resolution, abandonedtheir camp, which by its situation was almost impregna­ble, and ran down into the valleys over against them.—Here the Romans found much booty, and victory withoutloss of blood.
After all these gallant actions, and three different warssuccessfully ended, the senate and people began to beequally solicitous about the event of their domestic dis­putes. The usurers had not been idle all the while, but







OCR Output








18 TITUS LIVIUS' Boon I.


themselves, within five miles of the "city- This intrench-tuent was called the Cluilian ditch, from the name of thegeneral, for some ages, till the ditch and name togetherfell the victims of time.
In this camp, the Albans lost their leader Cluilius;and for his successor in the command, chose MettusFutTetiu?. In the mean time, Tullus, naturally brave,and animated still more by the death of Cluilius, gaveout, that the great God of heaven, having already be­gun at the head, would not stop there, but take ven-ptanco on the whole Alban nation, as the authors of thisunjust war. Wherefore, passing the enemy's camp inthe night, he marches into the territory of Alba, witha hostile army. This motion drew Mettus out of hiscamp, who, having led his army as near the enemy'slines as possible, dispatched a herald with his compli­ments to Tullus, and orders to tell him, that previous toany engagement, it would be for their mutual interestto have an interview. .
Tullus did not decline the meeting; but suspecting itwas only calculated to amuse him, draws out his armyinto the field, as did the Atbans also. Whilst both ar­mies stood drawn up in order of battle, the generals,escorted by a few of their principal officers, advance tomeet in the centre between the armies, where the Albandelivers himself thus: " I think I have heard Cluilius"alledge, as the grounds of this war, the damages re-"ceived from Rome, and the refusal of satisfaction, in"terms of the treaty: and, I doubt not, O Tullus,"but on your side, the same plea will be urged: but, if"instead of amusing ourselves with appearances, we"state facts as they really are, it will not be denied that'« ambition and a thirst of empire, excite to arms two"nations united both by blood and neighbourhood;".whether justly or not, I shall not determine; that con-"sideration belongs to the author of the war, the ma-"nagement of which, the Albans have committed to"me as their general. Of one thing, O Tullus, 1 beg"leave to remind you, that we are both, but you parti-"cularly, hemmed in by the powerful states of Etruria,"and as you lie nearer them than we, you must be the*' more sensible of the propriety of this observation. By







OCR Output








xii . THE TRANSLATOR, fa


We shall conclude the character of this great Histo­rian, with an extract from a modern Author*, who,having done justice toother Roman historians, does LIVYthe noblest homage, in the following elegant encomium:
OF mightier spirit, of majestic fame,With powers proportion'd to the Roman name:When Rome's fierce Eagle his broad wings unfurl'diAnd shadow'd with them all the subject world,In bright pre-eminence, that Greece might own,Sublimer LIVY claims th' historic throne:With that rich eloquence, whose golden lightBrings the full scene distinctly to the sight:That zeal of truth which interest cannot bend;That fire, which freedom ever gives her friend.Immortal artist of a work supreme!Delighted Rome beheld with proud esteem,'Her own bright ima'ge, of Colossal size,From thy long toils in purest marble rise.But envious time, with a malignant stroke,This sacred statue into fragments broke;In Lethe's stream its nobler portions sunk> x
And left futurity the wounded trunk.Yet, like the matchless, mutilated framei .To which great Angelo bequeath'd his name.This glorious ruin, in whose strength we findThe splendid vigour of the sculptor's mind;In the fond eye of admiration still,Rivals the finish'd forms of modern skill. ^
* Hayley's poetical Essay on History.
Academy, Glasgow,I6/A January, 1783.







OCR Output








CONTENTS.


it.
iii.


v.
• vi.
vii.viii.


BOOK I.
Containing the History of the Ri-gal Government qf Rome.
Page
INTRODUCTION ................ 15
Chap. i. jSJneas' arrival in Italy, and marriage ... 15
Eneas' grand atchievements ............... 17
The reign of Ascanius in'Alba; of ./Eneas
Sylvius, and the rest of the Sylvian
family ................ (8
Rhea Sylvia with child to Mars. Ro­
mulus and Remus born ............... 20
Amulius killed ................ . .............. 21
The city of Rome built by Romulus ...... 22
Remus killed ................ 23
The senate chosen ........................... 26
War with the Sabines ......... . ......... ... 27
Opima Spolia presented to Jupiter Fere-
trius ....... .' ............................... 30
The Antemnates and Crustumini defeated
and brought to Rome .................. SI
The Romans defeat the Sabines in- battle, 33The Sabine women interpose, and obtain
a coalition ...... ........ . ............ .... 34
The Fidenates routed ....................... 55
The Vejentes conquered ............ ........ 37
Romulus is carried out of sight and dei­
fied ............................ .. .......... 38
The fathers and people agree to choose a
king ............. ....... ..... .. ......... ... 39
Numo appointed king ....................... 41
He builds the temple of Janus .. ......... . 42
He teaches religious rites ............ ...... 44
He institutes an annual festival, and other
sacrifices ........ . ..... ..... ............... 45
Tullus Hostilius succeeds Nuroa, and
makes war with the Albans .......... 46
Treaty relative to the Horatii and Curiatii, 49
The Combat of the Horatii and Curiatii, '51
Horatius arraigned and acquitted ........ 53
The Albans revolt .,..,, ...... ...., ..... ..... 55


xii.xiii.
xiv.xv.
xvi.xvii.
xv iii.
xix.
xx.
xxi.xxii.


xxiv.
xxv.
xxvi.
xxvii.







OCR Output








318 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV.


-t


CHAP. V.
Conclusion.


JjUT to conclude: only let me ask you, is the sove-'reign power in \.\\epfopleof Rome, or in you, Patricians?'Did we expel the kings to render you absolute, or to« purchase a liberty, which should be common to, and'equal in all? I hope it will not be denied that the'people can, at their pleasure, make a law; and will'you then, ihe moment a law is proposed, pretend to'• list them immediately for the war: and the moment
* that I, in virtue of my office as tribune, begin to call'upon the tribes for their suffrages, shall you, by your'consular authority, oblige the youth immediately to'take the military oath, and march them to the camp,'threatening both the people and their tribune? Have'you not twice already felt the effects of cudgelling the'people into an involuntary obedience? Perhaps yoa
* dropped the argument, out of regard to our safety; or'rather did you keep your temper, because the stronger'party was also the more moderate? Believe me, Ro-'mans, there will be no bloodshed on this occasion'neither. Your temper they will always try; but as'for your strength, that is quite adifferent affair. Where-'fore, hear me, consuls, whether these wars you talk of,'be real or fictitious, the people shall be ready at a call,'if by the ties of marriage and mutual affinity, these'ancient privileges, the two orders be again united, re-'stored to their natural tights, and be made one people:'and if, by real merit, the citizens may look up to'offices of distinction in the state, without regard to'adventitious circumstances5 if such, in conjunction with'you, are admitted *i a share in the administration of'public affairs, to demonstrate that they are equally'called upon in the annual magistracy, to command and'obey, in which alone, true liberty consists. But if'• these laws are opposed, talk for ever of wars, exag-'gerate the danger as much as you will—not a man
shall enter the service—not a man shall take arms—'not a man shall expose his life for such imperious lords.


 







OCR Output








»0 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


In the very beginning of th'rs work, it is affirmed, thatthe gods exerted their power to presage the future great­ness of this empire. For, though the birds declared,that all the other temples might be deprived of theirsacred honours, they could not be brought to approveof the measure with respect to Terminus. This omenand augury was thus explained, that as Terminus would"not move, and being the only one of all the gods thathad not been moved from their respective stations, theyhad in that circumstance, a sure sign of the permanencyand stability of their empire.
This oruen being understood to have a respect to thepermanency, there followed another which portendedits greatness: For, as the story. goes, whilst the masonswere opening the ground for the foundation of the tem­ple, a human head appeared to them, with the face en­tire. This phenomenon, without straining the interpre­tation, plainly presaged, that this temple should be thehead of the empire, and the empire univer.-al. This toowas the opinion of the soothsayers, not only of Rome,but of those also who had been sent for from' Etruria,to be consulted on it. Presages so flattering, could notmiss to enlarge the king's mind with respect to the ex-pence; insomuch that the spoils of Pometia, originallyintended to defray the expence of the whole superstruc­ture, were scarcely sufficient for laying the foundation.—For this reason, I am the more inclinable to believeFabius: besides, that he is the more ancient author, whorestricts the plunder of this city to forty talents, thanPiso, who atfmns that 40,000 pound weight of gold andsilver, had been sequestrated for that purpose; a sumscarcely to be expected from the spoils of any one cityin the world at that time, and more than sufficient forlaying the foundation of any, the most magnificent fabriccf modern times.
CHAP. LVI.
Sends a colony to Signia and Ceredum. Sends Brutu<ito Delphos.
J. ARQUIN being intent upon building the temple;hired architects and skilful workmen from Etrnria;







OCR Output








74 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


CHAP. XL.
Turfjuin killed by a plot of the tons of Marcius^
1. ARQUIN having reigned now upwards of thirty-seven years, Servius Tullius had not only by far thegreatest share of the royal favour, bi.t also stood veryhigh in the esteem of both senate and people. Aboutthis time also, the two sons of Marcius, who had alwaysreflected with indignation that their guardian had art­fully tricked them out of their father's kingdom, andsecured it to himself, a stranger descended of no familyin Rome, nay, not even in Italy; when they observedthat the kingdom was not like to revert to them, evenafter the death of Tarquin, but to become the perquisiteof the refuse of mankind, set no bounds to their resent­ment. "What! said they, shall the Roman state, acentury after Romulus, its founder and sovereign,while on earth, whose extraction was divine, and him­self ranked among the gods, be given to a slave ?—the son of a slave, to reign over it, while we, the sonsof Ancus are living? Shall the Roman throne lie opennot only to strangers, but even to slaves? Would notthis be a reproach to the Roman name, and an inde-"lible stain on that illustrious house, which can never"be wiped off"?"
By the sword, therefore, they resolve to do themselvesjustice. But their indignation for the injuries they hadreceived, was rather excited against Tarquin than Ser­vius; as the revenge of a king was more to be dreadedthan that of a private man: moreover, should they de­stroy Servius, Tarquin might provide himself in anotherson-in-law, who could also succeed him; for these rea­sons the plot was laid against the king himself. Two ofthe most resolute among the shepherds were chosen forexecuting their villainous purpose. They had each suchiron instruments as they used to carry in the country;and pretending to quarrel at the gate of the palace,made such a prodigious noise, that they brought all theofficers of the court about them. Then, when they bothappealed to the king, the noise they made reaching the







OCR Output








824 TITUS LIVIU?' BOOK III.


ceptiug when the law was in question. On all other oc­casions, they were all affability and complaisance to thecommons. Nay, the tribunes had not only full libertyto do their other business quietly, but without a contra-dictive word, or the least violence offered them, were re-chosen to their office for the ensuing year; condescen­sions and compliances, by which they gradually soothedthe multitude, and effectually defeated every attempt infavour of the laws for all that year.
•CHAP. xv.
Herdonius' attempt upon Rome. A. R. 293.
\VHEN C. Claudius, son of Appras, and P. ValeriusPublicuia, succeeded to the consulship, they found great­er harmony in the state, than it had enjoyed for some. time before. The new year produced nothing remark­able, as to getting the bill passed; and to prevent it,continued to be the sole object of public attention.The more the young nobles insinuated themselves into.the good graces of the .Plebeians, the more vigilant werethe tribunes in setting every engine at work, by loading-then] with calumnies, to render them suspected. Theyalledged, " That there was a conspiracy on foot ;•—that"Caeso was actually at Rome;—that measures were."concerted for murdering the tribunes, and massacringthe commons: That the elder senators had given it incharge to the younger, to suppress the tribunitianpower, and to restore the state to that form of govern-.ment which prevailed in Rome before the secessionto the mons sacer." Moreover, they dreaded a warwith the jEqui and Volsci, which was now become com­mon, as it happened regularly almost every year: but, inthe mean time, another new and unexpected calamitybecame the object of their attention, nearer home.
The capitol and fortress adjacent to it, was surprisedand seized in the nightime, by 4500 out-laws andslaves, with Appius Herdonius, a Sabine, at their head.A1I that were found in the citadel, who refused to joinin their enterprise, and take up arms with them, wereimmediately put to death. In the confusion, some agi­







OCR Output








CHAP. 13. ROMAN HISTORY. 221


atchievernents in pitched battles, as well as detachedparties: and with the most persuasive arguments, heexhorted the people, "To make it their choice, that a'« youth possessed of so many excellent endowments,•' which must render him a valuable acquisition to any"state, whither he might retire, should rather be a"citizen of Rome, than of any other city whatever."The fire and spirit, which" they found fault with would"evaporate with an increase of years, and give him"prudence in exchange, which was the only thing he,"wanted; his faults declining, whilst his virtues were"perpetually advancing to maturity, they would fmd"their account in suffering so great a man to improve"and grow old in his country." ^Among the rest, L.Quinctius, sirnamed Cincinnati, pleaded also for his son,not by extolling his merit, fpr fear he would therebyonly exasperate his enemies, but by entreating the assem­bly to impute his errors to his youth, and for his father'ssake, to forgive them, whom none of them could accuse.of having injured them in any instance, either by wordor deed. Some of the assembly made no return to theirsubmissions, either through modesty or fear, whilstothers complaining, that they and their friends had suf­fered by his blows, by the rashness of their return.plainly discovering what their sentence was to be.
CHAP. XJII.
€aso arrested, finds bail, and banisJies himself.
JL HERE was one charge brought against Csso, which.hung heavier on him than all the public odium besides*in support of which, M. Volscius Fictor, who had beentribune of the people some years before, rose up to giveevidence. He averred, " That soon after the city was"freed from the plague, he had fallen in with a set of"libertine young Patricians, rioting in the Subura, and"a quarrel ensuing, his elder brother, who had not then"got entirely over his complaints, was knocked down"by Cawo, and left almost expiring; being carried home"between men's hands, he died; and, he had reason to"think, that it was in consequence of that blow. Bui







OCR Output








7« TITUS LIVIUS' Boon I.


in an upper storey, opening to the new street: for Tar-quin's palace stood near the temple of Jupiter Siator:telling them, " to make themselves easy :— that the king"had been stunned with the sudden blow, but that the"wound was not deep :— That he had now come to"himself: — That the wound had been searched, and'the blood washed away; and she hoped matters were« in such a train that they would see him soon. In the< mean time, it was his orders, that they should obey*' Servius Tullius, who would administer justice, and per-• form every other office incumbent on the king." .-•-
Servius, upon thi.% ,went out dressed in the Trabea,*attended by the Lictors, and being seated on the throne,determines some causes, and leaves others undetermined,till he should consult the king. Thus, therefore, though.Tarquin had been already dead, by concealing that eventfor some days, he had' an opportunity of strengthening-bis interest, under the pretence of acting by deputationfrom his father-in-law.
When at last the event was made publicj and the la-•mentations set up in the palace, Servius, surroundedwith a strong guard, was the first who was advanced tothe throne by the senators, without waiting for the con­sent of the people. f — The sons of Ancus having nowbeen informed, that the .assassins they employed wereseized, that the king was still alive, and Servius's partyso very strong, went, of Iheir own accord, into banish-jnent/to Suessa Pometia.J •'
\-;- CHAP. XLII.
".TUliits routi the Vejentes, and constitutes the Census.


, not only strengthened his interest by his at-
.lention to public business, but also by plans concerted"in private; for, that the.; sons of Tarquin might not be'actuated by the same spirit of resentment against him,
• '* The Trabea was tlie ordinary habit of the Roman monarchs;-and differed from the Toga, in this particular, that it was adornedwith stripes of purple, at proper distances from each other, on awhite ground. •'
t A, U. C. 116. J Now Cisterra Pontinae.







OCR Output








849- . TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK III.


demned, which exasperated the senators prodigiously.Ronnlius was fined in 10,000 asses, and Veturius inV5.000 brass asses. Notwithstanding this example thesucceeding consuls abated nothing of iheir usual activity,but swore, that were they also to be condemned, they'would never suffer the people and their demagogues tocarry the law.
The tribunes then dropping their bill, which had beenso often tabled, that it \yas now worn to rags ^ and as­suming a milder tone than hitherto, when addressing thesenators, requested, " that they would now put aa end"to all contention, and since Plebeian laws were disa-"greeable to them, that they .would suffer legislator?,"partly Patricians and partly Plebeians, to be created,."for establishing laws for the common benefit, and cotn-"mon security of all ranks, in point of liberty." Thesenators made no other objection to this proposal, but theadmission of Plebeians into the number of the legislators.When therefore they were agreed upon having taws, thenext point to be settled was the nomination of those tobe put in commission to make them. Spurius Post-humius Albus, A. Manilas, P. Sulpitiul Camerinus werecommissioned and sent to Athens, to copy the celebratedlaws of Solon, and to learn the statutes, usages, and lawsof the other states of Greece.
CHAP. XXXII.
The Commissioners from Greece returned, and the Deccm*•mm proposed for compiling the new laws. A. R. 300.
.l HE Romans had no longer war to disturb them allthis year, nor in the following consulship of P. Horatiusand S. Quinctilius, which was still more remarkable forthe constant taciturnity of the tribunes, occasioned bythe deputation to Athens, and their expectation of fo­reign laws; add to this, that they were terribly afflictedwith famine and pestilence, equally destructive to manand beast. The country became a solitude; constantburials thinned the city; and many families, some ofthem of the first distinction, were always in mourning.Ser. Cornelius, high priest of Romulus, died of the







OCR Output








84 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I,


"a kingdom; who remembers ,that he is the son of a"king; and one who would rather he in possession now,"than look for a kingdom. 'If you are the man, whom"I think I married, I must call you both husband and"kmg; if not, I have made a miserable change, because"I have got a coward m a murderer. Why do not you"bestiryourself? You have no occasion, like your father,"to come from Corinth, or Tarquiuii, in questof a king-"dom amonsjst foreigners; your household gods, the"gods of your country, the statue of your father, the"patace where you dwell, the regal throne in that pa-"lace, and the very name of Tarquin, create and call"you king. But, if none of these things can rouse you"to action, why do you deceive the expectations of the"people, why do you suffer them to regard you as a man"of a princely soul? Go, coward; get you hence toTar-"quinii, or Corinth, and sink into the former obscurity"of your family, since you have more in you of your"brother, than your father."
By these, and such reproaches, the young man's mindwas set on fire; nor could she be at rest herself. "If"Tanaquil," thought she, "who was a foreigner, had the"address to dispose of the kingdom twice successively,"first to her husband, and then to bet son-in-law, shall"I, who am born a princess, have no influence what-'' ever, in taking away or bestowing a crown?"
Tarquin, impelled by the reveries of this mad woman,renewed his intrigues among the senators, particularlythose of the last creation, putting them in mind of hisfather's favours, for which he now was soliciting a" re­turn. The young men he engaged to his interest bypresents, promising to do wonders in his administration:and wherever he went, charging the king with theblackest crimes. At last, when he found a proper op­portunity for putting his design in execution, surround­ed with a .body of armed men, he forced his way intothe forum; and whilst all present were struck with ter­ror, placing himself on the throne in the senate-house,he ordered the fathers to be summoned to attend kingTarquin, in the house, by the public crier. They im­mediately obeyed; some because they were in the plot,others through fear that their absence might be made







OCR Output








CHAP. S. ROMAN HISTORY. 19'


the times, to his mother, or step-mother, and laid the/foundation of another new city tor himself, at the footof mount Alba, which, from its situation, being extendedon the declivity of a hill, was called Longa Alba*
From the.time that Lavinium was founded, and thecolony planted at Alba Longa, there was an interval ofnear thirty years. Yet so rapid was the progress of theLatin power, especially after the defeat of the Etrurians,that not even upon .Kneas'sdeath, nor thereafter, duringthe regency of Lavinia, and the first exhibitions of ajuvenile administration, did Mezentius, or the £trurians,or any other neighbouring power, dare to make the leastattempt against it. A peace had been made on theseterms, that the river Albula, which they now call theTiber, should be the line of division, between the Etru-rianTJmd Latins.
Sylvius, by some accident born in a wood, succeededhis father Ascaniusf. Him also his son, ./Eneas Sylviasucceeded, who transmitted the kingdom to his son La-tinus Sylvius. This king planted several colonies, andcalled them ancient Latins. After him the name of Syl­vius was assumed by all the succeeding kings of Alba.Alba was the son and successor of Latinus, Alys of Alba,Capys of Alys, Capetus of Capys, and of Capetus Ti-berinus, who was drowned in crossing the Albula, andthereby left it a name famous among posterity.
Agrippa was the son and successor of Tiberinus,and Romulus Sylvias of Agrippa. He being killed bylightning, the kingdom devolved on Aventinus, whowas buried on that hill, which is now part of the cityof Rome, and called by his name. After him ProcareigneJ, the father of Numitor and Amulius. ToNumitor, his eldest son, he left. the ancient kingdom ofthe Sylvian family; but power was more prevalentthan the will of a parent, or the deference due to se­niority.
Numitor was expelled, aml Amulius usurped the go-. vernment. One crime followed upon the heels of ano­ther. He cut off all his brother's representatives of themale line; and that there might be no hopes of poste-
* Patazotta. •(• Some say bis brother.







OCR Output








9. ROMAN HISTORY. 446


a plain below, declaring at the same time, that theywould submit to any punishment, if they did not force itbefore night. He commended their ardour, bid themrefresh themselves, and be ready at the fourth watch.
As the enemy, to hinder the Romans from escapingfrom the* hilt to Verrugo, in the night-time, were guard-Ing the road that led thither, the two armies met there.The action began before day-light, but-the moon shonebright all the night over, and they could see what theywere about, as well as by day. The shouts of the com­batants reaching Verrugo, it was believed there that.Posthumius' camp was assaulted, which occasioned sucha fright, that notwithstanding all that /Emilius couldurge to prevent them, the troops dispersed and: fled forrefuge to Tusculum. Thence flew a report to Rome,that Posthumius and hrs army were cut to pieces. BatPosthumius, as soon as it was light, and safe to make ahot pursuit without danger of falling into an ambush,rode through the ranks, reminding them of their pro­mise, which inspired them with such ardour, that theJEqni could no longer stand before them. The slaughterthat-ensued of the fugitives, was rather the effects , of re­sentment than bravery, and ended in the destruction ofthe enemy. Posthumius' letter crowned with laurel soonundeceived them with respect to the melancholy newsfrom Tusculum, bearing that the Romans had gained acomplete victory, and that the army of the flLijui hadbeen quite destroyed.
CHAP. XXIX.
Motions ef the JEtpd. Trial and condemnation of twoTribunes.


the tribunes of the people had made no progressin their bill, the commons laboured hard to keep thosein office who had proposed it, as did the fathers, on theother hand, tq get those re-elected, who had opposed it.The commons prevailed however in the com it ia. Thefathers, in revenge of this disappointment, procured adecree of the sentate for electing consuls, magistrates thatwere odious to the people. After an interval of fifteenyears, L. Lucretius Flavus, and Servilius Sulpicius Corne­
ll , •







OCR Output








AP. 35. ffCMAN tflSTORY. '453


Setting out with a numerous train of hone- and foot,came first 10 the coumry ot Tiicastini (a). They wereon/sifter opposed by the Alps, which seemed to them.passable; and no wonder, since there is no certainidetico that ever they had been crossed by mortal,iless we are inclined to give .credit to the stories con-- uing Hercules.
Whilst the Gauls were confined by the height of these- .lountains, and were looking about them for a way lead-ig to another world, over the tops of these mountains,'hich reached to heaven, they were detained by a re-gious scruple: they were informed that a strange peo'*ile were out in quest of a settlement, and were opposediy the Salyes (b); it was the Massilians, who had sailedrom Phocaea, in Asia Minor. The Gauls considering11 IB'as an omen of their own fortune, assisted them in"unifying a place where they first landed, which wasnaturally defended by surrounding woods. The Gaulspursued their route over the pathless Alps, by the Tau-rinian forest(c); and having defeated an army of Tuscans,near the river Ticin, they were informed that the coun­try where they were encamped was called Insubria,(now the Milanese;) a name, given also to a canton ofAutun. There, pursuing their good fortune, they built.a city which they called Mediolanum (now Milan.).
CHAP. XXXV.-. .
;' 7n continuation.
/YFrER that* ariother body of Caenomani (tf) underthe conduct of Elitovius, following the paths of the for­mer, passed the Alps by the same forest, with the as­sistance of Bellovisus, and settled in those places, whichthe Libici then possessed, where now we find the citiesBrixia (e) and Verona (/). These again were followedby the Saluvii, who dwelt near the ancient nation of theLa3vi (g), and tne Ligures (A), and settled upon the banks
(a) St. Pol Trois-Chatteaux, in Danphiny. (4) The coast ofProvence. (c) It stood at the foot the Alps Cottiie.
(d) A people about Brescia. (e) Now Brescia. (/) Or,Cremona. (g) Inhabitants of Pavia and Novarra, (A) 1o- . ,habiUnts on the banks of the Loire.







OCR Output








24 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


each is saluted king by his respective followers. Theone party pled a priority in point of time, and the othera superiority in point of numbers. Upon this highW>rds ensued, which, being inflamed with.jjassion, ended.ja-blood.^lThere Remus fell in the scuffle. >\ There isstill another account of the matter, whichmeets with greater credit; namely, that Remus in ri­dicule of his brother, had leaped over his new wall, atwhich Romulus being highly incensed, put him to death;adding, moreover, in an ironical tone, " Thus let every"one perish, who shall attempt a similar insult."—Thusthe sovereignty devolved on Romulus ajone, who calledthe new built city after his own name. >
The firstobject of his attention was the'Palatine mount,where he had spent his younger years, and that he for­tified. In the worship of all the other gods, he observ­ed the ceremonies of Alba; but in what respected Her­cules, the ceremonies of Greece, as instituted by Evan-det.—They tell a story, that Hercules having killedGerion, brought off with him some cows of surprizingbeauty; and that having swipamed across the Tiber, driv­ing them before him, he lay down in a meadow fujl ofgrass, to refresh himself after the fatigue (if his journey,and feed his cattle with the rich pastured There, havingeat and drunk plentifully before, when he had fallenfast asleep, a shepherd, named Cacus, who resided there­about, being full of his strength, and quite charmedwith the beauty of the cows, resolved to make free withthem/ And because the marks of their feet would havebetrayed his retreat to their owner, had he driven themforwards, he drew the most beautiful of the whole herd,one by one, into his cave, backwards by the tail.
Hercules getting up, as soon as day appeared, andsurveying his cattle, found some of them were gone;upon which he walked Jo the next cave, if possible, totrace them. But when he observed their footsteps allturned from it, and leading no where else, he was quiteconfounded: and having no other alternative, beganto drive his cattle from the enchanted spot. Upon this,as it commonly happens, some of the cows, as he wasdriving them along, began to low for want of those theyhad left behind; nor did the cows in the cave fail to







OCR Output








TITUS LIVIUS*ROMAN HISTORY.


BOOK III.


CHAP. I.


CONTAINING THE DISPUTES BETWEEN THE ORDERS, FO­REIGN WARS, THE CREATfON AND ExPULSION OF DECEM­VIRS, AND THE RE-ESTABLISHMENT OF CONSULAR GO­yERNMENT AND POPULAR MAGISTRATES, DOWN TO THEYEAR 306.
Contests about the Agrarian law. War with the jEqui.


the taking of Antium, T. jEmilius and Q.Fabius were elected consuls. This was that Fabtus, whoalone, of all the .Fabian family, survived the slaughterat Cremera. ./Emilias, in his former consulship, haddeclared for the partition of the lands among the people.Wherefore, in his second consulship, the friends of theAgrarian law were encouraged to hope, that they mightnow get it passed; and the tribunes persuaded, that byhaving one of the consuls in their interest, they mightnow accomplish, what they had in vain attempted, whenboth were in the opposition, brought the affair once moreupon the carpet.
jEmilius had not shifted sides. They who were inpossession of the lands, and the majority of the senators,complained much, that a chief magistrate of the city,should be active in promoting the claims of the tribunes,







OCR Output








CHAP. 72. ROMAN HISTORY.


t.


'bauring states would ascribe to the reveries of old Scap7'tiu?, so infamous a judgment? He will, indeed, be al-
• ways remembered when this alFair is mentioned; but
• the Roman people will be for ever branded with chi-'canery and barratry, in making a booty of other mens'law-suits. For, would any judge on earth, even in a'private affair, seize the property in question as a per-'quisite of his own? No! Scaptius himself, although it'was plain he had out-lived all shame, could scarce be'guilty of so gross a deed.'
Thus did the consuls atid principal senators remon­strate, with all the warmth in their power, but avariceand Scaptius prevailed, and the tribes being called over,adjudged the territory to themselves.
Had the affair been referred to other judges, that theclaim of the Roman people could not have been set aside,is not denied; but the justice of their pretensions, in; thep/esent case, d6es not lessen the infamy of their sen­tence. It gave the senate more concern, and to themappeared in a more iniquitous point of view, than it didto the claimants themselves. For the remainder of theyear, Rome had no disturbance either at home or abroad,







OCR Output








72 ... TITUS UVIUS' Book 1.


"into my power, and that of the Roman people? We"have done it. And I receive them."
The Sabine war being-thus concluded, Tarquin re­turned to Rome in. triumph. Then he made war uponthe ancient Latiusi and without coming to a general en­gagement, by appearing before their towns, one afteranother, he subdued the . whole nation. The cities,Corniculum, Old Ficulnea, Cumeria, Crustumerium,Ameriola, Medullia, Nomentum, were either taken fromthe Latins themselves, ,or from those who had revoltedto them. Now there was peace, when he turned hisniind upon carrying on the works he had begun in it,even more keenly, if possible, than he had done the war,that the people might have no more idle time at home,in peace, than abroad in arms. For he not only madepreparations for drawing a stone wall round that part ofthe city which had not been fortified, the beginning ofwhich had been interrupted by the Sabine war; but be-• cause the water could not be easily carried off from theflat grounds, he drained the low places of the city aboutthe Forum, and the other vallies lying between the hills,by common sewers, which were drawn sloping to theTiber. Moreover, he levelled an area, for laying thefoundation of a temple to Jupiter, in the capital, whichhe had vowed in the Sabine war,.anticipating even thenin idea, the future greatness of the place.
CHAP. XXXIX.
A strange phenomenon.
XA.BOUT this time, a very surprising phenomenon, for-lowed by an event no less so, happened in the palace..The story goes, that in presence of many, the head of aboy, cai'ed Servius Tullius, seemed all in flames, whilsthe was a;leep. The prodigious noise occasioned by thisstrange appearance, awaked the royal family, and whenone of the servants was fetching water to extinguish theflame, he was stopt by the queen, who, after the confu­sion was over, ordered that nobody should stir the boy,till he should awake of himself. Very soon the flame







OCR Output








CHAP. to. ROMAN HISTORY. 2rT


Upon this, Lucretius had the honour paid him due tohimself and army: For, he triumphed over the Volsciand ./Equi, his soldiers following in the procession. AnOvation * was also granted to his colleague, who enteredthe city without his army.
The next year, an attempt was made on the new con­suls, to revive Tarentinus' bill; in promoting which, the-whole college of tribunes warmly joined their interest.The consuls were P. Volumniua and Ser. Sulpicius.
That year the heavens seetned to be on fire, and therewas a terrible earthquake: and what seemed incrediblethe year before, that a cow had spoke, now passed cur­rent. Among other prodigies, a dreadful shower fellof raw flesh, which, it is said, was catched as it- fell, byswarms of birds fluttering around it; what escaped them, *lay scattered on the ground, without changing its smell.The duumvirs, who presided over sacred things consult­ed the Sybilline books. They declared, that the city wasthreatened with an irruption of strange enemies, and toprevent any attack upon the higher parts of the city,and the slaughter that might ensue, among other thingsit was strongly recommended to give sedition no coun­tenance. The senators were accused by the tribunes ofcontriving this to obstruct the passing of the law, and inconsequence, the dispute ran very high.
In the mean time, advices are brought from the Her-nici, that the Volsci and .SSqui, for all the fatal blow theyhad received, were recruiting their army, just as if thewar were every year to take the same turn. That theAntiates, who openly held their councils at Ecetra, werethe principal support of the enemies of Rome. Thatthe head of the confederacy, was At)tium, which furnish­ed troops for the war. When these things were laid be­fore the senate, they ordered an army immediately to belevied. The management of the war was committed tothe consuls conjunctly, the one to march against theVolsci, and the other against the jEqui.
The tribunes, in the mean time, exclaimed loudly in
* A lesser kind of triumph, decreed to those who obtained a vic­tory of smalt importance, where the opposition was not formula.J-te. In this case, the general did not enter the city in a chariot,.nor was he crowned with taurel. . .







OCR Output








CHAP. tff. ROMAN HISTORY. *l


obsolete, are founded the forms used in elections, andpassing bills even at this day. For, before a, single voteis taken up, a convention is called by the senate, whocan know nothing of the event. Then, the assemblybeing met, the inter-rex addresses them thus: " Good,"fortunate and happy may it be! Elect, O Romans,"for yourselves a king. The senate give their consent;"and'if you pitch upon a prince, worthy of succeeding"Romulus, will also ratify your choice." The peopleconsidered this' a very high compliment; and that theymight not be outdone in generosity, they only voted andenacted, that the election should be entirely left to tliotat hers.
CHAP. XVIII.
Numa appointed king,
A HERE was, at that time, a man of great reputationfor piety and justice, called Numa PprtyqJiiuS. He resid­ed at Cures, a Sabine city, and m t1i& knowledge of alllaws, divine and human, the age he lived in knew not hisequal. Because they can pitch upon no other philoso­pher, they give out, but without reason, that he was adisciple of Pythagoras, the Samian, who, it appears;flourished above a century after him, in the reign of Ser-vius Tullius, and had a number of young men attendinghim in their studies, in the remotest parts of Italy, aboutMetapontus, Heraclia, and Croton. From which placeshad he even been cotemporary with Numa, how- couldfais fame reach the Sabines? By what communication oflanguage, could he excite in any one an ambition forlearning? Or, how was he escorted, travelling alonethrough so many nations, whose language and mannerswere so widely different?
I am rather of opinion, that Numa owed his extra­ordinary qualifications to the force of his own natura-Igenius; and that he was not so remarkable for the ac­quisition of foreign knowledge, as he was a perfect mas<-ter in the severe and rigid discipline of the Sabines, for­merly in very high repute for its strictness and purity,







OCR Output








252 TITUS LIVIUS". BOOK III.'


protection of their tribunes, since the decemvirs allowedcauses which had been determined by one of tiiem to bere-heard by another. - •'
CHAP. XXXV.'
. .
Decemvirs chosen a-neu).
A HE assembly for the election of new decemvirs beingfixed twenty-seven days after, the canvassing for thatoffice raised such a ferment, that the principal men ofthe state, fearing, no doubt, that an office of so greatauthority, were they not to appear as candidates, mightlay open to persons, by no means worthy of it, used alltheir influence to get themselves returned in the nomina­tion to a dignity, of the establishment whereof, they hadbeen the wannest opposers, although they now humblysolicited the favour of that very people, agamst whomthey had contended with so much vehemence before.
Appius, seeing*men so respectable for their years, whohad passed through all the dignities ot the state,so warmin the pursuit of this, began to be seriou.-iy alarmed. Itwas difficult to say, from his behaviour at thii.time,whether he was then in office, or wanted to be so. Onlyon some occasions, he showed more of the candidatethan the decemvir. He spoke lightty of the nobitity,but the lowest" and most contemptible of the competitorshe extolled to the skies; strutting in the forum amongthe Dulii and Julii, his advocates among the people,with whom their influence- was very considerabte. Atlast his colleagues, who till then had been entirety at hisdevotion, began to mark him more attentively, bemg ata loss to unravel the mystery of his intentions. To themit appeared, that he wus all a mask together. " What!"said they, " is i! possible, that a man, who inherits all"the pride of the Claudian family, should all at once"degenerate into such servile obsequiousness, without"views of the most interested kind? To descend so"much from his stateliness;—to put himself so much"under restraint;—and to mingle m the face of the sun"with private persons, had not the appearance thai he"was in haste to abdicate, tut rather, that he was pur-"suing every plan to be continued in his office."


 







OCR Output








450 TITUS LIVIUS' Book V.


tian lands, every where, without meeting with the leastopposition; till at length; the Volsinians, who were hearti­ly tired of the war, obtained a truce for twenty years,on condition of replacing whatever they had taken fromthe people of Rome, and of being at the expence of oneyear's pay to the army.
This year too, one Ca;dicius, a man of low rank, toldthe tribunes, that he heard a miraculous voice in theNew Street, above the temple of Vesta, where there is •now a chapel, which pronounced distinctly, ' Go, tell
* the magistrates, the Gauls draw near.' The man'smeanness, as it is the way of the world, brought thewarning into contempt. Moreover, that nation was re­mote, and consequently little known. But not only werethe warnings from the gods despised on this occasion,but Rome, pushed headlong by the fates to destruction,had also deprived herself, in the banishment of Camillas,of every human aid. This great man having had a dayappointed, by L. Apuleius, tribune of the people, to an­swer to an accusation, in relation to the spoils of Veii,when he was in deep affliction for the loss of his son, apromising youth, he called a meeting in his house, of hiskindred and clients, which comprehended a great part ofthe commons; and when he had sounded them with re­spect to the charge laid against him, and found by theiranswers that they could not acquit him, though theywould most cheerfully contribute to his fine, be ratherchose to banish himself from Rome; praying the immortalgods, ' That if he had suffered this injury without rea-'son, his ungrateful country might soon have reason to
* regret his absence.' He was condemned in absence,in 15,000 asses of brass.* - . - • -
CHAP. XXXIII.


Tii


Digression relative to the Gauls. A. R. 362.


HUS was oae citizen driven into- exile, who, had heremained at Rome, would in all probability, have savedthe city from being taken. As the fatal-stroke was fastapproaching, ambassadors came from Clusium to soliciv.







OCR Output








11* TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


disgrace, and recover all they had lost in war. Thename and relation to the Tarquinienses, were irresistiblemotives. Besides, they piqued themselves upon the ho­nour of giving a king to Rome. Thus the armies ofthese two states put themselves under the command ofTarquin, to reinstate him on the throne, and take ven­geance on the Romans.
When they entered the Roman territories, the consulswent out to meet them. Valerius led on the foot insquare battalia, and Brutus marched before with thehorse to reconnoitre the enemy. The Tarquins marchedin the same order: Aruns, Tarquin's son, advancingwith the horse, and Tarquin himself following with thelegions. Aruns, by the lictors, knewnt was one of the.consuls who was advancing against him, when at a dis­tance: but upon a nearer approach, he discovered byhis face, that it was certainly Brutus. Then boilingwith indignation, "There," says he, " is the man,"who hath banished and expelled us our country; see"him, how he rides in state, proud in the ensigns of"our dignity. Ye gods, avengers of injured kings,"assist me now."—With this, he put spurs to his horse,and drove against the consul with all his force. Brutussaw his aim; and, as in those days it was reckoned a pieceof gallantry in the generals to open the battle, by en­gaging in single combat, at the head of their armies,he met him with equal ardour. They rushed againsteach other with inveterate fury, insomuch, that neithercaring how much his own person was exposed, could heonly wound his adversary, they both tumbled from theirhorses at the same instant lifeless, to the ground, pinnedtogether by their lauce^ which being pushed in oppositedirections, had transfixed them through their shields.
At the same time, the battle with the horse becamegeneral, nor was it long before the foot came up ; oftenwas the victory lost and won, and in the end very doubt­ful. The right of both armies carried all before them,while the left of both was defeated. The Vejentes, ac­customed to be beat by the Roman?, were routed andput to flight. The Tarquinienses, a new enemy, notonly stood their ground, but where they fought, obligedthe Romans to give way.







OCR Output








CHAT. 21. ROMAN HISTORY. 233


"when the troops took the oath." But the contempt of'the gods, which reigns so triumphant in our days, wasat that time quite unknown. In these times, men didnot by artful interpretations, contrive to make oaths andIaws convenient for their own purposes, but suited theirpractice to their oaths and to the laws.
The tribunes finding nowj that they could not preventthe consuls design,^ consulted'how to delay the army'smarch from the city, more especially, as it was rumour­ed, " That the augurs had been enjoined to attend at"the lake of Regillus. That the place was to be con-"•secrated ; where, the auspices once taken, the consulsmiglit treat wiih the people, in order to repeal, bytheir votes in the Comitia, all laws that had been ex­torted at Rome, by the violence of the tribunes. Thatthere the people would be entirely at the devotion ofthe consuls: the freedom of appeal* did not extendbeyond a mile without the city, and the jurisdiction"of the tribunes, being confmed to the same limits,"should they go out to the place ol rendezvous, they"would also, wiih the multitude, be subject to the au-"thority of the consuls."
These considerations appeared terrible, but what struckthem most sensibly was, that Quinctius frequently de­clared, " That he" would hold no Comitia for electing"the consuls; that the state was too much distempered"for the application of ordinary remedies: That the"commonwealth stood in need of a dictator, who would"make all disturbers of the peace, feel the weight of an"authority, from which there was no appeal."
CHAP. XXI.
A compromise.—The Tribunes re-elected.'
1 HE senate were at this time assembled in the capi-tol. Thither ran the tribunes, with the multitude, in aconsternation, at their heels; Th.e people, with loudvoices, called sometimes upon the consuls, and some­times upon the fathers, to compassionate their case:but the consuls would listen to no intreaties, till thetribunes had promised to abide by whav the senate
hould judge fit to be done. Theu he reported their







OCR Output








240 . TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK III.


"this sacred oak, and whatever divinity resides in it,"bate.witness to your breach of treaty; may they pay"more regard to our just complaints, and by and by"prosper our arms, when we shall take you to a severe"account for your violation of the laws of gods and men."The moment the ambassadors were returned to Rome,the senate ordered one of the consuls to march with anarmy to. the Algidus,-against Gracchus, and the otherto lay waste the territories of the .ffiqui. The tribunes,as usual, opposed the levies at first, and miglit have doneso to the last, but for a fresh aud sudden alarm.
CHAP. XXVI.
Minucius besieged in his camp Cincinnatus createddictator.


A


SWARM of Sabines drove like an inundation, ravag­ing all before them, almost to the walls of Rome. TheRoman lands were laid waste, and in the city there wasgreat consternation. The people then cheerfully tookarms, and in spire of all the remonstrances of the tribunes,two formidable armies were levied. Nautius led one ofthem against the Sabines, and encamped at Eretum,whence he sent out small detachments, and these gene­rally in the night, by which he committed such terribledevastations, that comparatively speaking, what the Ro­mans had suffered bore no proportion.
But Minutius in his expedition, had neither the samespirit, nor the same good fortune: for, having encamp­ed not far from the enemy, although he had met with noextraordinary check, he kept within his camp for fear.The enemy, the moment they observed his cowardice,began, as it generally happens, to pull up a prodigious(low of spirits. Thus animated, they attacked his campin'the night, but finding they could make no impressionby open force, drew lines round it the next day. Beforethey had finished their circumvallation, and blocked upevery avenue, five horsemen, who had been dispatchedon purpose, escaped the vigilance of the enemy's cen-tries, and carried the news to Rome, that the consul andhis army were besieged in their camp. This intclli-







OCR Output








CONTENTS. 493


Chap,
xxxiii.
xxxiv.
xxxv.
xxxvi.
xxxvii.
xxxviii.
xxxix.
xl.
xtt.
xlii.
xliii.


xliv.
xlv.


xlvi.
xlvii.
xlviii,
xlix.
1.
Ti.
lii.
liii.


liv.
It.


- . Page
Defeat of the Vejentes and Fidenates... 358
FidemE taken and plundered. The Dic­
tator returns in triumph ^ 360
Celebration of games. Complaints of -
'the tribunes , f» S6l
Scheme of the military tribunes.........-362
Semprbnius acta incautiously ............. 363
The Gallantry of Sextiis Tempanius ... 365
A drawn battle ib.
TenipaniuS returns to Rome, and examin­
ed by the tribunes 367
His sensible trnd modest answer 368
Generous conduct of the four tribunes,
with respect to SemprentuS ..-. 376'
The iEqui in motion, suppressed. New"
contests. 'Wise" counsel of 12 Papi-
rius Mugilanus .«..-. -, -371
Trial of'SetnpMmius, and 'a'Vestal 373 •
Conspiracy of the Slaves. Motions of•
the-' iEqui and Lavicans.- Obstinacy
of the military tribunes 375.
Misunderstanding and miscarriage of the
tribunes. A dictator chosen '376
The defeat of the 2£qni and Lavicans,
and capture of Lavicum, for which a
Roman colony was voted 378
Contests about the Agrarian law. Ad­
vice of Appius 379
The iEqui humbled. Pride of Posth'u-
inius checked by L. Sextius 381
Posthumius stoned to death by his own
army 383
The trial of the mutinous soldiers. Cbn-
fests between the Orders ............ 385
Epidemical distemper, and a famine ... 380Opposition of the college to Maenius.Valerius humbles the- iEqui, but is
unpopular in the army 387
Three Plebeian quoestors chosen 389
Further contests with/the tribunes. Ter­
ritories of- the iEqui and Volsci ra­
vaged' rrr.rr „ ,.,, 390
Y







OCR Output








CHAP. 50. ROMAN HISTORY. 181


CHAP. L.
-
The Fabii full into an ambuscade, and are cut off,
V/NCE more the Vejentes resumed their operation'against the Fabii, without any new preparations; nordid they content themselves with ravaging the countrv,or making sudden incursions, but sometimes measuredtheir swords in pitched battles, upon fair ground. Thusone Roman family, frequently carried off the victoryfrom a people, who were, at that time, the most opulentof all the Etrurian nations. By this the Vejentes at first,thought themselves disgraced and highly affronted: and,in consequence, formed a design of laying ambuscadesfor their intrepid enemy; and rejoiced to find, that theforwardness of the Fabii increased with their repeatedvictories.
Wherefore, herds of cattle were frequently driven outin the way of foraging parties, as if they had lightedon them by chance; and by the flight of the peasants,vast tracts of land seemed to be abandoned. Parties ofsoldiers were also sent out to chastise the ravagers, whoretreated oftener through a pretended than a real fear.
By this time, the Fabii held the enemy in such sove­reign contempt, that they did not imagine they couldstand against their victorious arms, let the occasion orground be ever so advantageous< Elated with thesehopes, and seeing some herds of cattle grazing in a plain,at a considerable distance from Cremera, although theywere guarded by some small parties of the enemy, theyran from the fort to carry them off. Thinking them­selves secure, they had passed the ambush laid for themon both sides of the way, and had dispersed in pursuitof the cattle, straggling through the fields, which theyalways do upon an alarm; the enemy suddenly quittingtheir lurking places, appeared all at once, in front andin rear, and on every side.
At first they raised a terrible shout, and then pouredin a volley of darts upon them from every quarter. TheEtrurians came closer together, till the Fabii were totallysurrounded, by one strong uniform body of armed muti,







OCR Output








352 '; TITUS LIVIUS". BOOK IV.


\
CHAP. XXIX.'
The Dictator returns in tiiumph. f
J. HE fury of Messius" attack, with a troop of youngintrepid soldiers, opened them a passage over ihe bodiesof their slain, to the camp of the Volsci, which wan not'yet taken. Our whole army followed him thiiher.The consul pursued the scattered enemy up to theirlines, .which he attempted to force, and make himselfmaster of their camp. The dictator, on another side,led on bis troops to the attack: The work here 'was fullas warm as in the battle. The consul, it is said, threwan ensign into the entrenchments, with a view to ani­mate the soldiers to advance with all the ardour possi­ble; and the first impression they made was owiug totheir noble exertions in recovering their colours. Thedictator to, having dismounted the palisadoes, had al­ready entered the enemy's camp sword in hand; uponwhich the enemy began to lay down their arms, andsurrender at discretion' This camp being also taken,all the enemy, the senators excepted, were sold forslaves^ Part of the plunder was restored to the Latinsand Hernici, who could point out what belonged tothemselves. The remainder the dictator sold by auction,and having left the consuls to command the troops thatremained in the camp, he returned to Rome in triumph,.and immediately laid down his office.
Those authors, \ybo aver that A. Posthumius causedthe head of his son to be struck off, because he hadquitted his post without orders, upon seeing an opportu­nity of striking a blow, -in which he succeeded, greatlyabridge the glory of this dictatori-hip. For my ownpart, 1 cannot believe it; and yet, amidst so many opi­nions, one may be led to believe it. What couviucesme that there must be a mistake, is, that such instances•of severity are calted the orders of Manlius, and not ofPosthumius; and there is no doubt but he who first setsuch a rigid precedent, would have entailed upon him-uelf a title charactei-istical of his severity. Manlius wai


 







OCR Output








34 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


"Jupiter, the best and the greatest, orders you from this"moment, to stop, rally, and renew the engagement."The Romans obey, as if the order had come from hea­ven. Romulus himself, flies to the foremost ranks.Mettius Curtius had come galloping down from the cita­del, driving the Romans before him, all along the forum;and when he was within a little of the gate of the Pala-tium, he bawled, "We have beat our perfidious hosts,"—our cowardly enemies;—now they are convinced to"their cost, that to fight with men, and run away with"girls, are very different things."
Whilst he was vaunting in this insulting manner, Ro­mulus charged. him at the head of a party of gallantyoung fellows; and, as it happened, that Metiius foughton horseback, it was the more easy to drive him fromhis post. He is put to flight in his turn, and pursued.Another' battalion of the Roman army, spirited up by thegallantry of their prince, routs the Sabines. Mettiuswas thrown into a swamp from his horse, rendered un­manageable from the noise of those who pursued, a cir­cumstance, seemg their champion in danger, that alarm­ed the Sabines prodigiously. Animated by the criesand signs made to him by bis party, he, however, escap­ed.—The battle was renewed on both sides, in the centreof a valley, between two hills; but fortune declared forthe Romans.


B


CHAP. XII!.


The Sabine women interpose, and obtain a coalition.


>Y this time the Sabine women, en whose accounthostilities had commenced, with dishevelled hair and rentgarments, their melancholy circumstances having ren-"dered them superior to the fear common to their sex,threw themselves between the two armies among showers'of darts, with a view to stop the effusion of blood, andsuspend the fury of the combatants; beseeching their fa­thers, on the one side, and their husbands, on the other;"That they would not impiously, being fathers and"sons-in-hiw, embrue their hands in the blood the one







OCR Output








390 . TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV.


ployment but that of offering sacrifice for the prosperityof the people, divested of every share of government orauthority in the state.
Whilst both parties were in this ferment, whilst thepeople were screwed up to the highest pitch, beingheaded by three people, celebrated for their exertions inpopular causes; the fathers foreseeing that every otheroffice would go in the same manner as the qua-storship,where the people had a liberty of choosing out of eitherorder, directed all their engines to secure a consular Co-rnitia, in which the people had as yet no alternative.The Icilii, on the other hand, insisted for military tri­bunes, and that it was high time now for the Plebeiansto be admitted to a participation of the honours of thatoffice. .
CHAP. LV.
Further contests with the Tribunes. Territories of theJEqui and Vokci ravaged.
JjUT as yet no claim was entered by the consuls, forwhich reason, the people had it not in their power, bythe force of their opposition, to extort what they wanted;when, very fortunately for their views, advices'were re­ceived, that the Volsci and jEqui had marched out oftheir own country, to pillage that of the Latins and Her-Jjici. . To chastise the insolence of these restless depre­dators, when by a decree of the senate, the consuls be­gan to make the levies, the tribunes opposed them withall tnfjir might, declaring, that fortune had presentedthem and the people with an opportunity of doing them­selves justice. There were three of them, men of thefirst distinction among the Plebeians, and all of themexceedingly active and enterprising. Two of themuudertook to have a continual eye upon the motions ofh,is consul, whilst the third harangued the people at as­semblies, and checked or spurred them, as seemed re­quisite. Thus were the consuls, on the one hand, pre­vented from expediting the levies; and the tribunes onthe other hand, from holding the Cornitia, the objects oftheir respective pursuits.







OCR Output








CHAP. 58. ROMAN HISTORY. • 287


brass, and hung np in the forum. According to somehistorians, it was the ffidiles, who, at the instance of thetribunes, performed that office.
CHAP. LV1II.
Application in favour of Appius fruitless.—Oppius alsotried, and both die in prison. The rest of the Decemvirsbanished.
C/AIUS CLAUDIUS, having always disliked the prin­ciples of the Decemvirs, and particularly detested thepride and insolence of his nephew, had withdrawn toKegillum, his native country j but though he was nowvery old, he returned to Rome, to assist him with all hiscredit at this dangerous conjuncture, however much hehad been a declared enemy of his vices; and for thatpurpose appeared in the forum in a mourning habit, at­tended by his whole family and a great number of clients,soliciting the favour of every one he met, conjuringthem " not to entail on the Claudian family a disgrace,"which would cause them to be considered by posterity"as citizens that merited chains and prisons.—iSot to snFr"fer a man, whose memory posterity ought to revere."as the legislator of Rome, and the founder of their civil"rights, to lie in a dungeon with thieves and robbers:"but rather to suffer their just indignation to give wcy-" to the more natural feelings of compassion which arise"from reflection; and rather forgive one of the Claudii,"for the sake of so many of the name as interceded for"him, than out of hatred to one, to reject the prayers of"so many.—At the same time he begged leave to as-"sure.them, that this solicitation on his own part was"not the result of• a reconciliation with, or partiality"for the delinquent, but merely on account of his re-"lation, and honour of the Claudian name: and as they"had now recovered their liberty by their bravery, they"should also strengthen the union between the two or-"ders of the state, by their clemency."
Many, who had no regard for Appius, were affectedwith the intreaties of this venerable old man; but Vir-ginius, on the other hand, " begged them rather to hav*


 







OCR Output








CHAP. 49. ROMAN HISTORY. -. 383


the Agrarian law, he added, that he would also bring ina bill, for sending a colony to Volfe, because that cityand its pertinents was in justice the property of thosewho had conquered it by their arms: " Wo be to my"soldiers indeed, says he, if they will not be quiet."An expression, which was not mpre shocking to the as­sembly who heard it, than it was afterwards to the se­nators.
The-tribune Sextius, a man who neither wanted spi­rit nor eloquence, having found in the opposition a proudheart and a petulant tongue, whom he could provoke andenrage, till he was driven to such expressions as wouldnot only render himself odious, but the cause he espous­ed, and the order to which he belonged, attacked Post-humius more frequently, and with greater warmth thanany other of the military tribunes. Therefore, immedi­ately upon the harsh and brutal expression, he cried out,'Do you hear, Romans, how Posthumius threatens his
* soldiers, as if they were his slaves? However, when'the first offices of the state are to fie disposed of, this
* savage will be thought more worthy of them in your'judgment, than those who provide you with cities and
* lands, and send you into colonies? who procure you'safe retreats for your old age; and for your interest,
* enter the list with such cruel and haughty antagonists.'After this you may wonder, if you please, why so few'appear as champions lor the defence of your rights.'What have they to expect from you ?—Is it these hon-'ours which you chuse rather to confer on your adver-'saries than your defenders/1 The expressions you just'now heard, drew groans from you. But what then,'Were you just now to go to an election, you would
• prefer this man, who threatens you with wo, to those
• who are. for procuring you lands, dwellings, and es-
• tablishments.' •'
CHAP. L.
Poslhwnius stoned to death by Ms own army.
\. HE report of this injurious expression having spreadin thecamp, it occasioned much greater indignation there.







OCR Output








CHAP. 52. ROMAN HISTORY. 277


it, to the Aventine Mount. There, having joined theother army, they gave it in charge to the twenty tribunes,to chuse two of their number to the supreme command.Their choice fell upon M. Oppius and Sex. Manilius.
The senators anxious for the commonwealth, sat everyday; but the time which ought to have been employedin concerting prudent measures, was wasted in strife andwrangling. The decemvirs were incessantly reproachedw.ith the murder of-Sicinius, the lust of Appius, and themiscarriages in the war. They resolved, however, tosend Valerius and Horatius to the Mount Aventine; butthey refused to undertake the embassy, till the decem­virs should divest themselves of the ensigns of their au­thority, which they ought to have done twelve monthsago. The decemvirs complained* that they were to bereduced, by force, to the condition of private persons,declaring, they would not lay down their authority, be­fore jhe laws were passed, for enacting which they hadbeen created, which was the only term fixed for the ex­piration of their magistracy.
CHAP. LII.
The Decemvirs are prevailed on to lay down their authority,
\. HE people having got intelligence, by means of M.Duilius, who had been a tribune, that the senate hadcome to no decisive resolution, owing to their constantwranglings, they left the Aventine, and retired to thesacred Mount: Duilius assuring them, that the fatherswould never think seriously of the matter, till they shouldsee the city totally deserted. "But the Mons Sacer will"remind them ol the steady resolution of the commons,"- and convince them, that unless the tribunes be restor-"ed, they will find a re-union impracticable."
Marching, therefore, by the Nomantine way, thencalled Ficulensis, they encamped on the sacred Mount,observing the same good discipline, for which their an­cestors had been so much admired. Thither they wereaccompanied by the people, none staying behind, whoseage would permit him to go. Their wives and childrencame after them, asking them mournfully, to whose care
N


 







OCR Output








78 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


were designed for defence; a spear and sword were alsogiven them as weapons of offence. To this class wereadded two centuries of mechanics, who were to servewithout arms, and to be employed in carrying the mili­tary engines. ,
The second. class comprehended those whose estatesamounted to 75,000 asses of brass,* and upwards to100,000; and of those including old and young, weremade up twenty centuries. Their arms were in everyrespect the same as those mentioned above, exceptingthat they had an oblong shield, instead of a round one,and no coat of mail.
The third class lie appointed to consist of those whowere rated at 50,000 asses. f Tljese again, with respectto difference of age and number of centuries, were dis­tinguished in UK.' same manner as- the second; nor was-there any alteration in their arms , but that they had noboots.
In the fourth class, the valuation was estimated at2.5,000 asses,t and the centuries the same as in the third.This class bad no defensive arms; but their offensivewere a spear and a long javelin.
In the fifth class, the centuries were increased to thirty;and were armed with slings and stones. Among themwere reckoned the Accensi,|| the blowers on the horn, andpipers, divided into three centuries. This whole classconsisted of those who were rated at 1 1,000 asses.§
The sixth class comprehended all such as were belowthe last rate, and of them one century was made up,which was exempted from carrying arms.
The infantry being thus arranged and accoutred, heraised twelve centuries of horse from among the princi­pal citizens; and to the three centuries instituted byRomulus, he added six others, by the same names assign­ed them at their first institution. Ten thousand asses**were given them to lay out upon horses, out of the trea­sury; and for the maintenance of these horses, the


:9a. • t .£161 : 9 : 2d.|| Supernumerary officers; or, according to Varro, aids du-oamp to the generals and tribunes.
:5i ** £32 : 5 : 104







OCR Output








250 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK 111.1


Claudius and Genucius, to balance the consular fasces towhich they had been preferred this year, and to Sestius,one of the consuls the preceding year, because he hadbrought that affair before the senate, though his colleaguewas entirely against it. Next to these were named thethree commissioners, who had been sent to Athens, as acompliment due to them for their trouble in executing acommission at such a distance, at the same time it wasthought that men acquainted with foreign laws, would beof some consequence in instituting a body of laws cal­culated for their own meridian. Those who succeededin the list completed the number; but they who werenamed last, were too old, as some say, to oppose, with asufficient degree of resolution, the sentiments of their col­leagues.
Appius, by the favour he had acquired among thepeople, had the modelling of their magistracy. For hehad so far new-modelled his temper, that from being themost austere Patrician, who crossed the Plebeians in alltheir claims and pretensions, he suddenly became a veryPoplicola, solely intent upon pleasing the multitude andacquiring their affection.
Each of these new magistrates, in his turn, administer­ed justice every tenth day, when he bad the fasces bornebefore him : each of the oilier nine being that day onlyattended by a single officer*.
The perfect unanimity that prevailed among them­selves, far from being prejudicial to particulars, whichis too often the case, was attended with the strictest equi­ty, in regard to all the citizens. We shall only men­tion a single anecdote, as an instance of their moderation.By the tenor of their institution, from their judgmentthere could be no appeal: yet when a corpse was detect­ed, and" dug up in the house of P. Sestius, by birth aPatrician, and exposed in the public assembly; in a caseso glaring and atrocious, the decemvir, C. Julius, ap­pointed him a day for his trial; and though he was thelegal judge himself in the cause, yet he appeared as thepublic prosecutor before the people, derogating from hisown authority as decemvir, to add to that of the people.
•-. This officer was called Accensus, el acciendo.







OCR Output








CHAP. 33. ROMAN HISTORY. 65


CHAP. XXXIII.
The Latins conquered, and made free of the city.
X\NCUS having committed the care of religious mat­ters to the Fiamens and other priests, and having leviedla new army, marched against Polytorium, and took itby storm.
Then, following the example of his predecessors, inadding to the population of the city, by adntitting theconquered nations, he transported all the inhabitants toRome. And because all the ground about the Palatium•had been assigned to the ancient Romans, that about thecapital and castle to the Sabines, and mount Caelius tothe Albans, the Aventine mount was appointed for thenew people. Soon after, another set from Tellini andFicana also taken, were stationed in the same quarter.Polytorium suffered a new siege, some time after this,having been a second time peopled by the Latins. Forthis reason it was razed to the ground, that it might nptbe a place of refuge for the enemy.
After this, Medulla became the seat of the war, whereseveral battles were fought with various success, in whichneither party had much advantage; for the town wasdefended by strong works, and an able garrison; andthe Latin army, being encamped in the open plain, hadseveral skirmishes with the Romans. At .last, Ancusmustering all his force, for the first time, obtained acomplete victory, and returned to Rome with a consider­able booty. On that occasion too, many thousands ofthe Latins were received into the city, and accommodat-.ed with. ground to build upon near the temple of Murcia,in order thereby fo join the Aventine and Palatine hills.Janiculum was also added, not for want of room, but lestat any time it should become a lodgement to the enemy.He thought proper alsp to join it to the city, not only bya wall, but also, for the convenience of travelling, by .awooden brjdge; the first that was ever thrown over theTiber.
The Fossa Quiritium, which rendered the city less ac­cessible from. the. lower grounds, was also the work of
- •./ • .• cJ i!' . • • .-. ••• •-.'..







OCR Output








50 TITUS LIVIUS' , BOOK I.


This treaty was ratified in the following form; and itis surely the most ancient record in history. A heraldput the question to king Tullus, "Is it your pleasure, O"King, that I enter mto a treaty with the Pater Patra-"tus of the people of Alba?" The king answering inthe affirmative; "Give me then vervain, O king," con­tinued he; " take it up pure," rejoined the king; theherald took up a pile or' pare grass from the temple, andthen put this second question; " Do you, O kmg, consti-"tute me the royal ambassador of the Roman people?"Do you appoint me an equipage and a retinue?" Towhich the king made answer, " Whatever I can do with-"out prejudice to myself, or the Roman people, that I"do." The herald was Marcus Valerius, who nomi­nated Spurius Fusius, the pater patratus touching hishead and hair with vervain.
It is the business of the pater patratus to administerthe oath, by which the treaty is ratified, and this he doesin along form of words too tedious to mention: the se­veral clauses and conditions being all read over; " Hear,"O Jupiter," says he, " give ear, O pater patratus of"the Alban people; and ye, O people of Alba, hear"that the Romans shall not be the first to depart from"these conditions, which, out of these waxed tables,"without fraud or equivocation, have, from first to last,"been read over in your hearing, in the real accepta-"tation in which they are this day taken and under-"stood. And if, by public authority or fraudulent de-"sign, they should be the first to break through these"conditions, may thou, O Jupiter, that moment so strike"the Roman people, as here, this day, I strike this hog;"and may thy stroke, great Jupiter, be as much heavier,"as thy power is greater."—Having thus spoke, he struckthe hog dead with a flmt. The Albans took their ownoath, and went through their own forms, with their owndictator and priests.







OCR Output








70 TITUS LIVIUS* BOOK I


art, as it is said, " Come, you conjurer," says lie, " tell"me by augury, whether, what I just now conceive in"my mind, can be effected?" The other, when he hadconsulted his birds, returned and told the king, it couldsurely be done. "Truly then," says the king," I was*' just thinking within myself, whether it were possible"to cut this flint with this razor: do, take them, and per-"form what your birds say is possible." In a moment,they say, he cut the flint.—A statue of Attus, with hishead veiled, was erected in the Comitium upon the stairs,on the left of the senate house, where the affair happen­ed. They likewise add, that the flint was deposited in-the same spot, where it might remain, as a monument ofthe miracle to posterity.
This affair brought so much credit on augury, and thecollege of augurs, thai no matter of any moment, inpeace or war, was ever after carried into execution, tillthe birds were consulted. Assemblies were broke up,armies disbanded, and negotiations, the most important,broke off) when the birds were averse.
Tarquin, at that time, made no alteration in the cen­turies of horse, save only, that he doubled the comple-. ment of men in each corps; so that the three centuriesconsisted of one thousand eight hundred knights.
CHAP. XXXVII. .
Tarquin beats the Salines.
JriAVING thus augmented his cavalry,.he had anotherbrush with the Sabines: and, although his army had beenconsiderably reinforced; yet, with all the secrecy hecould, he put in practice the following stratagem. Hedispatched a party to set fire to a heap of timber, as itlay on the banks of the Anio, and afterwards to throw itinto the river. The timber thus set on fire, and drivenby the wind, catched hold of the piles and boats, and soset the bridge in a flame. This contrivance damped theSabin'es not a little in time of action; and, after theywere routed, greatly retarded their flight; so that manyof them, who might have made good their retreat, were







OCR Output








56 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


the mountains. To the Vejentes, Tullus opposes hisRomans, and to the Fidenates, the Albans. Mettus,as destitute of courage, as of honour, durst neither main­tain his post, nor pass over at once to the enemy, butwithdrew imperceptibly up the hills; till fmding he wassufficiently remote, that he drew up on the eminence;and to spin out the time, whilst he was still in suspense,he extended his line. His purp'ose was, whatever wayfortune should flow, to follow the tide.
The Romans, who were posted next them, were struckwith amazement at first, when they saw their flanks leftexposed, by the desertion of their friends; and they in­stantly dispatch a trooper, at full gallop, to inform theking, that the Albans were retiring. Tullus, amidst thisconsternation vows twelve Salii and temples to Pallorand Pavor. Then rebuking the trooper, with a voiceloud enough to be heard by the enemy, he orders himback to his post, telling him, that he had nothing to fear,for it was by his orders the Albans had made a circuit,that they might fall on the unguarded rear of the Fide-nates. He also orders the cavalry to carry their spearshigh; by which expedient the greatest part of the Ro­man foot saw nothing of the motions of the Alban?.They who observed them, thinking only of what theyhad heard from ihc king, fought with the greater ar­dour. The panic was now transferred to the enemy;for they had heard distinctly what the king said, andmost of the Fidenates, as being a Roman colony, under­stood Latin. Wherefore, that their retreat from thetown might not be cut off by the sudden descent of theAlbans, they made the best of their way. Tullus pur­sues: and that wing where the Fidenates were postedbeing thus routed, he falls with redoubled fury on theVejentes, who were already disheartened by the flight oftheir allies. Nor could they stand so vigorous a charge:The river, however, which was in their rear, obligedthem to keep in a body. At last when they could standit no longer, many of them quitting their arms, threwthemselves headlong into the river; others, whilst theywere deliberating on the banks whether to fight or fly,were cut to pieces.—This perhaps was tha hardest worl$ihe Romans ever had.


 







OCR Output








366 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOKIV.


their own army. This happened accordingly. The ca­valry were blocked up, and found it.quite impracticableto return the way they had advanced: the enemy hav-ing closed, and in that part of the line, standing in veryclose array.
The consul and Roman legions having lost sight ofthe battalion which was the life and soul of their army,and fearing those generous troops would be blocked upand overpowered by the enemy, outbraved every dan­ger for their relief. The Volsci making a double froat,on the one side, sustained the charge of the consul andhis legions; and on the other pressed hard upon Tem-panius and his cavalry, who having often attempted tobreak through the enemy's ranks to join the main bodyof their army, without effect, at last took possession of aneminence, where throwing themselves into a ring, theydefended themselves with such bravery as cost the Volscidear. Only the night put an end to the battle.
The consul, on his part, kept the enemy sufficientlyemployed, while any light remained. Night drew offboth sides, equally uncertain-which was victorious.Their ignorance, in this respect, struck such a panic onboth, that leaving their wounded and a great part oftheir baggage behind, both concluding themselves de­feated, made the best of their way to the mountainswhich lay nearest them. The eminence, however, con­tinued to be invested till after midnight, when the be­siegers being informed, that their camp was abandoned,and not doubting. but the army had been also defeated,went off in a fright, under cover of the darkness, the bestway they could.
Tempanius fearing an ambuscade, kept his post tillday-light; when he went out with a few of his followersto reconnoitre the enemy, and found upon inquiry atsome of the wounded enemy, that the Volsci had aban­doned their camp. Then with pleasure calling down allhis soldiers from the hill, he entered the Roman camp,and there found the like solitude and total desertion as inthe enemy's. Therefore, as he was entirely ignorant ofthe consul's rout, and fearing a return of the Volsci up-en the first discovery of their error, be took up as many


 







OCR Output








CHAP. 57. ROMAN HISTORY. 191


not the whole assembly, highly incensed at the beha­viour of Appius, taken part with their tribune against theconsul, great numbers of their body, upon the alarm,flocking thither from all parts of the city. Appius, how­ever did uot flinch, but stoutly stood the storm, whichwould certainly have ended in blood, had not Quinctius,the other consul, given it in charge to the senators ofconsular dignity, to remove his colleague from the forumby force, if persuasion should be ineffectual, whilst hehimself endeavoured to mollify the people by the warm­est intreaties, and conjured the tribunes to dismiss the as­sembly, and give their passion time to subside, " That a"few hours delay would not diminish .their power, but"would add wisdom to direct it: That the consul would"be advised by the fathers, and the fathers would com-"ply with the people."
CHAP. LVII.
Peace restored by means of Stuinciius. Obstinacy of thearmy under Appius.
JLT was with some difficulty that Quinctius composedthe people, but in bringing the other consul to himself,the senate found still more. At length when the assem­bly of the people was dismissed, the senate was conven­ed by the consuls. Anger and fear dictating by turns,produced a variety of sentiments; but the longer theydeliberated, the more they saw the folly of continuingthese contests; insomuch, that Quinctius had the thanksof the house for interfering so seasonably, to suspend thedaemon of discord. On the other hand, they conjuredAppius, " Not to carry his zeal for the dignity of the con-"sulship, beyond what was consistent with the peace"and harmony of the state. That whilst the consuls"and tribunes were dragging every thing to themselves,"the state was left naked and impotent between them,"each side seeming less intent upon its safety, than"upon making themselves its masters."
On the other hand, Appius " called gods and men to/•' witness, that they abandoned and betrayed the com-"monwealth, through mere pusillanimity.—That the







OCR Output








15* TITUS LIV1US' Book II.


was a young officer, a Pairician by birth, named Mar-cius, ureally esteemed for his valour and prudence, andafterwards sir-named Coriolanus. Wlnle the Romanswere engaged in the siege ofCoriof, and their an cut toilwholly t.iken up with the operations of the besieged wrh-in the walls, and apprehending no danger from without,the Volscian legions marching from Antium, fell sudden­ly upon them, at t:,e same time ihat the besieg-d madea vigorous sally from (he town. Marcius happened tobe then on guard, and pulling himself at the head of aselect corps, he not 'miy repulsed those who had salliedfrom the town, but rushing luriously in at a gaie theyhad opened, and having tilled ihe part of the city thatlay next to him with blood and slaughter, he hastilysnaiched up some fire, and threw it against the housesthat overlooked the wall.
The cries of the townsmen, and the shrieks of thewomen and children, when they saw the flames break-in" out, gave the Romans new spirits, and damped theenemy, who found the city was taken, they had cometo relieve. Thus were the Volsci roined, and Coriolitaken at the same time.
The glory acquired by Marcius in this war, so fareclipsed the reputation of the consul, that if the treatymade with the Latins, by Sp. Ca"sius alone, whilst hiscolleague was absent, an.I engraven on a pillar of brass,had not handed down to posterity, that Posihumius Co-minius commanded ,in the expedition against the Volsci,his concern there wrould have been totally forgot.
This year, the public lost Menenius Agnppa, a man,who through the who e course of his life, had been dearto both senate and people, but still more so to the peopleafter their secession, although he had the honour to bemediator and umpire in the dispute between the orders,although he was chosen delegate from the fathers to thepeop'e, and although he had influence to re-unite thepeople to the senate, he died so poor, that all his estatewas not sufficient to defray the expence of his funeral.That charge was defrayed by the people, who assessedthemselves for that purpose, each in the value of thesixth parth of an ass.*
* The one eighth part of a farthing.







OCR Output








CHAP. 54. ROMAN HISTORY. 281


the city in their retinue. Another pa*t of the peoplewent out from the camp to meet them. They congra-.tulated each other upon the recovery of peace and li­berty. Then the deputies, having called an assembly,delivered themselves to this purpose: "Return, soldiers,"to your country, your household gods, your wives and"children; and may your return be attended with all"the prosperity, success, and felicity to yourselves and"the republic, which your hearts can desire! Return,"however, with the same moderation to the city, you"have hitherto observed, when so great a multitude,"in a necessity so urgent and so general, have not in-"jured a single field. March back to the Aventine,"whence you came. There, in that place of happy"augury, where you laid the first foundation of your•' liberty, create tribunes of the people. The high-"priest will be there, to preside in your assembly."
The joy, upon this occasion, was general and exces­sive, and expressedjn the loudest acclamations. Imme­diately the army snatched up their ensigns, and march­ed to Rome, congratulating all they met, and receivingtheir congratulations. They passed through the citywith profound silence, and halted upon Mount Aventine,where the high-priest immediately holding the assembly,they elected their tribunes. A. Virginius was first nam­ed, then L. Icilius, and P. Numitorius, Virginia's uncle,as the chief promoters of the secession. After them,C. Sicinius, a descendant of that Sicinius, who is saidto have been created the first tribune upon the sacred. Mount: and M. Dnilius, who had distinguished himselfin the office of tribune, before the institution of the de-.eemvirate, and ever after had stood firm against them,in the interest of the people: five others were chosen,M. Titinius, M. Pomponius, C. Apronius, P. Villius,C- Oppius, more in expectation of future, than for pastservices.
I As soon as they entered upon office, on a motion ofIcilius they enacted, that no person should be prose­cuted for separating from the decemvirs. Duilius, at thesame time, passed a bill for the election of consuls, withti'e right-of appeal to the people< All these things were.


 







OCR Output








482 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK V.


• tomed to survey, and yonder sky, under which I was«. born and bred, came crowding into my mind. Let'these my fellow-citizens, by their attractive charm?,
• rather engage you to remain iu your own place of'abode, than after you have abandoned them, to regret'your loss, when it will be too late. .
'It was not without reason, that gods and men se-'lected this spot for the purpose of building a city,< where we have most wholesome hills, and a conve-'nient river for conveying the corns from the inland
• countries, and merchandize from the sea, which, by'the bye, is near enough for all good purposes, and at'the same time so remote, as to secure us against any'attack from foreign fleets. It lies in the centre of SH
• the provinces of Italy, the only situation capable of
• promoting the increase of a city. Can we have any'stronger proof of this, than the rapidity of its progress?
• This, my friends, is only the three hundred and sixty-
• fifth year of our city; so long have yot been waging'war with many nations of a long standing, and after all,'neither the Volsci, in conjunction with the 7K<ni i. in-'possession of so many strong cities, nay not even all
• Ktruria, so powerful both by sea and land, and estend-'ing the whole breadth of Italy, between two seas, have'been a match for you in war. What reason have you'then, or rather, what dcemon possesses you, who, know'how you have been here, for trying new experiments?'You may indeed carry your bravery elsewhere, but« can you carry thither that fortune, which is unalter-'ably annexed to this particular spot? Here is the Capi-
• tol, where a human head was found long ago, and it'was declared concerning it, that the place where it was'found, should be the seat of universal empire, the capi-'tal of the world. It was here too, when the Capitol'was cleared of all other divinities, that Youth and Ter-'minus refused to be removed. Here are the fires of
• V.estaj.here are the celestial bucklers; in one word;
• it is to your continuance here, that the gods have an-'nexed your prosperity, power, and glory.' •







OCR Output








37 S TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV.


vived.their courage in a peculiar manner, was the no­mination of Quinctius Servilius Priscus, dictator, by or­der of the senate; a man, of whose penetration the statehad had proofs on former occasions, and especially with* respect to the event of this war, he being the only OIK;,who, before the late miscarriage, seemed to foreste theconsequence of the misunderstanding of the tribunes.According to some authors, he cbo?e his son general ofthe horse; by whom, in quali'y of military tribune, hebad been himself declared dictator. Others, however,say, that Semlius Ahala was made general of the horseupon this occasion. Wherefore, taking the field withhis new army, he reinforced it with that at Tusculum,and encamped within two miles of the enemy..
CHAP. XLVII.
Tlie defeat sf the JRqui and Lavicans, and capture ofLu'uicum, for which a Roman colony vias voted.
T
J. HE neglect and insolence, which had formerly pre­vailed in the Roman generals, went over to the /Ivrr,with their good success. The dictator having se.nt hiihorse, in the beginning of the battle, to charge the ene­my's front, which was soon put into disorder, ordered thelegions to advance to support them with all expedition;and observing an ensign slacken his pace, he killed himon the spot. The ardour of the Roman troops was toomuch for the /Equi to sustain; wherefore, being over­powered in the field, they fled with great precipitationto their camp, which required still less time and troubleto force, than it had done to beat them in- the field.The camp being taken and rifled, the dictator gave allthe plunder of it to the troops.
The horse, who had pursued the enemy in their flightout of the camp, having brought advice, that the routedLavicans, and a great part of the ./Equi had fled toLavicum, the army marched thither next day, invesiedthe place, and having taken it by escalade, it was plun­dered by the soldiers. The dictator marched back hisvictorious army to Rome, and resigned the dictatorship,eight days after his nomination.


 







OCR Output








454 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK V.


of the Teem. Then the Boii (a), and Lingenes (6) cros­sed the Pennine Alps, and having possessed themselvesof all the countries between the Alps and the Po, passedthat river in boats, and not only drove the Etrurians,but even the Umbrians (c) out of the country. Theyconfined themselves, however, within the Appenines.Then the Senones (d), the last of all the new comers,possessed themselves of the countries lying between the.rivers Montone and Fiumesmo.
This was the nation, I find, that came first to Clusium,and thence to Rome; but I cannot say whether they-Icame alone, or assisted by all the other Cisalpine emi­grants. The Clusiaas,. terrified at this new war, whenthey saw the number aod extraordinary size of the ene­my, and withal the kind of arms they used, at the sametime having often heard that the Etrurians had beenoften defeated by them, both on this and the other side.of the "o: atthough they had no alliance with Rome,nor any claim to her friendship, if it were not, .that theyhad not'appeared in defence of the Vejentes, their kins­men, agiCinsK the Romans, sent ambassadors to Rome tosolicit assistance from the senate. In this, however, theydid not succeed; but the thret sons of Ambustius Fabiuswere sent ambassadors to treat with the Gauls in nameof the senate and people of Rome, and to represent,that they ought not to attack the friends and allies ofthe people of Rome, who never had injured them, andin whose defence, should it prove necessary, they wouldbe obliged to arm. But the most eligible alternativewas, if possible, to prevent it; and it would add more tothe character of the Gauls, whose settlement there hadbeen but of a short Standing, to make themselves knownby the arts of peace, than their prowess in war.
(«) "Who inhabited the Bourbotmois. (i) Who inhabited
1 angress. (c) Who possessed part of the dutchy" of Urbrn,
of the territory of Perugia, the county of Citta Castellana, andmost of the dutchy of Spoleto. (4) From Sens and Auxerre.







OCR Output








. . TO TIJE PUBLIC. ix


ages: and when we consider the various accomplishmentsand requisites for executing it well, the reason why themost learned and polished nations have produced so fewperfect historians, will be abundantly obvious. To com­plete this character, the philosopher, the politician, thegeneral, the orator, and the man of the world, must allbe united in one and the same person. To accuracy and• diligence in his researches; symmetry, and proportionin the arrangement of his matter; elegance, and nervous­ness of diction; freedom and impartiality in his reflexions,he must join a thorough acquaintance with the consti­tution of the state whose history he writes, and the dis-*criminating characters of its various ages; an intimateknowledge of the human heart; and above all, an honest,virtuous, steady, and unbiassed disposition. The moreextended the subject, the greater variety of examples itexhibit?, the more genius it requires to treat it with pro­priety, and the more extensive the advantages to be de­rived from it.
The subject upon which Livy treats, accurately con­sidered in evejy circumstance, is perhaps the most beau­tiful and richest that possibly can be conceived. TheRomans were a people, who from an origin the mostobscure and inglorious, by correcting what was amiss iutheir manners, by prudence in their councils, by activityand address in the executing of their plans, by secrecyand fidelity in their negociations, by strictness of disci­pline civil and military, and by their unshaken firmnessand fortitude, amidst the most imminent dangers, arrivedto fL pitch of glory almost incredible, which they owedalone to the vigour of their constitution, and their virtu­ous principles: so that their history furnishes us with allthat is great,—with all that is excellent,—with all thatis truly noble.
In contemplating this mighty empire, the imaginationmusfrbe highly delighted, when the virtues which pro­moted its elevation, and the vices which hastened its ruin,pass in reuiew before it. It is here, where we can ex­amine the most illustrious characters with candour and"impartiality, unbiassed by prejudice, and undazzled bygreatness. Can the understanding be more enlarged, orthe judgment be letter confirmed, than in living thusover past.ages, profiting try their experience, and







OCR Output








CHAP. 8. ROMAN HISTORY. 117


CHAP. VIII.
* • r
P. Valerius proposes a law, for allowing appeals to thepeople. The capital dedicated.


this, the consul made laws, which not onlycleared him of all suspicion of aiming at sovereign power,but, oh the contrary, made him even popular. Fromthis consideration he got the name of Publicola. Thelaws, which above all others, raised him in the esteem ofthe public, were these, which made an appeal to thepeople competent, from the judgment of the magistrates,and the person and effects of him, who should form anyplot for usurping the sovereign power, execrable. Theselaws he passed while the only consul, that he might havethe sole merit of them; and immediately after, he as­sembled the comitia for electing a colleague. SpuriusLucretius was chosen consul, who, being now very old,and quite unfit for the duties of his office, died in a fewdays after his election.
M. Horatius Pulvillus succeeded Lucretius. In someold histories, I do not fmd Lucretius mentioned as con­sul at all, but Horatius immediately after Brutus. Thereason, I imagine, may be owing to this, that nothing re­markable happened, during the short time he enjoyed hisoffice.
The temple of Jupiter, was not yet dedicated in thecapitol; wherefore Valerius and Horatius the consul?,cast lots, which of them should have the honour of per- -forming that ceremony. The lot fell to Horatius, andPublicola marched against the Vejentes. Valerius'sfriends showed more uneasiness than became them, thatthe honour of dedicating so famous a temple shouldhave fallen to Horatius. Nothing was left unattemptedto throw obstacles in the way, and after every otherscheme had proved abor.tive, they endeavoured to sur- -prise him with a melancholy piece of news, just as hewas holding the post in the temple, and addressing hisprayer tn the god, telling him, "That his son was dead, ."and that he could not dedicate the temple, when his"family were in mourning.'* Whether he gave no







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








CHAP. 5, ROMAN HISTORY. 209


having sold his life as dear as possible. Upon the newsof his brother's disaster, the consul returned to the en­gagement, and rushing with more haste than caution,among the thickest of the epemy, he was wounded, andwith difficulty carried off the field by those about him;a circumstance which dispirited the Roman army not alittle, and inspired the enetny with a greater degree ofconfidence, who, proud that they had dispatched thelieutenant, and wounded the consul, carried all beforethem, drove the Romans back to their camp, and therebesieged them again, inferior in strength, and withoutthe least ray of hope to support them.
Such was their miserable situation, when Quinctiuscame to their relief with an army of tfce Latins, Her-nici, and other foreign troops. Whilst the jEqui di­rected all their force against the Roman camp, and in­sulting the besieged, by exposing to their view the headof their lieutenant-general, Quinctius attacked them inrear, whilst, upon a signal from him at a distance, asally was made from the camp, so that the enemy wasin a great measure surrounded. No great slaughter en-isued, as they fled in straggling parties, through the Ro«man territories.
Whilst they were straggling thus, and plunderingby the way, P'osth'umius, with some detachments, whichhe had posted in proper places, gave them a very warm.reception : and, after they had escaped the fury of Post-humius.they fell in with Quinctius, who, after his victory,was returning with the wounded consul. Here the con­sular army took full revenge for their lieutenant-generaland his cohort*, as well as the wound received by theconsul. The slaughter was great on both sides, forthose tiroes.
It is indeed, next to impossible, to ascertain with pre­cision, at this distance of time, what numbers were en­gaged, or fell: although Antias Valerius finds no dif­ficulty in condescending on the exact number. Accord­ing to his account, there fell of the Romans, in the coun.try of the Hernici, five 'thousand three hundred. Ofthose jEqui, who in scattered parties, pillaged the Ro­man territories, Posthnmius dispatched two thousand fourhundred: but it was Quinctius v«ho gave them the fatal







OCR Output








CHAP. 28. 'ROMAN HISTORY. 243


CHAP. XXVIII.
The consul relieved, the Mqui beat, and obliged to passunder the yoke.
JL HE dictator mounting on horseback, rode round theenemy's camp, and examined its form and extent withall the minuteness the night would admit; he then or­dered the tribunes to cause the baggage' to be heaped upin one place, and the soldiers to return with their armsand stakes into their ranks; all which was instantly com­plied with. He made his army extend itself aroundtheir camp, in the same good order as they had marched,with orders to throw up a ditch, and fortify it with pali-sadoes, and the moment the signal should be given, toset up a. great shout all together. They waited not longfor the signal, and executed the orders with the utmostpunctuality. The cry was heard round the enemy onall si'les, and beyond the camp of the jEqui, soon reach­ed the consul's camp, where it spread confidence and joy,whilst it filled the /Kqui with consternation and terror.
The consul's army, when they heard the shouts oftheir fellow citizens, congratulated each other; and as­sured that relief was at hand, threatened the enemy withtheir advanced.and picquet-guards. "There is now notime to be lost," cried the consul; " the shout we havebeard, has not only announced the arrival of ourfriends, but that they are already engaged with theenemy. Nay, it would be matter of wonder, if theenemy's lines are not already attacked on the outside.To arms, therefore, to arms, and follow me soldiers."Out sallied the legions in the night to the attack, andtheir shouts informed the dictator, that the enemy hadalso hot work on the inside.
The .SLqui were just going to interrupt the works thedictator ha.I begun, to prevent their being surrounded,when the alarm from the other side, obliged them to turnthe. best part of their strength that way, lest they shouldopen a way through the heart of their camp; and leavethe dictator at liberty, for the rest of the night, to go onwith his works.







OCR Output








304 TITUS LIVIUS' • BOOK III.


• suls, by betraying the dignity of their order, had'made their court to the peopte, or had made them
• still more obdurate and untractable, by supporting the'rights of the senate, with too much haughtiness and'austerity. But that Titus Quinctius had adapted his'discourse to the times, and without losing sight of the
"* 'dignity of the senate, had constantly kept iu view, the
'union and reconciliation of parties. They unani-
'mously requested him and his colleague to provide
• for the safety of the state; at the same time recom-
* mending to the tribunes, to act in concert with the
* consuls, for driving the enemy from the gates and'walls of the city, and to engage the people to act with
• cheerfulness and submission in -every thing ordered'by the senate, in so dangerous a conjuncture. That'it was the genius of Rome, that upon this extraordi-
* nary occasion, implored the aid of the tribunes, wben
* their lands were laid waste, and the city in danger of'being taken.'
The levies were decreed, without a dissenting voice,and made without opposition. Then the consuls addres­sed themselves to the multitude in substance as follows:At present their time was too sacred for examiningthe excuses of those who had not given in their names.The youth must all be ready by day-break to-morrow,in the Campus Martins. At the conclusion of thewar, they would then enquire into these matters, andtreat all as deserters, whose excuse should be found un­tenable.'
Next day, the youth assembled accordingly, wheneach cohort chose its own centurions, and hail two se­nators placed at the h'e&d of it. All this we find donewith such expedition, that the ensigns were readv, andbrought from the arsenal by the ijusestors, and the troopsfairly oa their march by the fourth hour of ihc day.This new army, joined with a few veteran cohorts, whofollowed air volunteers, halted after a march often milesfrom Rome. The next day they came iu view of <lieenemy, and encamped hard by tliem at Corhio. On.the third day, both sides were eager to come to an en-jgagement; the Romans prompted by resentment, andthe enemy, liy a conviction that they could expect no


 


•







OCR Output








322 TITUS LIVIUS* BOOK IV.


'were not hearty in their endeavours to prevent their'being injured, and careful, if at any time they had'reason of complaini, to remove the cause, with a\\ the'dispatch in their power.' The ambassadors promisedto lay the matter before their council of state, and weredismissed with marks of respect.
As the city now had no supreme magistrates, the se­nate met and named an inter-rex. The main questionnow during this interregnum was, whether consuls ormilitary tribunes should be appointed to the government,which was the subject of debate for several days. Theinter-rex and senate, insisted to have a Comitta for elect­ing consuls, but the people and their tribunes, for mili­tary tribunes. The senate prevailed, because the peo­ple being determined, at all events, to chuse Patricians,grew indifferent about a question that could answer noend: And their leaders themselves, preferred an electionWhere they could not appear as candidates, to that wherethey were sure to be cast as unworthy. The tribunestoo, out of respect to the principal senators, gave up apoint, which they saw they could not maintain. T.Quinctius Barbatus, the inter-rex, created L. PaperiusMugilanus, and L. Sempronius Atratinus consuls. Dur­ing their administration, the treaty with the Ardeateswas renewed, which'is an incontestible proof that theywere consuls that year, though the ancient annals, aswell as the register of magistrates, make no mention ofeither. It would seem, that military tribunes havingbeen created in the beginning of the year, the names olthe consuls who succeeded them, were omitted, as if themilitary tribuneship had continued in force to the end o!'the year. Lic-inius Murer declares, that their names arerecorded in the treaty with the Ardeates, and also f.-undin the linen records, in the temple of Monita. Notwith­standing of all the alarms from the neighbouring nations,Rome enjoyed peace both at home and abroad.


 


.•







OCR Output








Gn*r. 42. ROSTA'flF BISTORT. . 263


^ • . /
ofie. For so prevalent had the influence of his col­leagues in the decemvirate been on Fabius, who former­ly had acted with great propriety, Jioth in peace and inwar,. that he now thought it a greater honour to bethought like Appius, than like his former self. He hadthe management of the Sabine war assigned him, inwhich commission,.Man. Rabnleius, andQ. Pcutilius werejoined. M. Cornelius was sent to the Algidus, with L.Miiuicius, T. Antonius, CIESO Duilius, and M. Sergius.Sp. Oppius was appointed- to assist Appius in defending,the city ; and for that purpose, they were left equally in­vested with the whole extent of decemviral authority.
CHAP. XLH.
Ill conduct of the Roman armies.
JL HE republic suffered no less by mismanagementabroad, than at home. The generals were indeed no-­otherwise to blame, than in having rendered themselvesodious to the citizens:, for,. in all other respects, the sol­diers were totally culpable. For, that nothing. mightsucceed under the direction and management of the de­cemvirs, they suffered themselves to be beat, to theirown disgrace, and that of their commanders. Theirarmies were routed by the Sabines at Eretum, and bythe /Equi at the Algid us. The army at Eretum tookthe opportunity of the darkness of night, to make theirescape to a rising. ground- nearer, the city,, betweenFidenae and Crustumeria,. where they, immediately threwup entrenchment?. Thither, the enemy pursued them,but could never bring them to a battle on fair ground, asthey chose rather to trust to their situation and ramparts,than to their valour and arms..
The army at the Algidus behaved still worse, and inconsequence received a more terrible overthrow: for,having lost their camp, and deprived of all their militaryaccoutrements, they made the best of their way to Tus-culum, trusting for subsistence and protection to thefidelity and generosity. of their allies, in which they wereby no means disappointed. Rome was so alarmed withjthese dreadful accounts, that the senators, without mind,-­







OCR Output








CHAP. 6. ROMAN HISTORY. 319


'with whom he can neither share the public honours of* the state, nor private alliance by marriage.'
CHAP. VI.
Military Tribunes of either order, proposed to supersedeConsuls.


HE consuls having also gone out to the assembly ofthe people, from long speeches the parties now fell toaltercation. The tribune put the question, why a Pletbeian might not attain to the consulship? It was answer­ed, perhaps with some truth, though to little purpose onthe present occasion, that no Plebeian had a right to theauspices, for which reason the decemvirs had declaredsuch marriages void, as in a heterogeneous race, theauspices might be rendered uncertain.
It is impossible to express the indignation of the peotpip, when they heard that they were to be denied theauspices, as men bateful to the immortal gods. And asin their tribune they had a most intrepid cham.pion, andwere themselves no less determined, the fathers were atlast obliged to suffer the law concerning marriages topass; persuaded, that fronp this concession, the tribuneswould be induced to drop entirely the other bill respect­ing the Plebeian consuls, or at least suspend it till theconclusion of the war; and that the people, satisfied withobtaining a repeal of the marriage-act, would cheerfullyagree to the levies. But as Canuleius' victory over thefathers had raised his credit and influence among thepeople to an extraordinary height, the other tribunes,emulous of his glory, exerted all their influence to carrythe law they had proposed; and though the reports ofthe impending war became every day more flagrant, theystill obstructed the levies. ^^
The consuls fmding that nothing effectual could beconcluded in the senate, by reason of the interruptionthey met with from the tribunes, held meetings of thenobility in their own houses; to whom it appeared evi­dent, that matters were now come to that pass, that theymust yield the victory, either to the enemy abroad, orto the people at home. Valerius and Horatius were the.







OCR Output








32 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


legion * was quickly dispatched against them, and com­ing up with them by forced marches, cut them off, as.they were dispersed in 'small parties over the country.Thus was the enemy routed at the first shout and charge,and their town also taken. As Romulus was returningin triumph from this double victory, his wife, Hersilia,wearied out with the importunities of the ravished ladies,requests of him to be reconciled to their fathers, and re­ceive them into the city, for by such union, there wouldbe, between them, a reciprocation of interest. This fa­vour was easily obtained.
After this he marched against the Crustimini, - whotoo had commenced hostilities: But here the resistancehe met with was feeble indeed. The enemy was quitedispirited by the overthrow of their neighbours. Colo­nies were sent to each of these places: but on account ofthe richness of the soil, the majority enlisted for Crustu-minium From them too there were frequent emigrationsto Rome, consisting chiefly of the parents and relations'•-of the ravished ladies. The last, but not the least warthey had on this account, was with the Sabines, theywere neither actuated by passion, nor love of plunder;nor did they threaten before they were ready to execute.
To expedite their designs, they had recourse to a stra­tagem. Spurius Turpeius was then governor of the ci­tadel. With the promise of a sum of money, Tatiusprevailed on a young lady, the governor's daughter, topermit his soldiers to enter the citadel in arms; bychance, at that time, she had gone without the walls tofetch water for some sacred purpose. They whom sheadmitted, either because they thought it more honourable,that it should appear the citadel was taken fairly, or tomake her an example to posterity, that no faith shouldbe kept with traitors, smothered her under their bucklers.Because the Sabines, on their left arms, commonly worebracelets of great value, and on their fingers, rings set
* From Inhere, to chnse; because the Roman legion consistedentirely of chosen men. The number, which at that time consti­tuted a legion, is not easity ascertained. Ptutarch lays, 3000foot aml 300 horse.


 







OCR Output








342 TITUS LIVIUS" BOOK IV.


the Roman territory, with a view to plunder. Havingafterward formed a junction with the army of the Ve-jentos, for tlie Falfsoi, notwithstanding tlie distress of theRoman republic, and the solicitations of their allies, weredetermined to he no more concerned, the two confederatearmies passed the Anio, and displayed their colours nearthe Colline-gate. . ,
The consternation was prodigious in town and country.The consul Icilius drew up his troops on the walls andrampart of the city, whilst Virginius consulted the senatein the temple of Romulus. There a dictator was resolv­ed on, and A. Servilius appointed to the commission, who,by some, is sirnamed Priscus, by others Structus. Virgi-nius only waited 10 advise his colleague, who having noobjection, lie named the dictator that night, who chosePosthumius JEbutius Elva, master of tlie horse.
CHAP. XXII.
The Vuhci and Fidenatcs beat, and Fidena taken.
V-/RDERS were issutd by the dictator, that all shouldappear early next morning without the Colline'-gate;nor did any, who were able to carry arms, fail in theirobedience. The standards were brought him from thetreasury without a moment's delay. When the enemyobserved these motions, they retired to the eminences,whither the dictator foltowed them with an army suffi­ciently engaged: and coming to blows with them nearNomenton, gave the legions of Etruria a severe drubbing,and pursued them to the city Fidenat, where he blockedthem up. But, as the city stood high and strongly for­tified, it could not be taken by escalade, nor could ablockade have been of any service, as they had not onlyprovisions sufficient for the present, but large magazinespreviously laid in. Therefore, finding it would Tie im­practicable to carry the city by storm or blockade, thedictator resolved to open a passage under ground to thecitadel, from places near enough to be sufficiently ex­amined,-at the back of the town, where it was guardedwith least care, as being most strongly fortified by na­ture.


 







OCR Output








CHAP. 49. ROMAN HISTORY. 87


CHAP. XLIX.
"Farquin keeps an armed guard. A. IL C. 220.
J[ HEN Tarquin began to shew away in the regal func­tion; his arrogance procured him the sirname of proud;for, he refused to suffer the usual obsequies to be per­formed for his father-in-law, alledging for a reason, that"Romulus himself died without that honour." Theprincipal of the senators, whom he suspected to havebeen in Servius's interest, he put to death; and beingsensible, that the base means lie had made use of to raisehimself to the throne, might become a president thatwould recoil upon hiaiseU, he never appeared without astrong guard. For, indeed, he had no legal pretensionsto the crown, but what were founded in violence and in­justice, having neither obtained the consent of the people,nor the sanction of the senate. Add to this, that as hehad no hopes of gaining the affections of the people, hecould only support himself on the throne from motivesof fear, the influence of which, that he might make asuniversal as possible, in all criminal causes he sat judgein person, admitting neither the assistance nor advice ofany assessor whatever. This furnished him not onlywith an opportunity of butchering and banishing such ashe hated or suspected; but also of confiscating the effectsof those, whom he could charge with no crime, providedhe could enrich himself .with their spoils.
Having by these means, in particular, very much re­duced the order of the Fathers, he determined to makeno new creation, that the order thus reduced, might,dwindle into contempt, consequently be the more indif­ferent that nothing was transacted by their means. Hewas the first king, who broke through a rule observed byall his pr«lo:essors£..pf consulting the senate upon everyemergen^y-i All state affairs he managed by domesticcounsels. ^iVar, peace, treaties, alliances, he made withwhomsoever he choosed; and broke when he pleased, byhimself alone,- without the countenance or consent of se­nate, or people!
He was at great pains to make himself popular among







OCR Output








CHAP. 7. ROMAN HISTORY. 23


histoty-ef his grand-sons, how they were born, broughtup, and discovered; and also informs them of the mur­der of the tyrant, at the same time acknowledging,that it did not happen without his consent. Then theyoung princes, making their way through the middle ofthe crowd, with their attendants, saluted their grand­father king; of which the multitude echoing shouts ofapprobation, confirmed to him at once, the prerogative,as well as the title of king.
TNumitor being thus recognized king of Alba, Romulusand Remus became passionately fond of building a cityon the very spot where they had been exposed andbrought up. A number, both of Trojans and Albans,could well enough be spared, and the shepherds had al­ready acceded to the motion, who altogether were easilyinduced to hope, that in future times, Alba and Lavi-nia would only be looked upon as inconsiderable villages,compared with the city they were about to build. Theseviews were afterwards interrupted by ambition, an here­ditary evil, which though it was attended with no sortof acrimony at first, had an event sufficiently tragical.
As the brothers were twins, and the respect due toseniority could make no distinction, they agreed that thetutelar gods of the country should decide by Augury *,which of the two should give a name and laws to thenew city, when built. Romulus choosed the Palatine,and Remus the Aventine mount, for making their re­spective observations.
CHAP, VII. Remus killed.
XV EMUS, it is said, had the first omen, namely, sij£.Vultures: but he had hardly made his report, wfrendouble"the number appeared to Romulus; upon which
* Ab iivium gestu, vel garritu, first invented in Chaldea, thencetransmitted to Greece, thence to the Tuscans, and by themcommunicated to the Latins and Romans. In taking an Augury,the observer stood on a tower, vita'bis head covered with agown pecutiar to his office, calted Laena, and turning his face tothe east, marked out the heavens into four temples, or quarters,with his litus or short rod, after which he stood waiting for theomeu, which always gained most credit when confirmed by another







OCR Output








132 TITUS LIVIUS\ BOOK II.


cue of that family, they would certainly have paid thecompliment to his father Valerius, who had been consul,and given proofs of his merit.
When the dictator was first created at Rome, and thepeople saw the axes carried before him, they were«truckwith prodigious -awe, and became very submissive andobedient. For it was not now, as under the consulargovernment, where, the power being equal, they mighthave influence on one of them; or, at any rate, appealto the people. Here there was no alternative, but ab­solute submission and obedience. The Sabines too, werenot without their fears, when they heard that a dictatorwas created at Rome, more especially being persuaded,that tney were the object against whom he was pointed-.Wherefore they sent ambassadors to sue for peace, re­questing of the dictator and senate, that they would par­don the folly of the youth. They received for answer,that they could easily forgive the folly of the young men.but the petulance of the oldi who were constantly hatch­ing one war after another, coutd not so easily be over­looked. They continued however, their negotiationsabout a peace, which would at last have been conclud­ed, had the Sabines thought propeV to comply with ademand of reimbursing the Romans in the expence theyhad been at in their preparations for war. War wasaccordingly proclaimed, but a truce privately concludedkept all quiet for that year.
CHAP. XIX.
War with the Latins.
J. HE consuls were Servtus Sulpitius, and Manius Tul-lus; but during their administration, nothing remarkablehappened. They were succeeded by T. jEbutius, andC. Veturius. During their consulship, Fidenae was be­sieged, Crustumeria taken; and from the Latins, Prae-neste revolted to the Romans. Upon this, the warwith the Latins, which had been gathering for someyears, immediately broke out. The dictator, A. Post-humius, and his general of the horse, marching at thehead of a numerous army of horse and foot to the lake







OCR Output








CHAP. 19. .ROMAN HISTORY. 4$


be quite impracticable, amidst the noise and confusionof war, to give minds already grown wild with the useof arms, a relish for the arts of peace, he resolved to sof­ten and extinguish their martial ardour by degrees, andtherefore builds the temple of Janus, at the end of thestreet Argiletum, to be the sign of peace and war: ofwar, when operf; of peace, when shut. Twice only,since the reign of Numa has it been shut; once in theconsulship of Titus Manlius, after the end of the firstpunicwar; and a second time in the reign of the Em­peror Caesar Augustus, after the battle of Actium, whichgave peace by sea and land; a happiness it hath pleasedthe gods to grant to our age.
Having made peace with all his neighbours, by trea­ties or alliances, the temple of Janus was shut; so havingno apprehension of danger from abroad, to prevent li­centiousness, the concomitant of idleness, in his subjectsat home, whom fear of the enemy, and military exerciseshad always kept in order, he had recourse to religion;proper impressions of which, he conceived would be themost effectual means of civilizing a multitude, at thatperiod rough and unpolished to a great degree. But aseven these impressions could be but faint, unless theywere accompanied with something supernatural, he pre­tends, that in the night time, he was admitted to holdconferences .with the goddess Egeria, and instructed byher, he instituted such sacred rites as would be most ac­ceptable to the gods; to each of whom he also appoint­ed their respective priests.
And first of all, he made twelve lunar months the- measure of the year. And because a lunar month doesnot consist of thirty days complete, and some days arewanting to complete a full solar year, he managed mat­ters so, by inserting intercalary months, that twenty-four of these years taken together, should equal the samenumber of revolutions, and the days should return to thetame point in the ecliptic. He likewise distinguishedthe days into lawful and unlawful; because on somedays there would be no occasion for calling assemblies ofthe people. <







OCR Output








178 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


spirit of Caeso Fabius, which formerly appeared great inevery manly exertion, through an excess of glory, wasnow enervated and effeminate.
After this, in the city, party prejudice continued dor­mant. The Latins were, however, harassed by the in­roads of the $L'Iui. Coeso was dispatched with an armyto chastise them, and entered their country to make re­prisals. Upon this, the /Equi retired mto their towns,and kept themselves within their walls, for which reasonno remarkable action happened. By the rashness of theother consul, the Roman army suffered severely, in anaction with the Vejentes, and Ijnt for the seasonable in­tervention of Cseso had beeii all cnt to pieces.
From this time, with the Vejentes, there was neithersolid peace, nor open war. Tliflir views seemed to ex­tend to rapine and plunder only. Upon the approach ofthe Roman legions, they fled into tl]eir capitol ; and themoment they disappeared, ihey renewed their incursionsupon the Roman territories, evading a general engage­ment, by appearing to be at peare, and all terms of ac­commodation, by repeated acts of hostility: so that thiswar could neither be dropped, nor finally discussed.
There were other nations too, as the HL<\u\ and Volsci,who never continuing longer quiet, than till they hadforgot their last loss, were on the |xiint of declarmg war;nor was it improbable that the Sabines, the constantenemies of Rome, and all Etruria would quickly armagainst them. But the Vejentes, who were rather cou-stant, than a formidable enemy, gave them more troubleby their frequent inroads, thnn apprehension of danger,which at uo time could be so far overlooked, as to per­mit their attention to be directed to any other i|narter.
Upon this, the Fabian family made a proposal to thesenate, by the mouth of the consul, in name of the rest,to*the following etfect: "Conscript fatliers, to oppose"the enterprises of the Vejentes, as you well know, re-"quires raiher an assiduous than a powerful party."Do ye take care of the other wars, and leave us of the"Fabian family to manage the Vejentes. We under-"take to be the guardians of the majesty of the Roman"name in that quarter. This war, we will carry on at"our private expeoce, as if our family were only coo­







OCR Output








CHAP. 7. ROMAN HISTORY. 321


CHAP. VII.
Creation of Military Tribunes who soon lay down theiroffice, because there was an informality in their election.
AN the year 310, from the foundation of Rome, A.Sempronius Atratinus, L. Atilius, Titus Caecilius, beingchosen military tribunes, lor ihe first time, in the roomof consuls, entered upor. their office accordingly; andthe unanimity \vhiah. subsisted at; home, during theiradministration, contributed not a little to maintain peaceabroad. Some authors are silent, with respect to the billfor electing consuls from among the people, assigning asa reason for the election of three military tribunes, in­vested with the authority and ensigns of the consols, thatbesides the revolt of the Ardeates, the Romans had, atthe same time upon their hands, a war with the JEi\\i\,the Volsci, and Vfjentes, too much for the managementof two consuls at the same time.
The establishment of this office, however, was- notpermanent: for, by a decree of the augurs, they laiddown their office in three months after they had enter­ed upon it, because some essential formality had beenomitted in their election, C. Curtius, the preses at theCumitia, having made some mistake in pitching the tent.
About this time, ambassadors came from Ardea, com­plaining of the injustice done them; but in such terms,"as showed no intention of renouncing their treaty andalliance with the Romans, provided a restitution of theirterritory could be obtained. The senate returned themfor answer: ' That from the judgment of the people,'there was no appeal to their tribunal, and as they had
* the sanction of no law, nor precedent for reversing the
* sentence of the people, such a proceeding might be of
* dangerous consequence to that harmony, which ought
* to subsist between the two orders of the state. But, if
* the Ardeates would be good enough to wait for a'favourable opportunity, and leave it to the wisdom of
* the senaie, io find means of redressing their grievance,'they would have no reason to repent, on a future day,
•- . ci their condescension; nor to imagine, that the senate







OCR Output








!'* W?
TITUS LIVIUS''


ROMAN HISTORY.


BOOK V,


CONTAINING THE REDUCTION OF VEIL BANISHMENT AND
RECAL OF CAMILLUS DESCENT OF THE GAULS. DE­STRUCTION OF ROME. RESTORATION BY CAMILLUS.


CHAP. I.
War with the Vejentes, A. R. 350.
HILST all around were in peace, the Romans andVejentes were at war, which they prosecuted with sucha spirit of hatred and revenge,. that it appeared the warmust terminate in the dissolution of the conquered. Theassemblies for the election of magistrates in these twostates, acted upon principles entirely different. TheRomans increased the number of their military tribunes,eight being elected this year, which never happened be­fore; namely, Manius jEmilius Mamercinus, a secondtime, L. Valerius Potitus, a third time, Ap. ClaudiusCrassus, M. Quinctilius, L. Julius Julus, M. Posthumius,M. Camillas, M. Posthumius Albinus.* The Vejentes,on the contrary, tired out with the annual intrigues aboutelections, which .sometimes laid the foundation of civilbroils, chose a king to rule over them.
'•-- The two last were censors, not military tribunes, accordingto the Capitoline marbles.







OCR Output








CHAP. 27. ROMAN HISTORY. 343


<*.
CHAP. XXVII.
The Dictator marches against the Mqui and Volsci.
./\LL these things were performed with remarkabledispatch, and the consul, C. Julius being left for the de­fence of the city; and L. Julius, general of the horse, toprovide for the sudden exigencies of the war, that theirmotions might not be retarded with any thing they mightwant in the camp, the dictator vowed, in a form pre­scribed by A. Cornelius, the pontifex Maximus, the greatgames, on account of the present confusion. Theninarching out of the city, and dividing his commandwith the consul Quinctius, he came up with the enemy.As they had observed that the enemy had two camps, atno great distance from each other, they likewise encamp­ed about a mile from them, the dictator at a place nearTusculum, and the consul near Lnnuvium. Thus theyhad tour armies, and as many fortified camps, .with aplain in the middle, not only large enough to admit ofskirmishes between small parties, but to,contain the ar­mies on both sides, drawn up in battalia. From the mo­ment the camps lay in this opposite direction, a singleday did not pass without small encounters; the dictatorgiving the soldiers full liberty to try their strength withthe enemy, that the event of these skirmishes might gra­dually lead them to hopes of victory m a general battle.Wherefore, the enemy despairing of success, by fight­ing it fairly in the open plain, attacked the consul'scamp in the night, staking their all upon a very uncer­tain event. The sudden shout they raiser", not onlyalarmed the consul's guards, and afterwards his wholearmy, but roused the dictator himself. In cases of im­mediate danger, the consul wanted not courage, norconduct. A party was ordered to reinforce the guards,at the gates, and others to post themselves round therampart. In the dictator's camp, as there was less hurryand confusion, so he could the better provide'for thepresent exigence. Wherefore, having immediately dis­patched a reinforcement to the consul's camp, under thecommand of his lieutenant-general, Sp. Posthumius,Q







OCR Output








CHAP, 43. ROMAN HISTORY. tfl


and every member of the state, and for.their own part,they had neither the inclination nor the power of depriv­ing the people of their prerogative'in judging the accus-ed; but if,their earnest intieaties in behalf of their ge­neral, who had been to them an indulgent parent, couldnot prevail, they would go into mourning with him.Nay,' replied Hortensius, ' but that shall not be; thecommons of Rome shall not see their tribunes intomourning. 1 have nothing farther to say against C.Sempronius, who by his behaviour in command, couldendear him so effectually to his soldiers.'The gra'eful affection of the four tribunes, did notgive greater pleasure i<-> the senators and people, whowere equally affected, than^he good nature of Horten­sius, which disposed him to yield so readily to theirreasonable request. Fortune did not continue long tofawn upon the 5kjni, whose mercury rose as high uponthis doubtful victory of the Volsci, as if they themselvesbad been crowned with laurels.
CHAP. XUII.
The JEqui in motion, suppressed. New contest.—Wisecounsel of L. Papirius Mugilanus.
.L\ EXT year, in 'the consulship of Numerius FabiusVibulanus, and T. (Juinctius Capitolinus, the son ofCapitolmus, Fabius, who h.'d got the direction of thewar by lot, performed nothing memorable; for the .ffiquihad no sooner shown their faces* than like a conventionof cowards* they took to their heels J so that the consulgained no great honour, and of course was refused a tri­umph.. Yet because this victory served in some measureto extenuate the reproach of the Sempronian disaster, hewa« permitted to enter the city with an ovation. As thiswar was brought to a conclusion, with less trouble thanhad been apprehended, so also in the city there anise,out .of a profound calm, an unexpected storm of dissen­sion between the senate and the people, which had itsfoundation in a proposal to double the number of thequaestors.







OCR Output








308 BOOK III. TITUS LIVIUS'


'still fresh in his memory. That the territory in ques-r tion was a pertinent of Corioli, which being .subjected'to the Romans, the land of course became the property'of the Roman people. That it surprised him, how in'all the world, the Arcini and Ardeates, who bad never'claimed this territory while Corioli existed as a state,'could expect to ascertain their claim to it, by making
• the Romans, who had the legal right, arbitrators in the'case. That for his own part he had not long to live,'and since he could do po more now, when he was old, he'could not help claiming possession by his feeble voice,'of a property, to the acquisition of which, he had con-« tributed all in his power when young. And that it
• was his earnest advice to the people, that they should'not, by a mistaken and foolish modesty, pass judgment'against themselves,'
CHAP. LXXII.
T!ie People adjudge in their own favour.
1 HE consuls nmding that the multitude listened toScaptius, with every mark of attention and satisfaction,called gods and men to witness their dissent from the no­torious injustice just about to be committed, and callingthe chief men of the state, with them went about implor­ing the tribunes, ' To use their best endeavours to dis­suade the people from introducing the practice amongarbitrators, of adjudging to themselves a subject sub­mitted 10 their decision, which is not only infamou^in itself, but of the most pernicious tendency; for,suppose, in thia case, their claim was well found­ed, and for that reason, a concern for their own inte­rest became justifiable; yet it would be highly iropo-litical: for the acquisition of this territory would bebut a poor compensation for the imputation of injus­tice, and the loss of the friendship of their allies.Moreover, in point of character and credit, the losswas irreparable. Shall the deputies of the states carryhome the news? shall it be told to the allies, and theenemies of Rome? The first will be sorry;1—the lastwill rejoice. Is it possible to imagine, that the neigh-


 







OCR Output








CHAP. 27. ROMAN HISTORY. 55


the father, nor sufficiently admire the undaunted spiritof the son, which was proof against every danger. Hewas therefore acquitted, rather out ot a regard to hisbravery, than from a conviction of the justice ot his cause.But not to leave so manifest a murder wholly unpunish­ed, the father was ordered to make satisfaction for.himout of the public treasury. At the same time, havingmade some expiatory sacrifices, which were ever afterkept up in the Horatian family, he set up a gallows inthe high-way, under which his son behoved to pass,hood-winked, as if he had passed under the yoke. Theremains of the galiows may be seen at this day, repair­ed at the public expense, known by the name of theSister's Rafter. A tonfb of square stones was erected forHoratia, in the place where she was killed.
CHAP. XXVII.
The Atbans revolt.
1 HE peace with Alba did not hold long. The peoplewere highly offended, that the fate of the whole nationhad been committed toMhe arms and gallantry of threecombatants, which put the fluctuatmg genius of the dic­tator upon new schemes, with a view, since good policyhad not succeeded with him, to recover the' esteem andconfidence of his citizens, by the most perfidious de­signs. Wherefore, as but lately he had courted peace,when he had war for an alternative, so now, in peace,he wishes for war. And conscious that the power of theAlbans was by no means equal to their inclination, hemakes it his business to stir up other states to make waropenly and avowedly, whilst he and his people, underthe mask of allegiance, should act as traitors.
The Fidenates, a Roman colony, in concert with theVejentes, their allies, assured of the revolt of the Albans,take the field. The Fidenates having thus openly de­clared themselves, Tullus sends for Mettus and his armyfrom Alba, and marches against the enemy. Havingcrossed the Anio, he encamped at its conflux with theTiber; between which place and Fnlenae, the Vejenteshad crossed the Tiber. They draw up on the right to­wards the river, and the Fidenates on the left, towards







OCR Output








118 TITUS LIVIUS' . BOOK II.


credit to this intelligence, or had resolution enough notto mind it, is not snid, nor is it easy to conjecture. Heonly stopped while he ordered the body to be buried;and stili holding the post, went on with his prayer,~ 3ndfinished the dedication. These were the most remark­able transactions at Itome, in peace, and in war, the firstyear after the expulsion of the kings. After which,Publius Valerius a second time, and Titus Lucretius, weremade consuls.
CHAP. IX.


Ai


Porsenna prevailed on to espouse the quarrel of theTarquins.


^.FTER this, the Tarquins made their application toLars Porsenna, king of Clusiutn.* There minglingtheir advice with intreaties, 'hey" now requested "That"he would never suffer them, who were Etrurians hy"descent, and of the same blood and name, to live in"perpetual exile and poverty." Again they advisedhim, " by no means to suffer this growing practice of"banishing kings, to pass unrevenged. That liberty"had in itself many inducements ^ and if kings were not"as tenacious of the royal prerogative, as the people"were of their liberty, there. would be an end to all"subordination. There would be no distinction among"mankind, all would he on a level. Then adieu to mo-"narchy, the most glorious institution among gods or"men."
Porsenna thinking it would add greatly to the honourof Etruria, to establish a king at Rome, especially oneof their own nation, marched against it with a hostilearmy. Such consternation never seized the senate be-.fore, so formidable was Clusium at that time, and sogreat was the reputation of Porsenna. Nor did theirfear only extend to the enemy, they were apprehensiveof their own citizens, lest the populace, overcome bytheir fear, should admit the tyrants into the city, andgive their liberty in exchange for peace. Wherefore,
* Chiusi.







OCR Output













OCR Output








242 TITUS LIVIUS' > BOOK III.


CHAP. XXVII. - .
The Dictator marches to the Consul's relief.
JL HE dictator, next morning, went into the forum, andnamed for his general of the horse, L. Taiquitius, a Pa­trician, who had distinguished himself by his braveryabove all the Roman youth; but, being too poor to keepa horse, had till then never served but in the infantry.With him he repaired to the assembly, proclaimed a va­cation in all judiciary proceedings, ordered the shopsthroughout the city to be shut up, a suspension of all la­bour whatever, and all the citizens able to bear arms, tomeet him before sun-set, in the field of Mars, with theirarms, dressed provisions for five days, and each furnish­ed with twelve stakes for a pallisade. Whoever throughage was disqualified for the service, was ordered to dressprovisions for the soldier who lived nearest him, whilst befamished himself with stakes, and got ready his arms.
In consequence of this order, the youth dispersed them­selves up and down in quest of stakes, taking them asthey occurred, without the least interruption. They allassembled without the least delay, as the dictator hadordered.
The dictator then at the head of the infantry, and hisgeneral of horse at the head of the cavalry, led out thetroops drawn up, not only for marching, but for action,should occasion require it. Each corps was animated,by arguments drawn from the present emergency. Theywere requested, "to march with expedition, in order tocome np with the enemy in the night, as the consuland a Roman army had now been besieged for threedays. That it was impossible to say what a day ornight might bring forth, as a single moment often de­termined the greatest and most important event."To gratify their leaders, the soldiers addressing eachother, cried out, " March out, ensign; follow soldier.'*About the miiidle of the night, they arrived at the Algi-dus, and when they perceived themselves not far fromthe enemy, gave orders to halt.







OCR Output








CHAP. 21. ROMAN HISTORY. 341


in the presence of Romulus, witnesses not to be imposedon with a fictitious inscription, calls himself, A. COKNE-LIUS Cossus, CONSUL.
CHAP. XXI.
An epidemical distemper rages among the Vejentes andFalisci. T/ie Fidenates attempt a descent upon the Romanterritory.
iN the consulship of M. Cornelius Maluginensis andL,. Paperius Crassus, the Roman armies marched intothe territories of the Vejentes and Falisci, and broughtoffa iarge booty in prisoners and cattle; but the enemykept out .of the way, so that there was no opportunityof coming to blows. They did not, however, lay siegeto any of their cities, because an epidemical distemperraged among the people, and Spurius Maelius, a. tribuneof the commons, was endeavouring, though-with littlesuccess, to raise commotions at home. lie thought thepopularity of his name would enable him to raise somedust, and therefore had impeached Minucius, and broughtin a bill for confiscating the estate of Servilius Ahala;contending, that the charge brought against Maelius byMinucius, was a villainous trick, a vile forgery; andthat Servilius had put to death a Roman citizen, unheardand uncondemned. These prosecutions appeared full asridiculous to the people, as the author of them. Theirattention, however, was totally engrossed by the violenceof the distemper, which was still encreasing, and fright­ful prodigies, such as the news, that houses in the coun­try were frequently demolished by repeated shocks of anearthquake. Wherefore, they had recourse to prayer, IBwhich the people followed the duumvirs. '.,
The plague rages with still greater fury, when C. Ici-lius, for the seconJ time, and L. Virginius, were consuls,and threatened such desolation in town and country, thatso far from making excursions for the sake of plunder, aforeign war was never so much as hinted either in the-senate or the forum. The Fidenates however, who hadat first kept themselves in the mountains, towns, and for­tified places, were tempted now to make a descent upon







OCR Output








CHAP. 9. ROMAN HISTORY. 215


absence of the consuls a proper opportunity for intro­ducing the claims of the tribunes, had for some daysbeen inveighing against the pride of the senators beforethe people, and particularly against the consular power astoo despotic and intolerable in a free state; representing,"That it differed from regal despotism only in name,"for in effect it had in it something still more odious."That instead of one king, they had got two, whose"power was boundless and immoderate; and being"themselves neither confined nor restrained by any law,turned the whole terror and severity of the laws againstthe common people. That this licentiousness mightnot be perpetual, he intended to prefer a bill for get­ting five commissioners appointed to draw up laws forregulating the consular authority. That in conse­quence, the consul should have no other right overthe people, than the people themselves should thinkproper to give them; nor substitute their own passionand caprice in place of law."This law being proposed, the Patricians were not alittle afraid, that in the absence of the consuls this yokemight be wreathed about their necks, when Q. Fabiusassembled the senate as governor of the city. There hegave full scope to his indignation, in inveighing againstthe bill and its author, insomuch, that had both consulsbeen present, determined to pull the tribune to pieces,they could not have opened on him with greater fury,or employed more dreadful menaces. "This fellow,"(says he,) lies in wait, and takes advantage of the ab-"sence of the consuls, to strike a blow against the com-«* monwealth. Had the gods in their wrath, only the"year before, given Rome such a tribune, in the midsr."of the plague and the war, his villainy might havebeen then triumphant. The two- consuls being nomore, and the city labouring in siekness and generalconfusion, he would have proposed the abolition ofthe consulship, and placed himself at the head of the/l''.qui and Volsci to attack the city. What can heplead in excuse for such licentiousness? If the consuls,in the abuse of their authority, oppressed any citizen,"th«y might be cited before the people, at whose tri-•* bonal they were obliged to answer; and of this onler,"the complainant himself is a member. Proceeding







OCR Output








CHAP. 46. ROMAN HISTORY. 269


-
ditious persons, that they will find resolution in a de­cemvir and legislator, to inforce his own decrees. Norshall I have occasion for my colleague's lictors, myown will be sufficient, to chastise the insolence of theturbulent and seditious."
The time for perpetrating this act of villainy beingthus put off, and the counsel for the defendant retired,they first of atl resolved, instantly to dispatch Icilius,brother ami Numitorius' son, two active young men, tothe gates, to bring Virginius from the camp 'vith allexpedition, for the preservation of his daughter depend­ed entirely-upon his being present exactly at the ap­pointed time. They set out as directed, and posting itall the way, carried the news to Viginius.
In the mean time, the plaintiff insisted, that Iciliusshould give security for producing her in court. Iciliustold him, that he was just then about it, designedlyspinning out the time, till the messengers dispatched toVirginius had made some progress in their journey; thepeople all around held up their hands, every one otter­ing eagerly to be surety for Icrlius. Touched with theaftection of his fellow-citizens, Icilius burst into tears,while he returned them thanks. "To-morrow," saidhe, "I will make use of your assistance; to-day we have"abundance of securities." Thus was Virginia set atliberty, her relations having given bail to present her.Appius, to avoid suspicion, that he had sat in judgmenton account of this cause alone, did not leave his tribunaldirectly; but as no other cause was called, Virginia hav­ing so much engrossed the public attention, that nobodyapplied to him; he returned home, and wrote to hiscolleague in the camp, intreating, " They would give"no leave of absence to Virginius, but on the contrary,"lay him under arrest."
This wicked advice, deservedly came too late; for,Virginius having obtained a furlough, had set out by thefirst watch in the night, whereas the letters for detain­ing him, were only delivered next morning early, whenhe was out of their reach.







OCR Output








&8 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


This young nobleman, when he understood that theprincipal of the Roman nobility, and among the resthis own brother, had been butchered by his uncle, heresolved that nothing should appear in his spirit to alarmthe fears, and nothing in his fortune to tempt the rapa­city of the king; imagining he would be safer under thecloak of contempt, than in the protection of the laws.Wherefore, designedly assuming the air and habits of afool, he suffered himself and all his fortune to fall intothe hands of the king, and very cheerfully took the sir-name of Brutus; that his extraordinary abilities, con­cealed under this title of reproach, might watt for theproper season to appear with redoubled lustre, in assert­ing the liberty of Rome.
When at that time he accompanied the Tarqnins toDelphi, rather as their buffoon, than companion, it is'reported of him, that he carried with him a rod of gold,enclosed in a case of elder, which gave it the appearanceof a common stick, as a present to Apollo.—This was atrue emblem of his own mind and external appearance.
When they had finished their journey, and executedtheir father's commands, they were prompted by theircuriosity to enquire of the oracle, which of them shouldsucceed him in the kingdom. Upon which, it is said,a voice from the bottom of the cave made the followingresponse: " Whoever of you, gentlemen, shall first"have the good fortune to give a kiss to his mother,"shall be ruler at Rome." The Tarquins, as Sextustheir brother had been left at Rome, and consequentlyignorant of the oracle's answer, that he should have noshare in the government, order that all should be keptsecret and determined by lot, which of them two, upontheir return to Rome, should first kiss his mother Tullia.But Brutus concluding that the oracle's mean:ng wasvery different, pretended to fall down by chance, andkissed the earth, the common mother of all living. Af­ter this they all returned to Rome, where they foundthe city in a commotion, on account of the preparationsfor a.war against the Rutuli.







OCR Output








CHAP. 9. ROMAN HISTORY. 2<>


city. The whole nation of the Sabines* came, withtheir wives and children. Being treated with great'hospitality in the different houses, when they had takena view or the city, its situation, fortifications, and theprodigious number of houses it contained, they could notconceal their wonder at the rapidity of Its progress in soshort a time.
When the exhibition came on, their eyes and mindsbeing equally fixed on that object, a tumuit was set onfoot, as had been concerted, and the signal being given,the Roman youth ran different ways to carry oil' theyoung women by force. A great part of them were borneaway promiscuously, by those into whose hands chancehad put them. Some of superior beauty, destined forthe principal senators, were, by persons employed for thepurpose, carried- to their houses. A young lady, in herperson and looks, far surpassing all the rest, it is said,had been seized by a party commissioned by one Talas-sius, who, to save her from rudeness, when the questionwas put, for whom was she intended? they repeatedlycried out, for Talassius; a word, which afterwards wasadopted in the marriage ceremonies.
The consternation occasioned by this proceeding hav­ing interrupted the games, the parents of the young wo­men in sorrow fled from the city, exclaiming bitterlyagainst the Romans, for violating the laws of hospitality,and invoking the vengeance of that god, to countenancewhose games they had come to Rome, betrayed underthe specious pretence of religion and public faith. Norwere the hopes of the young women more sanguine, northeir resentment less poignant.
But Romulus, in person, went about and informedthem, "That whatever had happened, was entirely ow­ing to the pride of their fathers, who had refused togive them in marriage to their neighbours: but, thatnevertheless, they should be joined by indissoluble tiesto their fortunes and freedom, as well as to their per­sons. And, moreover, what would still be a moreendearing connexion, they would be united with theirhusbands in the tender affection of parents of the same
• From Sabus their founder.







OCR Output








SG4. , TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV.


with the Volsd was unavoidable, which was also confirm­ed by dispatches from the Latins and Hernici, importing,that never upon any former occasion had the Volsci ap­peared more in earnest, either with respect to the choiceof their generals, or expediting their levies; declaring-upon all occasions, that they must now bid adieu to armsand war for ever, and tamely submit to the yoke of ser­vitude, or no longer shew themselves inferior to those,with whom' they contended for sovereignty, in personalbravery, patience under hardships, and military disci­pline.
These accounts were far from being groundless, thoughthey seemed to make no great impression on thefathers;and C. Sempronius, who by lot had the command in thatwar, trusting entirely to fortune, as a thing incapable ofchange, especially as he led a victorious army against a'conquered enemy, performed all the duties of his office,without caution or care; insomuch that there was more ofthe Roman discipline to be found in the Volscian armythan in their own. For which reason, fortune, as it hasoften happened before, shifted to that side where meritwas most conspicuous.
In the first engagement, which Sempronius .hazardedwithout the Ieast precaution or consideration, havingformed no corps-de-reserve, and made a very injudiciousdisposition of his horse before the action, the shouts gavethe first intimation of the turn matters were like to take:these raised by the enemy were brisker and more con­stant ; whilst on the side of the Romans, they were con­fused, unequal, faint, and often repeated, and by theirdiscord, expressive of the fear which had taken possessionwithin. Encouraged by this, the enemy advanced withredoubled fury, pressed hard upon them with their shields,and plied them with their brandished swords On- theother side, the soldiers siood staring about them, theirhelmets nodding on their heaJs, and being totally at a- loss how to act, ran trembling together in crowds. Thecolours sometimes standing still were abandoned bythe front ranks; at other times they were moved back,and planted among their own squadrons. As yet'theyhad not resolved to fly, nor were the enemyabsolutelycertain of victory. The Romans however, "acted rather







OCR Output








434 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK V.


which stood in the citadel 'of Veii. Some attacked thesoldiers behind as they defended the walls; some un­barred the gates; and some of them, whilst they werepelted from the house tops with stones and tiles by thewomen and slaves, set .fire to the houses. The wholecity resounded with the shouts of the invaders, and criesof the besieged, mingled with the shrieks and lamenta­tions of women and children. In an instant, the wallswere cleared of those who defended them, and the gatesbroke open, when part of the Roman army entered inwhole battalions, others scaled the deserted ramparts, sothat the city soon swarmed with enemies, and the battleraged in every quarter. However, after a prodigiousslaughter, it began to subside, when the dictator orderedthe heralds to proclaim quarter to all who should laydown their arms.
Here the slaughter ended, and the surrender of the un­armed multitude commenced: then also, with permissionof the dictator, the soldiers fell to plunder. When Ca-millus had ocular demonstration,- that the spoils, both inquantity and value, far surpassed what he had ever ex­pected or imagined, he is said to have lifted up his bandsto heaven, praying, ' that if the good fortune of the
• Roman people, or his own, appeared too great in th»
• sight of gods or men, that the envy thereof might fall'upon him, but to spare the commonwealth.' It is fur­ther added, that as he was turning round, after this.prayer, that he fell on the ground; an accident construedby some to presage his condemnation, after it had reallyhappened, and the destruction of Rome, after it was takenby the Gauls: both these events happened a few yearsafter. Thus was that day spent in slaughtering the Ve-jentes, and plundering their most opulent city.
CHAP. XXII.Murmurs against Camillta, Juno brought to Rome.


EXT day, the dictator exposed the freemen to publiesale, the proceeds whereof alone were set apart for thepublic treasury. At this the people took great oflence,alledging, that what plunder they carried home with.them, they had no reason to ascribe to the general,







OCR Output








280 TITUS LIVIUS" BOOK III.


You have more occasion for the shield . than thesward. He is brought low enough, who, degradedfrom his authority must live on a level with others,without the power of committing, or the trouble of re-senting injuries. If at any time you would wish toappear formidable, it must be when you have re­covered your magistrates and your laws, when you willhave the power in your own hands, and our lives and'fortunes at your disposal. Then, and not tilt then,can you determine the fate of any one. For the pre­sent, be satisfied with the recovery of your liberty."
CHAP. LIV.
Restoration o/ the Consulate and tribunitian power.
A HE whole assembly, having unanimously submittedtheir pretensions to the deputies, they. promised to returnsoon with the ratification of their demands. When, ontheir return, they laid the people's claims before thesenators; the rest of the decemvirs, beyond all expecta­tion, finding no mention made of punishing them, ob­jected to nothing; but Appius, the most cruel and odi­ous wretch of the whole, measuring the people's hatredof him, by his to them, said, "I am not ignorant of the"fate that awaits me. I see ihat we are only reserved"for a greater condemnation, when our enemies havegot arms in their hands. Nothing but blood will sa­tisfy their malice. I am ready nevertheless, to divestmyself of the decemvirate; and the sooner the bet­ter." The senate passed a decree, " That the
decemvirs should instantly depose themselves; that thehigh-priest Q, . Funus, should create tribunes of thepeople; and that none should be liable to prosecution"upon account of the desertion of the soldiers, or re-"moval of the people to Mount Aventine."
These matters being fmished, and the seuate broke up,the decemvirs repaired to the forum, and in the assem­bly of the people, abdicated their office, to the great joyof the citizens.
The news was immediately carried to the camp bythe deputies, who had all the people that were left in


 







OCR Output








CHAP. 28. ROMAN HISTORY, 351


centre, they would have paid dear for their rebellion,if Vectius Messius, one of the Volsci, a man more dis­tinguished for his merit, than his birth, had not read hiscountrymen a severe lecture, as they were already star­ing about them in crowds; calling aloud to them, 'Areyou determined to open your breasts, exposed to theenemy's darts, and to fall here unrevenged? Was itfor this purpose that you brought arms with you?—Was this all you had in view, when you were the firstto take up arms; mighty bold, when there is no dan­ger, but in battle mere poltroons? What do you lookfor standing here? Do you imagine, that some divi­nity is to take you under his protection, and extricateyou from your present difficulty? No; you must opena passage with your swords. Such of you as haveany desire to see your houses, fathers, wives, andchildren again, come this way along with me, whitheryou shall see me lead the way. You are neither ob­structed by walls nor entrenchments; but by menarmed like yourselves. If you are equal in courseyou are certainly superior in point of necessity, thelast and most effectual weapon.'He had scarce finished this speech, when he was fol­lowed by his own people with repeated shouts, as he wasputting in practice what he had promised. They at­tacked with great fury the cohorts -which opposed themunder Posthnmius Albus, and made them give way,victorious as they had been, till the dictator came upjust as they were beginning to retire. The whole heatof the battle turned that way. The fate of the enemydepended on Messius alone. The list of the woundedand killed was high on both sides. On the side of theRomans, the general officers did not escape withoutwounds. Though the dictator was wounded in theshoulder, though Fabius' thigh was almost pinned to hishorse, and though the consul lost an arm, none of themthought of quitting the field at so critical a juncture.







OCR Output








'CHAP. 55. ROMAN HISTORY. 95


poppies with his cane. The messenger being oat of allpatience with begging and waiting for an answer, return­ed to Gabii, no wiser than when he left it. However, ofwhat he said himself, and what he had occasion to ob­serve, he makes a faithful relation; adding moreover,that Tarquin, whether from passion, resentment, or pride,never once deigned to open his mouth.
The moment Sextus had unriddled these dark hints,he puts to death the most eminent men of the city, someby accusing them to the people, others became properobjects of his revenge, by envying his greatness. Manyof them were executed publicly; others, against whomthe indictment could not be so clearly proved, were madeaway with privately. Some were permitted to maketheir escape, and some were banished; but in whatevermanner they were disposed of, whether dead or alive, ifthey were out of the way, their estates were confiscatedand divided among the people. The sweets of plunder,and the private emolument arising from these largesses,extinguished, in the people, all sense of feeling for thepublic calamities, till destitute of counsel, and void of allresources, the state of Gabii became an easy prey toTarquin, without striking a stroke.
CHAP. LV.
Tarquin turns his attention to the affairs of the city.
JL ARQUIN having thus got possessionof Gabii, madea peace with the ./Equi, and renewed the treaty with theEtrurians. He then turned his attention to the affairsof the city, particularly to the building a temple to Ju­piter, on the Tarpeian mount, which he might leave asa monument of his name and reign, since of (he two Tar-quins who had reigned at Rome, the first had vowedthis temple, and the last had finished it. And that thearea of this temple might be clear of the worship ofother gods, and totally appropriated to Jupiter, he re­solved to deprive several small temples and chapels oftheir consecrated honours, which had been vowed byTatios in the heat of the battle he had fought- with Ro­mulus, and afterwards hallowed and dedicated.







OCR Output








CHAP. 7. ROMAN HISTORY. 35


answer them, which induced Hercules to turn back. Ashe was advancing to the cows, Cacus attempted to stophim with all the force he'could muster; but Hercules,with a singte stroke oi his ciub, laid him breathless atbis feet, whilst he vainly imptored the protection of theshepherds.
At that time Eyaader, having fled from Peloponnesus,*had the government of this country, more out of respectto bis superior merit, than any legal investiture. Hewas highly revered for his wonderful learning, a thingquite uncommon among men who were ignorant of everyart] and still more for the supposed divinity of his motherCarmenta, to whom before the coming of the Sybil-)-into Italy, these nations, for her prophetic spirit, paidgreat "veneration. This Evander was called upon by theshepherds, who crowded in great consternation aboutthe stranger, and impeached him with open murder.
Having heard the crime, and the provocation fullyexplained, and observing a certain dignity in the air ofHercules, and his size rather above the human, he askedhim who he was? The moment his name, his father,and his country were mentioned, " Hail, Hercules, (said"he) son of Jupiter; my mother, a true prophetess,". hath declared to me, that you will increase the num-"ber of the celestials, and that to you an altarf shall,"be dedicated here, which an empire, the most povt-er-"ful upon earth, shall call the greatest-f Herculesreaching him the hand of friendship, replied, "That he"gladly accepted the omen, and would fulfil the plea-"sure of the fates, by raising and consecrating an altar"accordingly."
Thus, for the first time, an heifer being selected forthe purpose, the most beautiful in the whole collection,a sacrifice was made to Hercules; the Potitii and Pinarii,families of the first distinction in the country, performingthe service, and partaking of the entertainment. Ithappened, however, that the Potitii were present at the
* Now the Morea.
f The Sybils were thought to have been divinely inspired, ofvhicb, the most considerabte were the Persian and Cumsan,I It itood ib the Ox Market. ,







OCR Output








20 TITUS LIVIUS' . BOOK I.


rity from the female line, under pretence of doing ho­nour to Rhea Sylvia, Numitbr's daughter, he got heradmitted a vestal virgin, which condemned her to per­petual virginity.
- I I !.•
CHAP. IV.
«Rhea Sylvia with child to Mars. Romulus and Remus born.
JjUT, if I am not mistaken, we must look for theorigin of so extraordinary a city, and the foundation ofan empire, in power inferior only to that of the gods,in the records of fate. The vestal was surprised, forced,and delivered of twins; whom, either because she reallythought so, or because a god was a more honourablecloak for her offence, she fathered upon Mars. Butneither gods nor men screened her from the cruelty ofthe king : the vestal was put in close confmement; andthe infants were ordered to be thrown into the Tiber,where the current was most rapid. \ By the interpositionof some divinity, the river had, at that time, overflowedits banks; upon which the waters stood diffused in stillpools, which rendered the channel quite inaccessible.They who were charged with the execution of the orders,thinking the water, however still, would be sufficient todrown the infants, laid them down in the nearest pool,where now stands the Ruminalis ficus *; formerly, bytradition, the ficus Romularis, concluding, that they hadnow fairly done their duty.
The country was, at that time, a vast wilderness: and,it is said, that after the water had subsided and leftthe trough, or skift, in which the infants had been ex­posed, upon dry ground, a thirsty she-wolf coming downfrom the neighbouring mountains, was led to the placeby their cries, and bended with so much complacencyto suckle them, that she was found by the king's shepherdgently licking them with her tongue. It is said theshepherd's name was Faustulus, and that he brought
* fii some copies we find Viciis Ruminalis, which appears to bethe true reading, for it is hardly probable that a fig-tree in Ro­mulus' time, would be standing in the days of I.ivy.







OCR Output








•62 .TITUS L1VIUS' BOOK I,


lowest and most childish superstitions; and, by his ex­ample, the people were also infected. For the Romans,in general, returned to the same spirit that prevailed un­der Numa, persuaded that no other means were leftthem•of escaping from the present calamity, but recourse tothe gods, and appeasing their wrath with sacrifices.
It is also said, that the king himself, in examining theregister of Numa, found that there were certain privatesacrifices-oflered annually to Jupiter Eliciu?, which heshut himself up to perform. Butsoniething being wrong,either in point of time, or mode of execution, he saw nosigu from heaven of its acceptance; and besides, Jupiter•was so provoked at his mistaken zeal, that he and hishouse were consumed with fire from -heaven.*—Tullus•reigned with great glory for thirty-two years.
CHAP. XXXII,Ancus Al&riius renews tlie institutions of Numa. A. R.


 


r the death of Tullus, the administration, agreeablyto the constitution, devolved on the Senate. They namedan inter-rex, who, having called a convention, AncusMartius was declared king by the people, and the Senateconfirmed their choice. He was the grandson of Numa,by a daughter. The new king, mindful of his grand­father's reputation, found, that however glorious the lastreign had been iu other respects, in the worship of thegods, either in point of frequency, or mode of perform­ance, there had been a prodigious neglect. Therefore,to avoid all innovations, he resolved to restore the insti­tutions of Numa; and for that purpose, he orders thehigh priest to collect them from the royal register, andtranscribe them upwn tables, to be exposed to public view.From this specimen, his own subjects fond of ease,and the neighbouring nations too, gladly hoped, that theking would implicitly follow his grandfather's plan incivil, as well as religious matters. In this confidence,the Latins, with whom Tullus had settled all things bytreaty, began to pull up a spirit; and, having made anincursion upon the Roman territory, treated with inso-
# The fire from heaven iu ascribed to Ancus Mjirtius.







OCR Output








100 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


said each of them. They galloped all the way to Rome,where they arrived about the dusk in the evening, andfrom thence to Collatia. There they found Lucretia, notemployed like the king's daughters-in-law, in companywith other ladies of distinction, enjoying themselves infeasting and diversions; but even at a late hour amidsther maids, manufacturing wool by candle light.
The contest was determined in favour of Lucretia. Shebad received her husband and the Tarquins with muchailkbiltty. Her husband not a little vain of his con­quest, invited his royal guest to a friendly repast. ThereSextus Tarquinius was so captivated with the charmsand behaviour of Lucretia, and so inflamed with passion,that he was resolved to enjoy her by force.—However,having thus got over their youthful frolic, which hadtaken up a great part of the night, they return unto thecamp.


A


CHAP. LVIII.
Lucretia ravished: stabs herself.


FEW days after, Sextus Tarquinius, without ac­quainting Collatinus, set out for Cotlatra, with only oneservant. As nobody could divine the motives of thisvisit, he was entertained with great civility and respect;and, after supper, conducted to his apartment. In­flamed with the ardour of his passion, observing evervthing was quiet, and the whole family asleep, he stoteinto Lucretia's chamber; and coming with his sworddrawn to her^bed-side, he laid his left hand on her breastand awakened her.
"Be hush, Lucretia," says he, " 1 am 'Sextus Tar-"quinius; my sword is drawn, the moment you speak"a word, that moment shall be your last." Lucretia,as she awakened in a fright, seeing death impending, norelief near her, was obliged to listen to a declaration ofhis passion: he begged amI entreated her to yield to hisdesires; then he mingled threats with his prayer-!, andleft no art unpractised to shake her resolution. Whenhe found that she was positive, and that even the fear ofdeath could not prevail upon her to consent, he threat­







OCR Output








462 lf ITtTS LIVIUS' BOOK V.


suited together, what sacred things they should carryaway, and as they could not take the whole, what theyshould leave behind, <md where these precious depositsmight be roost safely lodged. At last, they concludedit would be best to pack them in small casks, and burythem in a chapel, next to the house of the priest of Ko-mulus, where now h is reckoned'unlawful to spit. Whatwas to be carried away, they divided among them, andeach with his burden, took the road by the bridge, Sul--picius leading to the Janiculum.
As L. Albinus, a Plebeian, was drawing his wife andchildren in a waggon, among the rest of the crowd, whocould hare been of no use in the defence of the city, beobserving the vestals on the side of a hill, notwithstand­ing the necessity of the times, forgot not the respect dueto things divine; for thinking it most preposterous thathe should be seen in a carriage with his family, whilstthe public priests of the Roman people were on foot,carrying the sacred things, he ordered out hi* wife andchildren, and placing the vestals with their sacred bur­dens in the waggon, drove them to Caere, the place oftheir destination. .,
"';: .CHAP. XLI.
., Retolution and massacre of the aged Senators.
N the mean time, every thing for the' defence of theditadel being disposed at Rome, in the best manner pos-sib]ei considering the present exigency, the venerablecompany of superannuated patriots returned to theirhoused, there to wait, with steady resolution, the comingof the enemy, and deith. Such of them as had bornecurule magistracies, that they might die adorned withthe ensigns of their former dignity, honours, and gal­lantry, dressed themselves in their most magnificent robes,which they used to wear in the procession of their gods,and in their triumphs, seating themselves in their ivorychairs in the middle of their halls. We find in someauthors, that these ancients first devoted themselves fortheir country, and the Roman'people, by a vow whichM. Fabius, the high priest, administered in form.
The Gauls, as the intervention of a whole night had







OCR Output








CHAP. 10. ROMAN HISTORY. 119 ,


great was the complaisance which was shown to the peo­ple, by the senate at I hat time.
Their first care was to lay in provisions; for procur­ing which, agents were sent among the Volsci and toCurnae.* And because the tax on salt was farmed at avery high rate, the monopoly was taken from privatepersons, and committed to clerks, who were to manageit for the public. The common people were relieved ofall imposts and taxes whatever, whicU were laid upon therieh, who were able to bear them. The poor contribut­ed enough to the state, when they brought up their chil­dren. Wherefore this tenderness of the fathers, so unit­ed the hearts of the people, that notwithstanding all thedistresses they suffered, during the siege and famine, thename of king was equally detestable to high and lowjnor could ever a man since that period, by mdirect prac­tices acquire a popularity equal to that which the senateobtained by their good government.


Ui


CHAP. X.
The gallantty of Cocks.


I PON the enemy's approach, eyery one, to save him­self, fled from the country into the city: the city itselfthey secured with strong guards; and having walls uponone side, and the Tiber on the other, it seemed prettywe'll defended:
The bridge Sublicius, however, had almost opened a ]&passage for the enemy into the city, when the gallantryof one man, Horatius Cocles, prevented it. To him did•the fortune of Rome owe its defence that day. He hap­pened to be placed sentry on the bridge, when he sawthe Janiculum taken by surprise, and the enemy runningdown from thence with all the speed they coulci: observ­ing a crowd of the Romans throwing down their arms, andleaving their ranks in confusion, he laid hold of them,one by one, pulling them back, and beseeching them inthe name of gods and men: he declared, "That their"flight would signify nothing, if they once deserted their"post; if they left the bridge behind them, free for the
* A city of Campania.







OCR Output








CHAP. 67. ROMAN HISTORY. 299


Titus Quinctius Capitblinus a fourth time, and Agrip-pa Furius weie then made consuls, who found no sedi­tion at home, nor war abroad; but Rome was threaten­ed with both. The torrent of discord could be no long-.er stemmed, the tribunes and people being so much ex­asperated against the senate, that the assemblies resound­ed every day with accusations agamst some one or otherof that order. On the first rumour of these domesticbroils, the 2E.ym and Volsci, as if'they had been thesignal of war, took arms. Their chiefs, prompted bythe love of plunder, persuaded them, " That the people"had thrown off all authority, and that the levies could"noteven now be made, which had been appointed two*' years before. That it was for this very reason, an army"had not been sent against them: the vigour of their"discipline had now degenerated into licentiousness, and"Rome was no longer considered as the native country,"common to both orders, and the resentment and re-"venge they formerly practised against other nations,"they now turned against one another. Now, now was"the time to extirpate these wolves, whilst they were"tearing one another."
Having joined their forces, the first ravaged the coun­try of the Latins,. and meeting with no resistance, ani­mated by the authors of the war, who were exulting withjoy, they advanced to the very walls of Rome plunder­ing the country, on the side next the /Esquiline gate,and laying waste all before them m the face of the cityby way of insult. ^ Then driving off their booty with.impunity, they returned to Corbio in good order, whenQninctius called an assembly of the people, where hespoke to the following effect:
CHAP. LXVII.
Speech of Qninctitts.
T-' ...
HOUGH I can charge myself, O Romans, with no* crime, by me committed, it is with the utmost shame'and confusion that I appear in your assembly. You'have seen it,—posterity will know it,—That in the'fourth consulship of Titus Quinctius, the jEqui and







OCR Output








196 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


more warmly to save any one of (heir order. Theycould not see, without extreme concern, the guardian ofthe senate, the avenger of their dignity, and the invin­cible bulwark of their rights, against the attacks of thetribunes and their abettors, given up to the rage of thepopulace, and that only because his passion had carriedhim a little beyond the bounds of moderation, in the heatof the dispute.
Of all the senators, Appius was the only one thatheld the tribunes, the people, and the judgment theywere about to pass, in sovereign contempt. Neither thethreats of the commons, nor ail the entreaties of the se­nate, couM ever prevail upon him even to change hisdress, or humble himself to solicit the favour of his judges:nay, nor in making his defence, to abate anything of hisusual haughtiness, or sharpness of stile. In every thing,lie retained the same externals, the same air of confidence,and the same boldness of speech; so that the people, forthe most part, were no less awed by him, wheti citedbefore them as a criminal, than they were before, whenhe was consul. He pleaded his cause once, but then itwas with his usual tone, and the authority of an accuser;and so much were the people and tribunes astonished athis resolution, that unsolicited, they put off his trial to afuture day, and thereafter were prevailed on to renew theprorogation. But, before that day arrived, he died of adistemper. The tribunes attempted to hinder the pro­nouncing his funeral oration; but the people would notconsent that so great a man should be deprived of anhonour so justly his due. They heard his praise afterhis death, wiih as much pleasure as they had his accusa­tion when alive. Nay, many of them assisted at his fu­neral.
'CHAP. LXII.
The country of tlie jEqui and Sabines plundered.
J. HIS same year, Valerius the consul, led an armyagainst the /Equi, and fmding it impracticable to drawthem to a battle, attempted to storm their camp. A ter­rible tempest accompanied with thunder and hail, put a







OCR Output








CHAP. 43. ROMAN HISTORY. 57


which the sons of Ancus had discovered against his pre­decessor, he gave his two daughters in marriage to thetwo young princes, Lucius and Aruns: yet this precau­tion could not prevent the unalterable decrees of fate,nor secure him against the envy attending a crown,which was productive of the blackest treasons, and scenesof the grossest barbarity, even in his own family.
Very seasonably for the present tranquillity, war wasundertaken against the Vejentes (the truce with them be­ing now expired,) and the other states of Etruria. Inthat war, fortune conspired, with his own native gallan­try, to ennoble Tullius: for, having routed the enemy'sprodigious army, he returned to Rome, sovereign of theaffections of senate and people. After this, he sets aboutthe works of peace, which, of all others, are the most sa­lutary: and "as Numa jtad^bgsiLjj^ .author of the reHgUOu£ jjojjtj^ofJR onjJe^Tfi at^post leTitymi g ht have reasonf5mention Servms with respect, as author of the several or­ders and ranks in the state, whereby the different de­grees of dignity or fortune are ascertained, he institutedthe census; the effects of which were most salutary in astate, that promised to arrive at such a pitch of greatness:for by it the charges of peace and war were not leviedby the head as before, but in proportion to their estatesrespectively. tHe then divided the people into classes'and centuries, according to his census; a regulation verypropet"" both in peace and


CHAP. XLIII.
- * * *
He divides tlie people into classes and centuries.
V,yF those whose, fortune amounted to, or exceeded100,000* asses of brass, he made up eighty centuries:one half whereof were of the aged citizens, and one halfof the younger. These together were called the firstclass. The design of the elder part was to have them aU-ways at hand to guard the city; of the younger, to carryarms abroad. The arms assigned them were a helmet, around shield, -boots, a coat of mail; all of brass. These
• •' • i • ««
: 18: 4d, •• -







OCR Output








312 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK IV.


'failed to procure Iionourand respect to all and sundries,'its authors and abettors. That they might look back'upon the majesty of the senate, when they received'it from their fathers, and compare it with the state in'which they were like to transmit it to iheir children:'they would then see, whether they had reason to boast'with the people, that their privileges were exceedingly'improved and enlarged. That the same evils would
* constantly prevail, whilst sedition carried all before it,'and its authors so highly distinguished. What a de-
* testable project is this, which C. Canuleins has attempt-'ed? He is for mingling the blood *of the nobles, with'the scurn of the people ;—confounding the public and'private auspices;—leaving nothing pure, nothing un-'corrupted in the state, that distinctions being put out'of the way, a man might be equally a stranger to him-'self and his relations. For, what else could possibly'be the design of such preposterous marriages, but that'the fathers and people should couple together with as'little ceremony as wild beasts '( So that a child born of'such marriages, half Patrician and half Plebeian,'would be in a kind of war with himself, being totally'ignorant of his rank and family, and the sacrifices pro-'per for his state : and, as it were not enough to con-« found all rights human and divine, these disturbers of'the public peace have the imprudence to lift their eyes'to the consulship itself. That at first they had only'talked of electing one Plebeian consul, but now they'rise in their demands, and insist, that the people may'elect consuls out of either order, as they please: and,'can any one entertain a doubt, that they would no-
* minate the most turbulent of their own order? Then
* would the Canulei and Icilii strut about with the fas-
* ces. They trusted, however, that the most high Ju-'piter would never suffer the majesty of the consulship'to fall into such contempt; and for their own parts,
* they had rather die a thousand deaths, than concur in'so infamous a disgrace. That it was a certain fact, if'their ancestors could have divined, that by making so
* many concessions, the people were not to become more
* tractable, but on the contrary more assuming, bymak-'ing demand upon demand, every one of them more un­







OCR Output








58 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


then the king proceeded in continuation. "For the ad-*' vantage, prosperity, and felicity of the Roman people} ."for nry own, and for yours, O Albans, I ana resolved"to remove all the inhabitants of Alba to Rome, to make"the people citizens, and the nobles senators. In one"word, to unite the two nations in one city, and one"commonwealth, that as Alba once formed two nations"of one, she may now return to unity again."
The Alban youth, at these words, were variously agi­tated in their minds; but seeing themselves surroundedwith armed soldiers, they were all impressed with thesame common fear, which kept them silent. Tulius,then turning to Mettus resumed his discourse, " If," saidhe, " you could learn to be true to your word, and faith-"ful to treaties, I would suffer you to live, and be my-"self your instructor! but as I see your disposition iis"incurable, you shall, by your punishment, teach man-"kind, to hold those things sacred and inviolable, which"you have disgracefully infringed. As therefore in"yesterday's action, you kept your mind divided be-"tween Rome and fridenae, so shall you to-day, give"your body to be divided and torn asunder."
Then he ordered two chariots to be brought, drawniby four horses, and Mettus to be tied thereon, stretchedat full length. The horses were then xlrawn differentways, and his body torn in pieces, each chariot carryingalong with it the members which had been tied to it.The spectators could not stand the shocking sight, butturned away their eyes.—This was the first and lastpunishment among the Romans, that seemed inconsistentwith the laws of humanity. In all other instances, theycould boast that no other nation punished with less se­verity-
CHAP. XXIX.
Alba destroyed.
J.N the mean time, the horse had been previously dis­patched to Alba, to bring the people to Rome; and afterthat, tbe foot, to demolish the city. Their entry there,was not attended with that tomult and confusion, whichgenerally accompany the taking of towns-, when thfe







OCR Output








CHAP. 4. ROMAN HISTORY. • % . 405


disease constantly prevailing in the state, that youmight always have recourse to them for a cure. But,tribune?, whether do you profess to be the people'sprotectors, or their enemies? Are you advocates for,or against the soldiers? Perhnps you will tell me,that every act of the senators, whether for, or againstthe interest of the commons, you are determined iodislike: and as masters did not suffer their slaves tohave any intercourse with their neighbours, that theymight neither be well or ill used by them, so you willnot suffer the commons to have any intercourse withthe nobles, lest by our complaisance and generosity,we should secure their attachment, and lest they, onthe other hand, should shew their regard, in their obe­dience to our orders. How much more then should itbe your study, suppose you had no regard for the state,if you had but the least spark of humanity remaining,to use your utmost endeavours, to promote this reci­procal complaisance and compliance between the se­nate and people > For, should this harmony be per­manent, who would not venture to promise, that thisour empire would soon be the most respectable of allaround us? -'


I


CHAP. IV.
Appius in continuation.


N the sequel of my discourse, I shall show how muchtha resolution of my colleagues, not to withdraw thetroops from before Veil, till it is taken, is not only ex­pedient, but necessary: at present only permit me tospeak with regard to the condition of the troops there.And I am convinced, were I to speak, not only toyou, but in the camp, where the soldiers themselveswould be my judges, I should infallibly have theirapprobation. For, were my own ingenuity to furnishme with nothing new to advance in this affair, Ishould think myself at no loss, when I can confute myopponents from what they themselves have advanced.It was but lately that they insisted that the soldiersought to have rib pay iiow, because they had nonebefore. How then can they be offended now, when







OCR Output








190 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


fathers imagining that all their force would be exertednow, they chose Appius Claudius for consul, the son ofthat Appius, who by long family disputes, was an openenemy to the commons, and was equally hated by them.Titus Quinctius was given him for his colleague.
The first thing brought on the carpet, in the begin­ning of the year, was the law: and, as Volero, whofirst moved it, continued firm in its interest, his colleague"Laetorius, being a later advocate for it, for that reasonexerted himself more strenuously. He was a man ofknown valour; and the glory he had purchased in war,furnished him with resolution and assurance. Volerowas not severe, in any of his discourses, against theconsuls, but confined himself entirely to the law; butLai tori us insisted on the excessive pride and cruelty ofAppius and his family, to the peopte, affirming that thesenate, in him, had not created a consul, but a butcher,to cut the people's throats, and tear them to pieces.Bred in the camp, he had not words to express his sen­timents adequate to the freedom which he took. Where­fore, being at a loss for expression, he cried out, " As"I do not speak with the same ease, as I act, Romans,"come hither to-morrow, I will pass the law, or die in"vour presence."
The tribunes placed themselves in the temple nextday; and the consuls, with all the Patrician order, as­sembled to oppose the law. Laetorlus ordered the forumto be cleared of all who had no right to vote; and assome of the young nobility refused to obey, he orderedsome of them tote seized. The consul Appius insisted,that the authority ot a tribont extended ouly to the com­mons: for he was not a Patrician, but a Plebeian magis­trate, and that he himself had no power to remove themty any former precedent, the form of addressing tlum,being, " Depart, Romans, if it be your pleasure."
lt was easy^ confound Laeionus, by talking fluentlyanJ contemptuously of the forms of court. Transported,however, with passion, he sent his serjeant to the consul,who, in return, sent his lictor to the tribune, crying out,that he was only a private person, that he was no ma­gistrate, and had no right to command; and, withoutdoubt, the tribune would have suffered violence, had







OCR Output








t IV. \


V
HAiVMt cutset UMMH
«fT OF
attNt MTHUB runrrw
1ANUARY 28,


 


J. «• C. Muirh--d, Printtn,Edinburgh.


,\







OCR Output








CHAP. 37. ROMAN HISTORY. 36*


tribunes of the people, to pass a decree, that as therewas advice that the Volsci had taken the field, to ravagethe country of the Hernici, the military tribunes shouldset out immediately to inform themselves on the spot;and that, in the mean time, an assembly for the electionof consuls should be held.
They left at their departure, as praefect of the city,Appius Claudius, the son of the decemvir, a young ma- Igistrate of great fire and vivacity, and who, from hiscradle, had imbibed an aversion to the people and theirtribunes. The tribunes afterwards had no room to con­tend with those who had procured this act of the senate,because they were absent; nor with Appius, because the,affair was entirely over and completed,
~ * . •
CHAP. XXXVII. .'
^ . Sempronius acts incautiously.
J. HE fasces were conferred on C. Sempronius Atratinus-and Q. Fabius Vibulanus. An event which happenedthis year, though it has no immediate connection withthe affairs of Rome, deserves to be taken notice of here.Vulturnum,! a city belonging to the Etrurians, now cal­led f.'uj'iua, was taken by the Samnites. It got the nameof Capua,* from Capys, the general of the Samnites; or,which is more probable, from the openness of the coun­try, However, that be, they got possession of it in thismanner:
The Etrurians being quite exhausted by a tedious war,the Samnites were first admitted to settle with them inthe cily and its territory; and, some time after, takingthe advantage of a public solemnity, the new comers fellupon the first inhabitants, buried in wine and sleep, andmurdered them all in the night. Immediately on theback of these transactions, the consuls mentioned aboveentered upon their office", on the thirteenth day of De­cember. By this time, the envoys reported, that a war
* Capua was considered as one of the three most considerable ci­ties in the wortd; and, for some time, rivalted both Rome and Car­thage. Its ruins stitt remain near the village Sancta Maria di Capoa,situated in one of the finest provinces of the kingdom of Naples.







OCR Output








CHAP. 64. ROMAN HISTORY. 199.


The good conduct of the general, and valour of thetroops, were equally conspicuous in the war with theVolsci.
They engaged first in a plain; the battle was bloody,and the slaughter great on both sides, which being moresensibly felt by the Romans, as they were less numerous,a defeat would have followed, had not the consul, by awell-timed fiction, inspired them with fresh courage,crying out, that the enemy was routed in the other wing.Wherefore, the army making a fresh attack, and believ­ing themselves victorious, became really so. The con­sul, afraid to push his success too far, lest they shouldrally, sounded a retreat. For some days, both armiescontinued so quiet, that one would have imagined theyhad privately consented to a truce.
During this respite, the army of the Volsci was con­siderably reinforced by numbers of their own country,and that of the .3Lqui, imagining, that the Romans, themoment they were advised of this Secession, wouldmarch oflfin the night: impressed with this opinion, theycame before the third watch to storm the camp. Quinc-tius having dissipated the terror occasioned by this sud-den alarm, gave orders, that all should remain quiet intheir tents, and led out of the camp a body of the Her-iiici fer an advanced guard; and to keep the enemy in aconstant alarm till day-light, he set the trumpeters andblowers on the horn, on horseback, with orders to play,from time to time, before the rampart, For the rest ofthe night, every thing was so quiet in the camp, thatthe Romans were sufficiently refreshed.
The appearance of a body of infantry in arms, whomthe Volsci took for Romans, superior in number to them­selves; the noise and neighing of the horses, which, un­accustomed to this kind of riders, and frightened with thesound of their instruments, were very attractable, keptthe Volsci as much upon their guard, as if they hadIjeen every moment to be attacked by the enemy.







OCR Output








60 TITUS LIVIUS' - . BOOK I.


ed ever after, to encourage others to build there also.He admitted among the patricians, the principal familiesof Alba, such as the Julii, Servilii, Quintii, Geganii, Cu-riatii, and Claelii, that the patrician order might be in­creased in proportion: and upon this accession to theorder, he built a temple for a senate-house, which ourfathers knew by the name of Hostilia. And that everyorder might derive some additional strength from the ac­cession of the Albans, he formed from among that peo­ple, ten centuries of knights. With them also he re­cruited the old, and formed new legions.
Being now confident of his strength, he declares waragainst the Sabines, a nation, at that time, next theEtrurians, the most populous and powerful of all theirneighbours. Encroachments had been made, and satis­faction demanded by both parties, to no purpose. Tul-lus complained, that some Roman merchants had beenseized at a public market, near the temple of Feronia:the Sabines, that some of their people were detained atRome, although they had fled for protection to theasylum.
From these injuries, the war is said to have originated.The Sabines, being well aware, that their strength hadsuffered a considerable diminution, in the party incor­porated by Tatius, with Rome; and that the Romanpower had been considerably increased by the accessionof Alba, thought proper to look about for foreign aid.Etruria lay next them ; and of jthat country the Vejenteswere their nearest neighbours. From thence they drewvolunteers, who, when the ashes of former wars wereraked up in their minds, were easily prevailed on to re­volt. Vagrants too among the poorer sort, enlisted intheir service for pay; but by public authority, they hadno assistance: for the Vejentes strictly observed the trea­ty made with Romulus; and it is not surprizing that theywere joined by none of the other powers.
Both parties having made all possible preparations,and nothing remaining now, but to strike the first blow,Tullus begins to march his army into their country. Abloody actio\} ensued, near the malefactor's forest, iawhich the Roman army proved far superior not only inthe weight of their infajUry, but also by the late aug­







OCR Output








CHAP. 15. ROMAN HISTORY. 127


the camp were sold, to prevent the people from break­ing in to rifle them, and that tiiey were called the goodsof 1'orsenna, rather in compliment to his generosity, thanthat his property was exposed to veudae, which the Ro­mans had never in their power.
The war with Rome being thus laid aside, that hisarmy might not seem to- have been led mto tiie>e coun­tries for nothing, Porsenna sent his son Arurt-, with a:detachment of it, to lay siege to Aricia. At first, theAricians were struck with this unexpected invasion; butafterwards, having procured assistance from the peopleof Latium ami Curnae, they thought themselves .suffici­ently strong to venture a battle. Then the Etrurtanschanged with such prodigious fury, that the Aricians im­mediately gave way; but the Oitman cohorts opposedgood generalship to force. They fell back for a little,and after the enemy had passed them in great disorder,turned and charged them in the reap
Thus were the Etrurians, though they had almost acomplete victory, surrounded and cut to pieces. A partof them, by far the least, having lost their general, andhaving no nearer safe retreat, came to Rome, withouttherr arm?, in circumstances and a condition not to beenvied. There they met with a kind reception, aifd werehospitably entertained. When their wounds Were cured,some of them went home, where they made honourablemention of the civilities they had met with at Rome.Many of them out of regard to their hosts, and attach­ment to the city, staid at Rome, where ground was as­signed them to build upon, ever since called the Tuscanstreet.
CHAP. XV.
Porsenna sent an embassy to Rome.
X\.FTER. this, P. Lucretius, and P. Valerius Publico-la, were made consuls for the third time. That year,Porsenna sent an embassy to Rome, to treat of a restora­tion of the Tarquins, for the last time; by whom, thoughthey could have returned an answer, the senate chose tosend ambassadors to the king, and immediately the most







OCR Output








244 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK III.


The engagement wiih the consular army continuedtill morning, bv which time the dictator had drawn hisworks quite round them, nor were they quite a match forone of the armies. Then the dictator's troops ha3 nosooner finished their work, than they run to their armsand attacked the enemy's lines.
Here was new work cut out for them, without theleast respite from the old, which was still maintainedwith great vigour, and being at last overpowered bv anenemy on each side, they threw down their arms, andbegged quarter, on the one side conjuring the dictator,on the other, the consul, not to place victory in the utterdestruction of their nation, but to suffer them to departunarmed. The consul referred them to the dictator,who being highly provoked, ordered them to bring theirgeneral, Gracchus Claelius, and their other leaders inchains to him, and immediately to evacuate the city ofCorbio; telling them at the same time, " That as be"did not want their blood, he would let them go; but"that by passing under the yoke, they should acknoW-"ledge, in the face of -the sun, they were now a con-"quered people." This yoke was constructed withthree spears, two whereof stood perpendicular to theplain, and the third laid across them, under which, agree­able to the dictator's order, they all passed.
CHAP. XXIX.
Cincinnaius triumphs. MinutiuS degraded.
.HAVING taken the enemy's camp, which was plenti­fully supplied with stores of every kind, and indeed he-had stripped them of every thing, he gave all the bootyto his own soldiers. To the consul .and his army, hegave nothing but a sharp rebuke; telling them, " You"shall not, soldiers, who were just about to fall a prey"to your enemies, have any share in their spoils. And"as for you L. Minucius, titl you begin to have the spi-"rit of a consul, you shall only serve as a lieutenam-ge-"neral in this army." Minucius abdicated the consul­ship, and continued with the army as he was ordered.So religiously was discipline observed at this time, and







OCR Output








criAp.5. ROMAN HISTORY: 40?


kept their faith. A thousand times have they ravagedour lands: at their instigation, the Fidenates revolted:they butchered the colonies we had planted at Fidenra.:it was they who, contrary to the law of nations, causedour ambassadors to be assassinated. They have en­deavoured t\> arm all Etruria against us, nor have theyyet given over their intrigues. Nay, they were with­in an ace of offering violence to our ambassadors, whenthey were demanding satisfaction for dangers sus-.••-tained.'
,
CHAP. V.
Appius in continuation.
./\RE these the'enemies we should treat with \e-*-nity? have they any title to be indulged with a re­spite? But, suppose all these motives, forcible as they •are, were to go for nothing, will not these which fol­low, have some weight with you? Their city is sur­rounded with considerable works, which Uteep themshut up within their walls. Their lands either lywithout cultivation, or are totally ruined by the xwar.Were we to take off our army, the consequence is evi­dent ; prompted by a desire of revenge, and still moreby necessity, which the losses they have sustained laythem under to plunder, will they not immedtately re­taliate upon us? Were we to listen to your tribunes,we would not remove the war, but draw it home intoonr own country. And after all, what are these pe­culiar advantages, which these good tribunes wouldsubstitute, in place of pay to the soldiers, of whichthey would wish to deprive them? The soldiers, withimmense labour, have drawn a ditch and rampartthrough a large tract of ground. On these, at first,they only raised a few forts, but since the army hasbeen reinforced, they have multiplied them prodi­giously. They have erected redoubts, not only againstthe town, but against Etruria also, to prevent- the aidwhich might be sent from thence. Why need I men-







OCR Output








CHAP. 26. ROMAN HISTORY. 347


'friends among the commons, and their countenance'once obtained, they would not fail to promote them.'Wherefore, it was resolved, that a law should be pro­posed, in order to put an effectual stop to intriguing, thatfor the future no person appearing as a candidate for anoffice, should affect to be distinguished by the Whitenessof his robes. At this period, a dispute so trifling wouldbe little regarded; but, however much it may appearlike a farce now, between the senators and the peoplethen, it was a very serious affair. The tribunes prevail­ed, and the law passed. As the present animosity of thepeople gave reason to suspect that they would be biassedin favour of their own party; therefore, to put it out of.their power to prefer them, the senate enacted, that thecomitia for electing consuls should be held this year.
CHAP. XXVI.
The Tribunes compel the Consuls to name a Dictator.
./\DVICES from the "Hernici and the Latins, that theVolsci and ./Equi were in motion, furnished an apologyfor this resolution. T. Quinctius^Cincinnatus, the son ofLucius, sirnamed also Pennus, and C. Julius Men to,were made consuls. This dreadful war was no longerdelayed: for, by means of a sacred law among them,the most effectual means of raising an army, havingmade up their quotas, each nation led a.formidable partyto the Algidus, the place agreed on for their general ren*-dczvcns. There the TEqui and Volsci fortified two sepa-^rate encampments, their generals discovering a muchgreater degree of attention in disciplining the troops andsecuring the lines, than ever'they had done on any for­mer occasion. ,
These accounts increased the consternation at Rome,so much the more. The senate were determined toname a dictator; because, though they had to do with a'people Who had often shewn them their backs, theyseemed at this time resolved on an extraordinary effort;and besides, the strength of the Romans was impairedY>y the loss of some of their youth, that had been cut offby the raging distemper. But, nothing gave them so'much concern as the perverseness of the consuls, their







OCR Output








. <H. ROMAN HISTORY". 291


troops were marched out, and had time to form them­selves; and to intimidate them the more, raising a greatshout, they appeared before the Roman consul, like anunweildy mob assembled without design, and looking atone another. At first they gave way; but being re­proached by their generals for losing ground before ene­mies they had beat, they resumed their courage, and re­newed the fight.
CHAP. LXI.
Victory over the 3Lqui and Volsci. '-
JL HE consul, on the other hand, put the Romans inmind, " That this was the first opportunity, since they"became free, that fortune had given them of distin-"guishing themselves for a free country.—That they"would now conquer for themselves, and not for decem-"virs.—That Appius was no longer their commander,but Valerius the consul; who being descended of pa­triots, had himself established the liberty of the peo­ple.—That they should now demonstrate, it was notowing to the soldiers, but to the generals, that in for-'mer battles they had not been victorious. To have'~it 'aid, that they had signalized themselves moreagainst iheir fellow citizens, than now against the ene­my; and that they were more afraid of slavery inRome, than in the field of battle, would be infamous"to the last degree. That Virginia was only one indi-"vidu.il, whose chastity was in danger in time of peace, ."and in the criminal passion of Appius alone, this dan-"ger totally centered. But, were the fortune of war to"declare against them, the danger from so many thou-"sand enemies, would not even be confined to them-"selves, but descend to their posterity. But, he would"not di'aw conclusions from events, which he hoped"Jupiter, and their father Mars, would never suffer to~" befal a city, founded wii it such glorious prospects."Then putting them in mind of the Aventine and sacredMounts, he told them, " That as but a few months*' before, they had there regained their liberty, ^hither«' it became them to carry back their power







OCR Output








148 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK If.


CHAP. XXX.
Manius Valerius chosen Dictator.
_L HE opinion of Appius, seemed to many, as it reallywas, extremely harsh and severe. On the other hand,the propositions by Virginius and Largius, would bedangerous precedents, especially that of Largius, whichwould give a fatal blow to all credit and commerce. Itwas admitted, that the opinion of Virginius, which by ajudicious medium, corrected Largius's excess, was themost moderate and eligible. But the intrigues of par­ties, and the view of private interest, which ever did,and ever will obstruct public deliberations, turned thescale in favour of Appius's opinion, who was within alittle of being declared dictator himself, which would en­tirely have exasperated and alienated the people at thisdangerous conjuncture, when the Volsci, JEqu't, and Sa-bines, were all in arms together.
But the consuls and the older senators took care, thatan authority, in itself imperious and absolute, should beconferred upon one of a mild and moderate disposition.So the election fell upon Manius Valerius, the son ofVolesus. The people saw well enough, that it was.against them, a dictator was cheated; yet, having gotthe right of appeal, by a law preferred by his brother,they suspected nothing oppressive or tyrannical from thatfamily. t
An edict of the dictator^, much of the same naturewith that published by the consul Servilius, confirmedthem afterwards in these hopes. Wherefore, in confi­dence of the dictator's name, and the sovereign powerof his office, they gave in their names without opposition.Ten legions were raised; an army superior to any leviedbefore. Each of the consuls commanded three, and thedictator four. They were obliged to take the field im­mediately; for the /Equi had entered the territory ofI.atium with a hostile army, and the Latins, by theirdeputies, insisted that the senate should relieve them, orpermit them to arm in their own defence. It seemedmore eligible to send an army for their protection, than







OCR Output








CHAT. 33. ROMAN HISTORY. 71


drowned in the river, which carried their arms floating.with the current, to publish this signal victory at Rome,.before the arrival of the express.
The principal honour, in this action, was due to the-horse'; for, as they were posted in the two wings, andobserved the infantry, which composed the main body ofthe army, already giving way, it is said, they charged sobriskly in flank, that they not ojily gave a check to theSabine legions, who were carrying all before them, butobliged them to retreat with precipitation. The Sabinesfled to the mountains in great disorder, which only fewof them reached! the greatest part, as formerly observed,having been pushed by the cavalry into the river.
Tarquin determined to make the must of their terror,sent the prisoners and booty to Rome; and having piledup and set fire to the spoils, which he had vowed to Vul­can, advanced with his army to the Sabine territories.Although the Sabines had got a severe check, and couldsee no prospect of being able to retaliate; yet, as therewas no time for deliberation, they came out with anarmy tumultuously assembled; but they were routedagain; and being reduced-to the last extremity, sued forpeace.
CHAP. XXXVIII.
He builds a wall round the city, and drains the water fromthe rallies.
V>OLLATIA and the country about it, in consequence ofthis victory, was ceded to the Romans, and Egerius, theking's nephew, left governor of the place. It is, how­ever, affirmed in history, that Collatia capitulated, andsurrendered in the following form: The king put thequestion, " Are you delegates and deputies commission*ed by the people of Collatia, to surrender yourselvesand them? We are. Are the people of Collatia theirown masters! They are. Do you then surrenderyourselves, the people of Collatia, their city, theirlands, their water, their marches, temples, utensils,and every thing sacred, or civil, belonging unto them,







OCR Output








140 . TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK II.


the senators might take arms, and march against the ene­my; let them who reaped the fruits of war, encounterthe dangers of it. .
The sertate, in so critical a conjuncture, having everything to fear from within, as well as without the walls,were in the utmost perplexity; wherefore, they entreat­ed the consul Servilias, whose disposition was milder andmore popular than his colleague's^ to ex*rt himself forthe delivery of the state, from the evil that threatened it.
Servilius having dismissed the senate, repaired to anassembly of the people, where he tells them, That thefathers had nothing more at heart, than the redress oftheir grievances: but in the moment they were delibe­rating on proper measures for their interest, who werebut a part, though by far the greatest, a far more serioussubject of fear had occurred to interrupt them, which re­garded the wliole community. Nor was it possible forthem, while the enemy had almost reached their gates,to apply their minds to any other subject, but the war.And though some respite were given, it would not be­come the people to refuse to take up arms for their coun­try, till they had been paid beforehand, and as little forthe honour of the senate, to provide for their insolventcitizens, through motives arising from their present fears,than afterwards as the effects of inclination. To con­vince the assembly of the reality of these intentions, hepublished a proclamation, " Prohibiting all and sundry,"from detaining a Roman citizen in prison, or in chains,"go as to prevent his enlisting himself under the con-"suls; and from seizing or selling the effects of any sol-"dier, or arresting his children, or grandchildren, while"he remained in camp." 'This edict being publish­ed, the debtors who were present, immediately gave intheir names; and as now their persons could not be de­tained by their creditors came out from their conceal­ments, and crowded into the forum to take the militaryoath. Of these a considerable party was completed, andnone behaved with greater gallantry, or contributedmore to put an end to the war with the Volsci. Theconsul led out his army against the enemy, and encamp­ed not far from then?.







OCR Output








CHAP. 26. ROMAN HISTORY. 241


gence, of all others, was least expected, or looked for;and the terror and consternation it occasioned at Rome,was much the same, as if the city itself, and not thecamp, had been invested.
The consul Nautius was sent for; but that their onlyconfidence might not be placed in him, they judged itproper to name a dictator, to retrieve their embarrassedaffairs, and pitched upon L. Quinctius Cincinnatus, withon'e consent, for that purpose.
It is worth any one's while, who makes light of everything but riches, and who imagines, that without them,there can be no real greatness, no virtue,—to listen at­tentively to the following narrative. This same LuciusQuinctius, the'prop and stay of the Roman people, livedin the country, on the other side of the Tiber, and culti­vated with his own hands, a small piece of land of fouracres, called the Quinctian meadows, opposite that veryplace, where the ship-docks now are. The senate's de­puties found him there, trenching with the spade, or atplough; at least, one thing is certain, that he was busilyemployed about his farm. After the usual complimentson both sides were passed, they begged him,- " To put"on his gown, and hear the senate's message, praying it"might prove auspicious both to himself and the state."Struck wifh admiration, he asked them, " If all was"well?" Then turning to his wife Racilia, " Go,"says he, " make haste and fetch my gown :" and wipingthe dust and sweat from his face, he put it on and re­joined them. The deputies straight saluted him Dictator,with great demonstrations of joy, invited him to the city,and informed him of the critical situation of the army.A barge belonging to the state was waiting to conveyhim to the city. His three sons, his other relations andfriends, and the greatest-part of the senators, were wait­ing to receive him at his landing. With this attendance,preceded by the lictors he was conducted to his house.Crowds of the Plebeians likewise put themselves in histrain, although his arrival to them was not over-agree­able; for they thought his authority too extensive, andhimself too severe in the execution of it. They keptwatch in the city all that night.







OCR Output








CHAP. 30. ROMAN HISTQRY, 59


conquerors, breaking open the gates, battering down thewalls, or forcing the citadel, spread themselves throughevery quarter, and with dreadful cries destroy all withfire and sword. But here a mournful silence and sullengrief had so arrested every faculty, that through fear,they forgot what they had left behind, or shoutd carrywith them, listless and absent, often asking one anotherthe same questions. One while they stood motionless atthe doors of their houses, and another ran through themin distraction, only to see them for the last time. Butwhen the horsemen became clamorous and urgent foriheir departure, when thev now heard from the remotestcorners of the city, the noise of the falling houses, whenthe dust, rising in different places, had darkened thehorizon; then snatching up what they could, they marchaway, leaving behind them, household gods, countrygods, and the roofs under which they had been born andbrought up.
Already had a long train of emigrants lined thestreets. The mutual sight of their calamities, by a na­tural sentiment of compassion, made tears of sympathyflow afresh. Lamentations and .mournful cries wereheard, especially of the women, when in passing theiraugust temples, they saw them beset with armed men,and left their gods, as it were, prisoners of war. Whenthe Albans were all out- the Roman soldiers levelled tothe ground, all the buildings, public and private. Thus,in one hour, the work of four hundred years, the timeAlba had stood, was entirely demolished, and razed tothe ground. The temples, however, by the king's ex*press order, were spared.
CHAP. XXX.
The Albans made citizens of Rome. War declared againstthe Sahincs.
JVOME, in the meat* time, improved greatly upon therums of Alba. The number of citizens was doubled*,It was then that mount Claelius was added to the city;upon which Tullus built a palace for himself, and resid­







OCR Output








SO TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


children:—that now they ought to soften their re­sentment, and surrender their hearts to those men, towhom fortune had given possession of their persons.•—That from wrongs and injuries, love and friendshiphad often proceeded; and that they would find theirhusbands behave themselves with so tender an affec-'tion, as would leave them no cause to regret the loss'of either parents or country."
To these soothing expostulations, we may add the ca­resses of the husbands, pleading in excuse the ardour oftheir passion and violence of their love; pleas, whichseldom fail to operate with success on the female heart.
CHAP. X.
Opima Spolia presented to Jupiter Feretriui.
.DY this time ihe passion of the ladies had greatly sub­sided; but their parents all the while were going aboutin a pitiful dress, endeavouring by tears and lamenta­tions, to stir up their states to revenge: nor did theyconfine their complaints to their own country, but as­sembled from all quarters to Titus Tatius, king of theSabines, to whom, as being the most conspicuous cha­racter in these countries, all embassies were addressed.The Cseninenses, Crustumini, and Antemnates, had theirshare in the indignity. To them Titus and his Sabinesseemed slow and inactive, for which reason, havingformed a triple alliance among themselves, they preparefor hostilities.
Stilj were the motions of the Crustumini and Antem­nates too slow for the ardour and fury of the Caeninenses,so that they alone made an incursion upon the Romanterritories; but Romulus meeting them with his army,as they were ravaging the country, in straggling parties,soon convinced them in a slight skirmish, that fury, un­supported by strength, is impotent in the extreme. Theirarmy is defeated, routed, and pursued. Romulus killedtheir king with his own hand, and stripped him of hisarmour. Their general being slain, the city scarce stoodan attack. Then Romulus returning with his victorious







OCR Output








92 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I,


ing thus doubled the number of companies, he appoint*fl Centurions to command them.
CHAP. LIII.
Defeats the Volsci; and, tuith the spoils, builds a t»'ipleto Jupiter Capitolinus.
JL UT though Tarquin was a tyrannical prince, in timeof peace; in war, as a general, he made no despicablefigure. In that art, he would not have been thought in­ferior to his predecessors, had not his degeneracy in otherrespects eclipsed that brighter part of his character.
He was the first who carried the Roman arms againstthe Volsci, and .began a war which subsisted for two hun­dred years after him; from them he took Suessa Pome-tia by storm. In the division of the plunder, when hereserved forty talents of gold and silver to himself,* heconceived in idea, the dimensions of a temple whichshould be worthy the king of gods and men, adequateto the dignity of the Roman empire, and suited to theBiHJ«ty of the place, where it was to be erected. Themoney saved from the spoils of the Volsci, he set apartto defray the- expence of building it.. After this, a war he had undertaken, did not keeppace with his hopes. It was against the Gabii.f acity in the neighbourhood; for the reduction of which,he had exerted his utmost, but in vain. Having beenoften repulsed with loss, and seeing no probability ofsucceeding by a siege, at last he had recourse to fraudand stratagem, arts never practised by the Romans, toaccomplish his purpose. For, pretending to have laidaside all thoughts of war, his attention being whollyengrossed with laying the foundation of the temple, andother public works, his son Sextus, the youngest of three,as concerted between his father and him, made hiselopement to Gabii, where he exclaimed against his fa­ther's inhuman cruelty; declaring, " That he had now"shifted the scene, and turned away his insupportable"pride from other objects, that the whole weight of it
* j£7750. t Now fcelenna.







OCR Output








86 TITUS LIVIUS' BOOK I.


him out of the senate-house, threw him from the top tothe bottom of the stairs, and (hen returned to hold thesenate. The king's officers and attendants made the bestof their way. He himself quite faint, was returninghome, supported by a small retinue, half dead with fear,and had got to the top of the Cyprian street, when hewas overtaken and slain by a party sent out by Tarquinfor that purpose.
This happened, it is thought by Tullia's advice; as shehad been deeply concerned in all the other villainousplots: One thing however is certain, that she drove inher chariot, and without minding the crowd about her,she called her husband out of the senate-house, and wasthe first to salute him king; and being ordered by himto retire out of the crowd, on her way home, when shehad reached the upper part of the Cyprian street, wherelately stood a temple of Diana, as she was wheeling tothe right, towards the Virbian ascent, which was the wayto the Esquiline hill, the charioteer, struck with horror,checked his horses, and made a stop, pointing to the bo­dy of Servius, which lay murdered in the street.
Cruel and inhuman is the action that is said to havefollowed upon this; of which the place itself exhibits aproof: they call it the wicked street, in which Tullia,racked and tortured with the furies of her husband andsister, is reported, in a fit of madness, to have driven herchariot over the body of her father, and to have carriedhome on her clothes and chariot, part of his blood, to herown house gods, and those of her husband; who beingjustly provoked at the barbarity of the action, broughttheir. usurpation speedily to an end suited to the wicked­ness of its beginning.
The reign of Tullius had been so glorious forforty-fiveyears, that it would have been hard even for a goodprince, a reasonable king, to have filled his place withequal dignity.—This too adds to the glory of his reign'that the just and legal exercise of the royal prerogativefell at the same time with him. Some authors are of opi­nion, that he had it in view to have resigned his power,however mild and moderate the exercise of it had been,because it was absolute, had not the intrigues of his ownfamily cut short his plan of fixing his country's liberty.







OCR Output








CHA<-.45, ROMAN HISTORY. 173


swer, that their demand was unseasonable; it was notyet time" to" fight, so that they must keep within theircamp. Then a proclamation was made, prohibiting themto engage, under the severe penalty of" being treated asan enemy.
Dismissed thus, the backwardness the consuls shewedto fighting, only served to increase their ardour; more­over, when the enemy got intelligence that the consulshad resolved not to risk a battle, they repeated theirinsults with more violence than ever, being now assuredthey might do it with impunity, as the soldiers wouldnot be trusted with arms: This at last would terminatein a mutiny, and that in the dissolution of the Romanempire. Stimulated with these reflections, they advan­ced haughtily to the works, branded them with a thou­sand opprobrious names, and were within a little ofstorming the camp.
The soldiers could no. longer suffer an abuse so offen­sive, but ran from all quarters of the camp to the con­suls, not formally as before, by the principal of the cen­turions, but almost all in a body, with loud cries, de­manding to be Ied on to battle. The time was nowcome, but they were still put off; at last Fabius, find­ing his colleague giving way, lest the tumult should endin a revolt, after the trumpet had sounded to silence,addressed him thus: "That these fellows can conquer,1 am perfectly assured; but whether they will,—thatis the question. Therefore, with me it is a decidedand determined point, never to give the signal forbattle, till they first swear that they will return vic­torious. They once deceived a Roman consul, but'the gods they will not deceive." Among the fore­most of those who were urgent for battle, was M. Flavo-leius, a centurion, "I shall return, Marcus Fabius,"said he, " from the field victorious. If I deceive you,"may father Jupiter, "Mars Gradivus, and ihe other"incensed deities, dash me to pieces." The rest -ofthe army followed his example, each swearing to thesame purpose.
Having thus sworn, the signal is given; they fly totheir arms, and big with resentment as well as hopes,they march em to battle. They tell them now to deal



