


OCR Output








406 ROMAN EMPIRE.


well, we shall meet again among the groves and fountainswhich God has provided for his elect. The faithful cap­tives might exercise a passive and more arduous resolu­tion; and a cousin of Mahomet is celebrated for refusing,after an abstinence of three days, the wine and pork, theonly nourishment that was allowed by the malice of theinfidels. The frailty of some weaker brethren exaspe­rated the implacable spirit of fanaticism: and the fatherof Amer deplored, in pathetic strains, the apostacy anddamnation of a son, who had renounced the promisesof God, and the intercession of the prophet, to occupy,with the priests and deacons, the lowest mansions of hell.The more fortunate Arabs who survived the war, andpersevered in the faith, were restrained by their abste­mious leader from the abuse of prosperity. After a re­freshment of three days, Abu Obeidah withdrew histroops from the pernicious contagion of the luxury ofAntioch, and assured the caliph that their religion andvirtue could only be preserved by the hard discipline ofpoverty and labour. But the virtue of Omar, howeverrigorous to himself, was kind and liberal to his brethren.After a just tribute of praise and thanksgiving, hedropped a tear of compassion; and, sitting down on theground, wrote an answer, in which he mildly censuredthe severity of his lieutenant. God (said the successorof the prophet) has not forbidden the use of the goodthings of this world to faithful men, and such as haveperformed good works. Therefore you ought to have giventhem leave to rest themselves, and partake freely of thosegood th ings wh ich the country affordeth. If any of the Sa­racens have no family in Arabia, they may marry in Syria;and whosoever of them wants any female slaves, he maypurchase as many as he hath occasion for. The conquer­ors prepared to use, or to abuse, this gracious permission;but the year of their triumph was marked by a mortalityof men and cattle; and twenty-five thousand Saracenswere snatched away from the possession of Syria. The







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 195


signal, Ravenna, Venice, and the cities of the exarchateand Pentapolis, adhered to the cause of religion; theirmilitary force by sea and land consisted, for the mostpart, of the natives; and the spirit of patriotism andzeal was transfused into the mercenary strangers. TheItalians swore to live and die in the defence of thepope and the holy images: the Roman people was de­voted to their father, and even the Lombards were am­bitious to share the merit and advantage of this holywar. The most treasonable act, but the most obviousrevenge, was the destruction of the statues of Leo him­self: the most effectual and pleasing measure of rebel­lion, was the withholding the tribute of Italy, and de­priving him of a power which he had recently abusedby the imposition of a new capitation.p A form of ad­ministration was preserved by the election of magistratesand governors: and so high was the public indignation,that the Italians were prepared to create an orthodoxemperor, and to conduct him with a fleet and army tothe palace of Constantinople. In that palace, the Ro­man bishops, the second and third Gregory, were con­demned as the authors of the revolt, and every attemptwas made, either by fraud or force, to seifce their per­sons, and to strike at their lives. The city was repeat­edly visited or assaulted by captains of the guards, anddukes and exarchs of high dignity or secret trust; theylanded with foreign troops, they obtained some domes­tic aid, and the superstition of Naples may blush thather fathers were attached to the cause of heresy. Butthese clandestine or open attacks were repelled by the


torem quasi contra hmleni ae armavit, renuens haeresim ejus, scribens ubique secavere Christianas eo quod orta fuisset, impietas talis. Igitur permoti omnesPentapolenses, atque Venetiarum exercitus contra Imperatoris jussionem restite-runt; dicentes se nunquam in ejusdem pontificis condescendere necem, sed proejns magi s defensione viriliter decertare. (p. 156.)
P A census, or capitation, says Anastasius; (p. 156.) a most cruel tax, unknownto the Saracens themselves, exclaims the zealous Maimbonrg, (Hisi. des Icono-clastes, lib. 1.) and Theophanes, (p. 344.) who talks of Pharaoh's numbering themale children of Israel. This mode of taxation was familiar to the Saracens;ami, most unluckily for the historian, it was imposed a few years afterward inFrance by his patron Louis XIV.


o2







OCR Output








CHAP. LII. 53:3


moment in the list of conquest; the emperor Zimiseesencamped in the paradise of Damascus, and acceptedthe ransom of a submissive people; and the torrent wasonly stopped by the impregnable fortress of Tripoli, onthe sea-coast of Phrem'cia. Since the days ofthe EU- Heraclius, the Euphrates, below the passage ofmount Taurus, had been impervious, and almostinvincible, to the Greeks. The river yielded a free pas­sage to the victorious Zimisees ; and the historian mayimitate the speed with which he overran the once famouscities of Samosata, Edessa, Martyropolis, Amida," andNisibis, the ancient limit of the empire in the neigh­bourhood of the Tigris. His ardour was quickened bythe desire of grasping the virgin treasures of Ecbatana, "*a well-known name, under which the Byzantine writerhas concealed the capital of the Abbassides. The con­sternation of the fugitives had already diffused the ter­ror of his name; but the fancied riches of Bagdad hadalready been dissipated by the avarice and prodigalityDanger of of domestic tyrants. The prayers of the people,Bagdad. an(l ^ne stern demands of the lieutenant of theBowides, required the caliph to provide for the defenceof the city. The helpless Mothi replied, that his arms,his revenues, and his provinces, had been torn from hishands, and that he was ready to abdicate a dignitywhich he was unable to support. The emir was inexo­rable; the furniture of the palace was sold; and thepaltry price of forty thousand pieces of gold was instantly


m The text of Leo the Deacon, in the corrupt names of Emeta and Myctarsim,reveals the cities of Amida and Martyropolis. (Miafarekin. See Abulfeda, Geo-graph. p. 245. vers. Reiske.) Of the former, Leo observes, urbsmunita etillustris;of the latter, clara atque conspicua opibusque et pecore, reliquis ejus provinciiiurbibus atque oppidis longe prtestans.
b Ut et Echatana pergeret Agarenorumque regiam everteret aiunt enim
urbium qus' usquam sunt ac toto orbe eiistunt felicissimam esse auroque di-tissimarn. (Leo Diacon. apud Fagium, torn. 4. p. 34.) This splendid descrip­tion suits only with Bagdad, and cannot possibly apply either to Hamadan, thetrue Echatana, (d'Anville, Geog. Ancienne, torn. 2. p. 237.) or Tauris, which hascommonly been mistaken for that city. The name of Echatana, in the same inde­finite sense, (a transferred by a more classic authority (Cicero pro Lege Manili»,c. 4.) to the royal seat of Mithridcues, king of Fontus.







OCR Output








CHAP, XLVlf. f?


Paul, The powers of government were strained in hisA,». 538. SUpport; he might appoint or displace the dukesand tribunes of Egypt; the allowance of bread whichDiocletian had granted, was suppressed, the churcheswere shut, and a nation of schismatics was deprived atonce of their spiritual and carnal food. In his turn thetyrant Was excommunicated by the zeal and revenge ofthe people; and none except bis servile Melchites wouldsalute him as a man, a Christian, Ot a bishop. Yetsuch is the blindness of ambition, that when Paul wasexpelled ofl a charge of murder1, he solicited, with abribe of seven hundred pounds of gold, his restorationA to the same station of hatred and ignominy.
His successor Apollinaris entered the hostile


'city in military array, alike qualified for' prayeror for battle. His troops, under arms, were distributedthrough the streets; the gates of the cathedral wereguarded, and a chosen band was stationed in the choir,to defend the person of their chief. He stood erect dtthis throne, and throwing aside the upper garment ofa warrior, suddenly appeared before the eyes of the mul­titude in the robes of patriarch of Alexandria. Astonish­ment held them mute; but no sooner had Apollinarisbegan to read the tome of St. Leo, than a volley ofcurses, and invectives, and stones, assaulted the odious-minister of the emperor and the synod. A charge wasinstantly sounded by the successor of the apostles; thesoldiers waded to their knees in blood, and two hun­dred thousand Christians are said to have fallen by thesrword ; an incredible account, even if it be extended fromtire slaughter of a day to the eighteen years of the reignof Apollinaris. Two succeeding patriarchs, Enlogius*


h Eulogius, who had been a monk of Ant inch , was more conspicuous for subtletythan eloquence. He proves that the enemies of the faith, the Gaianites and Theodo-sians, ought not io be reconciled; that the same proposition may be orthodox in themuuth of St. Cyril, heretical in that of Severus; that the opposite assertions of St.Leo are equally trne, &£. Ilia writings are no longer extant, except in the ex­tracts- of Photius, who had pdrtlsed them with care and satisfaction. Cod. -'Hi. 325—317. 230. 880.







OCR Output








CHAP. LII. 509


the Greeks, the apostate was slain before her walls, andhis African friends were reduced to the necessity offeeding on the flesh of their own horses. In their turnthey were relieved by a powerful reinforcement of theirbrethren of Andalusia: the largest and western part ofthe island was gradually reduced, and the commodiousharbour of Palermo was chosen for the seat of the navaland military power of the Saracens. Syracuse preservedabout fifty years the faith which she had sworn to Christand to Caesar. In the last and fatal siege, her citizensdisplayed some remnant of the spirit which had former­ly resisted the power of Athens and Carthage. Theystood above twenty days against the battering-rams andcatapult tf, the mines and tortoises of the besiegers; andthe place might have'been relieved, if the mariners of theimperial fleet had not been detained at Constantinoplein building a church to the Virgin Mary. The dea­con Theodosius, with the bishop and clergy, was drag­ged in chains from the altar to Palermo, cast into a sub­terraneous dungeon, and exposed to the hourly peril ofdeath or apostacy. His pathetic, and not inelegantcomplaint, may be read as the epitaph of his country.'1From the Roman conquest to this final calamity, Syra­cuse, now dwindled to the primitive isle of Ortygea,had insensibly declined. Yet the relics were still pre­cious; the plate of the cathedral weighed five thousandpounds of silver; the entire spoil was computed at onemillion of pieces of gold (about four hundred thousandpounds sterling), and the captives must outnumber theseventeen thousand Christians who were transportedfrom the sack of Tauromenium into African servitude.In Sicily the religion and language of the Greeks wereeradicated; and such was the docility of the rising ge­neration, that fifteen thousand boys were circumcised


f The narrative or lamentation of Theodosius is transcribed and illustrated byPagi. (Critica, torn. 3. p. 719, &c.) Conatantine Porphyrogenitus (in Vit. Basil,c. 69, 70. p. 190—192.) mentions the loss of Syracuse and the triumph of thedemons.







OCR Output








CHAP. LII. 525


and respectful demeanour, the happiness of their subjectsand the security of their frontier. They were supplantedby one of those adventurers so frequent in the annals ofthe east, who left his trade of a brazier (from whence theThe Sof- name of Soffarides) for the profession of a robber^"P"' In a nocturnal visit to the treasure of the prince8?2—90?. of Sistan, Jacob, the son of Leith, stumbled overa lump of salt, which he unwarily tasted with his tongue.Salt, among the orientals, is the symbol of hospitality,and the pious robber immediately retired without spoilor damage. The discovery of this honourable behaviourrecommended Jacob to pardon and trust; he led anarmy at first for his benefactor, at last for himself, sub­dued Persia, and threatened the residence of the Abbas-sides. On his march towards Bagdad, the conquerorwas arrested by a fever. He gave audience in bed to theambassador of the caliph; and beside him on a tablewere exposed a naked scimitar, a crust of brown bread,and a bunch of onions. If I die (said he), your masteris delivered from his fears. If I live, this must deter­mine between us. If lam vanquished, lean return with­out reluctance to the homely fare of my youth. Fromthe height where he stood, the descent would not havebeen so soft or harmless: a timely death secured his ownrepose and that of the caliph, who paid with the mostlavish concessions the retreat of his brother Amrou tothe palaces of Shiraz and Ispahan. The Abbassideswere too feeble to contend, too proud to forgive: they.l^ Sa. invited the powerful dynasty of the Samanides,mamdes, wno passed the Oxus with ten thousand horse,ar*—999 so poor, that their stirrups were of wood; so bravethat they vanquished the Soffarian army, eight timesmore numerous than their own. The captive Amrou wassent in chains, a grateful offspring to the court of Bagdad,and as the victor was content with the inheritance ofTransoxiania and Chorasan, the realms of Persia returnedfor awhile to the allegiance of the caliphs. The pro-







OCR Output








CHAP. LIT. 531


troops, on whom, at this moment, I shall not hesitate tobestow the name of Romans. In the double city ofMopsuestia, which is divided by the river Sarus, twohundred thousand Moslems were predestined to deathor slavery/ a surprising degree of population, whichmust at least include the inhabitants of the dependantdistricts. They were stirrotmded and taken by assault;but Tarsus was reduced by the slow progress of famine;and no sooner had the Saracens yielded on honourableterms, than they were mortified by the distant and un­profitable view of the naval succours of Egypt. Theywere dismissed with a safe conduct to the confinesof Syria: a part of the old Christians had quietly livedunder their] dominion, and the vacant habitations werereplenished by a new colony. But the mosch wasconverted into a stable; the pulpit was delivered tothe flames; many rich crosses of gold and gems, thespoils of Asiatic churches, were made a grateful of­fering to the piety or avarice of the emperor; and hetransported the gates of Mopsuestia and Tarsus, whichwere fixed in the wall of Constantinople, an eternal mo-invasion of nunient of his victory. After they had forcedSyria. an(j secured the narrow passes of mount Amanus,the two Roman princes repeatedly carried their armsinto the heart of Syria. Yet, instead of assaulting thewalls of Antioch, the humanity or superstition of Nice-phorus appeared to respect the ancient metropolis of theeast: he contented himself with drawing round the citya line of circumvallation; left a stationary army; andinstructed his lieutenant to expect, without impatience,the return of spring. But in the depth of winter, in adark and rainy night, an adventurous subaltern, withthree hundred soldiers, approached the rampart, applied
"Ducenta fere mi Ilia hominum numerabat urbs (Abulfeda. Annal. Moslem, p.231.) ot'Mopsupstia, or Mafifa, Mampsysta, Mansista, Mamista, as it is corruptly,or perhaps more correctly, styled in the middle ages. (Wesseling.Itinerar. p. 580.)Yet I cannot credit this extreme populousness a few yean after the testimony of theemperor Leo, m> yap wo\wrx,iflia frfunu T»C KiXifi gafSijw; isnv. ^(Tactica, c. IS.in Meuraii Oper. torn. 6. p. 817.)







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 393


lous: the turrets glittered from afar; an ample spacewas covered with public and private buildings; and thecitizens were illustrious by their spirit, or at least by theirpride, by their riches, or at least by their luxury. Inthe days of Paganism, both Emesa and Heliopolis wereaddicted to the worship of Baal, or the sun; but thedecline of their superstition and splendour has beenmarked by a singular variety of fortune. Not a vestigeremains of the temple of Emesa, which was equalled inpoetic style to the summits of mount Libanus," while theruins of Baalbec, invisible to the writers of antiquity,excite the curiosity and wonder of the European travel­ler.1' The measure of the temple is two hundred feet inlength, and one hundred in breadth: the front is adornedwith a double portico of eight columns; fourteen maybe counted on either side; and each column, forty-fivefeet in height, is composed of three massy blocks of stoneor marble. The proportions and ornaments of the Co­rinthian order express the architecture of the Greeks;but as Baalbec has never been the seat of a monarch,we are at a loss to conceive how the expense of thesemagnificent structures could be supplied by private ormunicipal liberality.0 From the conquest of Damascus


• Emess fastigia celsa renident
Nam diffusa solo latus explicat; ac subit auras
Tunibus in ccelum nitentibus: incola Claris
Cor stndiis acuit ....
Denique flammicomo devoti pectora soli
Vitam agitant. Libanus frondosa cacnmina turget,
Et tamen his certant celsi fastigia templi.
These verses of the Latin version of Rufus Avienus are wanting in the Greek ori­ginal of Dionysius 1 and since they are likewise unnoticed by Eustathius, I must,with Fabricius (Bibliot. Latin, torn. 3. p. 153. edit. Erneeti), and against Sahnasins,(ad Vopiscum, p. 366,367. in Hist. August.) ascribe them to the fancy rather thanto the MSS. of Avienus.
6 I am much better satisfied with Maundrell's slight octavo (Journey, p. 134—139.) than with the pompous folio of Dr. Pocock; (Description of the East, vol. 2.p. 106—113.) but every preceding account is eclipsed by the magnificent, descrip­tion and drawings of MM. Dawkins and Wood, who have transported into Eng­land the ruins of Palmyra and Baalbec.
c The orientals explain the prodigy by a never-failing expedient. The edifices ofBaalbec were constructed by the fairies or the genii. (Hist, de Timour Bee, torn.3.lib. 5. c. 23. p. 311, 312. Voyage d'Otter, torn. 1. p. 83.) With less absurdity, butwith equal ignorance, Abulfeda and Ibn Chaukel ascribe them to the Sabsans orAadites. Nonsunt inomni Syria sdificiamagnificentiorahis. (Tabula Syris, p. 103.)







OCR Output








374 ROiMAN EMPIRE.


the victorious Arabs. To their industry, the prosperityof the province, the Sogdiana of the ancients, may in agreat measure be ascribed; but the advantages of thesoil and climate had been understood and cultivatedsince the reign of the Macedonian kings. Before theinvasion of the Saracens, Carizme, Bochara, and Samar-cand, were rich and populous under the yoke of theshepherds of the north. These cities were surroundedwith a double wall; and the exterior fortification, of alarger circumference, enclosed the fields and gardens ofthe adjacent district. The mutual wants of India andEurope were supplied by the diligence of the Sogdianmerchants; and the inestimable art of transforming lineninto paper, has been diffused from the manufacture ofSamarcand over the western world."
II. No sooner had Abubeker restored the unity
Invasion *
of Syria, of faith and government, than he dispatched a'circular letter to the Arabian tribes.—In the nameof the most merciful God, to the rest of the true believers.Health and happiness, and the mercy and blessing of Godbe upon you. I praise the most high God, and I pray forhis prophet Mahomet. This is to acquaint you, that Iintend to send the true believers into Syria* to take it outof the hands of the infidels. . And I would have you know,that the fighting for religion is an act of obedience to God.His messengers returned with the tidings of pious andmartial ardour which they had kindled in every province;


™ A curious description of Samarcand is inserted in the Bibliotheca Arabico-Hispana, torn, 1. p. 308, &c. The librarian Casiri (torn. 2. 9.) relates, from cre­dible testimony, that paper was first imported from China to Samarcand, A. H.3O, and invented, or rather introduced at Mecca, A. H. 88. The Escnrial librarycontains paper MSS. as old as the fourth or fifth century of the Hegira.
* A separate history of the conquest of Syria has been composed by AI Wakidi,cadi of Bagdad, who was bom A. D. 748, and died A. D. 822; he likewise wrotethe conquest of Egypt, of Diarbekir, &c. Above the meagre and recent chroniclesof the Arabians, Al Wakidi has the double merit of antiquity and copiousness.His tales and traditions afford an artless picture of the men and the times. Yethis narrative is too often defective, trifling, and improbable. Till something bettershall be found, his learned and spirited interpreter, (Ockley, in his History of theSaracens, vol. 1. p. 21—342.) will not deserve the petulant animadversion ofReiske. (Prodidagmata ad Hagji Chalifce Tabulas, p. 236.) I am sorry to thinkthat the labours of Ockley were consummated in a jail. (See his two prefaces tothe first vol. A. D. 1708, to the second, 1718, with the list of authors at the end.)







OCR Output








184 ROMAN EMPIRE.


The various denominations of men afforded a fund ofprejudice and aversion, of small account in the villagesof Anatolia or Thrace, but which, in the fortune of asoldier, a prelate, or a eunuch, might be often connectedwith the powers of the church and state.
Of such adventurers, the most fortunate wasiconoclast, the emperor Leo III.' who, from the moun-


,sUC tains of Isauria, ascended the throne of the
726^840 eas*' ^e was ignorant of sacred and profaneletters; but his education, his reason, perhapshis intercourse with the Jews and Arabs, had inspiredthe martial peasant with a hatred of images; and itwas held to be the duty of a prince, to impose on hissubjects the dictates of his own conscience. But inthe outset of an unsettled reign, during ten years of toiland danger, Leo submitted to the meanness of hypo­crisy, bowed before the idols, which he despised, and sa­tisfied the. Roman pontiff with the annual professions ofhis orthodoxy and zeal. In the reformation of religion,his first steps were moderate and cautious; he assembleda great council of senators and bishops, and enacted withtheir consent, that all the images should be removed fromthesanctuary and altar to a properheight in the churches,where they might be visible to the eyes, and inaccessibleto the superstition, of the people. But it was impossibleon either side to check the rapid though adverse impulseof veneration and abhorrence: in their lofty position, thesacred images still edified their votaries and reproachedthe tyrant. He was himself provoked by resistance and


lib. *. p. 258.) The Armenian churches are still content with the cross; (Missionstin Levant, torn. 3. p. 148.) but surely the superstitious Greek is unjust to the su­perstition of the Germans of the twelfth century.
• Our original, but not impartial, monuments of the Iconoclasts must be drawnfrom the Acts of the Councils, (torn. 8. and 9.) Collect . Lnbbr. edit . Venet . andthe historical writings of Theophanes, Nicephoras, Manasses, Cedrenus, Zonaraa,&c. Of the modem Catholics, Baronius, Pagi, Natalis Alexander, (Hist. Eccles.Seculum 8. and 9.) and Maimbourg, (Hist . des Conoclastes) have treated thesubject with learning, passion, and credulity. The Protestant labours of FrederickSpanheim (Historia Imaginarum Restitnta) and James Basnage, (Hist . desEglises Reformers, torn. t. lib. 23. p. 1339 — 1385.) are cast into the Icouoclastscale. With this mutual aid, and opposite tendency, it is easy for us to poise thebalance with philosophic indifference.







OCR Output








170 ROMAN E.MPIRE.


who had sense to choose, and severity to punish. Heprohibited the inhuman practice of pillaging the goodsand persons of shipwrecked mariners; the provinces,so long the objects of oppression or neglect, revived inprosperity and plenty; and millions applauded thedistant blessings of his reign, while he was cursed bythe witnesses of his daily cruelties. The ancient pro^verb, that blood-thirsty is the man who returns frombanishment to power, had been applied with too muchtruth to Marius and Tiberius; and was now verified forthe third time in the life of Andronicus. His memorywas stored with a black list of the enemies and rivals,who had traduced his merit, opposed his greatness, orinsulted his misfortunes; and the only comfort of hisexile was the sacred hope and promise of revenge. Thenecessary extinction of the young emperor and his mo­ther, imposed the fatal obligation of extirpating thefriends, who hated, and might punish, the assassin: andthe repetition of murder rendered him less willing, andless able, to forgive. A horrid narrative of the victimswhom he sacrificed by poison or the sword, by the seaor the flames, would be less expressive of his cruelty,than the appellation of the Halcyon-days, which wasapplied to a rare and bloodless week of repose: the ty­rant strove to transfer, on the laws and the judges, someportion of his guilt; but the mask was fallen, and hissubjects could no longer mistake the true author of theircalamities. The noblest of the Greeks, more especiallythose who, by descent or alliance, might dispute theComnenian inheritance, escaped from the monster's den:Nice or Prusa, Sicily or Cyprus, were their places of re­fuge: and as their flight was already criminal, they ag­gravated their offence by an open revolt, and the impe­rial title. Yet Andronicus resisted the daggers andswords of his most formidable enemies: Nice and Prusawere reduced and chastised: the Sicilians were contentwith the sack of Thessalonica; and the distance of Cy-







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVH. 81


wretchedness of the Greek patriarch and his diminutivecongregation.1
vi.The VI. TheCopticpatriarch,arebeltotheCaesars,^"Tand or a slave to the khalifs, still gloried in the filialWOBIANs. obedience of the kings of Nubia and ^Ethiopia.He repaid their homage by magnifying their greatness;and it was boldly asserted that they could bring into thefield a hundred thousand horse with an equal number ofcamels ;m that their hand could pour out or restrain thewaters of the Nile ;n and the peace and plenty of Egyptwas obtained, even in this world, by the intercession ofthe patriarch. In exile at Constantinople, Theodosiusrecommended to his patroness the conversion of theblack nations of Nubia," from the tropic of Cancer tothe confines of Abyssinia. Her design was suspectedand emulated by the more orthodox emperor. The rivalmissionaries, a Melchite and a Jacobite, embarked atthe same time; but the empress, from a motive of loveor fear, was more effectually obeyed; and the Catholicpriest was detained by the president of Thebais, whilethe king of Nubia and his court were hastily baptizedin the faith of Dioscorus. The tardy envoy of Justinian


'The history of the Copts, their religion, manners, &c. may be found in the abb*Renandot's motley work, neither a translation nor an original; theChroniconOrientale of Peter, a Jacobite; in the two versions of Abraham Ecchellensis,Paris, 1651, and John Simon Asseman, Venet. 1729. These annals descend nolower than the thirteenth century. The more recent accounts must be searchedfor in the travellers into Egypt, and the Nouveaux Memoires des Missions duLevant. In the last century, Joseph Abodacnus, a native of Cairo, published atOxford, in thirty pages, a slight Flistoria Jacobitarum, 147 post 150.
• About the year 737. See Renaudot, Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p. 321, Z2S.Eimacin, Hist. Saracen, p. 99.
» Ludolph. Hist. /T'.thiopic. et Comment.lib. 1. c. 8. Renaudot, Hist. Patriarch.Alex. 480, ore. This opinion, introduced into Egypt and Europe by the artifice ofthe Copts, the pride of the Abyssinians, the fear and ignorance of the Turks andArabs, has not even the semblance of truth. The rains of Ethiopia do not, in theincrease of the Nile, consult the will of the monarch. If the river approaches atNapata, within three days' journey of the Red Sea, (see D'Anville's maps) a canalthat should divert its course would demand, and most probably surpass, the powerof the Caesars.
• The Abyssinians, who still preserve the features and olive complexion of theArabs, afford a proof that two thousand years are not sufficient to change the co­lour of the human race. The Nubians, and African race, are pure negroes, asblack as those of Senegal or Congo, with flat noses, thick lips, and woolly hair.(Buffon, Hint. Naturelle, torn. 5. p. 117.143,144. 166. 219. edit, in 12mo. Paris,1769.) The ancients beheld, without much attention, the extraordinary pheno­menon which has exercised the philosophers and theologians of modern rimes.
VOL. VT. O







OCR Output








CHAP. LII. 507


dained by their own writers, who were ignorant of thefame of Jupiter and Minos, but it had not been over­looked by the Byzantine historians, who now begin tocast a clearer light on the affairs of their own times.1A band of Andalusian volunteers, discontented with theclimate or government of Spain, explored the adven­tures of the sea; but as they sailed in no more than tenor twenty galleys, their warfare must be branded withthe name of piracy. As the subjects and sectaries ofthe white party, they might lawfully invade the domi­nions of the black caliphs. A rebellious faction intro­duced them into Alexandria ;ra they cut in pieces bothfriends and foes, pillaged the churches and the moschs,sold above six thousand Christian captives, and main­tained their station in the capital of Egypt, till theywere oppressed by the forces and the presence of Al-mamon himself. From the mouth of the Nile to theHellespont the islands and sea-coasts both of the Greeksand Moslems were exposed to their depredations; theysaw, they envied, they tasted, the fertility of Crete, andsoon returned with forty galleys to a more serious attack.The Andalusians wandered over the land fearless andunmolested; but when they descended with their plun­der to the sea-shore, their vessels were in flames, andtheir chief, Abu Caab, confessed himself the author ofthe mischief. Their clamours accused his madness ortreachery: Of what do you complain? replied the crafty


3. p. 343—544.) Although Crete is styled by Homer, nitipx, by Dionysius Xmttfn« xai suBm;. 1 cannot conceive that mountainous island to surpass, or equal, infertility, the greater part of Spain.
1 The most authentic and circumstantial intelligence is obtained from the fourbooks of the Continuation of Theophanes, compiled by the pen or the command ofConstantine Porphyrogenitus, with the life of his father Basil the Macedonian.(Scriptores post Theophanem, p. 1—162. a Francis. Combesis, Paris, 1685.) Theloss of Crete and Sicily is related, lib. 2. p. 46—52. To these we may add thesecondary evidence of Joseph Genesius, (lib. 2. p. 21. Venet. 1733.) GeorgeCedrenus, (Compend. p. 506—508.) and John Scylitzes Curopalata. (apud Baron.Annal. Eccles. A. 13. 827, no. 24, &c.) But the modern Greeks are such noto­rious plagiaries, that I should only quote a plurality of names.
m Renaudot (Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p. 251—256. 268—270.) has described theravages of the Andalusian Arabs in Egypt, but has forgot to connect them with theconquest of Crete.







OCR Output








CHAP. LI I. 481


more probably the vanity, of the commander of thefaithful. From the Pyrennees, Abderame proceededwithout delay to the passage of the Rhone and the siegeof Arles. An army of Christians attempted the relief ofthe city: the tombs of their leaders were yet visible inthe thirteenth century; and many thousands of their deadbodies were carried down the rapid stream into the Me­diterranean sea. The arms of Abderame were not lesssuccessful on the side of the ocean. He passed withoutopposition the Garonne and Dordogne, which unite theirwaters in the gulf of Bourdeaux; but he found, beyondthose rivers, the camp of the intrepid Eudes, who hadformed a second army, and sustained a second defeat, sofatal to the Christians, that, according to their sad con­fession, God alone could reckon the number of the slain.The victorious Saracen overran the provinces of Aqui-tain, whose Gallic names are disguised, rather than lost,in the modern appellations of Perigord, Saintogne, andPoitou: his standards were planted on the walls, or atleast before the gates, of Tours and of Sens; and his de­tachments overspread the kingdom of Burgundy as faras the well-known cities of Lyons and Besan^on. Thememory of these devastations, for Abderame did notspare the country or the people, was long preserved bytradition; and the invasion of France by the Moors, orMahometans, affords the ground-work of those fables,which have been so wildly disfigured in the romances ofchivalry, and so elegantly adorned by the Italian muse.In the decline of society and art, the deserted cities couldsupply a slender booty to the Saracens; their richestspoil was found in the churches and monasteries, whichthey stripped of their ornaments and delivered to theflames: and the tutelar saints, both Hilary of Poitiersand Martin of Tours, forgot their miraculous powers inthe defence of their own sepulchres/ A victorious line


1 With regard to the sanctuary of St. Martin of Tours, Roderic Ximenes accusesthe Saracens of the dad. Turonis civitatem, ecclesiam et palatia vastatione etincendio simili diruit et consnmpsit. The continuator of Fredegarius imputes to
V OL. VI. 2 I







OCR Output








382 ROMAN EMPIRE.


his single lance maintained a flying fight against thirtyRomans, who were detached by Werdan ; and after kill­ing or unhorsing seventeen of their number, Derar re­turned in safety to his applauding brethren. Whenhis rashness was mildly censured by the general, he ex­cused himself with the simplicity of a soldier. Nay(said Derar), / did not begin first: but they came out totake me, and I was afraid that God should see me turnmy back: and indeed I fought in good earnest, and with­out doubt God assisted me against them; and had I notbeen apprehensive of disobeying your orders, I should nothave'Come away as 1 did; and Iperceive already that theywill fall into our hands. In the presence of both armies, avenerable Greek advanced from the ranks with a liberaloffer of peace; and the departure of the Saracens wouldhave been purchased by a gift to each soldier of a turban,a robe, and a piece of gold; ten robes, and a hundredpieces to their leader; one hundred robes, and a thou­sand pieces to the caliph. A smile of indignation ex­pressed the refusal of Caled. Ye Christian dogs, youknow your option: the Koran, the tribute, or the sword.We are a people whose delight is in war, rather than inpeace; and we despise your pitiful alms; since we shaUspeedily be masters of your wealth, your families, and yourpersons. Notwithstanding this apparent disdain, hewas deeply conscious of the public danger: those whohad been in Persia, and had seen the armies of Chos-roes, confessed that they never beheld a more formidablearray. From the superiority of the enemy, the artfulSaracen derived a fresh incentive of courage. You seebefore you (said he) the united force of the- Romans: youcannot hope to escape, but you may conquer Syria in asingle day. The event depends on your discipline and pa­tience. Reserve yourselves till the evening. It was inthe evening that the prophet was accustomed to vanquish.During two successive engagements, his temperate firm­ness sustained the darts of the enemy, and the murmurs







OCR Output








CHAP. LII. 523


sidered as the second visible cause of the decline and fallof the caliphs.'


Revolt of third and most obvious cause was the
the pro- weight and magnitude of the empire itself. TheA.D.^OO caliph Almamon might proudly assert, that it waseasier for him to rule the east and the west, thanto manage a chess board of two feet square;* yet I sus­pect, that in both those games he was guilty of manyfatal mistakes; and I perceive, that in the distant pro­vinces the authority of the first and most powerful of theAbbassides was already impaired. The analogy of des­potism invests the representative with the full majesty ofthe prince; the division and balance of powers mightrelax the habits of obedience, might encourage the pas­sive subject to inquire into the origin and administrationof civil government. He who is born in the purple isseldom worthy to reign; but the elevation of a privateman, of a peasant perhaps, or a slave, affords a strongpresumption of his courage and capacity. The viceroyof a remote kingdom aspires to secure the property andinheritance of his precarious trust; the nations must re­joice in the presence of their sovereign; and the commandof armies and treasures are at once the object and the in­strument of his ambition. A change was scarcely visibleas long as the lieutenants of the caliph were content withtheir vicarious title; while they solicited for themselvesor their sons a renewal of the imperial grant, and stillmaintained on the coin, and in the public prayers, thename and prerogative of the commander of the faithful.But in the long and hereditary exercise of power, theyassumed the pride and attributes of royalty; the alter­native of peace or war, of reward or punishment, de­pended solely on their will; and the revenues of the go­


1 For the sect of the Caxmathians, consult Elmacin, (Hist. Saracen, p. 219. 224.229. 231. 2S8. 241. 243.) Abulpharagius, (Dynast p. 179—182.) Abulfeda, (Annal.Moslem, p. 218, 219, &c. 245. 265. 274.) and d'Herbelot. (Bibliotheque Orientale,p. 256 — 258. 635.) I find some inconsistencies of theology and chronology, whichit would not be easy nor of much importance to reconcile.
k Hyde, Syntagma Dissertat. torn. 2. p. 57. in Hist. Shahiludii.







OCR Output








 


1001987650


 


Bibliotecade Catalunya







OCR Output








ROMAN EMPIRE.


The silence and death of the prophet restoredAimbe- the liberty of the people; and his companions&S9, convened an assembly to deliberate on the choiceune 7; of ^is successor. The hereditary claim and loftyspirit of Ali, were offensive to an aristocracy of elders,desirous of bestowing and resuming the sceptre by a freeand frequent election: the Koreish could never be recon­ciled to the proud pre-eminence of the line of Hashem;the ancient discord of the tribes was rekindled; ihe fu­gitives of Mecca and the auxiliaries of Medina assertedtheir respective merits, and the rash proposal of choosingtwo independent caliphs would have crushed in their in­fancy the religion and empire of the Saracens. The tu­mult was appeased by the disinterested resolution ofOmar, who suddenly renouncing his own pretensions,stretched forth his hand, and declared himself the firstsubject of the mild and venerable Abubeker. The ur­gency of the moment, and the acquiescence of the people,might excuse this illegal and precipitate measure; butOmar himself confessed from the pulpit, that if any Mus­sulman should hereafter presume to anticipate the suf­frage of his brethren, both the elector and the electedwould be worthy of death.' After the simple inaugu­ration of Abubeker, he was obeyed in Medina, Mecca,and the provinces of Arabia; the Hashemites alone de­clined the oath of fidelity; and their chief, in his ownhouse, maintained, above six months, a sullen and inde­pendent reserve; without listening to the threats ofOmar, who attempted to consume with fire the habitation,of the daughter of the apostle. The death of Fatima, andthe decline of his party, subdued the indignant spirit ofAli; he condescended to salute the commander of thefaithful, accepted his excuse of the necessity of pre-
« Ockley, (Hist, of the Saracens, vol. 1. p. 5, 6.) fron/an Arabian MS. repre­sents Ayesha as adverse to (he substitution of her father in the place of the apostle.This fact, so improbable in itself, is unnoticed by Abulfeda, Al Jannabi, and Al Bo-chari, the last of whom quotes the tradition of Ayesha herself. (Vit, Mohammed.p. 136. Vie de Mahomet torn. 3. p. 236.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIf. 95


scended from the throne with indignation, and soughta refuge in the female apartment of the palace. Thereign of Constantine III. lasted only one hundred andthree days: he expired in the thirtieth year of his age,and although his life had been a long malady, a beliefwas entertained that poison had been the means, andhis cruel step-mother the author, of his untimely fate.Heracie- Martina reaped indeed the harvest of hisAJD. 64i, death, and assumed the government in the nameM3?*5. of the surviving emperor; but the incestuouswidow of Heraclius was universally abhorred; the jea­lousy of the people was awakened, and the two orphanswhom Constantine had left, became the objects of the'public care. It was in vain that the son of Martina,who was no more than fifteen years of age, was taughtto declare himself the guardian of his nephews, one ofwhom he had presented at the baptismal font: it wasin vain that he swore on the wood of the true cross, todefend them against all their enemies. On his death­bed, the late emperor dispatched a trusty servant to armthe troops and provinces of the east in the defence ofhis helpless children: the eloquence and liberality ofValentin had been successful, and, from his camp ofChalcedon, he boldly demanded the punishment of theassassins, and the restoration of the lawful heir. Thelicence of the soldiers, who devoured the grapes anddrank the wine of their Asiatic vineyards, provoked thecitizens of Constantinople against the domestic authorsof their calamities, and the dome of St. Sophia re-echo­ed, not with prayers and hymns, but with the clamoursand imprecations of an enraged multitude. At theirimperious command, Hejacleonas appeared in the pul­pit with the eldest of the royal orphans; Constans alonewas saluted as emperor of the Romans, and A crown ofgold, which had been taken from the tomb of Hera­clius, was placed on his head, with the solemn benedic­tion of the patriarch. But in the tumult of joy and in-







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 363


Arabs had fixed themselves on the verge of the desert;and Hira was the seat of a race of kings who had em­braced the Christian religion, and reigned above sixhundred years under the shadow of the throne of Persia.qThe last of the Mondars was defeated and slain by Ca-led: his son was sent a captive to Medina; his noblesbowed before the successor of the prophet: the peoplewere tempted by the example and success of their coun­trymen: and the caliph accepted as the first-fruits offoreign conquest, an annual tribute of seventy thousandpieces of gold. The conquerors, and even their historians,were astonished by the dawn of their future greatness.In the same year (says Elmacin) Cakdfought many sig­nal battles; an immense multitude of the infidels wereslaughtered; and spoils, infinite and innumerable, wereacquired by the victorious Moslems.* But the invincibleC aled was soon transferred to the Syrian war: the invasionof the Persian frontier was conducted by less active or lessprudent commanders: the Saracens were repulsed withloss in the passage of the Euphrates; and, though theychastised the insolent pursuit of the Magians, their re­maining forces still hovered in the desert of Babylon.
The indignation and fears of the Persians sus-
Battleof j j f .1 • • . *• j. • •
Cadesia, penoed tor a moment their intestine divisions.'By the unanimous sentence of the priests andnobles, their queen Arzema was deposed; the sixth ofthe transient usurpers, who had arisen and vanished inthree or four years, since the defeat of Chosroes and theretreat of Heraclius. Her tiara was placed on the headof Yezdegerd, the grandson of Chosroes; and the same


q Pocock will explain the chronology, (Specimen Hist. Arabum, p. 66. 74.) andd'Anville the'geography, (1'Euphrateet le Tigre, p. 125.) of the dynasty of the Al-mondars. The English scholar understood more Arabic than the mafti of Aleppo;(Ockley, vol. 2. p. 34.) the French geographer is equally at home in every age andevery climate of the world.
•' Fecit et Chaled plurima in hoc anno proelia, in quihus urn.nut. Muslimi, et iufi-delium immen8& multitudine occisft spolia infinita et innumera sunt nacti. (Hist.Saracenica, p. 20.) The Christian annalist slides into the national and compen­dious term of infidels, and loften adopt (I hope without scandal) this characteristicmode of expression.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 4


guished three hundred years after the death of theirtyrant. Under the protection of the Gothic confede­rates, the church of the Arians of Constantinople hadbraved the severity of the laws; their clergy equalledthe wealth and magnificence of the senate; and thegold and silver, which were seized by the rapacioushand of Justinian, might perhaps be claimed as the spoilsof the provinces and the trophies of the barba-'rians. A second remnant of Pagans, who stilllurked in the most refined and the most rustic condi­tions of mankind, excited the indignation of the Chris­tians, who were perhaps unwilling that any strangersshould be the witnesses of their intestine quarrels. Abishop was named as the inquisitor of the faith, and hisdiligence soon discovered, in the court and city, themagistrates, lawyers, physicians, and sophists, who stillcherished the superstition of the Greeks. They weresternly informed that they must choose without delaybetween the displeasure of Jupiter or Justinian, andthat their aversion to the gospel could no longer bedisguised under the scandalous mask of indifferenceor impiety. The patrician Photius perhaps alone wasresolved to live and to die like his ancestors: he en­franchised himself with the stroke of a dagger, andleft his tyrant the poor consolation of exposing withignominy the lifeless corpse of the fugitive. Hisweaker brethren submitted to their earthly monarch,underwent the ceremony of baptism, and laboured, bytheir extraordinary zeal, to erase the suspicion, or toexpiate the guilt, of idolatry. The native country ofHomer, and the theatre of the Trojan war, still retainedthe last sparks of his mythology: by the care of thesame bishop, seventy thousand Pagans were detectedand converted in Asia, Phrygia, Lydia, and Caria;ninety-six churches were built for the new proselytes;and linen vestments, Bibles, and liturgies, and vases ofgold and silver, were supplied by the pious munifi­







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 357


fused the terror of their arms; and the appearance ofmilitary force revived and confirmed the loyalty of thefaithful. The inconstant tribes accepted, with humblerepentance, the duties of prayer, and fasting, and alms;and, after some examples of success and severity, themost daring apostates fell prostrate before the sword ofthe Lord and of Caled. In the fertile province of Ya-manah,* between the Red sea and the gulf of Persia, ina citynot inferior to Medina itself, a powerful chief, hisname was Moseilama, had assumed the character of aprophet, and the tribe of Hanifa listened to his voice. Afemale prophetess was attracted by his reputation: thedecencies of words and actions were spurned by these fa­vourites of heaven ;b and they employed several days inmystic and amorous converse. An obscure sentence ofhis Koran, or book, is yet extant ;c and, in the pride ofhis mission, Moseilama condescended to offer a partitionof the earth. The proposal was answered by Mahometwith contempt: but the rapid progress of the impostorawakened the fears of his successor; forty thousandMoslems were assembled under the standard of Caled;and the existence of their faith was resigned to the eventof a decisive battle. In the first action, they were re­pulsed with the loss of twelve hundred men; but the


a See the description of the city and country of Al Yamanah, in Abulfeda, 1 ><•-script. Arahi»-, p. 60, 61. In the thirteenth century, there were some mins, and afew palms: but in the present century, the same ground is occupied bythe vision*and arms of a modern prophet, whose tenets are imperfectly known. (Niebuhr,Description de 1'Arabie, p. 296—301.)
'• Their first salutation may be transcribed, but cannot be translated. It wa»thus that Moseilama said or sung :—
Surge tandem itaque strenue permolenda, nam stratus tibi thorus eat.
Ant in propatulo tentoriosi velis, aut in abditiorecubiculou malis;
Aut suspinam te 1mmi exporrectam fustigabo, si velis, aut si malis manibus iit-dibusque nixarn.
Aut si veins ejus (Priapi) gemino triente, aut si mails totus veniarn.
Imo, totus venito, O Apostole Dei clamabat fsmina. Id ipsum diceba..
Moseilama mihi quoque suggessit Deus.
The prophetess Segjah, after the fall of her lover, returned to idolatry; but, underthe reign of Moawiyah, she became a Mussulman, and died atBassora. (Abulfeda,Anna), vers. Keiske, p. 63.
*' See this text, which demonstrates a god from the work of generation, in Abul-pharagius (Specimen Hist. Arabum, p. 13. and Dynast, p. 105.) and Abulfeda.(Annal. p. 63.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 205


lity; his father had been the saviour of Christendom;and the claims of personal merit were repeated andennobled in a descent of four generations. The nameand image of royalty were still preserved in the lastdescendant of Clovis, the feeble Childeric; but his ob­solete right could only be used as an instrument ofsedition: the nation was desirous of restoring the sim­plicity of the constitution; and Pepin, a subject and aprince, was ambitious to ascertain his own rank and thefortune of his family. The mayor and the nobles werebound, by an oath of fidelity, to the royal phantom:the blood of Clovis was pure and sacred in their eyes;and their common ambassadors addressed the Romanpontiff, to dispel their scruples, or to absolve their pro­mise. The interest of pope Zachary, the successor ofthe two Gregories, prompted him to decide, and todecide in their favour: he pronounced that the nationmight lawfully unite, in the same person, the title andauthority of king; and that the unfortunate Childeric,a victim of the public safety, should be degraded,shaved, and confined in a monastery for the remainderof his days. An answer so agreeable to their wisheswas accepted by the Franks, as the opinion of a casuist,the sentence of a judge, or the oracle of a prophet: theMerovingian race disappeared from the earth; andPepin was exalted on a buckler by the suffrage of afree people, accustomed to obey his laws and to marchunder his standard. His coronation was twice per­formed, with the sanction of the popes, by their mostfaithful servant St. Boniface, the apostle of Germany,and by the grateful hands of Stephen HI. who, in themonastery of St. Denys, placed the diadem on the headof his benefactor. The royal unction of the kings ofIsrael was dexterously applied,"1 the successor of St. Peter


k Not absolutely for the first time. On a less conspicuous theatre it had beenused, in the sixth and seventh centuries, by the provincial bishops of Britain andSpain. The royal unction of Constantinople was borrowed from the Latins in thehvst age of the empire. Coostantine Manasses mentions that of Charlemagne as a







OCR Output








326 ROMAN EMPIRE.


terprise.' The Moslems were discouraged: they allegedthe want of money, or horses, or provisions; die seasonof harvest, and the intolerable heat of the summer: Hellis much hotter, said the indignant prophet. He dis­dained to compel their service; but on his return he ad­monished the most guilty, by an excommunication offifty days. Their desertion enhanced the merit of Abu-beker, Othman, and the faithful companions who devotedtheir lives and fortunes; and Mahomet displayed his ban­ner at the head of ten thousand horse and twenty thou­sand foot. Painful indeed was the distress of the march:lassitude and thirst were aggravated by the scorchingand pestilential winds of the desert: ten men rode byturns on the same camel; and they were reduced to theshameful necessity of drinking the water from the bellyof that useful animal. In the midway, ten days' journeyfrom Medina and Damascus, they reposed near the groveand fountain of Tabuc. Beyond that place Mahometdeclined the prosecution of the war: he declared him­self satisfied with the peaceful intentions; he was moreprobably daunted by the martial array of the emperorof the east. But the active and intrepid Caled spreadaround the terror of his name; and the prophet receivedthe submission of the tribes and cities from the Euphratesto Ailah, at the head of the Red sea. To his Christiansubjects, Mahomet readily granted the security of theirpersons, the freedom of their trade, the property of theirgoods, and the toleration of their worship.11 The weak­


'The expedition to Tabuc is recorded by our ordinary historians, Abulfed* (Vit.Moharn. p. 123—12T.) and Gagnier; (Vie de Mahomet, torn. 3. p. 147—163.)Imt we have the advantage of appealing to the original evidence of the K oran,(c. 9. p. 154. 165.) with Sale's learned and rational notes.
t The Dij'lomu tecurilatit Aitemibut, is attested by Ahmed Ben Joseph, ami tb0author Li&ri Sfleudorum; (Gagnier, Not. ad Abulfedam, p. 125.) but Abulfedahimself, as well as Elmacin, (Hist. Saracen, p. 11-.; though he own.-, Mahomet'sregard for the Christians, (p. I3-) only mentions peace and tribute. In the \t-ar1630, Sionlta published at raris the text and version of Mahomet's patent in fa­vour of tin- Christiana, which was admitted; and reprobated by the opposite twtaof Salmasius andGrotius. (Bayle, MAUoIIET, Kern. AA.) Hottinger doubts of itsauthenticity; (Hist. Orient* p. 237.) Renaudot urges the content of the Maho­metans. - (Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p. 169.)butMofeheim(Hist.Ecotes.p. i44.)ahe»»the futility of their opinion, and inclines to believe it spurious. Yet Abulpharagiu*







OCR Output








372 ROMAN EMPIRE.


of prosperity and peace; and his dominion was acknow­ledged by forty-four hordes of the barbarians of Tartary.His last garrisons of Cashgar and Khoten maintaineda frequent intercourse with their neighbours of the Jax-artes and Oxus; a recent colony of Persians had intro­duced into China the astronomy of the Magi; and Tait-song might be alarmed by the rapid progress anddangerous vicinity of the Arabs. The influence andperhaps the supplies of China revived the hopes of Yez-degerd and the zeal of the worshippers of fire; and hereturned with an army of Turks to conquer the inheri­tance of his fathers. The fortunate Moslems, withoutunsheathing their swords, were the spectators of his ruinand death. The grandson of Chosroes was betrayed byhis servant, insulted by the seditious inhabitants ofMerou,and oppressed, defeated, and pursued by his barbarianallies. He reached the banks of a river, and offered hisrings and bracelets for an instant passage in a miller'sboat. Ignorant or insensible of royal distress, the rusticreplied, that four drachms of silver were the daily profitof his mill, and that he would not suspend his work un­less the loss were repaid. In this moment of hesitationand delay, the last of the Sassanian kings was overtakenand slaughtered by the Turkish cavalry in the nineteenthyear of his unhappy reign.p His son Firuz, an humbleclient of the Chinese emperor, accepted the station ofcaptain of his guards; and the Magian worship was longpreserved by a colony of loyal exiles in the province ofBucharia. His grandson inherited the regal name; butafter a faint and fruitless enterprise, he returned to China,and ended his days in the palace of Sigan. The maleline of the Sassanides was extinct; but the female cap­tives, the daughters of Persia, were given to the conque­rors in servitude, or marriage: and the race of the caliphs
P I hare endeavoured to harmonize the various narratives of Elmacin, (Ili-i.Saracen, p. 37.) Abulpharagius, (Dynast, p. 116.) Abulfeda, (Annal. p. 74. 79.)and d'Herbelot. (p. 485.) The end of Yezdegerd was not only unfortunate, butobscure.







OCR Output








154 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the limits of the empire were enlarged in Europe andAsia; and the Comnenian sceptre was transmitted tohis children of the third and fourth generation. Yetthe difficulties of the times betrayed some defects in hischaracter, and have exposed his memory to some justor ungenerous reproach. The reader may possibly smileat the lavish praise which his daughter so often bestowson a flying hero: the weakness or prudence of his situa­tion might be mistaken for a want of personal courage;and his political arts are branded by the Latins with thenames of deceit and dissimulation. The increase of themale and female branches of his family adorned thethrone and secured the succession: but their princelyluxury and pride offended the patricians, exhausted therevenue, and insulted the misery of the people. Annais a faithful witness that his happiness was destroyed,and his health was broken, by the cares of a public life:the patience of Constantinople was fatigued by the lengthand severity of his reign; and before Alexius expired,he had lost the love and reverence of his subjects. Theclergy could not forgive his application of the sacredriches to the defence of the state; but they applaudedhis theological learning and ardent zeal for the orthodoxfaith, which he defended with his tongue, his pen, andhis sword. His character was degraded by the supersti­tion of the Greeks: and the same inconsistent principleof human nature enjoined the emperor to found a hos­pital for the poor and infirm, and to direct the execu­tion of a heretic, who was burnt alive in the square ofSt. Sophia. Even the sincerity of his moral and reli­gious virtues was suspected by the persons who hadpassed their lives in his familiar confidence. In his lasthours, when he was pressed by his wife Irene to alterthe succession, he raised his head, and breathed a piousejaculation on the vanity of this world. The indignantreply of the empress may be inscribed as an epitaph onhis tomb, You die as you have lived—A HYPOCRITE!







OCR Output








150 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the two candidates were distinguished by the surnamesof Bryennius and Botaniates; the former in the matu­rity of wisdojn and courage, the latter conspicuous onlyby the memory of his past exploits. While Botaniatesadvanced with cautious and dilatory steps, his activecompetitor stood in arms before the gates of Constan­tinople. The name of Bryennius was illustrious: hiscause was popular; but his licentious troops could notbe restrained from burning and pillaging a suburb; andthe people, who would have hailed the rebel, rejectedand repulsed the incendiary of his country. This changeof the public opinion was favourable to Botaniates, whoat length, with an army of Turks, approached the shoresofChalcedon. A formal invitation, in the name of thepatriarch, the synod, and the senate, was circulatedthrough the streets of Constantinople; and the generalassembly, in the dome of St. Sophia, debated withorder and calmness, on the choice of their sovereign.The guards of Michael would have dispersed this un­armed multitude; but the feeble emperor, applaudinghis own moderation and clemency, resigned the ensignsof royalty, and was rewarded with the monastic habit,and the title of archbishop of Ephesus. He left a son,a Constantine, born and educated in the purple; anda daughter of the house of Ducas illustrated the blood,and confirmed the succession, of the Comnenian dy­nasty.
John Comnenus, the brother of the emperorIsaac, survived in peace and dignity his gene-D. rous refusal of the sceptre. By his wife Anne,a woman of masculine spirit and policy, heleft eight children; the three daughters multi­plied the Comnenian alliances with the noblest ofthe Greeks; of the five sons, Manuel was stopped by apremature death; Isaac and Alexius restored the impe­rial greatness of their house, which was enjoyed withouttoil or danger by the two younger brethren, Adrian andNicephorus. Alexius, the third and most illustrious of







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 193


of justice is in the hands of the magistrate; the moreformidable weapon of excommunication is intrusted tothe clergy; and in the exercise of their divine commis­sion, a zealous son will not spare his offending father:the successor of St. Peter may lawfully chastise thekings of the earth. "You assault us, O tyrant! witha carnal and military hand: unarmed and naked, wecan only implore the Christ, the prince of the heavenlyhost, that he will send unto you.a devil, for the de­struction of your body and the salvation of your soul.You declare, with foolish arrogance, I will dispatch myorders to Rome; I will break in pieces the image ofSt. Peter; and Gregory, like his predecessor Martin,shall be transported in chains, and in exile, to the footof the imperial throne. Would to God, that I might bepermitted to tread in the footsteps of the holy Martin;but may the fate of Constans serve as a warning to thepersecutors of the church. After his just condemnationby the bishops of Sicily, the tyrant was cut off, in thefulness of his sins, by a domestic servant; the saint isstill adored by the nations of Scythia, among whom heended his banishment and his life. But it is our dutyto live for the edification and support of the faithfulpeople; nor are we reduced to risk our safety on theevent of a combat. Incapable as you are of defendingyour Roman subjects, the maritime situation of the citymay perhaps expose it to your depredation; but wecan remove to the distance of four-and-twenty stadia1 to
the first fortress of the Lombards, and then you
may pursue the winds. Are you ignorant that thepopes are the bond of union, the mediators of peace be­tween the east and west? The eyes of the nations arefixed on our humility; and they revere, as a god upon
a-raiix vir^tapim a A;y is-*-./; PK/UHC lif tm


;.T=>l 5ii-;cv TOU?aut/Mtit. (Ki'ist. 1. p. Mil.) This proximity of the Lombards ishard of digestion. Camillo Pellegrini (Dissert 4. de Decatfl Beneventi, in theScript . liul. torn. 5. p. 172, 173.) forcibly reckons the twenty-fourth stadia, notfrom Rome, but from the limits of the Roman dutchy, to the first fortress, perhapsSora, of the Lombards. 1 rather believe that Gregory, with the pedantry of theage, employs itadia for miles, without much inquiry into the genuine measure.
VOL. VI. O (







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 453


with his two governments his two sons, Abdullah andAbdelaziz. His long triumph, from Ceuta to Damas­cus, displayed the spoils of Afric and the treasures ofSpain: four hundred Gothic nobles, with gold coronetsand girdles, were distinguished in his train: and thenumber of male and female captives, selected for theirbirth or beauty, was computed at eighteen, or even atthirty, thousand persons. As soon as he reached Tibe­rias in Palestine, he was apprized of the sickness anddanger of the caliph, by a private message from Soliman,his brother and presumptive heir; who wished to reservefor his own reign the spectacle of victory. Had Walidrecovered, the delay of Musa would have been criminal:he pursued his march, and found an enemy on the throne.In his trial before a partial judge, against a popular an­tagonist, he was convicted of vanity and falsehood; anda fine of two hundred thousand pieces of gold either ex­hausted his poverty or proved his rapaciousness. Theunworthy treatment of Tarik was revenged by a similarindignity; and the veteran commander, after a publicwhipping, stood a whole day in the sun before the palacegate, till he obtained a decent exile$ under the piousname of a pilgrimage to Mecca. The resentment of thecaliph might have been satiated with the ruin of Musa,but his fears demanded the extirpation of a potent andinjured family. A sentence of death was intimated withsecrecy and speed to the trusty servants of the throneboth in Africa and Spain: and the forms, if not the sub­stance, of justice were superseded in this bloody execu­tion. In the mosch or palace of Cordova, Abdelazizwas slain by the swords of the conspirators; they accusedtheir governor of claiming the honours of royalty: andhis scandalous marriage with Egilona, the widow of Ro-deric, offended the prejudices both of the Christians andMoslems. By a refinement of cruelty, the head of theson was presented to the father, with an insulting ques­tion, whether he acknowledged the features of the rebel?







OCR Output








CHAP. LI 409


merchant of Edessa, who is said to have laden nine hun­dred camels with the weight of the brass metal: an enor­mous weight, though we should include the hundredcolossal figures,0 and the three thousand statues, whichadorned the prosperity of the city of the sun.Egypt. II. The conquest of Egypt may be explainedand aie of ty ^e character of the victorious Saracen, one ofAmiou. the first of nis nation, in an age when the meanestof the brethren was exalted above his nature by the spi­rit of enthusiasm. The birth of Amrou was at once baseand illustrious: his mother, a notorious prostitute, wasunable to decide among five of the Koreish; but theproof of resemblance adjudged the child to Aasi, theoldest of her lovers.d The youth of Amrou was impelledby the passions and prejudices of his kindred: his poeticgenius was exercised in satirical verses against the per­son and doctrine of Mahomet; his dexterity was em­ployed by the reigning faction to pursue the religiousexiles who had taken refuge in the court of the Ethio­pian king.* Yet he returned from this embassy a secretproselyte; his reason or his interest determined him torenounce the worship of idols; he escaped from Meccawith his friend Caled, and the prophet of Medina enjoyedat the same moment the satisfaction of embracing thetwo firmest champions of his cause. The impatience ofAmrou to lead the armies of the faithful was checked bythe reproof of Omar, who advised him not to seek powerand dominion, since he who is a subject to-day, may bea prince to-morrow. Yet his merit was not overlookedby the two first successors of Mahomet; they were in­debted to his arms for the conquest of Palestine; and inall the battles and sieges of Syria, he united with the


c Centum colossi ahum nobilitaturi locum, says Pliny, with his usual spirit.Hist , Natur. 34.18.
d We learn this anecdote from a spirited old woman, who reviled to their facesthe caliph and his friend. She was encouraged by the silence of Amrou and thnliberality of Moawiyah. (Abulfeda, Annal. Moslem, p. 111.)
» Gagnier. Vie de Mahomet, torn. 2. p. 46, &c. who quotes the Abyssinian his­tory, or romance of Abdel Balcides. Yet the fact of the embassy and ambassadormay be allowed.







OCR Output








270 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Mahomet, during which their swords were religiouslysheathed both in foreign and domestic hostility; andthis partial truce is more strongly expressive of thehabits of anarchy and warfare.1"
Their so- But ^e spi"t of rapine and revenge was at-ciaj.quaii- tempered by the milder influence of trade and
Scations r J—.. ...
andvir- literature. The solitary peninsula is encom-iiea' passed by the most civilized nations of the an­cient world: the merchant is the friend of mankind:and the annual caravans imported the first seeds ofknowledge and politeness into the cities, and even thecamps of the desert. Whatever may be the pedigreeof the Arabs, their language is derived from the sameoriginal stock with the Hebrew, the Syriac, and theChaldean tongues; the , independence of the tribeswas marked by their peculiar dialects ;q but each, aftertheir own, .allowed a just preference to the pure andperspicuous idiom of Mecca. In Arabia as well.as inGreece, the perfection of language outstripped the re­finement of manners; and her speech could diversifythe fourscore names of honey, the two hundred of aserpent, ,the five hundred of a lion, the thousand of asword, at a time when this copious dictionary was in­trusted to the memory of an illiterate people. Themonuments of the Homerites were inscribed with anobsolete and mysterious character; but the Cufic let-tersi the groundwork of- the present alphabet, were in­vented on the banks of the Euphrates; and the recentinvention was taught at Mecca by a stranger who set­tled in that city after the birth of Mahomet. The arts


i' I'rocopins (de Bell. Persic. lih. I. c. 16.) places tin- tico boly months about thesummer solstice. The Arabians consecrate four months of the year—the first, se-rcnth, eleventh, and twelfth; and pretend, that in a long series of ages the tracewas infringed only four or six times. (Sale's Preliminary Discourse, p. 147—150.and Notes on the ninth chapter of the Koran, p. 154, &c: Casiri, Bibllot , Hiapano-Arabica, torn. 2. p. 20, 21.)
i Arrian, in the second century, remarks (in Peripla Maris Erythraei, p. 12.)the partial or total difierence of the dialects of the Arabs. Their language andletters are copiously treated by Pocock, (Specimen, p. 150—154.) Casiri, (Bi-bliot. Hispano-Arabica, torn. 1. p. 1. 83. 292. torn. 2. p. 25, &c.) and Niebnhr.(Description de 1'Arabic, p. 72—86.) I pass slightly; I am not fond of repeat­ing words like a parrot.







OCR Output








420 ROMAN EMPIRE.


thousand baths of the city; and such was their incredi­ble multitude, that six months were barely sufficient forthe consumption of this precious fuel. Since the dy­nasties of Abulpharagius" have been given to the worldin a Latin version, the tale has been repeatedly tran­scribed; and every scholar, with pious indignation, hasdeplored the irreparable shipwreck of the learning, thearts, and the genius, of antiquity. For my own part, Iam strongly tempted to deny both the fact and the con­sequences. The fact is indeed marvellous. Read andwonder! says the historian himself: and the solitaryreport of a stranger who wrote at the end of six hundredyears on the confines of Media, is overbalanced by thesilence of two annalists of a more early date, both Chris­tians, both natives of Egypt, and the most ancient ofwhom, the patriarch Eutychius, has amply described theconquest of Alexandria.11 The rigid sentence of Omaris repugnant to the sound and orthodox precept of theMahometan casuists: they expressly declare that thereligious books of the Jews and Christians, which areacquired by the right of war, should never be committedto the flames; and that the works of profane science,historians or poets, physicians or philosophers, may belawfully applied to the use of the faithful.0 A moredestructive zeal may perhaps be attributed to the firstsuccessors of Mahomet: yet in this instance, the con­flagration would have speedily expired in the deficiencyof materials. I shall not recapitulate the disasters ofthe Alexandrian library, the involuntary flame that waskindled by CaBsar in his own defence/ or the mischievous


» Abulpharag. Dynast, p. 114. vers. Pocock. Audi quid factum sit et mirare.It would be endless to enumerate the modems who have wondered and believed,but I may distinguish with honour the rational scepticism of Renaudot: (Hist.Alex. Patriarch, p. 170.) historia habet aliquid «riarw ut Arabibus familiare est.
b This curious anecdote will be vainly sought in the annals of Eutychius and theSaracenic history of Elmacin. The silence of Abulfeda, Murtadi, and a crowd ofMoslems, is less conclusive from their ignorance of Christian literature.
* See Reland, de Jure Militari Mohammedanorum, in his third volume of Dis­sertations, p. 37. The reasons for not burning the religious books of the Jew sChristians, is derived from the respect that is due to the namt of God.
* Consult the collections of Frensheim (Supplement. Livum. c. 12. 43.) and







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 25S


his throne on the ruins of Christianity and of Rome.The genius of the Arabian prophet, the manners of hisnation, and the spirit of his religion, involve the causesof the decline and fall of the eastern empire; and oureyes are curiously intent on one of the most memorablerevolutions which have impressed a new and lastingcharacter on the nations of the globe.3
In the vacant space between Persia, Syria,tim of Egypt, and Ethiopia, the Arabian peninsula11may be conceived as a triangle of spacious butirregular dimensions. From the northern point of Bel«acon the Euphrates, a line of fifteen hundred miles isterminated by the straits of Babelmandel and the landof frankincense. About half this length may be allowedfor the middle breadth from east to west, from Bassorato Suez, from the Persian gulf to the Red sea.d Thesides of the triangle are gradually enlarged, and the


1 As in this and the following chapter I shall display much Arabic learning, Imust profess my total ignorance of the oriental tongues, and my gratitude to thelearned interpreters, who have transfused their science into the Latin, French,and English languages. Their collections, versions, and histories, 1 shall occa­sionally notice.
k The geographers of Arabia may be divided into three classes.—1. The Grecla andlatins, whose progressive know ledge may be traced in Agatharcides,(de Mari Rubro,in Hudson, Oeograph. Minor, torn. 1.) Diodorus Siculus, (torn. 1. lib. 3. p. 159—•167. lib. 3. p. 311—*16. edit. Wesseling) Strabo, (lib. 16. p. 1112—1114. fromEratosthenes, p. 1122—1132. from Artemidorus)Dionysius,(Periegesis,9i7—969.)Pliny, (Ilist. Natur. 5. 1 a. 6. 32.) and Ptolemy. (Dcscript. et Tabulae Urbium, inHudson, torn. 3.) 2. The Arabic writers, who have treated the subject with the zealof patriotism or devotion: the extracts of Pocock (Specimen Hist. Arabum, p. 125—128.) from the Geography of-the Sheriff al Kdrissi, render us still more dissatisfiedwith the version or abridgment (p. 24—27.44—56. 108, &C. 119, &c.) which theMaronites have published under the absurd title of Geographia Nubiensis; (Paris,1619.) but the Latin and French translators, Graves (in Hudson, torn. 3.) and Gal-land, (Voyage de la Palestine par la Roque, p. 265—346.) have opened to us theArabic of Abulfeda, the most copious and correct account of the peninsula, whichmay be enriched, however, from the Bibliotheque Orientale of D'Herbelot, p. I3O.et alibi passirn. 3. The European travelltrs, among whom Shaw (p. 438—155.) andNiebuhr (Description, 1773, Voyages, torn. 1. 1776.) deserve an honourable distinc­tion: Busching (Geographic par Beringer, torn. 8. p. 416—510.) has compiledwith judgment; and d Anville's maps (Orbis Veteribus Notus, and Ire Partie de1'Asie) should lie before the reader, with his Geographic Ancienne, torn. 2.p. 208—231.
» Abnlfed. Descript. Arabiae, p. 1. Danville, 1'Euphrate et le Tigre, p. 19, 3O.It was in this place, the paradise or garden of a satrap, that Xenophon and theGreeks first passed the Euphrates. (Anabasis, lib. 1. c. 10. p. 29. edit. Wells.)
'' Reland has proved, with much superfluous learning, 1. That our Red sea (theArabian gulf)is no more than apartof the Mar* iRubrum, the Epu8fii QaXiurirn of theancients, which was extended to the indefinite space of the Indian ocean. 2. Thatthe synonymous words fp3p; iuflio4-, alluded to the colour of the blacto or thenegroes. (Dissert. Miecell, torn, 1. p. 591—617.)







OCR Output








CHAP. I A. 465


of the church, the votes of a senate, or the memory of afree constitution. The authority of the companions ofMahomet expired with their lives; and the chiefs oremirs of the Arabian tribes left behind, in the desert, thespirit of equality and independence. The regal andsacerdotal characters were united in the successors ofMahomet; and if the Koran was the rule of their actions,they were the supreme judges and interpreters of thatdivine book. They reigned by the right of conquestover the nations of the east, to whom the name of libertywas unknown, and who were accustomed to applaud intheir tyrants the acts of violence and severity that wereexercised at their own expense. Under the last of theOmmiades, the Arabian empire extended two hundreddays' journey from east to west, from the confines of Tar-tary and India to the shores of the Atlantic ocean. Andif we retrench the sleeve of the robe, as it is styled bytheir writers, the long and narrow province of Africa, thesolid and compact dominion from Fargana to Aden, fromTarsus to Surat, will spread on every side to the measureof four or five months of the march of a caravan.1" Weshould vainly seek the indissoluble union and easy obe­dience that pervaded the government of Augustus andthe Antonines: but the progress of the Mahometan reli­gion diffused over this ample space a general resem­blance of manners and opinions. The language and lawsof the Koran were studied with equal devotion at Samar-cand and Seville: the Moor and the Indian embracedas countrymen and brothers in the pilgrimage of Mecca;and the Arabian language was adopted as the popularidiom in all the provinces to the westward of the Tigris."


'" See the article Eslamiah (as we say Christendom) in the Bibliotheque Orientate(p. 335.) This chart of the Mahometan world is suited by the author, Ebn Alwardi,to the year of the Hegira 385. (A. D. 995.) Since that time the losses in Spain havebeen overbalanced by the conquests in India, Tartary, and the European Turkey.
"The Arabic of the Koran .is taught asa dead language in the college of Mecca.By the Danish traveller, this ancient idiom is compared to the Latin; the vulgartongue of Hejaz and Yemen to the Italian; and the Arabian dialects of Syria,Egypt, Africa, &c. to the Proven9al, Spanish, and Portuguese. (Niebuhr, Descrip­tion de I'Arabie, p. 74, &c.)
VOL. VI. 2 H







OCR Output








300 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the idolaters, are sunk below each other in the abyss;and the lowest hell is reserved for the faithless hypo­crites who have assumed the mask of religion. Afterthe greater part of mankind has been condemned fortheir opinions, the true believers only will be judged bytheir actions. The good and evil of each Mussulmanwill be accurately weighed in a real or allegorical ba­lance, and a singular mode of compensation will be al­lowed for the payment of injuries: the aggressor willrefund an equivalent of his own good actions for thebenefit of the person whom he has wronged; and if heshould be destitute of any moral property, the weight ofhis sins will be loaded with an adequate share of thedemerits of the sufferer. According as the shares ofguilt or virtue shall preponderate, the sentence will bepronounced, and all, without distinction, will pass overthe sharp and perilous bridge of the abyss: but the in­nocent, treading in the footsteps of Mahomet, will glo­riously enter the gates of paradise, while the guilty willfall into the first and mildest of the seven hells. Theterm of expiation will vary from nine hundred to seventhousand years; but the prophet has judiciously pro­mised, that all his disciples, whatever may be their sins,shall be saved, by their own faith and his intercession,from eternal damnation. It is not surprising that super­stition should act most powerfully on the fears of hervotaries, since the human fancy can paint with moreenergy the misery than the bliss of a future life. Withthe two simple elements of darkness and fire, we createa sensation of pain, which may be aggravated to an in­finite degree by the idea of endless duration. But thesame idea operates with an opposite effect on the conti­nuity of pleasure; and too much of our present enjoy­ments is obtained from the relief, or the comparison, ofevil. It is natural enough that an Arabian prophetshould dwell with rapture on the groves, the fountains,and the rivers of paradise; but instead of inspiring the







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 18.5


invective: and his own party accused him of an imperfectdischarge of his duty, and urged for his imitation, theexample of the Jewish king, who had broken withoutscruple the brazen serpent of the temple. By a secondedict, he proscribed the existence as well as the use ofreligious pictures; the churches of Constantinople andthe provinces were cleansed from idolatry; the imagesof Christ, the Virgin, and the saints, were demolished,or a smooth surface of plaster was spread over the wallsof the edifice. The sect of the Iconoclasts was supportedby the zeal and despotism of six emperors, and the eastand west were involved in anoisy conflict of one hundredand twenty years. It was the design of Leo the Isau-rian to pronounce the condemnation of images, as anarticle of faith, and by the authority of a general council:but the convocation of such an assembly was reservedfor his son Constantine;' and though it is stigmatized bytriumphant bigotry as a meeting of fools and atheists,their own partial and mutilated acts betray many symp-Theirs toms of reason and piety. The debates andnod of decrees of many provincial synods introduc-
Constan- A 1 i .i i • ,
tinopie, ed the summons of the general council which'7o4'met in the suburbs of Constantinople, and wascomposed of the respectable number of three hundredand thirty-eight bishops of Europe and Anatolia; forthe patriarchs of Antioch and Alexandria were theslaves of the caliph, and the Roman pontiff had with­drawn the churches of Italy and the west from thecommunion of the Greeks. This Byzantine synod as­sumed the rank and powers of the seventh generalcouncil; yet even this title was a recognition of the sixpreceding assemblies which had laboriously built thestructure of the Catholic faith. After a serious delibera­


1 Some flowers of rhetorick are IounJ» trapm/un xai aS«v, and the bishops TOI; /ua-Tjuf fjri>. By Damascenus it is styled oxufo; xai nSfx-ro;. (Opera, torn. 1. p. 623.)Spanheim's Apology for the Synod of Constantinople (p. 171, &c.) is worked upwith troth and ingenuity, from such materials as he could find in the Nicene Acts,(p. 1046, &c.) The witty John of Damascus converts (urinuirouc into ivitmakes them xwxuiwXsut, slaves of their belly, &c. Opera, torn. 1. p. 306.







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 461


were overturned by the hostile fury of the Donatists, theVandals, and the Moors. The zeal and numbers of theclergy declined; and the people, without discipline, orknowledge, or hope, submissively sunk under the yokeof the Arabian prophet. Within fifty years after
'the expulsion of the Greeks, a lieutenant of Africainformed the caliph that the tribute of the infidels wasabolished by their conversion,' and, though he sought todisguise his fraud and rebellion, his specious pretencewas drawn from the rapid and extensive progress of theMahometan faith. In the next age, an extraor-
'dinary mission of five bishops was detached fromAlexandria to Cairoan. They were ordained by the Ja­cobite patriarch to cherish and revive the dying embersof Christianity:8 but the interposition of a foreign prelate,a stranger to the Latins, an enemy to the Catholics, sup­poses the decay and dissolution of the African hierarchy.It was no longer the time when the successor of St. Cy­prian, at the head of a numerous synod, could maintainan equal contest with the ambition of the Roman pontiff.A.D.1053 'n the eleventh century, the unfortunate priest—lore. wno was seated on the ruins of Carthage, im­plored the arms and the protection of the Vatican; andhe bitterly complains that his naked body had beenscourged by the Saracens, and that his authority wasdisputed by the four suffragans, the tottering pillars ofhis throne. Two epistles of Gregory VII.b are destinedto soothe the distress of the Catholics and the pride ofa Moorish prince. The pope assures the sultan that theyboth worship the same God, and may hope to meet inthe bosom of Abraham; but the complaint, that threebishops could no longer be found to consecrate a brother,


* The letter of Abdoulrahman, governor or tyrant of Africa, to the caliph AboulAbbas, the first of the Abbassides, is dated A.H. 132. (Cardonne, Hist, de I'Afriqueet de I'Espagne, torn. 1. p. 168.)
• Bibliotheque Orientale, p. 66. Renaudot, Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p. 287, 288.b Among the Epistles of the Popes, see Leo IX. epist. 3. Gregor. VII. lib. epist.
22, 23. lib. 3. epist. 19—21. and the criticisms of Pagi, (torn. 4. A. D. 1053.no. 1S.) who investigates the name and family of the Moorish prince, with whomthe proudest of the Roman pontiffs so politely corresponds.







OCR Output








78 ROMAN EMPIRE.


and John,' laboured in the conversion of heretics,with arms and arguments more worthy of their evange-Euiogius, lical profession. The theological knowledge ofA.D.580. Eulogius was displayed in many a volume, whichmagnified the errors of Eutyches and Severus, and at­tempted to reconcile the ambiguous language of St.Cyril with the orthodox creed of pope Leo and theJohn, fathers of Chalcedon. The bounteous alms ofA. D. 609. j0lfn the eleemosynary were dictated by super­stition, or benevolence, or policy. Seven thousandfive hundred poor were maintained at his expense; onhis accession, he found eight thousand pounds of goldin the treasury of the church; he collected ten thousandfrom the liberality of the faithful; yet the primate couldboast in his testament, that he left behind him no morethan the third part of the smallest of the silver coins.The churches of Alexandria were delivered to the Ca­tholics, the religion of the Monophysites was proscribedin Egypt, and a law was revived which excluded thenatives from the honours and emoluments of the state.Theirse a- ^ more important conquest still remained, ofrationand the patriarch, the oracle and leader of the Egyp-BCay' tian church. Theodosius had resisted the threatsand promises of Justinian with the spirit of an apostleor an enthusiast. Such (replied the patriarch), were theoffers of the tempter when he shewed the kingdoms ofthe earth. But my soul is far dearer to me than lifeor dominion. The churches are in the hands of a princewho can kill the body; but my conscience is my own; andin exile, poverty, or chains, I will steadfastly adhere tothe faith of my holy predecessors, Athanasius, Cyril, andDioscorus. Anathema to the tome of Leo and the synodof Chalcedon; Anathema to all who embrace their creed!


1 See the life of John the eleemosynary by his contemporary Leontius, bishop ofNeapolis in Cyprus, whose Greek text, either lost or hidden, is reflected in theLatin version of Baronius, (A. D. 619. no. 9. A. D. 629. no. 8.) Pagi, (Critica,torn. 2. p. 763.) and Fabricius, (lib. 5. c. 11. torn. 7. p. 454.) have made somecritical observations.







OCR Output








224 ROMAN EMPIRE.


in discipline, or in arms. The science of war has beenlost and revived with the arts of peace; but his campaignsare not illustrated by any siege or battle of singular diffi­culty or success; and he might behold, with envy, theSaracen trophies of his grandfather. After his Spanishexpedition, his rear-guard was defeated in the Pyreneanmountains; and the soldiers, whose situation was irre­trievable, and whose valour was useless, might accuse,with their last breath, the want of skill or caution of theirgeneral.* I touch with reverence the laws of Charle­magne, so highly applauded by a respectable judge. Theycompose not a system, but a series, of occasional and mi­nute edicts, for the correction of abuses, the reformationof manners, the economy of his farms, the care of hispoultry, and even the sale of his eggs. He wished toimprove the laws and the character of the Franks; andhis attempts, however feeble and imperfect, are deservingof praise: the inveterate evils of the times were suspend­ed or mollified by his government;11 but in his institu­tions I can seldom discover the general views and the im­mortal spirit of a legislator, who survives himself for thebenefit of posterity. The union and stability of his em­pire depended on the life of a single man; he imitatedthe dangerous practice of dividing his kingdoms amonghis sons; and, after his numerous diets, the whole con­stitution was left to fluctuate between the disorders ofanarchy and despotism. His esteem for the piety andknowledge of the clergy tempted him to intrust that as­piring order with temporal dominion and civil jurisdic­tion; and his son Lewis, when he was stripped and de­graded by the bishops, might accuse, in some measure,the imprudence of his father. His laws enforced the im­position of tithes, because the demons had proclaimed in


( In this action the famous Rutland, Rolando, Orlando, was slain—cum plan-tos alia. See the truth in Eginhard, (c. 9. p. 51—56.) and the fable in an inge­nious Supplement of M. Gaillard. (torn. 3. p. 474.) The Spaniards are too proud ofa victory which history ascribes to the Gascons, and Romance to the Saracens.
h Yet Schmidt, from the best authorities, represents the interior disorders andoppression of his reign. (Hist, des AllemaiuU, torn. t. p. 45—49.)







OCR Output








468 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Arabian fleet cast anchor, and the troops were disem­barked near the palace of Hebdomon, seven miles fromthe city. During many days, from the dawn of light tothe evening, the line of assault was extended from thegolden gate to the eastern promontory, and the foremostwarriors were impelled by the weight and effort of thesucceeding columns. But the besiegers had formed aninsufficient estimate of the strength and resources ofConstantinople. The solid and lofty walls were guardedby numbers and discipline: the spirit of the Romanswas rekindled by the last danger of their religion andempire: the fugitives from the conquered provincesmore successfully renewed the defence of Damascus andAlexandria; and the Saracens were dismayed by thestrange and prodigious effects of artificial fire. Thisfirm and effectual resistance diverted their arms to themore easy attempts of plundering the European andAsiatic coasts of the Propontis; and, after keeping thesea from the month of April to that of September, on theapproach of winter they retreated fourscore miles fromthe capital, to the isle of Cyzicus, in which they hadestablished their magazine of spoil and provisions. Sopatient was their perseverance, or so languid were theiroperations, that they repeated, in the six following sum­mers, the same attack and retreat, with a gradual abate­ment of hope and vigour, till the mischances of shipwreckand disease, of the sword and of fire, compelled them torelinquish the fruitless enterprise. They might bewailthe loss, or commemorate the martyrdom, of thirty thou­sand Moslems, who fell in the siege of Constantinople;and the solemn funeral of Abu Ayub, or Job, excitedthe curiosity of the Christians themselves. That vene­rable Arab, one of the last of the companions of Mahomet,
Baron de Tott, (torn. 3. p. 39— 97.) who was sent to fortify them against the Hus­sions. From a principal actor, I should have expected more accurate details;bathe seems to write for the amusement, rather than the instruction, of his reader*Perhaps, on the approach, of the enemy, the minister of Constantino was occupied,like that of Mustapha, in finding two Canary birds, who should sing precisely thesame note.







OCR Output








502 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the purity of taste, and the freedom of thought. Con­fident in the riches of their native tongue, the Arabiansdisdained the study of any foreign idiom. The Greekinterpreters were chosen among their Christian subjects;they formed their translations, sometimes on the originaltext, more frequently perhaps on a Syriac version; andin the crowd of astronomers and physicians, there is noexample of a poet, an orator, or even an historian, beingtaught to speak the language of the Saracens." Themythology of Homer would have provoked the abhor­rence of those stern fanatics; they possessed in lazy ig­norance the colonies of the Macedonians, and the pro­vinces of Carthage and Rome: the heroes of Plutarchand Livy were buried in oblivion; and the history of theworld before Mahomet was reduced to a short legend ofthe patriarchs, the prophets, and the Persian kings. Oureducation in the Greek and Latin schools may havefixed in our minds a standard of exclusive taste; and Iam not forward to condemn the litarature and judg­ments of nations, of whose language I am ignorant. YetI know that the classics have much to teach, and I believethat the orientals have much to learn: the temperate dig­nity of style, the graceful proportions of art, the formsof visible and intellectual beauty, the just delineation ofcharacter and passion, the rhetoric of narrative and ar­gument, the regular fabric of epic and dramatic poetry.*The influence of truth and reason is of a less ambiguouscomplexion. The philosophers of Athens and Romeenjoyed the blessings and asserted the rights, of civiland religious freedom. Their moral and political writ­ings might have gradually unlocked the fetters of eastern


• Abulpharagius (Dynast, p. 26.148.) mentions a Syriat version of Homer'stwo poems, by ThcophUus, a Christian Maronite of mount Libauus, who professedastronomy at Roha or Edessa, towards the end of the eighth century. His workwould be a literary curiosity. I have read somewhere, out I do not believe, thatPlutarch's Lives were translated into Turkish for the use of Mahomet the Second.
b I have persused with much pleasure, sir William Jones's Latin Commeatvyon Asiatic Poetry (London, 1774,in octavo), which was composed in the youth ofthat wonderful linguist. At present, in the maturity of his taste and judgment, hewould perhaps abate of the fervent, and even partial, praise which be has bestowedon the orientals.







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 271


of grammar, of metre, and of rhetoric, were unknownto the freeborn eloquence of the Arabians; but theirpenetration was sharp, their fancy luxuriant, their witstrong and sententious/ and their more elaborate com-Love of positions were addressed with energy and effectP0811?- to the minds of their hearers. The genius andmerit of a rising poet were celebrated by the applauseof his own and the kindred tribes. A solemn banquetwas prepared, and a chorus of women, striking theirtymbals, and displaying the pomp of their nuptials,sung in the presence of their sons and husbands thefelicity of their native tribe; that a champion had nowappeared to vindicate their rights; that a herald hadraised his voice to immortalize their renown. The dis­tant or hostile tribes resorted to an annual fair, whichwas abolished by the fanaticism of the first Moslems;a national assembly, that must have contributed to re­fine and harmonize the barbarians. Thirty days wereemployed in the exchange, not only of corn and wine,but of eloquence and poetry. The prize was disputedby the generous emulation of the bards; the victoriousperformance was deposited in the archives of princesand emirs, and we may read, in our own language, theseven original poems which were inscribed in letters ofgold, and suspended in the temple of Mecca.* TheArabian poets were the historians and moralists of theage; and if they sympathized with the prejudices, theyinspired and crowned the virtues, of their countrymen.The indissoluble'union of generosity and valour wasthe darling theme of their song; and when they pointed


'A familiar tale in Voltaire's Zadig (le Chien et le Cheval) is related to provetho natural sagacity of the Arabs, (d'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orient, p. 120. 121. Gag-nier, Vie de Mahomet, torn. 1. p. 37—16.) but d'Arvieux, or rather La Roque,(Voyage de Palestine, p. 92.) denies the boasted superiority of the Bedoweens.The one hundred and sixty-nine sentences of Ali (translated by Ockley, London,1718.) afford a just-and favourable specimen of Arabian wit.
• Pococt (Specimen, p. 158—161.) and Casira (Bibliot. Hispano-Arabica,torn. 1. p. 48. 84, &c. 119. torn. 2. p. 17, &c.) speak of the Arabian poets beforeMahomet: the seven poems of the Caaba have been published in English by sir'William Jones; but his honourable mission to India has deprived us of his ownnotes, far more interesting than the obscure and obsolete text.







OCR Output








432 ROMAN EMPIRE.


thousand of the natives might assemble in arms; but thenumber of three hundred and sixty towns is incompatiblewith the ignorance or decay of husbandry;' and a cir­cumference of three leagues will not be justified by theruins of Erbe or Lambesa, the ancient metropolis of thatinland country. As we approach the sea-coast, the well-known cities of Bugiak and Tangier1 define the more cer­tain limits of the Saracen victories. A remnant of tradestill adheres to the commodious harbour of Bugia, which,in a more prosperous age, is said to have contained abouttwenty thousand houses; and the plenty of iron whichis dug from the adjacent mountains might have supplieda braver people with the instruments of defence. Theremote position and venerable antiquity of Tingi, orTangier, have been decorated by the Greek and Arabianfables; but the figurative expressions of the latter, thatthe walls were constructed of brass, and that the roofswere covered with gold and silver, may be interpreted asthe emblems of strength and opulence. The provinceof Mauritania Tingitana, ™ which assumed the name ofthe capital, had been imperfectly discovered and settledby the Romans; the five colonies were confined to a nar­row pale, and the more southern parts were seldom ex­plored except by the agents of luxury, who searched theforests for ivory and the citron-wood," and the shores of


1 See Novairi (apud Otter, p. 118.) Leo Africanus (fol. 81, wjo), who reckonsonly cinque citta e infinite casal; Marmol, (Description de 1'Afrique, torn. 3. p. 33.)and Shaw. (Travels, p. 57. 65—68.)
k Leo Africanus, fol. 58. verso, 59. recto. Marmol, torn. 2. p. 415. Shaw,p. 43.
1 Leo African, fol. 52. Marmol, torn. 2. p. 228.
m Regio ignobilis, et vix quicquam illustre sortita, parvis oppidis habitatur, parvaflumina emittit, solo quam viris melior, et segnitie gentis obscura. PomponinsMela, 1. 5.3.10. Mela deserves the more credit, since his own Phoenician an­cestors had migrated from Tingitana to Spain. (See, in 2. 6. a passage of thatgeographer so cruelly tortured by Salmasius, Isaac Vossina, and the moat virulentof critics, James Gronovius.) He lived at the time of the final reduction of thatcountry by the emperor Claudius; yet almost thirty years afterward, Pliny (Hist.Nat. 5. 1.) complains of his authors, too lazy to inquire, too proud to confess theirignorance of that wild and remote province.
"The foolish fashion of this citron-wood prevailed at Rome among the men, asmuch as the taste for pearls among the women. A round board or table, foor orfive feet in diameter, sold for the price of an estate (latifundii tazatione), eight,ten, or twelve thousand pounds, sterling. (Plin. Hist. Natur. 13. 29.) 1 conceivethat I must not confound the tree citrui with that of the fruit cirrum. But I amnot botanist enough to define the former (it is like the wild cypress) by the vulgar







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 421


bigotry of the Christians, who studied to destroy themonuments of idolatry." But if we gradually descendfrom the age of the Antonines to that of Theodosius, weshall learn from a chain of contemporary witnesses, thatthe royal palace and the temple of Serapis no longer con­tained the four, or the seven, hundred thousand volumes,which had been assembled by the curiosity and magni­ficence of the Ptolemies/ Perhaps the church and seatof the patriarchs might be enriched with a repository ofbooks; but if the ponderous mass of Arian and Mono-physite controversy were indeed consumed in the pu blicbaths,g a philosopher may allow, with a smile, that it wasultimately devoted to the. benefit of mankind. I sin­cerely regret the more valuable libraries which havebeen involved in the ruin of the Roman empire: butwhen I seriously compute the lapse of ages, the waste ofignorance, and the calamities of war, our treasures, ratherthan our losses, are the object of my surprise. Manycurious and interesting facts are buried in oblivion; thethree great historians of Rome have been transmitted toour hands in a mutilated state, and we are deprived ofmany pleasing compositions of the lyric, iambic, anddramatic poetry of the Greeks. Yet we should grate­fully remember, that the mischances of time and acci­dent have spared the classic works to which the suffrageof antiquity11 had adjudged the first place of genius andglory: the teachers of ancient knowledge, who are still


Usher. (A nual, p. 469.) . Li vy himself had styled the Alexandrian library, elegan-tia regum cursque egregium opus; a liberal encomium, for which he is partlycriticised by the narrow stoicism of Seneca, ( De Tranquillitate Animi, c. 9.) whosewisdom, on this occasion, deviates into nonsense.
'See this History, vol. 5. p. 117.
'Aulus Gellius, (Noctes Attics, 6. 17.) Ammianus Marcellinui, (tZ. 16.) andOrosius. (lib. 6. c. 15.) They all speak in the post tense, and the words of Am­mianus are remarkably strong. fuerunt Bibliothecs innumerabiles; et loquiturmonumentorum veteran concinens fides, &c.
f Benaudot answers for versions of the Bible, Hexapla Catena PatrutD, Com­mentaries, Sfc. (p. 170.) Our Aleiandrian MS. if it came from Egypt, and notfrom Constantinople, or mount Athos, (Wetstein, Prolegorn. ad N. T. p. 8, &c.)might poisibly be among thern.
b I have often perused with pleasure a chapter of Quintilian, (Institut. Orator.10. 1.) in which that judicious critic enumerates and appreciates the series of Greekand Latin classics.







OCR Output








CHAP. L. -295


violate the harmony of nature; that a creed uncloudedwith mystery may be excused from miracles; and thatthe sword of Mahomet was not less potent than the rodof Moses.
Precepts The polytheist is oppressed and distracted bymet— ° the variety of superstition: a thousand rites offasting Egyptian origin were interwoven with the es-ala,*- sence of the Mosaic law and the spirit of the gos­pel had evaporated in the pageantry of the church. Theprophet of Mecca was tempted by prejudice, or policy,or patriotism, to sanctify the rites of the Arabians, andthe custom of visiting the holy stone of the Caaba. Butthe precepts of Mahomet himself inculcate a more simpleand rational piety: prayer, fasting, and alms, are the re­ligious duties of a Mussulman; and he is encouraged tohope, that prayer will carry him halfway to God, fasting-will bring him to the door of his palace, and alms willgain him admittance.' I. According to the tradition ofthe nocturnal journey, the apostle, in his persona! con­ference with the Deity, was commanded to. impose onhis disciples the daily obligation of fifty prayers. By theadvice of Moses, he applied for an alleviation of this in­tolerable burden; the number was gradually reduced tofive; without any dispensation of business or pleasure,or time or place, the devotion of the faithful is repeatedat day-break, at noon, in the afternoon, in the evening,and at the first watch of the night; and, in the presentdecay of religious fervour, our travellers are edified bythe profound humility and attention of the Turks andPersians. Cleanliness is the key of prayer: the frequentlustration of the hands, the face, and the body, which


1 The most authentic account of these precepts, pilgrimage, prayer, fasting, alms,and ablutions, is extracted from the Persian ami Arabian theologians by Maracci.(Prodrorn. part 4. p. 9—24.) Reland, (in his excellent treatise de Keligiooe Mo-hammedici, Uttecht, 1717, p. 67—1X3.) and Chardin. (Voyages en Perse* tarn. 4.p. 47—195*) Maracci is a partial accuser; bat the jeweller, Chardin, had theeyes of a philosopher; and Rotund, a judicious student, had travelled over the eastin his closet at Utrecht. The fourteenth letter of Tournefort (Voyage du Levant,torn. 2. p. 325—360, in octavo) describes what he had seen of the religion of theTuilu.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 129


fund was appropriated to each service; and a publicmethod secured the interest of the prince and the pro­perty of the people. After reforming the luxury, he as­signed two patrimonial estates to supply the decentplenty, of the imperial table: the contributions of thesubject were reserved for his defence; and the residuewas employed in the embellishment of the capital andprovinces. A taste for building, however costly, maydeserve some praise and much excuse; from thence in­dustry is fed, art is encouraged, and some object is at­tained of public emolument or pleasure; the use of aroad, an aqueduct, or an hospital, is obvious and solid;and the hundred churches that arose by the commandof Basil, were consecrated to the devotion of the age.In the character of a judge he was assiduous and impar­tial; desirous to save,, but not afraid to strike: the op­pressors of the people were severely chastised; but hispersonal foes, whom it might be unsafe to pardon, werecondemned, after the loss of their eyes, to a life of so­litude and repentance. The change of language andmanners demanded a revision of the obsolete jurispru­dence of Justinian: the voluminous body of his insti­tutes, pandects, code, and novels, was digested underforty titles, in the Greek idiom; and the Basilics, whichwere improved and completed by his son and grandson,must be referred to the original genius of the founderof their race. This glorious reign was terminated byan accident in the chase. A furious stag entangled hishorns in the belt of Basil, and raised him from his horse;he was rescued by an attendant, who cut the belt andslew the animal; but the fall, or the fever, exhaustedthe strength of the aged monarch, and he expired in thepalace, amidst the tears of his family and people. If hestruck off the head of the faithful servant, for presumingto draw his sword against his sovereign, the pride ofdespotism, which had lain dormant in his life, revived inVOL. VI, K







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 151


the brothers, was endowed by nature with the choicestgifts both of mind and body: they were cultivated by aliberal education, and exercised in the school of obedi­ence and adversity. The youth was dismissed from theperils of the Turkish war, by the paternal care of theemperor Romanus; but the mother of the Comneni,with her aspiring race, was accused of treason, and ba­nished, by the sons of Ducas, to an island in the Pro-pontis. The two brothers soon emerged into favour andaction, fought by each other's side against the rebels andbarbarians, and adhered to the emperor Michael, till hewas deserted by the world and by himself. In his firstinterview with Botaniates, Prince (said Alexius, witha noble frankness), my duty rendered me your enemy;the decrees of God and of the people have made meyour subject. Judge of my future loyalty by my pastopposition. The successor of Michael entertained himwith esteem and confidence: his valour was employedagainst three rebels, who disturbed the peace of the em­peror, or at least of the emperors. Ursel, Bryennius,and Basilacius, were formidable by their numerous forcesand military fame: they were successively vanquishedin the field, arid led in chains to the foot of the throne;and whatever treatment they might receive from a timidand cruel court, they applauded the clemency, as well asthe courage, of their conqueror. But the loyalty of theComneni was soon tainted by fear and suspicion; nor isit easy to settle between a subject and a despot, the debtof gratitude, which the former is tempted to claim by arevolt, and the latter to discharge by an executioner.The refusal of Alexius to march against a fourth rebel,the husband of his sister, destroyed the merit or memoryof his past services: the favourites of Botaniates pro­voked the ambition which they apprehended and accused;and the retreat of the two brothers might be justified bythe defence of their life or liberty. The women of thefamily were deposited in a sanctuary, respected by ty-







OCR Output








CHAP. LI I. 491


some hesitation, Almansor, the brother and successor ofSaffah, laid the foundations of Bagdad," the imperialseat of his prosperity during a reign of five hundredyears.' The chosen spot is on the eastern bank of theTigris, about fifteen miles above the ruins of Modain:the double wall was of a circular form; and such wasthe rapid increase of a capital, now dwindled to a pro­vincial town, that the funeral of a popular saint might beattended by eight hundred thousand men and sixty thou­sand women of Bagdad and the adjacent villages. Inthis city of peace," amidst the riches of the east, the Ab-bassides soon disdained the abstinence and frugality ofthe first caliphs, aud aspired to emulate the magnificenceof the Persian kings. After his wars and buildings Al­mansor left behind him in gold and silver about thirtymillions sterling ;* and this treasure was exhausted in afew years by the vices or virtues of his children. Hisson Mahadi, in a single pilgrimage to Mecca, expendedsix millions of dinars of gold. A pious and charitablemotive may sanctify the foundation of cisterns and cara-vanseras, which he distributed along a measured road ofseven hundred miles; but his train of camels, ladenwith snow, could serve only to astonish the natives ofArabia, and to refresh the fruits and liquors of the royal


•The geographer d'Anville, (1'Euphrate et leTigre, p. 121—123.) and the orien­talist d'Herbelot, (Bibliotheque, p. 167,168.) may suffice for the knowledge ofBagdad. Our travellers, Pietro della Valle, (torn. 1. p. 688—698.) Tavernier,(torn. 1. p. 230—238.) Thevenot, (part 2. p. 209—212.) Otter, (torn. 1. p. 162—168.) and Niebuhr, (Voyage en Arabic, torn. 2. p. 239—271.) have seen only itsdecay: and the Nubian geographer, (p. 204.) and the travelling Jew, Benjamm ofTudela, (Itinerarium, p. 112—123. a Const I'Empereur, apud Elzevir, 1633.) arethe only writers of my acquaintance who have known Bagdad under the reign ofthe Abbassides.
lThe foundations of Bagdad were laid A. H. 145. A. D. 762. Mostasem, the lastof the Abbassides, was taken and put to death by the Tartars, A. H. 656, A. D.1258, the 20th of February.
• Medinat al Salem, Dar al Salern. Urbs pads,or, as is more neatly compoundedby the Byzantine writers, EipnwroXi; (Irenopolis). There is some dispute concern­ing the etymology of Bagdad, but the first syllable is allowed to signify a gardenin the Persian tongue; the garden of Dad, a Christian hermit, whose cell had beenthe only habitation on the spot.
* Refiquit in alrario sexcenties millies mille stateres, et quater et vicies milliesmille aureos aureos. Elmacin, Hist. Saracen, p. 126. 1 have reckoned the goldpieces at eight shillings, and the proportion of the silver as twelve to one. But Inil! never answer for the numbers of Erpenius; and the Latins are scarcely abovethe savages in the language of arithmetic.







OCR Output








CHAP. LII. 469


was numbered among the ansars, or auxiliaries, of Me­dina, who sheltered the head of the flying prophet. Inhis youth he fought, at Beder and Ohud, under the holystandard: in his mature age he was the friend and fol­lower of Al i; and the last remnant of his strength andlife was consumed in a distant and dangerous waragainst the enemies of the Koran. His memory wasrevered; but the place of his burial was neglected andunknown, during a period of seven hundred and eightyyears, till the conquest of Constantinople by Mahometthe Second. A seasonable vision (for such are the ma­nufacture of eveiy religion) revealed the holy spot at thefoot of the walls and the bottom of the harbour; andthe mosch of Ayub has been deservedly chosen for thesimple and martial inauguration of the Turkish sultans.dThe event of the siege revived, both in the
Peace and ° .'
tribute, east and west, the reputation of the Roman arms,'and cast a momentary shade over the glories ofthe Saracens. The Greek ambassador was favourablyreceived at Damascus, in a general council of the emirsor koreish; a peace, or truce, of thirty years, was ratifiedbetween the two empires; and the stipulation of anannual tribute, fifty horses of a noble breed, fifty slaves,and three thousand pieces of gold, degraded the majestyof the commander of the faithful.* The aged caliphwas desirous of possessing his dominions, and ending hisdays in tranquillity and repose; while the Moors andIndians trembled at his name, his palace and city of Da­mascus was insulted by the Mardaites, or Maronites, ofmount Libanus, the firmest barrier of the empire, till theywere disarmed and transplanted by the suspicious policyof the Greeks/ After the revolt of Arabia and Persia,


J Demetrius Cantemir's Hist, of the Othman Empire, p. 105,106. Rycaut's Stateof the Ottoman Empire, p. 10,11. Voyages de Thevenot, part 1. p. 189. TheChristians, who suppose that the martyr Abu Ayub is vulgarly confounded withthe patriarch Job, betray their own ignorance rather than that of the Turks.
'Theopbanes, though a Greek, deserves credit for these tributes, (Chronograph.p. 295, 296. 300, 3OI.) which are confirmed, with some variation, by the ArabicHistory of Abulpharagius. (Dynast, p. 128. vers. Pocock.)
'The censure of Theophanes is just and pointed, rm p*paMin JimtJ-riwr »X;»TH-







OCR Output








CMAP. XLVII. 51


synod, whose name was pronounced with sincere or af­fected reverence by the Catholic world. If these bishops,whether innocent or guilty, were annihilated in thesleep of death, they would not probably be awakenedby the clamour, which after a hundred years was raisedover their grave. If they were already in the fangs ofthe demon, their torments could neither be aggravatednor assuaged by human industry. If in the cortfpanyof saints and angels they enjoyed the rewards of piety,they must have smiled at the idle fury of the theologi­cal insects who still crawled on the surface of the earth.The foremost of these insects, the emperor of the Ro­mans, darted his sting, and distilled the venom, perhapswithout discerning the true motives of Theodora andher ecclesiastical faction. The victims were no longetsubject to his power, and the vehement style of his edictscould only proclaim their damnation, and invite theclergy of the east to join in a full chords of curses andFHa» ge- anathemas. The- east, with e&me hesitation,council of consented to the voice of her sovereign: thetj^pj!T fiftn general council, of three patriarchs and oneA.D.553, hundred and sixty five bishops was held atJune«. ConSfentinople; and the authors, as well asthe defenders of the three chapters, were separated fromthe communion of the saints, and solemnly delivered tothe prince of darkness. But the Latin churches weremore jealous of the honour of Leo and the synod ofChalcedon; and if they had fought as they usually didunder the standard of Rome, they might have prevailedin the cause of reason and humanity. But their chiefwas a prisoner in the hands of the enemy, the throne ofSt. Peter, which had been disgraced by the simorty, wasbetrayed by the cowardice of Vigilius, who yielded,after a long and inconsistent struggle, to the despotismof Justinian and the sophistry of the Greeks. His apo-stacy provoked the indignation of the Latins, and nfc'more than two bishops could be found who would itn-


E2







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 79


Anathema to them now and for evermore! Naked cameI out of my mother's womb, naked shall I descend intothe grave. Let those who love God, follow me and seektheir salvation. After comforting his brethren, he em­barked for Constantinople, and sustained, in six suc­cessive interviews, the almost irresistible weight of theroyal presence. His opinions were favourably enter­tained in the palace and the city; the influence of The­odora assured him a safe conduct and honourable dis­mission; and he ended his days, though not on thethrone, yet in the bosom of his native country. On thenews of his death, Apollinaris indecently feasted thenobles and the clergy; but his joy was checked by theintelligence of a new election: and while he enjoyed thewealth of Alexandria, his rivals reigned in the mona­steries of Thebais, and were maintained by the voluntaryoblations of the people. A perpetual succession of pa­triarchs arose from the ashes of Theodosius; and theMonophysite churches of Syria and Egypt were unitedby the name of Jacobites and the communion of thefaith. But the same faith, which has been confined toa narrow sect of the Syrians, was diffused over the massof the Egyptian or Coptic nation; who, almost unani­mously, rejected the decrees of the synod of Chalcedon.A thousand years were now elapsed since Egypt hadceased to be a kingdom, since the conquerors of Asiaand Europe had trampled on the ready necks of a peo­ple, whose ancient wisdom and power ascend beyond therecords of history. The conflict of zeal and persecutionrekindled some sparks of their national spirit. Theyabjured, with a foreign heresy, the manners and languageof the Greeks: every Melchite, in their eyes, was astranger, every Jacobite a citizen; the alliance of mar­riage, the offices of humanity, were condemned as adeadly sin; the natives renounced all allegiance to theemperor; and his orders, at a distance from Alexandria,







OCR Output








318 ROMAiN EMPIRE.


Jews were dragged in chains to the market-place of thecity: they descended alive into the grave prepared fortheir execution and burial; and the apostle beheld withan inflexible eye the slaughter of his helpless enemies.Their sheep and camels were inherited by the Mussul­mans: three hundred cuirasses, five hundred pikes, athousand lances, composed the most useful portion ofthe spoil. Six days'journey to the north-east of Medina,the ancient and wealthy town of Chairbar was the seatof the Jewish power in Arabia; the territory, a fertilespot in the desert, was covered with plantations andcattle, and protected by eight castles, some of whichwere esteemed of impregnable strength. The forces ofMahomet consisted of two hundred horse and fourteenhundred foot: in the succession of eight regular andpainful sieges they were exposed to danger, and fatigue,and hunger; and the most undaunted chiefs despairedof the event. The apostle revived their faith and cou­rage by the example of Ali, on whom he bestowed thesurname of the Lion of God: perhaps we may believethat a Hebrew champion of gigantic stature was clovento the chest by his irresistible scimitar; but we cannotpraise the modesty of romance, which represents him astearing from its hinges the gate of a fortress, and wield­ing the ponderous buckler in his left hand." After thereduction of the castles, the town of Chaibar submittedto the yoke. The chief of the tribe was tortured, in thepresence of Mahomet, to force a confession of his hiddentreasure: the industry of the shepherds and husband­men was rewarded with a precarious toleration: theywere permitted, so long as it should please the con­queror, to improve their patrimony, in equal shares, forhis emolument and their own. Under the reign ofOmar, the Jews of Chaibar were transplanted to Syria;


1 Aba Rafe, the servant of Mahomet, is said to affirm that he himself, and sevenother men, afterward tried, without success, to move the same gate from theground. (Abulfedn, p. 90.) Abu Rafe was an eye-witness, but who will be witnessfor Abu Rafe? •







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 259


dwelt under similar tents, and conducted their horses,and camels, and sheep, to the same springs and thesame pastures. Our toil is lessened, and our wealth isincreased, by our dominion over the useful animals.'and the Arabian shepherd had acquired the absolutepossession of a faithful friend and a laborious slave.1Arabia, in the opinion of the naturalist, is the
The horse. . . r. ,
genuine and original country ot the horse; theclimate most propitious, not indeed to the size, but tothe spirit and swiftness, of that generous animal. Themerit of the Barb, the Spanish, and the English breed,is derived from a mixture of Arabian blood ;m the Bedo-weens preserve, with superstitious care, the honours andthe memory of the purest race; the males are sold at ahigh price, but the females are seldom alienated; andthe birth of a noble foal was esteemed among the tribesas a subject of joy and mutual congratulation. Thesehorses are educated in the tents, among the children ofthe Arabs, with a tender familiarity, which trains themin the habits of gentleness and attachment. They areaccustomed only to walk and to gallop: their sensationsare not blunted by the incessant abuse of the spur andthe whip: their powers are reserved for the moments offlight and pursuit; but no sooner do they feel the touchof the hand or the stirrup, than they dart away with theswiftness of the wind; and if their friend be dismountedin the rapid career, they instantly stop till he has re-
covered his seat. In the sands of Africa and
'Arabia, the camel, is a sacred and precious gift.
That strong and patient beast of burden can perform,
without eating and drinking, a journey of several days;


p. 327—,;.H. _) and Volney, (torn. 1. p. 343—385.) the last and most judicious ofom Syrian travellers.
'Read (it is no unpleasant task) the incomparable articles of the horse and theesmet, in the Natural History of M. de Button. ,
10 For the Arabian horses, see d'Arvieux (p. 159—173.) and Niebuhr. (p. 112—144.) At the end of the thirteenth century, the horses of Naged were esteemedsurefooted, those of Yemen strong and serviceable, those of Hejaz most uoble. Thehorses of Europe, the tenth and last class, were generally despised, as having toomuch body and too little spirit: (d'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orient, p. 339.) their strengthwas requisite to bear the weight of the knight and his armour.


S 2







OCR Output








24 ROMAN EMPIRE.


nounced the opening of the synod sixteen days after thefestival of Pentecost. Nestorius, who depended on thenear approach of his eastern friends, persisted, like hispredecessor Chrysostom, to disclaim the jurisdiction,and to disobey the summons, of his enemies: they has­tened his trial, and his accuser presided in the seat ofjudgment. Sixty-eight bishops, twenty-two of metro­politan rank, defended his cause by a modest and tem­perate protest; they were excluded from the counselsof their brethren. Candidian, in the emperor's name,requested a delay of four days; the profane magistratewas driven with outrage and insult from the assemblyCondem- of the saints. The whole of this momentousNestorius transaction was crowded into the compass of aJune 22. summer's day; the bishops delivered their sepa­rate opinions; but the uniformity of style reveals theinfluence or the hand of a master, who has been ac­cused of corrupting the public evidence of their actsand subscriptions.* Without a dissenting voice, theyrecognised in the epistles of Cyril, the Nicene creedand the doctrine of the fathers: but the partial -extractsfrom the letters and homilies of Nestorius were in­terrupted by curses and anathemas; and the hereticwas degraded from his episcopal and ecclesiasticaldignity. The sentence, maliciously inscribed to thenew Judas, was affixed and proclaimed in the streetsof Ephesus: the weary prelates, as they issued from thechurch of the mother of God, were saluted as her cham­pions; and her victory was celebrated by the illumi­nations, the songs, and the tumult of the night.
On the fifth day, the triumph was clouded
Opposition i o i
of the by the arrival and indignation of the easternjunta?! bishops. In a chamber of the inn, before he&c" had wiped the dust from his shoes, John ofAntioch gave audience to Candidian the imperial mi­


fja xara, TO >f» to. tv E$t7u rvmfoncu ;-:;<., B/XUT-"- mmofyi? Ji *iu tma6tr/ju> xaivDTo/uia KufiXXou nyja^mtt. Evagrius, lib. 1.e. 7. The same imputationwas urged by count Iraasus; (torn. 3. p. 1 249.) and the orthodox critics do notfind it an easy task to defend the purity of the Greek or Latin copies of the Acts.







OCR Output








CHAP. LII. 473


inhabitant of the city: but the liberal offer was rejectedwith disdain, and the presumption of Moslemah was ex­alted by the speedy approach and invincible force of thenavies of Egypt and Syria. They are said to haveamounted to eighteen hundred ships: the number be­trays their inconsiderable size; and of the twenty stoutand capacious vessels whose magnitude impeded theirprogress, each was manned with no more than one hun­dred heavy-armed soldiers. This huge armada pro­ceeded on a smooth sea and with a gentle gale, towardsthe mouth of the Bosphorus; the surface of the straitwas overshadowed, in the language of the Greeks, witha moving forest, and the same fatal night had been fixedby the Saracen chief for a general assault by sea andland. To allure the confidence of the enemy, the em­peror had thrown aside the chain that usually guardedthe entrance of the harbour: but while they hesitatedwhether they should seize the opportunity, or apprehendthe snare, the ministers of destruction were at hand. Thefireships of the Greeks were launched against them;the Arabs, their arms, and vessels, were involved in thesame flames; the disorderly fugitives were dashed againsteach other, or overwhelmed in the waves; and I nolonger find a vestige of the fleet, that had threatened toextirpate the Roman name. A still more fatal and irre­parable loss was that of the caliph Soliman, who died ofan indigestion™ in his camp near Kinnisrin, or Chalcis,in Syria, as he was preparing to lead against Constanti­nople the remaining forces of the east. The brother ofMoslemah was succeeded by a kinsman and an enemy:and the throne of an active and able prince was degradedby the useless and pernicious virtues of a bigot. Whilehe started and satisfied the scruples of a blind conscience,


'" 'I hi: caliph had emptied two baskets of eggs and of figs, which he swallowedalternately, and the tepast was concluded with marrow and sugar. In one of hispilgrimages to Mecca, Soliman ate, at a single meal, seventy pomegranates, a kid,six fowls, and a huge quantity of the grapes of Tayef. If the bill of fare be cor­rect, we must admire the appetite rather than the luxury of the sovereign of Asia.(Abulfedm, Anna!. Moslem, p. 126.)







OCR Output








390 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the battle, Jonas sought and found the object of his pur­suit; but her resentment was inflamed by the last act ofhis perfidy; and as Eudocia struggled in his hatefulembraces, she struck a dagger to her heart. Anotherfemale, the widow of Thomas, and the real or supposeddaughter of Heraclius, was spared and released withouta ransom: but the generosity of Caled was the effect ofhis contempt; and the haughty Saracen insulted, by amessage of defiance, the throne of the Caesars. Caledhad penetrated above a hundred and fifty miles into theheart of the Roman province: he returned to Damascuswith the same secrecy and speed. On the accession ofOmar, the sword of God was removed from the command;but the caliph, who blamed the rashness, was compelledto applaud the vigour and conduct, of the enterprise.Fairof Another expedition of the conquerors of Da-Abyia. mascus will equally display their avidity andtheir contempt for the riches of the present world. Theywere informed that the produce and manufactures ofthe country were annually collected in the fair of Abyla,'about thirty miles from the city; that the cell of a de­vout hermit was visited at the same time by a multitudeof pilgrims; and that the festival of trade and super­stition would be ennobled by the nuptials of the daughterof the governor of Tripoli. Abdallah, the son of Jaafar,a glorious and holy martyr, undertook, with a bannerof five hundred horse, the pious and profitable commis­sion of despoiling the infidels. As he approached thefair of Abyla, he was astonished by the report of themighty concourse of Jews and Christians, Greeks andArmenians, of natives of Syria and of strangers of Egypt,to the number of ten thousand, besides a guard of fivethousand horse that attended the person of the bride.The Saracens paused. For my own part (said Abdallah),


* Dair Abil Kodos. After retrenching the last word, the epithet, holy, I dis­covered the Abila of Lysanias between Damascus and Heliopolis: the name(Abil signifies a vineyard) concurs with the situation to justify my conjecture.( Reland, Palestin. torn. 1. p. 317. torn, 2. p. 5?5. 527.)







OCR Output








CHAP. LII. '.OS


from Persia to Greece. The queen (he spoke of Irene)considered you as a rook and herself a pawn. Thatpusillanimous female submitted to pay a tribute, thedouble of which she ought to have exacted from the bar­barians. Restore therefwe the fruits of your injustice,or abide the determination of the sword. At these wordsthe ambassadors cast a bundle of swords before thefoot of the throne. The caliph smiled at the menace,and drawing his scimitar, samsamah, a weapon of his­toric or fabulous renown, he cut asunder the feeble armsof the Greeks, without turning the edge, or endangeringthe tempe'r, of his blade. He then dictated an epistleof tremendous brevity: In the name of the most mer­ciful God, Haran al Rashid, commander of the faithful,to Nicephorus, the Roman dog. I have read thy letter,O thou son of an unbelieving mother. Thou shall nothear, thou shalt behold my reply. It was written in cha­racters of blood and fire on the plains of Phrygia, andthe warlike celerity of the Arabs could only be checkedby the arts of deceit and the show of repentance. Thetriumphant caliph retired, after the fatigues of the cam­paign, to his favourite palace.of Racca on the Euphrates:;but the distance of five hundred miles, and the inclemencyof the season, encouraged his adversary to violate thepeace. Nicephorus was astonished by the bold andrapid march of the commander of the faithful, who re-passed in the depth of winter, the snows of mount Taurus:his stratagems of policy and war were exhausted; andthe perfidious Greek escaped with three wounds from afield of battle overspread with forty thousand of his sub­jects. Yet the emperor was ashamed of submission, andthe caliph was resolved on victory. One hundred andthirty-five thousand regular soldiers received pay, and


t For the situstion of Racea, the old Nicephorium, consult d'Anville. (L'Ea-phrate et le Tigre, p. 24—27.) The Arabian Nights represent Harun al Rashid asalmost stationary in Bagdad. He respected the royal seat of the Abbassides, buttho.vices of the inhabitants had driven hiro from the city. (Abulfed. Anna), p. 167.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 91


death, the maxims and influence of their domestic go­vernment, and the tendency of their reign to accelerateor suspend the downfal of the eastern empire. Such achronological review will serve to illustrate the variousarguments of the subsequent chapters; and each cir­cumstance of the eventful story of the barbarians willadapt itself in a proper place to the Byzantine an­nals. The internal state of the empire, and the dan­gerous heresy of the Paulicians, which shook theeast and enlightened the west, will be the subject oftwo separate chapters; but these inquiries must bepostponed till our farther progress shall have openedthe view of the world in the ninth and tenth centuriesof the Christian era. After this foundation of Byzan­tine history, the following nations will pass before oureyes, and each will occupy the space to which it maybe entitled by greatness or merit, or the degree of con­nexion with the Roman world and the present age.
I. The FRANKS; a general appellation which includesall the barbarians of France, Italy, and Germany, whowere united by the sword and sceptre of Charlemagne.The persecution of images and their votaries, separatedRome and Italy from the Byzantine throne, and pre­pared the restoration of the Roman empire in the west.
II. The AKABS or SARACENS. Three ample chapterswill be devoted to this curious and interesting object.In the first, after a picture of the country and its inha­bitants, I shall investigate the character of Mahomet;the character, religion, and success, of the prophet. Inthe second, I shall lead the Arabs to the conquest ofSyria, Egypt, and Africa, the provinces of the Romanempire; nor can I check their victorious career till theyhave overthrown the monarchies of Persia and Spain.In the third, I shall inquire how Constantinople andEurope were saved by the luxury and arts, the divisionand decay, of the empire of the caliphs. A singlechapter will include, III. The BULGARIANS, IV. HUN-







OCR Output








CHAP. LII. 483


arms, are inferior to our own." If you follow my advice(replied the prudent mayor of the palace), you will notinterrupt, their march, nor precipitate your attack. Theyare like a torrent, which it is dangerous to stem in itscareer. The thirst of riches, and the consciousness ofsuccess, redouble their valour, and valour is of more availthan arms or numbers. Be patient till they have loadedthemselves with the incumbrance of wealth. This pos­session of wealth will divide their counsels, and assureyour victory." This subtle policy is perhaps a refine­ment of the Arabian writers; and the situation ofCharles will suggest a more narrow and selfish motive ofprocrastination; the secret desire of humbling the pride,and wasting the provinces, of the rebel duke of Aquitain.It is yet more probable, that the delays of Charles wereinevitable and reluctant. A standing army was unknownunder the first and second race: more than half thekingdom was now in the hands of the Saracens: accord­ing to their respective situation, the Franks of Neustriaand Austrasia were too conscious or too careless of theimpending danger; and the voluntary aids of the Ge-pidae and Germans were separated by a long intervalfrom the standard of the Christian general. No soonerhad he collected his forces, than he sought and foundthe enemy in the centre of France, between Tours andPoitiers. His well-conducted march was covered by arange of hills, and Abderame appears to have been sur­prised by his unexpected presence. The nations of Asia,Africa, and Europe, advanced with equal ardour, to anencounter which would change the history of the world.In the six first days of desultory combat, the horsemenand archers of the east maintained their advantage: butin the closer onset of the seventh day, the orientals wereoppressed by the strength and stature of the Germans,who, with stout hearts and iron hands'1, asserted the civil


h Gens Austris membrorum pre-eminentii valida, el gens Germanacorde etcor-ppre praestantissima, quasi in ictfl oculi manfl ferreaet pectore arduo Arabes cx-tinxerunt. (Roderic. T'oletan. c. 14.)


2 i 2







OCR Output








330 ROMAN EMPIRE.


his faults and virtues, that I should decide whether thetitle of enthusiast or impostor more properly belongs tothat extraordinary man. Had I been intimately con­versant with the son of Abdallah, the task would stillbe difficult, and the success uncertain: at the distanceof twelve centuries, I darkly contemplate his shadethrough a cloud of religious incense; and could I trulydelineate the portrait of an hour, the fleeting resemblancewould not equally apply to the solitary of mount Hera,to the preacher of Mecca, and to the conqueror of Arabia.The author of a mighty revolution appears to have beenendowed with a pious and contemplative disposition:so soon as marriage had raised him above the pressureof want, he avoided the paths of ambition and avarice;and, till the age of forty, he lived with innocence, andwould have died without a name. The unity of God isan idea most congenial to nature and reason; and aslight conversation with the Jews and Christians wouldteach him to despise and detest the idolatry of Mecca.It was the duty of a man and a citizen to impart thedoctrine of salvation, to rescue his country from the do­minion of sin and error. The energy of a mind inces­santly bent on the same object, would convert a generalobligation into a particular call; the warm suggestionsof the understanding or the fancy, would be felt as theinspirations of heaven; the labour of thought would ex­pire in rapture and vision; and the inward sensation,the invisible monitor, would be described with the formand attributes of an angel of God.q From enthusiasmto imposture, the step is perilous and slippery: the de­mon of Socratesr affords a memorable instance, how a


t The Christians, rashly enough, have assigned to Mahomet a tarn* pigeon, thatseemed to descend from heaven and whisper in his ear. As this pretended miracleis urged by Grotius (de Veritate Religions Christianae), hu Arabic translator, thelearned Pocock, inquired of him the names of bis authors ; and Grotius confessed,that it is unknown to the Mahometans themselves. Lest it should provoke theirindignation and laughter, the pious lie is suppressed in the Arabic version . bat ithas maintained an edifying place in the numerous editions of die Lai iu text. < I'o-cock, Specimen, Hist. Arabum, p. 186,187. Reland, de Religion. Moharn. lib. f.c. 39. p. 259—62.)
'







OCR Output








CHAP. LII. 479


of the French monarchy invited the attack of these insa­tiate fanatics. The descendants of Clovis had lost theinheritance of his martial and ferocious spirit; and theirmisfortune or demerit has affixed the epithet of lazy tothe last kings of the Merovingian race.0 They ascendedthe throne without power, and sunk into the grave with­out a name. A country palace, in the neighbourhood ofCompeigne,d was allotted for their residence or prison;but each year, in the month of March or May, they wereconducted in a waggon drawn by oxen to the assemblyof the Franks, to give audience to foreign ambassadors,and to ratify the acts of the mayor of the palace. Thatdomestic officer was become the minister of the nation,and the master of the prince. A public employmentwas converted into the patrimony of a private family:the elder Pepin left a king of mature years under theguardianship of his own widow and her child; and thesefeeble regents were forcibly dispossessed by the mostactive of his bastards. A government, half savage andhalf corrupt, was almost dissolved; and the tributarydukes, the provincial counts, and the territorial lords,were tempted to despise the weakness of the monarch,and to imitate the ambition of the mayor. Among theseindependent chiefs, one of the boldest and most success­ful, was Eudes, duke of Aquitain, who, in the southernprovinces of Gaul, usurped the authority and even the


had before him the Christian chronicle of Isidore Pacensis, and the Mahometanhistory of Novairi. The Moslems are silent or concise in the account of theirlosses, bnt M. Cardonne (torn. 1. p. 129—131.) Has given a pure and simple ac­count of all that he could collect from Ibn Halikan, Hidjazi, nml an anonymouswriter. The texts of the chronicles of France, and lives of saints, are inserted inthe collection of Bouquet (torn. 3.) and the annals of Pagi, who (torn. 3. under theproper years) has restored the chronology, which is anticipated six years ia theAnnals of Baronius. The Dictionary of Bayle (Abderame and Munuza) has moremerit for lively reflection than original research.
c Eginbart, de Vita Caroli Magni, c. 2. p. 13—18. edit . Schmink, Utrecht, 1711.Some modem critics accuse the minister of Charlemagne of exaggerating theweak-ness of the Merovingians; but the general outline is just, and tin. French readerwill for ever repeat the beautiful lines of Boileau's Lutrin.
d Mamacca on the Oyse, between Compeigne and Noyon, which Eginhart callsperparvi reditfis villarn. (See the notes, and the map of ancient France for Dom.Bouquet's Collection.) Compendium, or Compeigne, was a palace of more dig-nity, (Hadrian. Valesii Notitia Galliarum, p. 152.) and that laughing philosopher,the abW Galliani (Dialogues sUr le Commerce des Bleds), may truly affirm, thatit was the residence of the roia tres Chretiens et tres chevelus.







OCR Output








114 ROMAN EMPIRE.


throne and treasures which she resigned, solicited a de­cent and honourable retreat. His avarice refused thismodest compensation; and in her exile to the isle ofLesbos, the empress earned a scanty subsistence by thelabours of her distaff.
Nicepho- Many tyrants have reigned undoubtedly moreAsD 802 criminal than Nicephorus, but none perhapsOct. 31. have more deeply incurred the universal abhor­rence of their people. His character was stained withthe three odious vices of hypocrisy, ingratitude, andavarice; his want of virtue was not redeemed by anysuperior talents, nor his want of talents, by any pleas­ing qualifications. Unskilful and unfortunate in war,Nicephorus was vanquished by the Saracens, and slainby the Bulgarians; and the advantage of his deathoverbalanced, in the public opinion, the destruction ofa Roman army. His son and heir StauraciusA.D.en,' escaped from the field with a mortal wound:11)7 25' yet six months of an expiring life were suffi­cient to refute his indecent, though popular declara­tion, that he would in all things avoid the example ofhis father. On the near prospect of his decease, Mi­chael, the great master of the palace, and the husbandof his sister Procopia, was named by every person ofthe palace and city, except by his envious brother.Tenacious of a sceptre, now falling from his hand, heconspired against the life of his successor, and che­rished the idea of changing to a democracy the Romanempire. But these rash projects served only to inflamethe zeal of the people, and to remove the scruples of theMichaeli. candidate: Michael I. accepted the purple, andA?IX!u!' before he sunk into the grave, the son of Ni-October*. cephorus implored the clemency of his new so­vereign. Had Michael in an age of peace ascended anhereditary throne, he might have reigned and died thefather of his people: but his mild virtues were adaptedto the shade of private life, nor was he capable of con­







OCR Output








276 ROMAN EMPIRE.


idols of men, eagles, lions, and antelopes; and mostconspicuous was the statue of Hebal, of red agate,holding in his hand seven arrows, without heads orfeathers, the instruments and symbols of profane divi­nation. But this statue was a monument of Syrianarts: the devotion of the ruder ages was content with apillar or a tablet; and the rocks of the desert were hewninto gods or altars, in imitation of the black stone' ofMecca, which is deeply tainted with the reproach of anSacrifices idolatrous origin. From Japan to Peru, theand ntes. use of sacrifice has universally prevailed; andthe votary has expressed his gratitude or fear by de­stroying or consuming, in honour of the gods, thedearest and most precious of their gifts. The life of amand is the most precious oblation to deprecate a pub­lic calamity: the altars of Phoenicia and Egypt, ofRome and Carthage, have been polluted with humangore: the cruel practice was long preserved among theArabs; in the third century, a boy was annually sacri­ficed by the the tribe of the Dumatians;' and a royal•captive was piously slaughtered by the prince of theSaracens, the ally and soldier of the emperor Justinian/A parent who drags his son to the altar, exhibits themost painful and sublime effort of fanaticism: the deed,or the intention, was sanctified by the example of saints


c In the second century, Maximus of Tyre attributes to the Arabs the worship ofa stone—Apa£iu nBnm pat, orriM if sun oiJ», TO it ayaX/us «>«; Xido; nv •mf&ymK,(Dissert. 8. torn. 1. p. 142. edit . Reiske) and the reproach is furiously re-echoedby the Christians. (Clemens Alex, in Protreptico, p. 40. Arnobius contra Gentes,lib. 6. p. 246.) Yet these stones were no other than the dairuX* of Syria a"dGreece, so renowned in sacred and profane antiquity. (Euseb. Priep. Evangel.
lib. 1. p. 37. Marsham, Canon. Chron. p. 54—56.)
* The two horrid subjects of AvJpo&wna and naiJoSuo-ia, are accurately discussedby the learned sir John Marsharn. (Canon. Chron. p. 76—78. 301—304.) Saa-choniatho derives the Phoenician sacrifices from the example of Chronus: but weare ignorant whether Chronus lived before or after Abraham, or indeed whetherhe lived at all.
• KUT" rot fxvrw irai&t iSu», is the reproach of Porphyry; but he likewise im­putes to the Roman the same barbarous custom, which A. U. C. 657, had beenfinally abolished. Dumstha, Daumat al Gendal, is noticed by Ptolemy (Tabul, p.37. Arabia, p. 9—29.) and Abulfeda; (p. 57.) and may be found in d'Anvillesmaps, in the mid-desert between Chaibar and Tadmor.
'Procopins, (de Bell. Persico, lib. 8. c. 28.) Evagrius, (lib. 6. c. 21.) and Po-cock, (Specimen, p. 72. 86.) attest the human sacrifices of the Arabs in the sixthcentury. The danger and escape of Abdallah, is a tradition rather than a fact.(Gagnier, Vic de Mahomet, torn. 1. p. 82—84.)







OCR Output








164 ROMAN EMPIRE.


he was honourably conducted to Kiow, the residence ofthe great duke: the subtle Greek soon obtained theesteem and confidence of leroslaus: his character couldassume the manners of every climate; and the barba­rians applauded his strength and courage in the chase ofthe elks and bears of the forest. In this northern regionhe deserved the forgiveness of Manuel, who solicited theRussian prince to join his arms in the invasion of Hun­gary. The influence of Andronicus achieved this im­portant service; his private treaty was signed with a pro­mise of fidelity on one side, and of oblivion on the other;and he marched, at the head of the Russian cavalry, fromthe Borysthenes to the Danube. In his resentment Ma­nuel had ever sympathized with the martial and dissolutecharacter of his cousin; and his free pardon was sealedin the assault of Zemlin, in which he was second, andsecond only, to the valour of the emperor.
No sooner was the exile restored to freedom and hiscountry, than his ambition revived, at first to his own,and at length to the public, misfortune. A daughterof Manuel was a feeble bar to the succession of themore deserving males of the Comnenian blood: herfuture marriage with the prince of Hungary was re­pugnant to the hopes or prejudices of the princes andnobles. But when an oath of allegiance was requiredto the presumptive heir, Andronicus alone asserted thehonour of the Roman name, declined the unlawful en­gagement, and boldly protested against the adoption ofa stranger. His patriotism was offensive to the empe­ror; but he spoke the sentiments of the people, andwas removed from the royal presence by an honourablebanishment, a second command of the Cilician frontier,with the absolute disposal of the revenues of Cyprus.In this station, the Armenians again exercised his cou­rage, and exposed his negligence; and the same rebel,who baffled all his operations, was unhorsed and almostslain by the vigour of his lance. But Andronicus soon.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 31


victory." TheMonaphysite doctrine (one incarnate na­ture) was rigorously preached in the churches of Egyptand the monasteries of the east; the primitive creed ofA poll mavis was protected by the sanctity of Cyril; andthe name of Eutyches, his venerable friend, has been ap­plied to the sect most adverse to the Syrian heresy ofNestorius. His rival Eutyches was the abbot, or archi­mandrite, or superior of three hundred monks; but theopinions of a simple and illiterate recluse might have ex­pired in the cell where he had slept above seventy years,if the resentment or indiscretion of Flavian, the Byzan­tine pontiff, had not exposed the scandal to the eyes ofthe Christian world. His domestic synod was instantlyconvened, their proceedings were sullied with clamourand artifice, and the aged heretic was surprised into aseeming confession, that Christ had not derived his bodyfrom the substance of the Virgin Mary. From their par­tial decree Eutyches appealed to a general council; andhis cause was vigorously asserted by his godson Chry-saphius, the reigning eunuch of the palace, and his ac­complice Dioscorus, who had succeeded to the throne,the creed, the talents, and the vices, of the nephew ofSecond Theophilus. By the special summons of Theo-Ephesus0 dosius, the second synod of Ephesus wasjudi-Auf a^9' ciousty composed of ten metropolitans and ten«• bishops from each of the six diocesses of theeastern empire: some exceptions of favour or meritenlarged the number to one hundred and thirty-five;and the Syrian Barsumas, as the chief and representa­tive of the monks, was invited to sit and vote with thesuccessors of the apostles. But the despotism of theAlexandrian patriarch again oppressed the freedom
"Dixi Cyrillum dnm viveret, auctoritate sua effecisse, ne Eutychianismna et Mo-nophysitarum error in nervum erurnperet: idque verum puto . . . aliquo . . . ho-nesto modo roXiuiuy cecinerat. The learned but cautious Jablonski did not al­ways speak the whole truth. Cum Cyrillo lenius omuino egi, qusm si tecum autaliis rei hujus probe gnaris et scquis rerum sstimatoribus sermones privates confer-rtro, (Thesaur. Epistol. La Crozian, torn. 1. p. 197,198.) an excellent key to hisdissertations on the Nestorian controversy!







OCR Output













OCR Output








346 ROMAN EMPIRE.


phian bad been fierce and obstinate; his conversion wastardy and reluctant; his new faith was fortified by ne­cessity and interest; he served, he fought, perhaps hebelieved; and the sins of the time of ignorance were ex­piated by the recent merits of the family of Ommiyah.Moawiyah, the son of Abu Sophian, and of the cruelHenda, was dignified in his early youth with the titleor office of secretary of the prophet; the judgment ofOmar intrusted him with the government of Syria; andhe administered that important province above fortyyears, either in a subordinate or supreme rank. With­out renouncing the fame of valour and liberality, he af­fected the reputation of humanity and moderation; agrateful people was attached to their benefactor; and thevictorious Moslems were enriched with the spoils ofCyprus and Rhodes. The sacred duty of pursuing theassassins of Othman was the engine and pretence of hisambition. The bloody shirt of the martyr was exposedin the mosch of Damascus: the emir deplored the fateof his injured kinsman; and sixty thousand Syrians wereengaged in his service by an oath of fidelity and revenge.Amrou,the conqueror of Egypt, himself and army, was thefirst who saluted the new monarch, and divulged the dan­gerous secret, that the Arabian caliphs might be createdelsewhere than in the city of the prophet/ The policyof Moawiyah eluded the valour of his rival; and, afterthe death of Ali, he negotiated the abdication of his sonHassan, whose mind was either above or below the go­vernment of the world, and who retired without a sighfrom the palace of Cufa to an humble cell near the tombof his grandfather. The aspiring wishes of the caliphwere finally crowned by the important change of anelective to an hereditary kingdom. Some murmurs offreedom or fanaticism attested the reluctance of theArabs, and four citizens of Medina refused the oath offidelity; but the designs of Moawiyah were conducted


'I borrow, on this occasion, the strong sense and expression of Tacitns. i Hi i1. *.) Evulgato imperil arcauo posse imperatorom alibi quam Horn.' fieri.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 247


distress: their cause was espoused by Venice, PopeAlexander III., and the Greek emperor: the fabric ofoppression was overturned in a day; and in the treatyof Constance, Frederic subscribed, with some reserva­tions, the freedom of four-and-twenty cities. His grand-Predcncii.son contended with their vigour and maturity;—mo1" hut Frederic II.k was endowed with some per­sonal and peculiar advantages. His birth andeducation recommended him to the Italians; and inthe implacable discord of the two factions, the Ghibe-lins were attached to the emperor, while the Guelfsdisplayed the banner of liberty and the church. Thecourt of Rome had slumbered, when his father HenryVI. was permitted to unite with the empire the king­doms of Naples and Sicily: and from these hereditaryrealms, the son derived an ample and ready supply oftroops and treasure. Yet Frederic II. was finally op­pressed by the arms of the Lombards and the thundersof the Vatican; his kingdom was given to a stranger,and the last of his family was beheaded at Napleson a public scaffold. During sixty years, no em­peror appeared in Italy, and the name was remem­bered only by the ignominious sale of the last relictsof sovereignty.
The barbarian conquerors of the west werepleased to decorate their chief with the title ofemperor; but it was not their design to invest—i850,&c. him with the despotism of Constantino and Jus­tinian. The persons of the Germans were free, theirconquests were their own, and their national characterwas animated by a spirit which scorned the servilejurisprudence of the new or the ancient Roman. Itwould have been a vain and dangerous attempt to im­pose a monarch on the armed freemen, who were impa­tient of a magistrate; on the bold, who refused to obey;


k For the history of Frederic II. and the house of Swabia at Naples, see Giau-aone, Utoria Civile, torn. 2. lib. 14—19.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 221


and the judges of his innocence; and it was not with­out reluctance, that the conqueror of the Saxons delayedtill the ensuing year the personal discharge of thispious office. In his fourth and last pilgrimage, he wasreceived at Rome with the due honours of king andpatrician: Leo was permitted to purge himself by oathof the crimes imputed to his charge; his enemies weresilenced, and the sacrilegious attempt against his life waspunished by the mild and insufficient penalty of exile.On the festival of Christmas, the last year of the eighthcentury, Charlemagne appeared in the church of St.Peter; and, to gratify the vanity of Rome, he had ex­changed the simple dress of his country for the habitof a patrician/ After the celebration of the holy mys­teries, Leo suddenly placed a precious crown on hishead," and the dome resounded with the acclamationsof the people,—Long life and victory to Charles, themost pious Augustw, crowned by God the great and pa­cific emperor of the Romans! The head and body ofCharlemagne were consecrated by the royal unction:after the example of the Caesars he was saluted oradored by the pontiff; his coronation-oath represents apromise to maintain the faith and privileges of thechurch; and the first-fruits were paid in his rich offer­ings to the shrine of the apostle. In his familiar con­versation, the emperor protested his ignorance of theintentions of Leo, which he would have disappointedby his absence on that memorable day. But the pre­parations of the ceremony must have disclosed thesecret; and the journey of Charlemagne reveals hisknowledge and expectation; he had acknowledged that
> Twice, at I!»' request of Hadrian and Leo, he appeared at Rome—long;'i tunicft etchlauivdc amictus, et calceamentisquoque Romano more forniatis. Eginhard(c. 23.109—113.) describes, like Suetonius, the simplicity of his dress, so popular in thenation; that when Charles the Bald returned to France in a foreign habit, the patri­otic dogs barked at the apostate. (Gaillard, Vie de Charlemagne, torn. 4. p. 109.)
» See Ana>tasius(p. 199.)and Eginhard. (c. 28. p. 124—128.) The unction ismentioned by Theophanes, (p. 399.) the oath by Sigonius (from the Ordo Romanus),and the pope's adoration more antiquorum pnncipum, by the Annales Bertiniani.(Script. Murator. torn. ?. pan 2. p. 505.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 61


to the nations beyond the Tigris. The first indeliblelesson of Ibas, bishop of Edessa, taught them to exe­crate the Egyptians, who, in the synod of Ephesus,had impiously confounded the two natures of Christ.The flight of the masters and scholars, who were twiceexpelled from the Athens of Syria, dispersed a crowdof missionaries, inflamed by the double zeal of religionand revenge. And the rigid unity of the Monophy-sites, who, under the reigns of Zeno and Anastasius,had invaded the thrones of the east, provoked their an­tagonists, in a land of freedom, to avow a moral, ra­ther than a physical, union of the two persons of Christ.Since the first preaching of the gospel, the Sasaniankings beheld, with an eye of suspicion, a race of aliensand apostates, who had embraced the religion, andwho might favour the cause, of the hereditary foes oftheir country. The royal edicts had often prohibitedtheir dangerous correspondence with the Syrian clergy;the progress of the schism was grateful to the jealouspride of Perozes; and he listened to the eloquence ofan artful prelate, who painted Nestorius as the friendof Persia, and urged him to secure the fidelity of hisChristian subjects, by granting a just preference to thevictims and enemies of the Roman tyrant. The Nes-torians composed a large majority of the clergy andpeople: they were encouraged by the smile, and armedwith the sword, of despotism; yet many of their weakerbrethren were startled at the thought of breaking loosefrom the communion of the Christian world, and theblood of seven thousand seven hundred Monophysitesor Catholics, confirmed the uniformity of faith and dis-s- ciplinc in the churches of Persia.8 Their ec-^T" desiastical institutions are distinguished by a*;°> &c. liberal principle of reason, or at least of policy:the austerity of the cloister was relaxed and gradually
A dissertation on the state of the Nestorians has swelled in the hands of As-semanni to a folio volume of nine hundred and fifty pages, and his learned re­searches are digested in the most lucid order. Besides this fourth volume of the .







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 449


both in words and actions, that the victory of theArabs had not impaired his attachment to their cause.Some enemies yet remained for the sword of Musa.The tardy repentance of the Goths had comparedtheir own numbers and those of the invaders; thecities from which the march of Tarik had declined, con­sidered themselves as impregnable; and the bravest pa­triots defended the fortifications of Seville and Merida.They were successively besieged and reduced by the la­bour of Musa, who transported his camp from the Boetisto the Anas, from the Guadalquiver to the Guadiana.When he beheld the works of Roman magnificence, thebridge, the aqueducts, the triumphal arches, and thetheatre, of the ancient metropolis of Lusitania, " I shouldimagine (said he to his four companions) that the humanrace must have united their art and power in the foun­dation of this city; happy is the man who shall becomeits master!" He aspired to that happiness, but the Eme-ritans sustained on this occasion the honour of their de­scent from the veteran legionaries of Augustus.7 Dis­daining the confinement of their walls, they gave battleto the Arabs on the plain; but an ambuscade rising fromthe shelter of a quarry, or a ruin, chastised their indis­cretion, and intercepted their return. The wooden tur­rets of assault were rolled forwards to the foot of therampart; but the defence of Merida was obstinate andlong; and the castle of the martyrs was a perpetual tes­timony of the losses of the Moslems. The constancy ofthe besieged was at length subdued by famine and de­spair; and the prudent victor disguised his impatienceunder the names of clemency and jesteem. The alterna­tive of exile or tribute was allowed; the churches weredivided between the two religions; and the wealth of


7 The honourable relics of the Cantabrian war (Dion Cassias, lib. 53. p. 720.)were planted in this metropolis of Lusitania, perhaps of Spain. (Submittit cui totaeuos Hispania fasces.) Nonius (Hispania, c. 31. p. 106—110.) enumerates theancient structures, but concludes with a sigh,—Urbs hsc olim nobilissima ad mug.nam incolarum infrequentiam delapsa est, et prater priscie claritatis minus nihilostendit.
VOL. VI, 2 C







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 145


wished to prolong their dominion, they persuaded theaged princess to nominate for her successor Michael VI.Michael vi Tne surname of Stratioticus declares his mili-Stratio- taiy profession; but the crazy and decrepit ve-A.D'.io56, teran could only see with the eyes, and exe-ueust 'cute with the hands, of his ministers. Whilsthe ascended the throne, Theodora sunk into the grave;the last of the Macedonian or Basilian dynasty. I havehastily reviewed, and gladly dismiss, this shameful anddestructive period of Jwenty-eight years, in which theGreeks, degraded below the common level of servitude,were transferred like a herd of cattle by the choice orcaprice of two impotent females.Isaac i. From this night of slavery, a ray of freedom,A?D?io57',or at least of spirit, begins to emerge; theAugust si. Greeks either preserved or revived the use ofsurnames, which perpetuate the fame of hereditary vir­tue; and we now discern the rise, succession, and al­liance, of the last dynasties of Constantinople and Tre-bizond. The Comneni, who upheld for awhile the fateof the sinking empire, assumed the honour of a Romanorigin: but the family had been long since transportedfrom Italy to Asia. Their patrimonial estate was situatein the district of Castamona, in the neighbourhood ofthe Euxine; and one of their chiefs, who had alreadyentered the paths of ambition, revisited with affection,perhaps with regret, the modest though honourabledwelling of his fathers. The first of their line was theillustrious Manuel, who, in the reign of the secondBasil, contributed by war and treaty to appease thetroubles of the east: he left, in a tender age, two sons,Isaac and John, whom, with the consciousness of desert,he bequeathed to the gratitude and favour, of his so­vereign. The noble youths were carefully trained inthe learning of the monastery, the arts of the palace,and the exercises of the camp; and from the domesticservice of the guards, they were rapidly promoted to the
VOL. VI. L







OCR Output








354 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the law are the guides of their conscience and the ora­cles of their faith. From the Atlantic to the Ganges,the Koran is acknowledged as the fundamental code,not only of theology, but of civil and criminal jurispru­dence; and the laws which regulate the actions and theproperty of mankind, are guarded by the infallible andimmutable sanction of the will of God. This religionsservitude is attended with some practical disadvantage;the illiterate legislator had been often misled by his ownprejudices and those of his country; and the institutionsof the Arabian desert may be ill adapted to the wealthand numbers of Ispahan and Constantinople. On theseoccasions, the cadhi respectfully places on his head theholy volume, and substitutes a dexterous interpretationmore apposite to the principles of equity, and the man­ners and policy of the times.
His beneficial or pernicious influence on the
His merit *~ ,
towards Ms public happiness is the last consideration in thecouutiy' character of Mahomet. The most bitter or mostbigoted of his Christian or Jewish foes, will surely allowthat he assumed a false commission to inculcate a salu­tary doctrine, less perfect only than their own. He pi­ously supposed, as the basis of his religion, the truth andsanctity of their prior revelations, the virtues and mira­cles of their founders. The idols of Arabia were brokenbefore the throne of God; the blood of human victimswas expiated by prayer, and fasting, and alms, the laud­able or innocent arts of devotion; and his rewards andpunishments of a future life were painted by the imagesmost congenial to an ignorant or carnal generation. Ma­homet was perhaps incapable of dictating a moral andpolitical system for the use of his countrymen: but hebreathed among the faithful a spirit of charity and friend­ship, recommended the practice of the social virtues, andchecked, by his laws and precepts, the thirst of revengeand the oppression of widows and orphans. The hostiletribes were united in faith and obedience, and the valour







OCR Output








518 ROMAN EMPIRE.


of boiling oil.0 To a point of honour Motassem hadsacrificed a flourishing city, two hundred thousand lives,and the property of millions. The same caliph de­scended from his horse, and dirtied his robe to relievethe distress of a decrepit old man, who, with his ladenass, had tumbled into a ditch. On which of theseactions did lie reflect with the most pleasure, when hewas summoned by the angel of death ?dDisorders With Motassem, the eighth of the Abbassides,Turkish the glory of his family and nation expired. When


Arabian conquerors had spread themselves— aro, &c. over the east, and were mingled with the servilecrowds of Persia, Syria, and Egypt, they insensibly lostthe freeborn and martial virtues of the desert. The cou­rage of the south is the artificial fruit of discipline andprejudice; the active power of enthusiasm had decayed,and the mercenary forces of the caliphs were recruitedin those climates of the north, of which valour is thehardy and spontaneous production. Of the Turks,0 whodwelt beyond the Oxus and Jaxartes, the robust youths,either taken in war or purchased in trade, were educatedin the exercises of the field, and the profession of theMahometan faith. The Turkish guards stood in armsround the throne of their benefactor, and their chiefsusurped the dominion of the palace and the provinces.Motassem, the first author of this dangerous example, in­duced into the capital above fifty thousand Turks: theirlicentious conduct provoked the public indignation, andthe quarrels of the soldiers and people induced thecaliph to retire from Bagdad, and establish his own re­


c Constantin. Porpbyrogenitus, in Vit. Basil, c. 61. p. 186. These Saracens wereindeed treated with peculiar severity as pirates and reoegadoes.
d ForTheophilus, Motassem, and the Amorian war, see the Continuater of Tbeo-phanes, (lib. 3. p. 77 — 84.) Genesius, (lib. 3. p. 24 — 34.) Cedrenus, ( 328 — ~;32.^Elmacin, (Hist. Saracen. p. 180.) Abulpharagius, (Dynast, p. 165, 166.) Abulfeda,(Annal. Moslem, p. 191.) d'Herbelot. (Bibliot. Orientale, p. 639, 640.)
'M. de Guigues, who sometimes leaps, and sometimes stumbles, in the gulf be­tween Chinese and Mahometan story, thinks he can see that these Turks are theHoci-kc, alias the Kao-lehe, or high-waggons; that they were divided into fifteenhordes, from China and Siberia to the dominions of the caliphs and Samanides, &c.(Hist, des Huns, torn. 3. p. 1—33. 124—131.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 177


but the public religion of the Catholics was uniformlysimple and spiritual; and the first notice of the use ofpictures is in the censure of the council of Illiberis, threehundred years after the Christian era. Under the suc­cessors of Constantine, in the peace and luxury of thetriumphant church, the more prudent bishops conde­scended to indulge a visible superstition, for the benefitof the multitude; and, after the ruin of Paganism, theywere no longer restrained by the apprehension of anodious parallel. The first introduction of a symbolicworship was in the veneration of the cross, and of relics.The saints and martyrs, whose intercession was implored,were seated on the right hand of God; but the gracious,and often supernatural favours, which, in the popularbelief, were showered round their tomb, conveyed an un­questionable sanction of the devout pilgrims, who visited,and touched, and kissed, these lifeless remains, the me­morials of their merits and sufferings.11 But a memorial,more interesting than the skull or the sandals of a de­parted worthy, is a faithful copy of his person and fea­tures, delineated by the arts of painting or sculpture.In every age, such copies, so congenial to human feel­ings, have been cherished by the zeal of private friend­ship, or public esteem; the images of the Roman empe­rors were adored with civil and almost religious honours;a reverence less ostentatious, but more sincere, was ap­plied to the statues of sages and patriots; and theseprofane virtues, these splendid sins, disappeared in thepresence of the holy men, who had died for their celes-Theirwor- t*a^ an(^ everlasting country. At first the expe-•"P. riment was made with caution and scruple; andthe venerable pictures were discreetly allowed to in-struct the ignorant, to awaken the cold, and to gratifythe prejudices of the heathen proselytes. By a slowthough inevitable progression, the honours of the ori-


private worship of Alexander Severus. (Lampridius, c. 29. Lardner, HeathenTestimonies, vol. 3. p. 34.)
* See this History vol. 2. p. 445. vol. 3. p. 147. 178—487.
VOL. VI. N







OCR Output








•.







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 341


they assign the last and most humble place to the hus­band of Fatima, in the persuasion that the order of suc­cession was determined by the degrees of sanctity.m Anhistorian who balances the four caliphs with a hand un­shaken by superstition, will calmly pronounce, that theirmanners were alike pure and exemplary; that their zealwas fervent, and probably sincere; and that, in the midstof riches and power, their lives were devoted to the prac­tice of moral and religious duties. But the public vir­tues of Abubeker and Omar, the prudence of the first, theseverity of the second, maintained the peace and pros­perity of their reigns. The feeble temper and decliningage of Othman were incapable of sustaining the weightof conquest and empire. He chose, and he was deceived;he trusted, and he was betrayed; the most deserving ofthe faithful became useless or hostile to his government,and his lavish bounty was productive only of ingratitudeand discontent. The spirit of discord went forth in theprovinces, their deputies assembled at Medina, and theCharegites, the desperate fanatics who disclaimed theyoke of subordination and reason, were confoundedamong the free-born Arabs, who demanded the redressof their wrongs and the punishment of their oppressors.From Cufa, from Bassora, from Egypt, from the tribes ofthe desert, they rose in arms, encamped about a league fromMedina, and dispatched a haughty mandate to their so­vereign, requiring him to execute justice, or to descendfrom the throne. His repentance began to disarm anddisperse the insurgents; but their fury was rekindled bythe arts of his enemies; and the forgery of a perfidioussecretary was contrived to blast his reputation and preci­pitate his fall. The caliph had lost the only guard of his


m This gradation of merit is distinctly marked in a creed, illustrated by Reland;(de Relig. Mohamrn. lib. 1. p. 37.) and a Sonnite argument inserted by Ocfcley.(Hist, of the Saracens, torn. 2. p. f30.) The practice of cursing the memory ofAli was abolished, after forty years, by the Ommiades themselves; (d'Herbelot,p. 690.) and there are few among the Turks who presume to revile him as an in-fiM. (Voyages de Chardin, torn. 4. p. 46.)







OCR Output








352 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Success of The talents of Mahomet are entitled to our ap-Mahomet. plause, but his success has perhaps1 too stronglyattracted our admiration. Are we surprised that a mul­titude of proselytes should embrace the doctrine and thepassions of an eloquent fanatic? In the heresies of thechurch, the same seduction has been tried and repeatedfrom the time of the apostles to that of the reformers.Does it seem incredible that a private citizen should graspthe sword and the sceptre, subdue his native country,and erect a monarchy by his victorious arms? In themoving picture of the dynasties of the east, a hundredfortunate usurpers have arisen from a baser origin, sur­mounted more formidable obstacles, and filled a largerscope of empire and conquest. Mahomet was alike in­structed to preach and to fight, and the union of theseopposite qualities, while it enhanced his merit, contri­buted to his success: the operation of force and persua­sion, of enthusiasm and fear, continually acted oneach other, till every barrier yielded to their irresistiblepower. His voice invited the Arabs to freedom andvictory, to arms and rapine, to the indulgence of theirdarling passions in this world and the other; the re­straints which he imposed were requisite to establishthe credit of the prophet, and to exercise the obedi­ence of the people; and the only objection to his suc­cess, was his rational creed of the unity and perfec-
Perma ^OnS o^ ^OC^' ^ *S nOt ^ ProPagation ^ut ^e
nencyof permanency of his religion that deserves ourgion?' wonder: the same pure and perfect impressionwhich he engraved at Mecca and Medina, is preserved,after the revolutions of twelve centuries, by the Indian,the African, and the Turkish proselytes of the Koran. Ifthe Christian apostles, St. Peter or St. Paul, could re­turn to the Vatican, they might possibly inquire thename of the deity who is worshipped with such myste­


acribed by Demetrius Cantemir (Hist, of the Othman Empire, p. 94.) and Niebuhr.(Description de 1'Arabie, p. 9-16. 317, &c.) It » much to be lamented, that the.Danish traveller was unable to purchase the chronicles of Arabia.







OCR Output








464 ROMAN EMPIRE.


restraints must be offensive to the pride or the zeal of theChristians.1" About two hundred years after Mahomet,they were separated from their fellow-subjects by a tur­ban or girdle of a less honourable colour; instead ofhorses or mules, they were condemned to ride on asses,in the attitude of women. Their public and privatebuildings were measured by a diminutive standard; inthe streets of the baths it is their duty to give way or bowdown before the meanest of the people; and their testi­mony is rejected, if it may tend to the prejudice of a truebeliever. The pomp of processions, the sounds of bellsor of psalmody, is interdicted in their worship: a decentreverence for the national faith, is imposed on their ser­mons and conversations; and the sacrilegious attempt toenter a mosch, or to seduce a Mussulman, will not besuffered to escape with impunity. In a time, however,of tranquillity and justice, the Christians have never beencompelled to renounce the Gospel or to embrace theKoran: but the punishment of death is inflicted uponthe apostates who have professed and deserted the lawof Mahomet. The martyrs of Cordova provoked thesentence of the cadhi, by the public confession of theirinconstancy, or their passionate invectives against theperson and religion of the prophet.1The em- At the end of the first century of the Hegira,caliphs0"* tne canphs were the most potent and absoluteA.D.71B. monarchs of the globe. Their prerogative wasnot circumscribed, either in right or in fact, by the powerof the nobles, the freedom of the commons, the privileges


k Heland explains the general restraints of the Mahometan policy and jurispru­dence. (Dissertat. torn. 3. p. 16—20.) The oppressive edicts of the caliph Mota-wakkel, (A. D. 847—861.) which are still in force, are noticed by Eutychius (An-nal. torn. t. p. 448.) and d'Herbelot. (Bibliot. Orient, p. 640.) A persecution ofthe caliph Omar II. is related, and most probably magnified, by the Greek Theo-phancs. (Chron. p. 334.)
1 The martyrs of Cordova (A. D. 850, &c.) are commemorated and justified bySt. Eulogius, who at length fell a victim himself. A synod, convened by the caliph,ambiguously censured their rashness. The moderate Fleury cannot reconcile theirconduct with the discipline of antiquity, toutefois 1'autorite de l'Egli<e, &c.(Fleury, Hist. Eccles. torn. 10. p. 415—5*2. particularly p. 451. 508,509.) Theirauthentic acts throw a strong though a transient light on the Spanish church in theninth century.







OCR Output








•2 ROMAN EMPIRE.


I. A laudable regard for the honour of the firstman to the proselytes, has countenanced the belief, the hope,
Ebionites.


renes, were distinguished only by their obstinate perse­verance in the practice of the Mosaic rites. Theirchurches have disappeared, their books are obliterated:their obscure freedom might allow a latitude of faith, andthe softness of their infant creed would be variouslymoulded by the zeal or prudence of three hundred years.Yet the most charitable criticism must refuse these secta­ries any knowledge of the pure and proper divinity ofChrist. Educated in the school of Jewish prophecy andprejudice, they had never been taught to elevate theirhopes above a human and temporal Messiah." If theyhad courage to hail their king when he appeared in a ple-


antiquil y which I have seen with my own eyes, are compiled, digested, and illus­trated, by Petavius and Le Clerc, by Beausobre and Mosheirn. I shall be content tofortify my narrative by the names and characters of these respectable guides ; and,in the contemplation of a minute or remote object, I am not ashamed to borrow theaid of the strongest glasses. — 1. The Dogmata Theologica of Petavius, is a work ofincredible labour and compass; the volumes which relate solely to the incarnation(two folios, fifth and sixth, of eight hundred and thirty-seven pages) are dividedinto sixteen books — the first of history, the remainder of controversy and doctrine.The Jesuit's learning is copious and correct; his Latinity is pure, his method clear,his argument profound and well connected: but he is the slave of the fathers, thescourge of heretics, and the enemy of truth and candour, as often as they are ini­mical to the Catholic cause. 2. The Armenian Le Clerc, who has composed, in aquarto volume, (Amsterdam 1716.) the ecclesiastical history of the two first ivi, -turies, was free both in his temper and situation; his sense is clear, but his thoughtsare narrow , he reduces the reason or folly of ages to the standard of his privatejudgment, nnd his impartiality is sometimes quickened, and sometimes tain ted, bybis opposition to the fathers. See the heretics (Corinthians, 80. Ebionites, 103.Carpocratians, 120. Valentinians, 121. Basilidians, 123. Marcionites, 141, &c.)under their proper dates. 3. The Historie Critique du M&ncheisme (Amsterdam,1734, 1739, in two vols. in quarto, with a posthumous dissertation sur les Naza-renes, Lausanne, 1745.) of M. de Beausobre is a treasure of ancient philosophyand theology. The learned historian spins with incomparable art the systematicthread of opinion, and transforms himself by turns into the person of a saint, asage, or a heretic. Yet his refinement is sometimes excessive; he betrays an'amiable partiality in favour of the weaker side, and while he guards againstcalumny, he does not allow sufficient scope for superstition and fanaticisrn. Acopious table of contents will direct the reader to any point that he wishes to ex­amine. 4. Less profound than Petavins, less independent than Le Clerc, less in­genious than Beausobre, the historian Mosheim is full, rational, correct, and mo­derate. In his learned work, De Rebus Christianis ante Constanrinum (Helmstadt,1753, in quarto,) see the Natarenes and Ebionites, p. 172—179. 3*8 — 33a; theGnostics in general, p. 179. &c.; Cerinthus,:p. 196 — 202; Basilides, p. 35ft — 361;Carpocrates, p. 363.— 367; Valentinus, p. 371—389; Marcion, p. 404 — 410;the Manicheana, p 829—837, &c.
b Kai yap irarn; n/wuf TW Xfurrw aV&{lMWV i£ «&{aff•i irprtauiptn J4mirlo-&ai saysthe Jewish Tryphon, (Justin. Dialog, p. 507.) in the name of his countrymen ; andthe modem Jews, the few who divert their thoughts from money to religion, stillheld the same language, and allege the literal sense of the prophets.







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 439


yielded to her unworthy yoke. They no longer hoped,perhaps they no longer wished, the return of their By­zantine sovereigns: their present servitude was not alle­viated by the benefits of order and justice; and the mostzealous Catholic must prefer the imperfect truths of theKoran to the blind and rude idolatry of the Moors. Thegeneral of the Saracens was again received as the saviourof the province; the friends of civil society conspiredagainst the savages of the land; and the royal prophe­tess was slain in the first battle which overturned thebaseless fabric of her superstition and empire. Thesame spirit revived under the successor of Hassan; itwas finally quelled by the activity of Musa and his twosons, but the number of the rebels may be presumed fromthat of three hundred thousand captives; sixty thousandof whom, the caliph's fifth, were sold for the profit ofthe public treasury. Thirty thousand of the barbarianyouth were inlisted in the troops; and the pious laboursof Musa to inculcate the knowledge and practice of theKoran, accustomed the Africans to obey the apostle ofGod and the commander of the faithful. In their cli­mate and government, their diet and habitation, the wan­dering Moors resembled the Bedoweens of the desert.Adoption With the religion, they were proud to adopt thelanguage, name, and origin of Arabs: the bloodof the strangers and natives was insensiblymingled; and from the Euphrates to the Atlantic thesame nation might seem to be diffused over the sandyplains of Asia and Africa. Yet I will not deny thatfifty thousand tents of pure Arabians might be trans­ported over the Nile, and scattered through the Libyandesert; and I am not ignorant that five of the Moorishtribes still retain their barbarous idiom, with the appel­lation and character of white Africans.5


k The first book of Leo Africanus, and the observations of Dr. Shaw, (p. 320.223. 227. 247, Sue.) will throw some light on the roving tribes of Barbary, of Ara­bian or Moorish descent. But Shaw had seen these savages with distant terror;and Leo, a captive in the Vatican, appears to have lost more of his Arabic, than







OCR Output








234 ROMAN EMPIRE.


empire, was exalted to reign over their conquerors. HisA. -96'- father Henry the Fowler was elected, by thesuffrage of the nation, to save and institute the king­dom of Germany. Its limits0 were enlarged on everyside by his son, the first and greatest of the Othos. Aportion of Gaul, to the west of the Rhine, along thebanks of the Meuse and the Moselle, was assigned tothe Germans, by whose blood and language it has beentinged since the time of Caesar and Tacitus. Betweenthe Rhine, the Rhone, and the Alps, the successors ofOtho acquired a vain supremacy over the broken king­doms of Burgundy and Arles. In the north, Christianitywas propagated by the sword of Otho, the conquerorand apostle of the Slavic nations of the Elbe and Oder;the marches of Brandenburg and Sleswick were fortifiedwith German colonies; and the king of Denmark, thedukes of Poland and Bohemia, confessed themselveshis tributary vassals. At the head of a victorious army,he passed the Alps, subdued the kingdom of Italy, de­livered the pope, and for ever fixed the imperial crownin the name and nation of Germany. From that me­morable era, two maxims of public jurisprudence wereintroduced by force and ratified by time. I. That theprince who was elected in the German diet, acquiredfrom that instant the subject kingdoms of Italy andRome. II. But that he might not legally assume thetitles of emperor and Augustus, till be had received thecrown from the hands of the Roman pontiff.d
^he imperial dignity of Charlemagne wasannounced to the east by the alteration of hisand eaitem style; and instead of saluting his fathers, theempires. Qreeij emperors, he presumed to adopt the


c See the treatise of Coringius (de Finibus Imperil Gennanici, Francofurt. 1680,in quarto), be rejects the extravagant and improper scale of the Roman and Carlo-vingian empires, and discusses with moderation the rights of Germany, her vassals,and her neighbours.
d The power of custom forces me to number Conrad L and Henry I. the Fowler,in the list of emperors, a title which was never assumed by those kings of Germany.The Italians, Muratori, for instance, are more scrupulous and correct, and onlyreckon the princes who have been crowned at Rome.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 249


field. The temporal power of the clergy was cherishedand exalted by the superstition or policy of the Carlovin-gian and Saxon dynasties, who blindly depended on theirmoderation and fidelity; and the bishoprics of Ger­many were made equal in extent and privilege, superiorin wealth and population, to the most ample states ofthe military order. As long as the emperors retained theprerogative of bestowing on every vacancy these eccle­siastic and secular benefices, their cause was maintainedby the gratitude or ambition of their friends and favour­ites. But in the quarrel of the investitures, they weredeprived of their influence over the episcopal chapters;the freedom of election was restored, and the sovereignwas reduced by a solemn mockery, to his first prayers,the recommendation, once in his reign, to a single pre­bend in each church. The secular governors, insteadof being recalled at the will of a superior, could be de­graded only by the sentence of their peers. In the firstage of the monarchy, the appointment of the son to thedutchyor county of his father, was solicited as a favour;it was gradually obtained as a custom, and extorted as aright: the lineal succession was often extended to thecollateral or female branches; the states of the empire(their popular, and at length their legal appellation) weredivided and alienated by testament and sale; and all ideaof a public trust was lost in that of a private and perpe­tual inheritance. The emperor could not even be en­riched by the casualties of forfeiture and extinction:within the term of a year, he was obliged to dispose of thevacant fief, and in the choice of the candidate, it was hisduty to consult either the general or the provincial diet.TheOer- After the death of Frederic II. Germany wasmamccon- left a monster with a hundred heads. A crowd
stitution, ...
A. c. 1250. of princes and prelates disputed the ruins ofthe empire; the lords of innumerable castles were lessprone to obey, than to imitate, their superiors; and ac­cording to the measure of their strength, their incessanthostilities received the names of conquest or robbery.







OCR Output








208 ROMAN EMPIRE.


their great deliverer. At the aspect of the holy crosses,and ensigns of the saints, he dismounted from his horse,led the procession of his nobles to the Vatican, and, ashe ascended the stairs, devoutly kissed each step of thethreshold of the apostles. In the portico, Hadrian ex­pected him at the head of his clergy: they embraced, asfriends and equals; but in their march to the altar, theking or patrician assumed the right hand of the pope.Nor was the Frank content with these vain and emptydemonstrations of respect. In the twenty-six years thatelapsed, between the conquest of Lombardy and hisimperial coronation, Rome, which had been deliveredby the sword, was subject, as his own, to the sceptre ofCharlemagne. The people swore allegiance to his per­son and family: in his name money was coined, andjustice was administered; and the election of the popeswas examined and confirmed by his authority. Exceptan original and self-inherent claim of sovereignty, therewas not any prerogative remaining, which the title ofemperor could add to the patrician of Rome.pDonations The gratitude of the Carlovingians was ade-1uate to tnese obligations, and their names areto consecrated as the saviours and benefactors of


e popes. ^e Roman church. Her ancient patrimony offarms and houses was transformed by their bounty intothe temporal dominion of cities and provinces; and thedonation of the exarchate was the first fruits of the con­quest of Pepin.q Astolphus with a sigh relinquishedhis prey; the keys and the hostages of the principalcities were delivered to the French ambassador; and,in his master's name, he presented them before the


P Paul us Diaconus, who wrote before the empire of Charlemagne, describes Romeas his subject city — vestras civitates (ad Pompeium Festum), suis addidit sceptris(de Metensis Ecclesiae Episcopis.) Some Carlovingian medals struck at Rome, haveengaged Le Blanc to write an elaborate, though partial, dissertation on their autho­rity at Rome, both as patricians and emperors. (Amsterdam, 1692, in quarto.)
1 Mosheim (Institution Hist. Eccles. p. 263.) weighs this donation with fair anddeliberate prudence. The original act has never been produced; but the LiberPontificalia represents, (p. 171.) and the Codei Carolinus supposes, this amplegift. Both are contemporary records; and the latter is more authentic, since it ha*been preserved, not in the Papal, but the Imperial, library.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 181


host of heaven presumes not to behold? HE, who dwellsin heaven, condescends this day to visit us by his venerableimage; HE, who is seated on the cherubim, visits us thisday by a picture, which the Father has delineated withhis immaculate hand, which he has formed in an ineffablemanner, and which we sanctify by adoring it with fearand love. Before the end of the sixth century, theseimages, made without hands (in Greek it is a singleword'), were propagated in the camps and cities of theeastern empire ;m they were the objects of worship, andthe instruments of miracles; and, in the hour of3 danger or tumult, their venerable presence couldrevive the hope, rekindle the courage, or repress the fury,of the Roman legions. Of these pictures, the far greaterpart, the transcripts of a human pencil , could only pretendto a secondary likeness and improper title: but therewere some of higher descent, who derived their resem­blance from an immediate contact with the original,endowed, for that purpose, with a miraculous and pro­lific virtue. The most ambitious aspired from a filialto a fraternal relation with the image of Edessa; andsuch is the veronica of Rome, or Spain, or Jerusalem,which Christ in his agony and bloody sweat appliedto his face, and delivered to a holy matron. Thefruitful precedent was speedily transferred to the Vir­gin Mary," and the saints and martyrs. In the churchof Diospolis, in Palestine, the features of the motherof God "were deeply inscribed on a marble column:


See Duncage, in Gloss. GKEC. et Lat. The subject is treatedwith equal learning and bigotry by the Jesuit Grctsrr, (Syntagma de Imaginibusnon .Mann factis, ad calcem Codini de Officiis. p. 289 — 330.) the ass, or ratherthe fox, of Ingoldstadt (see the Scaligerana ; ) with equal reason and wit by theProtestant Beausobre, in the ironical controversy which he has spread throughmany volumes of the Bibliotheque Germanique. (torn. 1. p. 18 — 50. 20. p. V —68. 25. p. 1 — 46. 27. p. 85—112. 28. p. 1—33. 31. p. 111—148. 32. p. 75— 107.34. p. 67—96.)
"Theophylact Simocatta (lib. 2. c. 3. p. 34. lib. 3. c. 1. p. 63.) celebrates theBmifour uiUTfut, which he styles a)fiifmairm; yet it was no more than a copy,since he adds apxtmr.,v TO txtim a Fx/juuai (of Edessa) fipnffiuunxri TI affwra. SeePagi, torn. 2. A.D. 586. no. 11.
0 See in the genuine or supposed works of John Damascenus, two passages onthe Virgin and St. Luke, which have not been noticed by Greteer, nor consequentlyhy Beausobre. (Opera, Job. Damascen. torn. 1, p. 618. 631.)







OCR Output








336 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Jesus, and Fatima, the best beloved of his daughters.
Was she not old? (said Ayesha, with the insolence of ablooming beauty) has not God given you a better in herplace?—No, by God (said Mahomet, with an effusion ofhonest .gratitude), there never can be a better! she be­lieved in me, when men despised me: she relieved my wants,when I was poor and persecuted by the world.A
In ^e largest indulgence of polygamy, thefounder of a religion and empire might aspire tomultiply the chances of a numerous posterity and a linealsuccession. The hopes of Mahomet were fatally disap­pointed. The virgin Ayesha, and his ten widows of ma­ture age and approved fertility, were barren in his potentembraces. The four sons of Cadijah died in their in­fancy. Mary, his Egyptian concubine, was endeared tohim by the birth of Ibrahim. At the end of fifteenmonths the prophet wept over his grave; but he sus­tained with firmness the raillery of his enemies, andchecked the adulation or credulity of the Moslems, bythe assurance that an eclipse of the sun was not occa­sioned by the death of the infant. Cadijah had likewisegiven him four daughters, who were married to the mostfaithful of his disciples: the three eldest died before theirfather; but Fatima, who possessed his confidence andlove, became the wife of her cousin Ali, and the motherof an illustrious progeny. The merit and misfortunes ofAli and his descendants will lead me to anticipate, in thisplace, the series of the Saracen caliphs, a title which de­scribes the commanders of the faithful as the vicars andsuccessors of the apostle of God.e
The birth, the alliance, the character, of Ali, which


* Abulfedain Vit. Moharn. p. 12,13. 16,17. cum notis Gagnier.
e This outline of the Arabian history is drawn from the Bibliotheque Orientateof d'Herbelot; (under the names of Aboubecre, Omar, Olhman, Ati, &c.) from theAnnals of Abulfeda, Abulpharagius, and Elmacin (under the proper years of theHegira), and especially from Ockley's History of the Saracens (vol. 1. p. 1—10.Hi—122.229. l!49. 3<::3—o7t. 378—391. and almost the whole of the second vo­lume). Yet we should weigh with caution the traditions of the hostile sects; astream which becomes still more muddy as it flows farther from the source. SirJohn Chardin has too faithfullycopied the fables and errors of the modem Persians.(Voyages, torn. 2. p. 233—250, &c.)







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 395


Battle of It was incumbent on the Saracens to exert theI^ese fr1^ powers of their valour and enthusiasmNovember, against the forces of the emperor, who wastaught by repeated losses, that the rovers of the deserthad undertaken, and would speedily achieve, a regularand permanent conquest. From the provinces of Eu­rope and Asia, fourscore thousand soldiers were trans­ported by sea and land to Antioch and Caesarea: thelight troops of the army consisted of sixty thousandChristian Arabs of the tribes of Gassan. Under thebanner of Jabalah, the last of their princes, they marchedin the van; and it was a maxim of the Greeks, thatfor the purpose of cutting diamond, a diamond was themost effectual. Heraclius withheld his person from thedangers of the field; but his presumption, or perhapshis despondency, suggested a peremptory order, thatthe fate of the province and the war should be decidedby a single battle. The Syrians were attached to thestandard of Rome and of the cross; but the noble, thecitizen, the peasant, were exasperated by the injusticeand cruelty of a licentious host, who oppressed them assubjects, and despised them as strangers and aliens .d Areport of these mighty preparations was conveyed to theSaracens in their camp of Emesa; and the chiefs,though resolved to fight, assembled a council: the faithof Abu Obeidah would have expected on the samespot the glory of martyrdom; the wisdom of Caled ad­vised an honourable retreat to the skirts of Palestineand Arabia, where they might await the succours of theirfriends, and the attack of the unbelievers. A speedymessenger soon returned from the throne of Medina,with the blessings of Omar and Ali, the prayers of thewidows of the prophet, and a reinforcement of eightthousand Moslems. In their way they overturned a de­tachment of Greeks, and when they joined at Yermuk,


* I have read somewhere in Tacitus, or Grolius, Subjectos habent tanquam suos,viles tanquam alienos. Some Greek officers ravished the wife, and murderedthe child, of their Syrian landlord; and Manuel smiled at hi; undutiful complaint.







OCR Output








120 ROMAN EMPIRE.


in the hippodrome; and as these dreadful examplesmight be the effects of error or caprice, they must havealienated from his service the best and wisest of the ci­tizens. But the pride of the monarch was flattered inthe exercise of power, or, as he thought, of virtue; andthe people, safe in their obscurity, applauded the dan­ger and debasement of their superiors. This extraordi­nary rigour was justified, in some measure, by its salu­tary consequences; since, after a scrutiny of seventeendays, not a complaint or abuse could be found in thecourt or city; and it might be alleged that the Greekscould be ruled only with a rod of iron, and that thepublic interest is the motive and law of the supremejudge. Yet in the crime, or the suspicion, of treason,that judge is of all others the most credulous and par­tial. Theophilus might inflict a tardy vengeance onthe assassins of Leo and the saviours of his father; buthe enjoyed the fruits of their crime; and his jealous ty­ranny sacrificed a brother and a prince to the futuresafety of his life. A Persian of the race of the Sassa-nides died in poverty and exile at Constantinople, leav­ing an only son, the issue of a plebeian marriage. Atthe age of twelve years, the royal birth of Theophobuswas revealed, and his merit was not unworthy of hisbirth. He was educated in the Byzantine palace, aChristian and a soldier; advanced with rapid steps inthe career of fortune and glory; received the hand ofthe emperor's sister; and was promoted to the commandof thirty thousand Perians, who, like his father, had fledfrom the Mahometan conquerors. These troops, doublyinfected with mercenary and fanatic vices, were desirousof revolting against their benefactor, and erecting thestandard of their native king: but the royal Theophobusrejected their offers, disconcerted their schemes, and es­caped from their hands to the camp or palace of his royalbrother. A generous confidence might have secured afaithful and able guardian for his wife and his infantson, to whom Theophilus, in the flower of his age, was







OCR Output








104 ROMAN HISTORY.


iolia; and Justinian applauded the obedience of theEuxine, which had involved so many of his subjectsand enemies in a common shipwreck : but the tyrant wasstill insatiate of blood; and a second expedition wascommanded to extirpate the remains of the proscribedcolony. In the short interval, the Chersonites had re­turned to their city, and were prepared to die in arms;the khan of the Chozarshad renounced the cause of hisodious brother: the exiles of every provence were assem­bled in Tauris; and Bardanes, under the name of Phi-lippicus, was invested with the purple. The imperialtroops, unwilling and unable to perpetuate the revengeof Justinian, escaped his displeasure by abjuring his al­legiance; the fleet, under their new sovereign, steeredback a more auspicious course to the harbours of Synopeand Constantinople; and every tongue was prompt topronounce, every hand to execute, the death of the ty­rant. Destitute of friends, he was deserted by his bar­barian guards; and the stroke of the assassin was praisedas an act of patriotism and Roman virtue. His son Ti­berius had taken refuge in a church; his aged grand­mother guarded the door; and the innocent youth, sus­pending round his neck the most formidable relics,embraced with one hand the altar, with the other thewood of the true cross. But the popular fury thatdares to trample on superstition, is deaf to the cries ofhumanity; and the race of Heraclius was extinguishedafter a reign of one hundred years.
Between the fall of Heraclian and the rise ofthe Isaurian dynasty, a short interval of sixDecember, years is divided into three reigns. Bardanes, orPhilippicus, was hailed at Constantinople as a hero whohad delivered his country from a tyrant; and he mighttaste some moments of happiness in the first transports ofsincere and universal joy. Justinian had left behindhim an ample treasure, the fruit of cruelty and rapine:but this useful fund was soon and idly dissipated by his







OCR Output








162 ROMAN EMPIRE.


surprised by the sally of a vigilant foe: but while histroops fled in disorder, his invincible lance transpiercedthe thickest ranks of the Armenians. On his return tothe imperial camp in Macedonia, he was received byManuel with public smiles and a private reproof; butthe duchies of Naissus, Braniseba, and Castoria, werethe reward or consolation of the unsuccessful general.Eudocia still attended his motions; at midnight, theirtent was suddenly attacked by her angry brothers, im­patient to expiate her infamy in his blood: his daringspirit refused her advice, and the disguise of a femalehabit; and, boldly starting from his couch, he drew hissword, and cut his way through the numerous assassins.It was here that he first betrayed his ingratitude andtreachery: he engaged in a treasonable correspondencewith the king of Hungary and the German emperor;approached the royal tent at a suspicious hour, with adrawn sword; and, under the mask of a Latin soldier,avowed an intention of revenge against a mortal foe;and imprudently praised the fleetness of his horse as aninstrument of flight and safety. The monarch dissem­bled his suspicions; but, after the close of the campaign,Andronicus was arrested, and strictly confined in a'towerof the palace of Constantinople.
In this prison he was left above twelve years; a mostpainful restraint, from which the thirst of action and plea­sure perpetually urged him to escape. Alone and pen­sive, he perceived some broken bricks in a corner of thechamber, and gradually widened the passage, till he hadexplored a dark and forgotten recess. Into this hole heconveyed himself, and the remains of his provisions, re­placing the bricks in their former positions, and erasingwith care the footsteps of his retreat. At the hour ofthe customary visit, his guards were amazed with thesilence and solitude of the prison, and reported, withshame and fear, his incomprehensible flight. The gatesof the palace and city were instantly shut: the strictest







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 431


the name of Abdallah was joined by the Arabians withthe heroic names of Caled and Amrou.8Progress of The western conquests of the Saracens werewnifiiT" suspended near twenty years, till their dis-Afnca, sensions were composed by the establishment665—689. of the house of Ommiyah: and the caliphMoawiyah was invited by the cries of the Africans them­selves. The successors of Heraclius had been informedof the tribute which they had been compelled to stipu­late with the Arabs: but instead of being moved to pityand relieve their distresses, they imposed, as an equivalentor a fine, a second tribute of a similar amount. Theears of the Byzantine ministers were shut against thecomplaints of their poverty and ruin: their despair wasreduced to prefer the dominion of a single master; andthe extortions of the patriarch of Carthage, who wasinvested with civil and military power, provoked the sec­taries, and even the Catholics, of the Roman province toabjure the religion as well as the authority of their ty­rants. The first lieutenant of Moawiyah acquired a justrenown, subdued an important city, defeated an army ofthirty thousand Greeks, swept away fourscore thousandcaptives, and enriched with their spoils the bold adven­turers of Syria and Egypt.h But the title of conquerorof Africa is more justly due to his successor Akbah. Hemarched from Damascus at the head of ten thousand ofthe bravest Arabs; and the genuine force of the Mos­lems was enlarged by the doubtful aid and conversion ofmany thousand barbarians. It would be difficult, nor isit necessary, to trace the accurate line of the progress ofAkbah. The interior regions have been peopled by theorientals with fictitious armies and imaginary citadels.In the warlike province of Zab or Numidia, fourscore


partivav 2apaxqv»i TW A^gixnv, xat 7-u/u£oXorrs; ta TVfanwi, MI nut aw aural nmmon, xai irroi^iwaVTif ipgpw; ftlT» TOT Aif(m inTheophau. Chronograph, p. 285. edit. Paris. His chronology i i loose and inaccurate.h Theophanes (in Chronograph, p. 293.) inserts the vague rumours that mightreach Constantinople, of the western conquests of the Arabs; and I learn fromPaul Wamefrid, deacon of Aquileia, (de Gcstis Langobard, lib. 5. c. 15.) that atthis time the; sent a fleet from Alexandria into the Sicilian and African seas.







OCR Output








466 ROMAN EMPIRE.


servation of the native tongue reveals the descent of theMahometans of Persia/ In the mountains and deserts,an obstinate race of unbelievers adhered to the supersti­tion of their fathers; and a faint tradition of the Magiantheology is kept alive in the province of Kirman, alongthe banks of the Indus, among the exiles of Surat, andin the colony which, in the last century, was planted byShaw Abbas at the gates of Ispahan. The chief pontiffhas retired to mount Elbourz, eighteen leagues from thecity of Yezd: the perpetual fire (if it continue to burn)is inaccessible to the profane; but his residence is theschool, the oracle, and the pilgrimage, of the Ghebers,whose hard and uniform features attest the unmingledpurity of their blood. Under the jurisdiction of theirelders, eighty thousand families maintain an innocent andindustrious life; their subsistence is derived from somecurious manufactures and mechanic trades; and theycultivate the earth with the fervour of a religious duty.Their ignorance withstood the despotism of Shaw Abbas,who demanded with threats and tortures the propheticbooks of Zoroaster; and this obscure remnant of the Ma-gians is spared by the moderation or contempt of theirpresent sovereigns.'
The northern coast of Africa is the only landand fail of in which the light of the gospel, after a longantyta an(^ Perfect establishment, has been totally ex-Africa, tinguished. The arts, which had been taughtby Carthage and Rome, were involved in a cloud ofignorance; the doctrine of Cyprian and Augustin wasno longer studied. Five hundred episcopal churches


1 The last Magian of name and power appears to be Mardavige the Dilemitewho, in the beginning of the tenth century, reigned in the northern provinces ofPersia, near,the Caspian sea. (D'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orient, p.'335.) But hissoldiers and successors, the BoiriJa, either professed or embraced the Mahometanfaith; and under their dynasty (A.D. 933—1020.) I should place the fall of thereligion of Zoroaster.
r The present state of the Gbebera in Persia is taken from Sir John Chardin,not indeed the most learned, but the most judicious and inquisitive, of our moderntravellers. (Voyages in Perse, torn. 3. p. 109. 179—187. in quarto.) His bre­thren, Pietro de la Valle, Clearius, Thevenot, Tavemier, &c. whom I hare fruit­lessly searched, had neither eyes nor attention for this intereeting people.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 140


his valiant but unsuccessful efforts to resist the progressof the Turks. His defeat and captivity inflicted a deadlywound on the Byzantine monarchy of the east; andafter he was released from the chains of the sultan, hevainly sought his wife and his subjects. His wife hadbeen thrust into a monastery, and the subjects of Roma-nus had embraced the rigid maxim of the civil law, thata prisoner in the hands of the enemy is deprived, as bythe stroke of death, of all the public and private rightsMichael o^ a citizen. In the general consternation, theyn. Para- Csesar John asserted the indefeasible right of
pinnces, °
Androni- his three nephews: Constantinople listened tostaLtine°n his voice; and the Turkish captive was pro-XIL claimed in the capital, and received on theA.D.ion, frontier, as an enemy of the republic. RomanusAugust. was not more fortunate in domestic than inforeign war: the loss of two battles compelled him toyield, on the assurance of fair and honorable treatment;but his enemies were devoid of faith or humanity; and,after the cruel extinction of his sight, his wounds wereleft to bleed and corrupt, till in a few daysjie was re­lieved from a state of misery. Under the triple reignof the house of Ducas, the two younger brothers werereduced to the vain honours of the purple; but theeldest, the pusillanimous Michael, was incapable ofsustaining the Roman sceptre; and his surname of Pa-rapinaces denotes the reproach which he shared with anavaricious favourite, who enhanced the price, and di­minished the measure, of wheat. In the school of Psel-lus, and after the example of his mother, the son ofEudocia made some proficiency in philosophy andrhetoric; but his character was degraded, rather thanennobled, by the virtues of a monk, and the learning ofa sophist. Strong in the contempt of their sovereignand their own esteem, two generals at the head of theEuropean and Asiatic legions assumed the purple atAdrianople and Nice. Their revolt was in the samemonth; they bore the same name of Nicephorus; but







OCR Output








272 ROMAN EMPIRE.


their keenest satire against a despicable race, they af­firmed, in the bitterness of reproach, that the men knewnot how to give, nor the women to deny.' The
Examples . • •,• i • i • i i «i
of genero- same hospitality, which was practised by Abra-81ty' ham and celebrated by Homer, is still renewed inthe camps of the Arabs. The ferocious Bedoweens, theterror of the desert, embrace, without inquiry or hesita­tion, the stranger who dares to confide in their honourand to enter their tent. His treatment is kind and respect-'ful; he shares the wealth or the poverty of his host: and,after a needful repose, he is dismissed on his way, withthanks, with blessings, and perhaps with gifts. Theheart and hand are more largely expanded by the wantsof a brother or a friend; but the heroic acts that coulddeserve the public applause, must have surpassed thenarrow measure of discretion and experience. A dis­pute had arisen, who, among the citizens of Mecca,was entitled to the prize of generosity, and a successiveapplication was made to the three who were deemedmost worthy of the trial. Abdallah, the son of Abbas,had undertaken a distant journey, and his foot was inthe stirrup, when he heard the voice of a suppliant,—O son of the uncle of the apostle of God, I am a travel­ler and in distress! He instantly dismounted to presentthe pilgrim with his camel, her rich caparison, and apurse of four thousand pieces of gold, excepting onlythe sword, either for its intrinsic value, or as the gift ofan honoured kinsman. The servant of Kais informedthe second suppliant that his master was asleep; buthe immediately added, Here is a purse of seven thou­sand pieces of gold (it is all we have in the house), andhere is an order, that will entitle you to a camel and aslave: the master, as soon as he awoke, praised andenfranchised his faithful steward with a gentle reproof,that, by respecting his slumbers, he had stinted hisbounty. The third of these heroes, the blind Arabah,


1 Sale's Preliminary Discourse, p. 29, 30.







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 433


the ocean for the purple shell-fish. The fearless Akbahplunged into the heart of the country, traversed the wil­derness in which his successors erected the splendid ca­pitals of Fez and Morocco," and at length penetrated tothe verge of the Atlantic and the great desert. The riverSus descends from the western sides of mount Atlas, fer­tilizes, like the Nile, the adjacent soil, and falls into thesea at a moderate distance from the Canary, or Fortu­nate, islands. Its banks were inhabited by the last of theMoors, a race of savages, without laws, or discipline, orreligion; they were astonished by the strange and irre­sistible terrors of the oriental arms; and, as they pos­sessed neither gold nor silver, the richest spoil was thebeauty of the female captives, some of whom were after­ward sold for a thousand pieces of gold. The career,though not the zeal, of Akbah was checked by the pros­pect of a boundless ocean. He spurred his horse into thewaves, and raising his eyes to heaven, exclaimed with thetone of a fanatic—Great God! if my course were notstopped by this sea, I would still go on, to the unknownkingdoms of the west, preaching the unity of thy holyname, and putting to the sword the rebellious nationswho worship any other gods than thee.f Yet this Ma­hometan Alexander, who sighed for new worlds, was un­able to preserve his recent conquests. By the universaldefection of the Greeks and Africans, he was recalledfrom the shores of the Atlantic, and the surrounding mul­titudes left him only the resource of an honourable death.The last scene was dignified by an example of nationalvirtue. An ambitious chief, who had disputed the com­


OT Linnaanname; nor will I decide whether the citrum be the orange or the lemon.Saltnasius appears to exhaust the subject, but he too involves himself in the web ofhu disorderly erudition. (Plinian. Exercitat. torn. 2. p. 666, &c.)
'° Leo African, fol. 16, verso. Marmot, torn. 2. p. 28. This province, the firstscene of the exploits and greatness of the iherift, is often mentioned in the curioushistory of that dynasty at the end of the third volume of Marmol, Description derAfrique. The third vol. of the Recherches Historiques sur les Maures (latelypublished at Paris), illustrates the history and geography of the kingdoms of Fezand Morocco.
v Otter (p. 119.) has given the strong tone of fanaticism to this exclamation,which Cardonne (p. 37.) has softened to a pious wish of preaching the Koran. Yetthey had both the same text of Novairi before their eyes.
VOL. VI. 2 F







OCR Output








444 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Their se- faithful ally. The Saracens landed" at thecondde- pillar or point of Europe; the corrupt and fami-A.D.'rn, liar appellation of Gibraltar (Gebel al Tarik)f' describes the mountain of Tarik; and the in-trenchments of his camp were the first outline of thosefortifications, which, in the hands of our countrymen,have resisted the art and power of the house of Bourbon.The adjacent governors informed the court of Toledoof the descent and progress of the Arabs; and the de­feat of his lieutenant Edeco, who had been commandedto seize and bind the presumptuous strangers, admo­nished Roderic of the magnitude of the danger. Atthe royal summons, the dukes, and counts, the bishopsand nobles of the Gothic monarchy, assembled at thehead of their followers; and the title of king of the Ro­mans, which is employed by an Arabic historian, maybe excused by the close affinity of language, religion,and manners, between the nations of Spain. His armyconsisted of ninety or a hundred thousand men; a for­midable power, if their fidelity and discipline had beenadequate to their numbers. The troops of Tarik hadbeen augmented to twelve thousand Saracens; but theChristian malecontents were attracted by"the influence ofJulian, and a crowd of Africans most greedily tasted thetemporal blessings of the Koran. In the neighbour­hood of Cadiz, the town of Xeres0 has been illustratedencounter which determined the fate


and view'
July 19 of the kingdom; the stream of the Guadalete,
which falls into the bay, divided the two camps,and marked the advancing and retreating skirmishes ofthree successive and bloody days. On the fourth day,the two armies joined a more serious and decisive issue;


"The Nubian Geographer (p. 154.) explains the topography of the war; but itis highly incredible that the lieutenant of Musa should execute the desperate uduseless measure of burning bis ships.
0 Xeres (the Roman colony of Asia Regia) is only two leagues from Cadiz. Inthe sixteenth century it was a granary of com; and the wine of Xeres is familiarto the nations of Europe. (Lud. Nonii Hispania. c. I3. p. 54—56. a work of correct and concise knowledge; d'Anville, Etats de 1'Europe, &c. p. 154.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 83


4
siriian priesthood; the patriarch supplies each vacancywith an Egyptian monk; and the character of a strangerappears more venerable in the eyes of the people, lessdangerous in those of the monarch. In the sixth cen­tury, when the schism of Egypt was confirmed, the rivalchiefs, with their patrons, Justinian and Theodora, stroveto outstrip each other in the conquest of a remote andindependent province. The industry of the ernpres¥was again victorious, and the pious Theodora has esta­blished in that sequestered church the faith and disciplineof the Jacobites.* Encompassed on all sides by the ene­mies of their religion, the ^Ethiopians slept near a thou­sand years, forgetful of the world, by whom they wereThe Porto- forgotten. They were awakened by the Portu-Ab^sinia, guese, who, turning the southern promontory—15505*5 o^ Africa, appeared in India and the Red sea,&c. as if they had descended through the air from a
distant planet. In the first moments of their interview,the subjects of Rome and Alexandria observed the re­semblance, rather than the difference of their faith; andeach nation expected the most important benefits froman alliance with their Christian brethren. In theirlonely situation, the ^Ethiopians had almost relapsedinto the savage life. Their vessels, which had traded toCeylon, scarcely presumed to navigate the rivers ofAfrica; the ruins of Axume were deserted, the nationwas scattered in villages, and the emperor (a pompousname) was content, both in peace and war, with themoveable residence of a camp. Conscious of their ownindigence, the Abyssinians, had formed the rational pro­ject of importing the arts and ingenuity of Europe ;* andtheir ambassadors at Rome and Lisbon were instructed


• I know not why Assemannus (Bibliot. Orient, torn. 2. p. 384.) should call inquestion these probable missions of Theodora in to Nubia and /Ethiopia. The slightnotices of Abyssinia till the year 1500 are supplied by Elenaudot(p. 336.341.381,382. 405. 443, &c. 452. 456. 463. 475. 480. 511. 525. 559. 564.) from the Copticwriters. The mind of Ludolphus was a perfect blank.
1 Lndolph. Hint. ^Ethiop. lib. 4. c. 5. The most necessary arts are now exercisedby the Jews, and the foreign trade is in the hands of the Armenians. What Gre­gory principally admired and envied was the industry of Europe—artes et opificia.


G 2







OCR Output








132 ROMAN EMPIRE.


A. D. 9ii. the ancients. An apartment of the ByzantineMay11' palace was lined with porphyry: it was reservedfor the use of the pregnant empresses; and the royalbirth of their children was expressed by the appel­lation of porphyrogenite, or born in the purple. Severalof the Roman princes had been blessed with an heir;but this peculiar surname was first applied to Constan-tine VII. His life and titular reign were of equal dura­tion; but of fifty-four years, six had elapsed before hisfather's death; and the son of Leo was ever the volun­tary or reluctant subject of those who oppressed hisweakness or abused his confidence. His uncle Alex­ander, who had long been invested with the title ofAugustus, was the first colleague and governor of theyoung prince: but in a rapid career of vice and folly,the brother of Leo already emulated the reputation ofMichael; and when he was extinguished by a timelydeath, he entertained a project of castrating his nephew,and leaving the empire to a worthless favourite. Thesucceeding years of the minority of Constantine wereoccupied by his mother Zoe, and a succession of coun­cil of seven regents, who pursued their interest, gratifiedtheir passions, abandoned the republic, supplanted eachother, and finally vanished in the presence of a soldier.From an obscure origin, Romanus Lecapenus had raisedhimself to the command of the naval armies; and in theanarchy of the times, had deserved, or at least had ob­tained, the national esteem. With a victorious and af­fectionate fleet, he sailed from the mouth of the Danubeinto the harbour of. Constantinople, and was hailed asthe deliverer of the people, and the guardian of theprince. His supreme office was at first defined byRomanusi. the new appellation of father of the emperor;A. ixlug'!' but Romanus soon disdained the subordinateDec. 24. powers of a minister, and assumed, with thetitles of Caesar and Augustus, the full independence ofroyalty, which he held near five-and-twenty years.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 165


discovered a more easy and pleasing conqiiest, thebeautiful Philippa, sister of the empress Maria, anddaughter of Raymond of Poitou, the Latin prince ofAntioch. For her sake, he deserted his station, andwasted the summer in balls and tournaments: to hislove she sacrificed her innocence, her reputation, andthe offer of an advantageous marriage. But the resent­ment of Manuel for this domestic affront, interruptedhis pleasures: Andronicus left the indiscreet princessto weep and to repent; and, with a band of desperateadventurers, undertook the pilgrimage of Jerusalem^His birth, his martial renown, and professions of zeal,announced him as the champion of the cross; he sooncaptivated both the clergy and the king; and the Greekprince was invested with the lordship of Berytus, on-the coast of Phoenicia. In his neighbourhood resideda young and handsome queen of his own nation andfamily, great grand-daughter of the emperor Alexis,and widow of Baldwin III. king of Jerusalem. Shevisited and loved her kinsman. Theodora was the thirdvictim of his amorous seduction; and her shame wasmore public and scandalous than that of her predeces­sors. The emperor still thirsted for revenge; and hissubjects and allies of the Syrian frontier, were repeat­edly pressed to seize the person, and put out the eyes,of the fugitive. In Palestine he was no longer safe;but the tender Theodora revealed his danger and ac­companied his flight. The queen of Jerusalem wasexposed to the east, his obsequious concubine; and twoillegitimate children were the living monuments of herweakness. Damascus was his first refuge; and, in thecharacters of the great Noureddin and his servant Sa-ladin, the superstitious Greek might learn to revere thevirtues of the Mussulmans. As the friend of Noured­din he visited most probably Bagdad, and the courtsof Persia; and, after a long circuit round the Caspiansea and the mountains of Georgia, he finally settled







OCR Output








504 ROMAN EMPIRE.


heights of Chrysopolis or Scutari, informed Irene, in herpalace of Constantinople, of the loss of her troops andprovinces. With the consent or connivance of their so­vereign, her ministers subscribed an ignominious peace;and the exchange of some royal gifts could not disguisethe annual tribute of seventy thousand dinars of gold,which was imposed on the Roman empire. The Sara­cens had too rashly advanced into the midst of a distantand hostile land: their retreat was solicited by the pro­mise of faithful guides and plentiful markets; and nota Greek had courage to whisper, that their weary forcesmight be surrounded and destroyed in their necessarypassage between a slippery mountain and the river San-garius. Five years after this expedition, Harun ascendedthe throne of his father, and his elder brother; the mostpowerful and vigorous monarch of his race, illustriousin the west, as the ally of Charlemagne, and familiar tothe most childish readers, as the perpetual hero of theArabian Tales. His title to the name of Al Rashid(the Just} is sullied by the extirpation of the generous,perhaps the innocent, Barmecides; yet he could listento the complaint of a poor widow who had been pillagedby his troops, and who dared, in a passage of the Koran,to threaten'the inattentive despot with the judgment ofGod and posterity. His court was adorned with luxuryand science; but in a reign of three-and-twenty years,Harun repeatedly visited his provinces from Chorasanto Egypt; nine times he performed the pilgrimage ofMecca; eight times he invaded the territories of theRomans; and as often as they declined the payment ofthe tribute, they were taught to feel that a month ofdepredation was more costly than a year of submission.But when the unnatural mother of Constantine was de­posed and banished, her successor Nicephorus resolvedto obliterate this badge of servitude and disgrace. Theepistle of the emperor to the caliph was pointed with anallusion to the game of chess, which had already spread







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 109


with which he repeopled Constantinople and the Thra-cian cities. They reluctantly praise his activity and cou­rage; he was on horseback in the field at the head ofhis legions; and, although the fortune of his arms wasvarious, he triumphed by sea and land, on the Euphratesand the Danube, in civil and barbarian war. Hereticalpraise must be cast into the scale, to counterbalance theweight of orthodox invective. The Iconoclasts reveredthe virtues of the prince: forty years after his death, theystill prayed before the tomb of the saint. A miraculousvision was propagated by fanaticism Or fraud; and' theChristian hero appeared on a milk-white steed, brandish­ing his lance against the Pagans of Bulgaria: an absurdfable (says the Catholic historian), since Copronymus ischained with the demons in the abyss of hell.
Leo IV. the son of the fifth, and the father ofA.D.775, the sixth Constantine, was of a feeble constitu-pt" * *' tion both of mind and body, and the principalcare of his reign was the settlement of the succession.The association of the young Constantine was urgedby the officious zeal of his subjects; and the emperorconscious of his decay, complied, after a prudent hesi­tation, with their unanimous wishes. The royal infant,at the age of five years, was crowned with his motherIrene; and the national consent was ratified by everycircumstance of pomp and .solemnity, that could dazzlethe eyes, or bind the conscience, of the Greeks. Anoath of fidelity was administered in the palace, thechurch, and the hippodrome, to the several orders of thestate, who abjured the holy names of the son and mother,of God. Be witness, O Christ! that we will watch overthe safety of Constantine the son of Leo, expose our livesm his service, and bear true allegiance to his person andposterity. They pledged their faith on the wood of thetrue cross, and the act of their engagement was depo­sited on the altar of St. Sophia. The first to swear, andthe first to violate their oath, were the five sons of Co-







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 397


own hands, and administered the comfortable reflection,that the infidels partook of their sufferings without par­taking of their reward. Four thousand and thirty of theMoslems were buried in the field of battle; and the skillof the Armenian archers enabled seven hundred to boastthat they had lost an eye in that meritorious service.The veterans of the Syrian war acknowledged that it wasthe hardest and most doubtful of the days which theyhad seen. But it was likewise the most decisive: manythousand of the Greeks and Syrians fell by the swordsof the Arabs; many were slaughtered, after the defeat,in the woods and mountains; many, by mistaking theford, were drowned in the waters of the Yermuk; andhowever the loss may be magnified,8 the Christian writersconfess and bewail the bloody punishment of their sins.hManuel, the Roman general, was either killed at Da­mascus, or took refuge in the monastery of mount Sinai., An exile in the Byzantine court, Jabalah lamented themanners of Arabia, and his unlucky preference of theChristian cause.' He had once inclined to the profes­sion of Islam; but in the pilgrimage of Mecca, Jabalahwas provoked to strike one of his brethren, and fledwith amazement from the stern and equal justice ofthe caliph. The victorious Saracens enjoyed at Damas­cus a month of pleasure and repose: the spoil wasdivided by the discretion of Abu Obeidah: an equal


f We killed of them, says Abu Obeidah to the caliph, one hundred and fifty thou­sand, and made prisoners forty thousand. (Ockley, vol. 1. p. 241.) As I cannotdoubt his veracity, nor believe bis computation, I must suspect that the Arabic his­torians indulged themselves in the practice of composing speeches and letters fortheir heroes.
"After deploring the sins of the Christians, Theophanes adds, (Chronograph, p.376.) anrn S i;i/uiae; A/4n\nx TOTTTOT .'•,•«: TOT >••"-» TOW Xfwrou, iut yofrii s wftirci fogavrawtf TOU pvft&uisv ftyvnv n xara TO ra/3tOay Xiy» (does he mean Aiznadin ?) -xaiIfp/^suxa?, KAI my aQiff&fft cufta'ro%itft&i. His account is brief and obscure, but he ac-cuses the numbers of the enemy, the adverse wind, and the cloud of dust: ft*, ivn-fliml; (the Romans) arrtirfMumftu »x"f »C *'» TO» MvupTtv, vrrtmtu, xai taurou; 8t\-Xom; IK -rit-; rrmiaui; TOU liffa^Btu irirraftm out amiXero aftnr. (Chronograph, p.280.
'See Abulfeda, (Annal. Moslem, p. 70, 71.) who transcribes the poetical com­plaint of Jabalah himself, and some panegyrical strains of an Arabian poet, towhom the chief of Gossan sent from Constantinople a gift of five hundred pieces ofgold by the hands of the ambassadors of Omar.







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 281


tution of his cattle. And why (said Abrahah) do younot rather implore my clemency in favour of your temple,which I have threatened to destroy?—Because (repliedthe intrepid chief) the cattle is my own: the Caaba be­longs to the gods, and they will defend their house frominjury and sacrilege. The want of provisions, or thevalour of the Koreish, compelled the Abyssinians to adisgraceful retreat: their discomfiture has been adornedwith a miraculous flight of birds, who showered downstones on the heads of the infidels; and the deliverancewas long commemorated by the era of the elephant.1The glory of Abdol Motalleb was crowned with
Deliver- , . •. • i-/,
anceof domestic happiness, his hie was prolonged tothe age of one hundred and ten years, and hebecame the father of six daughters and thirteen sons.His best beloved Abdallah was the most beautifuland modest of the Arabian youth; and in the first night,when he consummated his marriage with Amina, of thenoble race of the Zahrites, two hundred virgins are saidto have expired of jealousy and despair. Mahomet,or more properly Mahommed, the only son of Abdallahand Amina, was born at Mecca, four years after thedeath of Justinian, and two months after the defeat ofthe Abyssinians,u whose victory would have introducedinto the Caaba the religion of the Christians. In hisearly infancy, he was deprived of his father, his mother,


'The M'cnr of this history, or fable, is contained in the one hundred and fifthchapter of the Koran, and Gagnier (in Prsefat. ad Vit. Moharn. p. 18, &c.) hastranslated the historical narrative of Abulfeda, which may be illustrated fromd'Herbelot (Bibliot. Orientale, p. 12.) and Focock. (Specimen, p. 64.) Pri-deaux (Life of Mahomet, p. 48.) calls it a lie of the coinage of Mahomet; butSale, (Koran, p. 501—503.) who is half a Mussulman, attacks the inconsistentfaith of the doctor for believing the miracles of the Delphic Apollo. Maracci(Alcoran, torn. 1. part 'J. p. 14. torn. 2. p. 823.) ascribes the miracle to the devil,and extorts from the Mahometans the confession, that God would not have de­fended against the Christians the idols of the Caaba.
"The safest eras of Abulfeda, (in Vit . c. 1. p. 2.) of Alexander, or the Greeks,88^, of Bocht Naser, or Nabonasser, 1316, equally lead us to the year 569. Theold Arabian calendar is too dark and uncertain to support the Benedictines, (Artde verifier les Dates, p. 15.) who from the day of the month and week deduce anew mode of calculation, and remove the birth of Mahomet to the year of Christ570, the tenth of November. Yet this date would agree with the year 882 of theGreeks, which is assigned by Elmaciu (Hist. Saracen, p. 5.) and Abulpharagius.(Dynast.p. 101. and Errata Pocock's version.) While we refine our chronology,it is possible that the illiterate prophet was ignorant of his own age.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 13d


sharing his imperial fortune, was dismissed with igno­miny from his bed and palace. In their last interview,she displayed a frantic and impotent rage; accused theingratitude of her lover; assaulted with words andblows her son Basil, as he stood silent and submissivein the presence of a superior colleague; and avowedher own prostitution in proclaiming the illegitimacy ofhis birth. The public indignation was appeased byher exile, and the punishment of the meaner accom­plices: the death of an unpopular prince was forgiven;and the guilt of Zimisces was forgotten in the splen­dour of his virtues. Perhaps his profusion was lessuseful to the state than the avarice of Nicephorus; buthis gentle and generous behaviour delighted all whoapproached his person; and it was only in the paths ofvictory that he trode in the footsteps of his predecessor.The greatest part of his reign was employed in thecamp and the field: his personal valour and activitywere signalized on the Danube and the Tigris, the an­cient boundaries of the Roman world; and by hisdouble triumph over the Russians and the Saracens,he deserved the titles of saviour of the empire, andconqueror of the east. In his last return from Syria,he observed that the most fruitful lands of his new pro­vinces were possessed by the eunuchs. And is it forthem (he exclaimed, with honest indignation,) that wehave fought and conquered? Is it for them that weshed our blood, and exhaust the treasures of our people?The complaint was re-echoed to the palace, and thedeath of Zimisces is strongly marked with the suspicionof poison.
Basil ii. Under this usurpation, or regency, of twelveMantin^" years, the two lawful emperors, Basil and Con-976,Aj^! stantme, had silently grown to the age of man-10- hood. Their tender years had been incapableof dominion: the respectful modesty of their attendanceand salutation, was due to the age and merit of their







OCR Output








80 ROMAN EMPIRE.


with hasty violence the liturgy of Rome and the inqui­sition of Portugal. He condemned the ancient prac­tice of circumcision, which health rather than supersti­tion had first invented in the climate of jEthiopia.y Anew baptism, a new ordination, was inflicted on thenatives; and they trembled with horror when the mostholy of the dead were torn from their graves, when themost illustrious of the living were excommunicated bya foreign priest. In the defence of their religion andliberty, the Abyssinians rose in arms, with desperatebut unsuccessful zeal. Five rebellions were extin­guished in the blood of the insurgents: two abunaswere slain in battle, whole legions were slaughtered inthe field, or suffocated in their caverns; and neithermerit, nor rank, nor sex, could save from an ignomini­ous death the enemies of Rome. But the victoriousmonarch was finally subdued by the constancy of thenation, of his mother, of his son, and of his most faith­ful friends. Segued listened to the voice of pity, ofreason, perhaps of fear; and his edict of liberty of con­science instantly revealed the tyranny and weakness ofthe Jesuits. On the death of his father, Basilides ex­pelled the Latin patriarch, and restored to the wishesof the nation the faith and the discipline of Egypt.Final ex. ^e Monophysite churches resounded with apuision of song of triumph, that the sheep of ^Ethiopiaits.A.o. were now delivered from the hyaenas of the west;less, c. and the ga^es 0£ thgj solitary realm were for
ever shut against the arts, the science, and the fanati­cism of Europe/


J I am aware how tender is the question of circumcision. Yet I will affirm,1. That the Ethiopians have a physical reason for the circumcision of males, andeven ef females. (Recherches Philosophiques sur les Americains, torn. 2.) 2.That it was practised in Ethiopia long before the introduction of Judaism, orChristianity. (Herodot. lib. t. c. 104. Marsham, Canon. Chron. p. 72, 73.)"Infantes circumcidunt ob consuetudinem non ob Judaismum," says Gregory theAbyssinian priest, (apud Fabric. Lux Christiana, p. 720.) Yet, in the heat of dis-pute, the Portuguese were sometimes branded with the name of uncircumcised.(La Croze, p. 80. Ludolph. Hist. Comment, lib. 3. c. 1.)
* The three protestant historians, Ludolphus (Hist. Ethiopia, Francofoit,1681; Commentarius, 1691; Relatio Nova, &c. 1693, in folio); Geddes (ChurchHistory of ^Ethiopia, London, 1696, in octavo), and La Croze (Hist, du Chrbrti­







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 155


Jdm or I* was tne w*sn of Irene to supplant the eldestC"10- of her surviving sons, in favour of her daugh-
Johanms, . °' °
A. D. 1118, ter, the princess Anna, whose philosophy wouldAngost is. not have jefose^ tne weigQt of a diadem. But
the order of male succession was asserted by the friendsof their country; the lawful heir drew the royal signetfrom the finger of his insensible or conscious father, andthe empire obeyed the master of the palace. AnnaComnena was stimulated by ambition and revenge toconspire against the life of her brother; and when thedesign was prevented by the fears or scruples of herhusband, she passionately exclaimed, that nature hadmistaken the two sexes, and had endowed Bryenniuswith the soul of a woman. The two sons of Alexius,John and Isaac, maintained the fraternal concord, thehereditary virtue of their race: and the younger bro-.ther was content with the title of Sebastocrator, whichapproached the dignity, without sharing the power, ofthe emperor. In the same person, the claims of primo­geniture and merit were fortunately united; his swarthycomplexion, harsh features, and diminutive stature, hadsuggested the ironical surname of Calo-Johannis, orJohn the Handsome, which his grateful subjects moreseriously applied to the beauties of his mind. Afterthe discovery of her treason, the life and fortune ofAnna were justly forfeited to the laws. Her life wasspared by the clemency of the emperor; but he visitedthe pomp and treasures of her palace, and bestowedthe rich confiscation on the most deserving of his friends.That respectable friend, Axuch, a slave of Turkish ex­traction, presumed to decline the gift, and to intercedefor the criminal; his generous master applauded andimitated the virtue of his favourite, and the reproach orcomplaint of an injured brother was the only chastise­ment of the guilty princess. After this example of cle­mency, the remainder of his reign was never disturbedby conspiracy or rebellion: feared by his nobles, be­







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 45


disease was ascribed to the miraculous succour of theholy martyrs Cosmas and Damian. The capital andthe provinces of the east were decorated with the monu­ments of his religion;™ and, though the far greater partof these'costly structures maybe attributed to his taste orostentation, the zeal of the royal architect was probablyquickened by a genuine sense of love and gratitude to­wards his invisible benefactors. Among the titles ofimperial greatness, the name of Pious was most pleasingto his ear; to promote the temporal and spiritual interestsof the church, was the serious business of his life; andthe duty of father of his country was often sacrificed tothat of defender of the faith. The controversies of thetimes were congenial to his temper and understanding;and the theological professors must inwardly deride thediligence of a stranger, who cultivated their art and neg­lected his own. What can ye fear (said a bold con­spirator to his associates) from your bigoted tyrant;Sleepless and unarmed he sits whole nights in his closet,debating with reverend gray-beards, and turning overthe pages of ecclesiastical volumes." The fruits of theselucubrations were displayed in many a conference, whereJustinian might shine as the loudest and most subtle ofthe disputants; inmany a sermon, which, underthe nameof edicts and epistles, proclaimed to the empire the the­ology of their master. While the barbarians invadedthe provinces, while the victorius legions marched underthe banners of Belisarius and Narses, the successor ofTrajan, unknown to the camp, was content to vanquishat the head of a synod. Had he invited to these synodsa disinterested and rational spectator, Justinian mighthave learned that religious controversy is the a/springof arrogance and folly; that true piety is most laudably
•, Procop. de Edificiis, lib. 1. c. 6.7, &c. passirn.
""0; )l xaftlTOI a^wtoXTOc 1C all iwi XJs^lt TIVOC =i»pl nuran ipau tut •'<& Iff""-.;::'.:l: arytva mountou Ta Xfia-rwTOv Xeyia cwwtr.i ty?n. Procop. dc Bell. Goth.lib. 3. c. St. In the life of St. Eutychms, (apucl Aleman. ad Procop. Arcan. c. 18.)the same character i» given with a design to praise Justinian.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 225


the air that the default of payment had been the causeof the last scarcity.1 The literary merits of Charlemagneare attested by the foundation of schools, the introduc­tion of arts, the works which were published in his name,and his familiar connexion with the subjects and strangerswhom he invited to his court to educate both the princeand people. His own studies were tardy, laborious, andimperfect; if he spoke Latin, and understood Greek, hederived the rudiments of knowledge from conversation,rather than from books; and, in his mature age, the em­peror strove to acquire the practice of writing, whichevery peasant now learns in his infancy .k The grammarand logic, the music and astronomy, of the times, wereonly cultivated as the handmaids of superstition: but thecuriosity of the human mind must ultimately tend to itsimprovement, and the encouragement of learning reflectsthe purest and most pleasing lustre on the character ofCharlemagne.1 The dignity of his person,™ the lengthof his reign, the prosperity of his arms, the vigour of hisgovernment, and the reverence of distant nations, distin­guish him from the royal crowd; and Europe dates anew era from his restoration of the western empire.That empire was not unworthy of its title;" and


1 Omnishomo ex sua proprietate legitimam decimam ad ecclesiam conferat , Ex-perimento eiiim didicimus, in anno, quo ilia validn fames irrepsit, ebullire vacuasannonas a dzmonibus devgratas, et voces exprobatiouis auditas. Such is the decreeand assertion of the great council of Frankfort, (canon 25. torn. 9. p. 105.) BothSelden (Hist, of Tithes; Works, vol. $. part 2. p. 1146.) and Montesquieu. (.Espritdes Lou, lib. 31. c. 12.) represent Charlemagne as the first legal author of tithes.Such obligations have country gentlemen to his memory!
k Eginhard (c. 25. p. 119.) clearly affirms, tentabat et scribere . . . sed pa turnprospere successit labor pteposterus et sero inchoatus. The moderns have per­verted and corrected this obvious meaning, and the title of M. Gaillard's Disser-tation (torn. 3. p. 247—260.) betrays his partiality.
1 See Gaillard, torn. 3. p. 138—176. and Schmidt, torn. *. p. 121—129.• M. Gaillaid (torn. S. p. 373.) fixes the true stature of Charlemagne (sec a Dis.serial ion of Marquard Freher adcalcem Eginhart, p. 220, &c.) at five feetnine inchesof French, about six feet one inch and a fourth English measure. The romancewriters have increased it to eight feet, and the giant was endowed with matchlessstrength and appetite: at a single stroke of his good sword Joyeuu, he cut asundera horseman and his horse; at a single repast he devoured a goose, two fowls, aquarter of mutton, &c.
° See the concise, but correct and original, work of d'Anville (Etats fomv'-s enEurope npres la Chute de 1'Empire Remain en Occident, Paris 1771, in quarto;,whose map includes the empire of Charlemagne: the different parts are illustrated,by Valesius (Notitia Galliarum) for France, Beretti (Dissertatio Chorographica)
VOL. VI. Q







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 427


made, and fled to Mecca, to escape the justice, and ex­pose the ignorance, of the apostle. After the conquestof Mecca, he fell prostrate at the feet of Mahomet: histears, and the entreaties of Othman, extorted a reluc­tant pardon; but the prophet declared that he had solong hesitated, to allow time for some zealous disciple toavenge his injury in the blood of the apostate. Withapparent fidelity, and effective merit, he served the re­ligion which it was no longer his interest to desert: hisbirth and talents gave him an honourable rank amongthe Koreish; and in a nation of cavalry, Abdallah wasrenowned as the boldest and most dexterous horseman ofArabia. At the head of forty thousand Moslems, he ad­vanced from Egypt into the unknown countries of thewest. The sands of Barca might be impervious to aRoman legion; but the Arabs were attended by theirfaithful camels; and the natives of the desert beheldwithout terror the familiar aspect of the soil and climate.After a painful march, they pitched their tents before thewalls of Tripoli,b a maritime city in which the name, thewealth, and the inhabitants, of the province had gradu­ally centred, and which now maintains the third rankamong the states of Barbary. A reinforcement of Greekswas surprised and cut in pieces on the sea-shore; butthe fortifications of Tripoli resisted the first assaults; andthe Saracens were tempted, by the approach of the pre­fect Gregory,0 to relinquish the labours of the siege forthe perils and the hopes of a decisive action. If his


* The province and city of Tripoli are described by Leo Africanus (in Naviga-tione et Viaggi di Ramnsio, torn. 1. Venetia, 1550, fol. 76. IT/HI) and Marmol.(Description de 1'Afrique, torn. 2. p. 562.) The first of these writers was a Moor,a scholar, and a traveller, who composed or translated his African geography in aMate of captivity at Rome, where he had assumed the name and religion of popeLeo X. In a similar captivity among the Moors, the Spaniard Marmol, a soldierof Charles V. compiled his description of Africa, translated by d'Ablancourt intoFrench (Paris, 1667, three vols. in quarto): Marmol had read and seen, but he isdestitute of the cnrious and extensive observation which abounds in the originalwork of Leo the African.
c Theophanes, who mentions the defeat, rather than the death, of Gregory. Hebrands the prefect with the name of Tupavw;; he had probably assumed the purple.(Chronograph, p. 285.)







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 463


After the revolution of eleven centuries, theJgws and Christians of the Turkish empire enjoythe liberty of conscience which was granted bythe Arabian caliphs. During the first age of the con­quest, they suspected the loyalty of the Catholics, whosename of Melchites betrayed their secret attachment tothe Greek emperor, while the Nestorians and Jacobites,his inveterate enemies, approved themselves the sincereand voluntary friends of the Mahometan government.*Yet this partial jealousy was healed by time and submis­sion; the churches of Egypt were shared with the Ca­tholics,11 and all the oriental sects were included in thecommon benefits of toleration. The rank, the immu­nities, the domestic jurisdiction, of the patriarchs, thebishops, and the clergy, were protected by the civil ma­gistrate: the learning of individuals recommended themto the employments of secretaries and physicians; theywere enriched by the lucrative collection of the revenue;and their merit was sometimes raised to the commandof cities and provinces. A caliph of the house of Abbaswas heard to declare, that the Christians were mostworthy of trust in the administration of Persia. TheMoslems (said he) will abuse their present fortune; theMagians regret their fallen greatness; and the Jews areTheir impatient for their approaching deliverance} Buthardships. the slaves of despotism are exposed to the alter­natives of favour and disgrace. The captive churchesof the east have been afflicted in every age by the avariceor bigotry of their rulers: and the ordinary and legal


'Absit (<aid the Catholic to the vizier of Bagdad) ut pari loco habeas Nestc-riauos, quorum prater Arabas nullus alias rex est, et Gracos quorum reges amo-rendo Arabibus bello mm desistunt, &c. See in the collections of Assemannus,(Bibliot. Orient, torn. 4. p. 94—101.) the state of the Nestorians under the caliphs.That of the Jacobites is more concisely exposed in the Preliminary Dissertation ofthe second volume of Assemannus.
h Eutych. Annal. torn. 2. p. 384. 387,388. Renandot, Hist. Patriarch. Alex,p. 205, 906.257. 331. A taint of the Monothelite heresy might render the first ofthese Greek patriarchs less loyal to the emperors and less obnoxious to the Arabs.'Motadhed, who reigned from A.D. 892 to 902. The .Magians still held theirname and rank among the religions of the empire. (Assemanni, Bibliot. Orient,torn. 4. p. 97.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 237


the reign of the Othos; and their ambassador de­scribes, in lively colours, the insolence of the Byzan­tine court.' The Greeks affected to despise the povertyand ignorance of the Franks and Saxons; and in theirlast decline refused to prostitute to the kings of Ger­many the title of Roman emperors.
These emperors, in the election of the popes,- continued to exercise the powers which hadbeen assumed by the Gothic and Grecianprinces; and the importance of this preroga-A.IX BOO tive increased with the temporal estate andspiritual jurisdiction of the Roman church.In the Christian aristocracy, the principal members ofthe clergy still formed a senate to assist the adminis­tration, and to supply the vacancy, of the bishop.Rome was divided into twenty-eight parishes, and eachparish was governed by a cardinal priest or presbytera tide which, however common and modest in its ori­gin, has aspired to emulate the purple of kings. Theirnumber was enlarged by the association of the sevendeacons of the most considerable hospitals, the sevenpalatine judges of the Lateran, and some dignitaries ofthe church. The ecclesiastical senate was directed bythe seven cardinal-bishops of the Roman province,who were less occupied in the superb diocesses of Ostia,Porto, Velitrae, Tusculum, Praeneste, Tibur, and theSabines, than by their weekly service in the Lateran,and their superior share in the honours and authorityof the apostolic see. On the death of the pope, thesebishops recommended a successor to the suffrage of thecollege of cardinals,1 and their choice was ratified or


k Ipse nuim vos, non imperatoremid est RwiXm snfi lingua, sed ob indignationemPnya, id eatregem nnstrii vocabat. Liutprand. in Legal, in Script. Ital. torn. 2. para 1.p. 479.) The pope had exhorted Nicephorus, emperor of the Gretkt, to make peacewith Otho, the august emperor of the Romans—qu«e inscriptio secundum Gracespeccalriaet temeraria*.... imperatorem inquiunt, wriversatem, Romanorum, Augta-rtun, magnum, ulum, Nicephorurn. (p. 486.)
The origin and progress of the title of cardinal may be found in Thomassin;(Discipline d'Eglise, torn. 1. p. 1261—1298.) Muratori, (Antiquitat. Italiae MediiiEvi, torn. 6. diaeert. 61. p. t59—182.) and Mosheim, (Institut , Hist. Eccles.p. 3-15—347.) who accurately remarks the forms and changes of the election.







OCR Output








CHAP. XI/VTII. 159


bat; and the gigantic champions, who encountered hisarm, were transpierced by the lance, or cut asunder bythe sword, of the invincible Manuel. The story of hisexploits, which appear as a model or a copy of the ro­mances of chivalry, may induce a reasonable suspicionof the veracity of the Greeks: I will not, to vindicatetheir credit, endanger my own; yet I may observe, thatin the long series of their annals, Manuel is the onlyprince who has been the subject of similar exaggeration.With the valour of a soldier, he did not unite the skillor prudence of a general: his victories were not produc­tive of any permanent or useful conquest; and his Turk­ish laurels were blasted in his last unfortunate campaign,in which he lost his armies in the mountains of Pisidia,and owed his deliverance to the generosity of the sultan.But the most singular feature in the character of Manuel,is the contrast of labour and sloth, of hardiness andeffeminacy. In war he seemed ignorant of peace; inpeace he appeared incapable of war. In the field heslept in the sun or in the snow, tired in the longestmarches the strength of his men and horses, and sharedwith a smile the abstinence or diet of the camp. Nosooner did he return to Constantinople, than he resign­ed himself to the arts and pleasure of a life of luxury:the expense of his dress, his table, and his palace, sur­passed the measure of his predecessors, and whole sum­mer days were idly wasted in the delicious isles of thePropontis, in the incestuous love of his niece Theodora.The double cost of a warlike and dissolute prince, ex­hausted the revenue, and multiplied the taxes; andManuel, in the distress of his last Turkish camp, endureda bitter reproach from the mouth of a desperate soldier.As he quenched his thirst, he complained that the waterof a fountain was mingled with Christian blood. It isnot the first time (exclaimed a voice from the crowd)that you have drank, 0 emperor! the blood of yourChristian subjects. Manuel Comnenus was twice mar-







OCR Output








CHAP. LII. 527


Fallen kahdi,the twentieth of the Abbassides, and thestate of thirty-ninth of the successors of Mahomet, wasKphsof the last who deserved the title of commander ofA!l).93d. the faithful ;q the last (says Abulfeda) who spoke&c- to the people, or conversed with the learned; thelast who, in the expense of his household, representedthe wealth and magnificence of the ancient caliphs. Afterhim, the lords of the eastern world were reduced to themost abject misery, and exposed to the blows and insultsof a servile condition. The revolt of the provinces cir­cumscribed their dominions within the walls of Bagdad;but that capital still contained an innumerable multitude,vain of their past fortune, discontented with their presentstate, and oppressed by the demands of a treasury, whichhad formly been replenished by the spoil and tribute ofnations. Their idleness was exercised by faction andcontroversy under the mask of piety, the rigid followersof Hanbalr invaded the pleasures of domestic life, burstinto the houses of plebeians and princes, spilled the wine,broke the instruments, beat the musicians, and disho­noured, with infamons suspicions, the associates of everyhandsome youth. In each profession, which allowedroom for two persons, the one was a votary, the other anantagonist, of Ali; and the Abbassides were awakenedby the clamorous grief of the sectaries, who denied theirtitle, and cursed their progenitors. A turbulent peoplecould only be repressed by a military force; but whocould satisfy the avarice, to assert the discipline, of the


1 Hie est ultimas chalifah qui multum atque ssepius pro concione perbrarit. . .Fuit etiam ultimus qui olium cum eruditis et facetis hominibus fallere hilariterqueagere soleret. Ultimus lanJcm chalifarum cui sumptus, stipendia, reditus, ct the­sauri, culinae, oeteraque omnis aulica pompapriorum chalifarurp ad instar compa-rata fuerint , Videbimus enim paullo post quam indignis ct serrilibus ludibriis exa-gitati, quam ad humilem fortunam ultimumque contemptum abjecii fu«rint Li quon­dam potentissimi totius terrarum Orientalium orbis domini. Abulfed. AHUM!.Moslem, p. 261. I have given this passage as the manner and tone of Abulfeda;but the cast of Latin eloquence belongs more proporly to Keiske. The Arabian his­torian (p. 255.257. 261—2ti9. 283, &c.) has supplied me ivith the most interest­ing facts of this parngTa];h.
'Their master, on a similiar occasion, shewed himself of a more indulgent andtolerating spirit. Ahmed Ebu Haubal, the head of one of the four orthodox sects,was born at Bagdad, A.H. 161, and died there A.H. 211. He fought and sufferedin the dispute concerning the creation of the Koran.







OCR Output








218 ROMAN EMPIRE.


eastern ^e translation of the empire to the less ortho-^re;74 dox Charlemagne. They were compelled to—BOO. choose between the rival nations; religion wasnot the sole motive of their choice; and while they dis­sembled the failings of their friends, they beheld, withreluctance and suspicion, the Catholic virtues of theirfoes. iThe difference of language and manners had per­petuated the enmity of the two capitals; and they werealienated from each other by the hostile opposition ofseventy years. In that schism the Romans had tasted offreedom, and the popes of sovereignty; their submissionwould have exposed them to the revenge of a jealoustyrant; and the revolution of Italy had betrayed the im­potence, as well as the tyranny, of the Byzantine court.The Greek emperors had restored the images, but theyhad not restored the Calabrian estates'1 and the Illyriandiocess/ which the Iconoclasts had torn away from thesuccessors of St. Peter; and pope Hadrian threatensthem with a sentence of excommunication unless theyspeedily abjure this practical heresy.* The Greeks werenow orthodox, but their religion might be tainted bythe breath of the reigning monarch: the Franks werenow contumacious; but a discerning eye might discerntheir approaching conversion from the use, to the adora­tion, of images. The name of Charlemagne was stainedby the polemic acrimony of his scribes; but the con­


i Theophanes (p. 343.) specifies those of Sicily and Calabria, which yielded anannual rent of three talents and a half of gold (perhaps seven thousand poundssterling). Liutprand more pompously enumerates the patrimonies of the Romanchurch in Greece, Judea, Persia, Mesopotamia, Babylonia, Egypt, and Libya,which were detained by the injustice of the Greek emperor. (Legat. ad Nicepho-mm, in Script. Rerum Italicarum, torn. 2. pars. 1. p. 481.)
r The great diocess of the eastern Illyricum, with Apulia, Calabria, and Sicily;(Thomassin, Discipline de 1'Eglise, torn. 1. p. 145.) by the confession of the Greeks,the patriarch of Constantinople had detached from Rome the metropolitans of Thes-salonica, Athens, Corinth, Nicopolis, and Patra; (Luc. Holsten. Geograph. Sacra,(p. 22.) and his spiritual conquests extended to Naples and Amalphi. (Giannone,Istoria Civile di Napoli, torn. 1. p. 517—524. Pagi, A. D. 730. no. 11.)
• In hoc ostenditur, quia ex uno capitulo ab errore reversis, in aliis duobus, ineodem (was it the same ?) permaneant errore . . . . de diocesi S. R. E. seu de pa-trimoniis interum increpantes commonemus, ut si ea restituere noluerit hereticumeum pro hujusmodi enore persevantii decememus; (Epist. Hadrian. Papae ad Ca-rolum Magnum, in Concil. torn. 8. p. 1598.) to which he adds a reason, mostdirectly opposite to his conduct, that he preferred the salvation of souls and ruleof faith to the goods of this transitory world.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 73


stiH enjoy, under their Turkish masters, a free religion,and a mitigated servitude. Their domestic governorsare chosen among the ancient nobility; the patriarch,in his monastery of Canobin, still fancies himself on thethrone of Antioch; nine bishops compose his synod,and one hundred and fifty priests, who retain the li­berty of marriage, are intrusted with the care of onehundred thousand souls. Their country extends fromthe ridge of mount Libanus to the shores of Tripoli;and the gradual descent affords, in a narrow space,each variety of soil and climate, from the Holy Cedars,erect under the weight of snow," to the vine, the mul­berry, and the olive trees of the fruitful valley. In thetwelfth century, the Maronites, abjuring the Monothe-lite error, were reconciled to the Latin churches of An-tioeh and Rome/ and the same alliance has been fre^quently renewed by the ambition of the popes and thedistress of the Syrians. But it may reasonably bequestioned, whether their union has ever been perfector sincere; and the learned Maronites of the college ofRome have vainly laboured to absolve their ancestorsfrom the guilt of heresy and schism/iv. THE IV. Since the age of Cohstantine, the AR-
ABMB- . ° *
MENiANs'had signalized their attachment to


XIAH8.


1 In tin- last century twenty large cedars still remained, (Voyage de laRoque,torn. 1. p. <.!!—76.) at present they are reduced to four or five. (Volney, ton. 1.p. 264.) These trees so famous in Scripture, were guarded by excommunication;the woo/d was sparingly borrowed for small crosses, etc. an annual mass was chan­ted under their shade; and they were endowed by tho Syrians with a sensitivepaver of erecting their branches to repel the (now, to which Mount Libanus is leufaithful than it is painted by Tacitus; inter ardores opacum fidumque nivibus—adaring metaphor! (Hist. 5. 6.)
> The evidence of William of Tyre (Hiet. in Gestis Dai per Francos, lib. 2g. c.8. p. 1022.) is copied or confirmed by Jacques de Vitra. (Hist. Hierosolyrn. lib. 2.c. 17. p. 1093,1094.) But this unnatural league expired with the power of theFcanks; and Abulpharagius, (who died in 1386) considers the Maronitea as a sectof Monothelites. (Bibliot. Orient, torn. 2. p. 292.)
* I find a description and history of the Maronites in the Voyage de la Syrie ettin Mont Liban par la Roque. (2 vols. in 1 '.'mo. Amsterdam, 1723, particularly torn.1. p. 42—47. p. 174—184. torn. 2. p. 10—120.) In the ancient part, he copiesthe prejudices of Nairon and the other Maronites at Rome, which Assemannus isafraid to renounce, and ashamed to support , Jablonski, (Institut. Hist. Christ,torn. 3. p. 186.) Niebuhr, (Voyaga de 1'Arabic, &c. torn. t. p. 346. 370—3il.)aad, above all, the judicious Volney, (Voyage en Egypte et en Syrie, torn. ft. p.8—31. Paris. 1787.) may be consulted.
"The religion of the Armenians is briefly described by La Croze. (Hut , du







OCR Output








304 ROMAN EMPIRE.


may be estimated by the absence of eighty-three menand eighteen women, who retired to Ethiopia in the se­venth year of his mission; and his party was fortifiedby the timely conversion of his uncle Hamza, and of thefierce and inflexible Omar, who signalized in the causeof Islam the same zeal which he had exerted for its de­struction. Nor was the charity of Mahomet confinedto the tribe of Koreish or the precincts of Mecca: onsolemn festivals, in the days of pilgrimage, he frequentedthe Caaba, accosted the strangers of every tribe, andurged, both in private converse and public discourse,the belief and worship of a sole deity. Conscious of hisreason and of his weakness, he asserted the liberty ofconscience, and disclaimed the use of religious violence/but he called the Arabs to repentance, and conjuredthem to remember the ancient idolaters of Ad and Tha-mund, whom the divine justice had swept away fromthe face of the earth." -
is opposed ^ne People of Mecca were hardened in theirty the unbelief by superstition and envy. The eldersA. D. ' of the city, the uncles of the prophet, affected to''despise the presumption of an orphan, the re­former of his country; the pious orations of Mahomet inthe Caaba were answered by the clamours of Abu Taleb.Citizens and pilgrims, listen not to the tempter, hearkennot to his impious novelties. Standfast in the worship ofAl Ldta and Al Uzzah. Yet the son of Abdullah wasever dear to the aged chief; and he protected the fameand person of his nephew against the assaults of theKoreishites, who had long been jealous of the pre-emi­nence of the family of Hashem. Their malice was co­


J The passages of the Koran in the behalf of toleration, are strong and numer­ous: c. 2. v. 257. c. 16. 129. c. 17. 54. c.45. 15. c. 50. 39. c. B8. 81, &c. with thenotes of Maracci and Sale. This character alone may generally decide the doubtsof the learned, whether a chapter was revealed at Mecca or Medina.
'See the Koran (passim, and especially c. 7. p. 123,124, &c.) and the traditionof the Arabs. (Pocock, Specimen, p. 35—37.) The caverns of the tribe of Tha-mund, fit for men of the ordinary stature, were shewn in the midway betweenMedina and Damascus, (Abulfed. Arabiae Descript. p. 43,44.) and may be pro­bably ascribed to the Troglodites of the primitive world, Michaelis, ad Lowth'd*Poesi Hebraor. p. 131—134. Recherches sur les Egyptiens, torn. 2. p. 48, &c.)







OCR Output








CHAP. LII. 477


justly denominated by the Greeks, the liquid 01 the maritimefire. For the annoyance of the enemy, it was employedwith equal effect, by sea and land, in battles or in sieges.It was either poured from the ramparts in large boilers,or launched in red-hot balls of stone and iron, or dartedin arrows and javelins, twisted round with flax and tow,which had deeply imbibed the inflammable oil: some­times it was deposited in fire-ships, the victims and in­struments of a more ample revenge, and was most com­monly blown through long tubes of copper, which wereplanted on the prow of a galley, and fancifully shapedinto the mouths of savage monsters, that seemed to vomita stream of liquid and consuming fire. This importantart was preserved at Constantinople, as the palladium ofthe state; the galleys and artillery might occasionallybe lent to the allies of Rome; but the composition of theGreek fire was concealed with the most jealous scruple,and the terror of the enemies was increased and prolongedby their ignorance and surprise. In the treatise of theadministration of the empire, the royal author* suggeststhe answers and excuses that might best elude the indis­creet curiosity and importunate demands of the barbarians.They should be told that the mystery of the Greek firehad been revealed by an angel to the first and greatestof the Constantines, with a sacred, injunction, that thisgift of heaven, this peculiar blessing of the Romans,should never be communicated to any foreign nation:that the prince and subject were alike bound to religioussilence, under the temporal and spiritual penalties oftreason and sacrilege; and that the impious attemptwould provoke the sudden and supernatural vengeanceof the God of the Christians. By these precautions, thesecret was confined, above four hundred years, to theRomans of the east; and, at the end of the eleventh cen­tury, the Pisans, to whom every sea and every art werefamiliar, suffered the effects, without understanding the


* Constantin. Porphyrogenit. de Administrat. Imperil, c. 13. p. 6!, 65.







OCR Output








462 ROMAN EMPIRK.


announces the speedy and inevitable ruin of the episcopaland Spain,or(^er- The Christians of Africa and Spain hadA-D.ii49,l(n)g since submitted to the practice of circum­cision and the legal abstinence from wine andpork; and the name of Mazarabes0 (adoptive Arabs)was applied to their civil or religious conformity.11About the middle of the twelfth century, the worship ofChrist and the succession of pastors were abolishedalong the coast of Barbary, and in the kingdoms of Cor­dova and Seville, of Valentia and Grenada." The throneof the Almohades, or Unitarians, was founded on theblindest fanaticism, and their extraordinary rigour mightbe provoked or justified by the recent victories and in­tolerant zeal of the princes of Sicily and Castile, of Ar-ragon and Portugal. The faith of the Moz-
arabes was occasionally revived by the papal
missionaries; and, on the landing of Charles V. somefamilies of Latin Christians were encouraged to rear theirheads at Tunis and Algiers. But the seed of the gospelwas quickly eradicated, and the long province from Tri­poli to the Atlantic has lost all memory of the languageand religion of Rome/


0 Mozarabes, or Mostarabes, udscititii, as it is interpreted in Latin. (Pocock,Specimen Hist. Araburn. p. 39, 40. Hibliot. Arabico-Hispana, torn. 2. p. 18.)The Mozarabic liturgy, the ancient ritual of the church of Toledo, has been at­tacked by the popes, and exposed to the doubtful trials of the sword and of Ere.(Marian. Hist. Hispan. torn. 1. lib. 9. c. 18. p. 378.) It was, or rather it is, in theLatin tongue: yet in the eleventh century it was found necessary (A.. T. C. 1687,A. I'. 1059.) to transcribe an Arabic version of the canons of the councils of Spain,(Bibliot , Arab. Hist , torn. 1. p. 547.) for the use of the bishops and clergy in theMoorish kingdoms.
cl About the middle of the tenth century, the clergy of Cordova was reproachedwith this criminal compliance, by the intrepid envoy of the emperor Otho I. (ViUJohan. Gorz, in Secul. Benedict. V. no. 115. apud Henry; Hist. En-lea, torn. It.p. 91.)
'• Pagi, Critica, torn. 4. A. D. 1149. no. 8, 9. He justly observes, that whenSeville, &ic. were retaken by Ferdinand of Castile, no Christians, except captives,were found in the place; and that the Mozarabic churches of Africa and Spain,'described by James a Vitriaco, A. D. 1518, (Hist. Hierosol. c. 80. p. 1095. inGest , Dei per Francos) are copied from some older book. I shall add, that thedate of the Hegira, 677, (A. D. 1278.) must apply to the copy, not the composition,of a treatise of jurisprudence, which states the civil rights of the Christians ofCordova; (Bibliot. Arab. Hist , torn. 1. p. 471.) and that the Jews were the onlydissenters whom Abul Waled, king of Grenada, (A.D. 1313.) could either dis­countenance or tolerate, (torn. 2. p. 288.)
'Renaudot, Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p. 288. Leo Africanus would have flatteredbis Roman masters, could he have discovered any latent relics of the Christianttrof Africa.







OCR Output








CHAP. "XLVII. 13


most fearful of separating, the divinity and the huma­nity of Christ. Impelled by religious frenzy, they fledwith adverse haste from the error which they mutuallydeemed most destructive of truth and salvation. Oneither hand they were anxious to guard, they were jea­lous to defend, the union and the distinction of the twonatures, and to invent such forms of speech, suchsymbols of doctrine, as were least susceptible of doubtor ambiguity. The poverty of ideas and languagetempted them to ransack art and jiature for every possi­ble comparison, and each comparison misled theirfancy in the explanation of an incomparable mystery.In the polemic microscope, an atom is enlarged to amonster, and each party was skilful to exaggerate theabsurd or impious conclusions that might be extortedfrom the principles of their adversaries. To escapefrom each other, they wandered through many a darkand devious thicket, till they were astonished by thehorrid phantoms of Cerinthus and Apollinaris, whoguarded the opposite issues of the theological labyrinth.As soon as they beheld the twilight of sense and he­resy, they started, measured back their steps, and wereagain involved in the gloom of impenetrable ortho­doxy. To purge themselves from the guilt or reproachof damnable error, they disavowed their consequences,explained their principles, excused their indiscretions,and unanimously pronounced the sounds of concordand faith. Yet a latent and almost invisible spark stilllurked among the embers of controversy: by the breathof prejudice and passion it was quickly kindled to amighty flame, and the verbal disputes' of the orientalsects have shaken the pillars of the church and state.


'I appeal to the confession of two oriental prelates, Gregory Abnlpharagius theJacobite primate of the east, and Elias the Nestorian metropolitan of Damascus,(see Asseman. Bibliothec. Oriental, torn. 2. p. 291. torn. 3. p. 514, &c.) that theMelchites, Jacobites, Nestorians, &c. agree in the doctrine, and differ only in theexpression. Our most learned and rational divines—Basnage, Le Clerc, Beau-sobre, La Croze, Mosheim, Jablonski—are inclined to favour this charitable judg­ment; but the zeal of Petavius is loud and angry, and the moderation of Dupin isconveyed in a whisper.







OCR Output








178 ROMAN KM PI UK.


ginal were transferred to the copy: the devout Chris­tian prayed before the image of a saint: and the Paganrites of genuflexion, luminaries, and incense, again stoleinto the Catholic church. The scruples of reason orpiety, were silenced by the strong evidence of visionsand miracles; and the pictures which speak, and move,and bleed, must be endowed with a divine energy, andmay be considered as the proper objects of religiousadoration. The most audacious pencil might tremblein the rash attempt of denning, by forms and colours,•the infinite Spirit, the eternal Father, who pervades andsustains the universe.* But the superstitious mind wasmore easily reconciled to paint and to worship the an­gels, and, above all, the Son of God, under the humanshape, which, on earth, they have condescended to as­sume. The second person of the Trinity had beenclothed with a real and mortal body; but that body hadascended into heaven, and, had not some similitudebeen presented to the eyes of his disciples, the spiritualworship of Christ might have been obliterated by thevisible relics and representations of the saints. A simi­lar indulgence was requisite, and propitious, for theVirgin Mary: the place of her burial was unknown;and the assumption of her soul and body into heavenwas adopted by the credulity of the Greeks and Latins.The use, and even the worship, of images, was firmlyestablished before the end of the sixth century; theytvere fondly cherished by the warm imagination of theGreeks and Asiatics; the Pantheon and Vatican wereadorned with the emblems of a new superstition; butthis semblance of idolatry was more coldly entertainedby the rude barbarians and the Arian clergy of the west.The bolder forms of sculpture, in brass or marble, which


- t ta.i xat
Oim *r.c\ iuu £bXii; tm tmnpunn xsi vrpxantyn furiaT ti/Lu» n/wic J it;.; a.* =«i> . i Con c i'lium Nicenum, 2. in Collect. Labb. torn. 8 p. 1025. edit Venet.) II seroit peut£tre »•propos dc tie point souffrir d'images de ):i Trinitc on de la Divinite ; les defenrennles plus /el es dcs images ayant condamne cell es ci, et le concile de Trente ne parlsntque dat images de Jesus Chrut et des wiim.s. (Dupin. Bibtiot. Eccles. torn. 6. p. 1 54. >







OCR Output








498 ROMAN EMPIRE.


manners of their countrymen; with general and partialhistories, which each revolving generation supplied witha new harvest of persons and events; with the codes andcommentaries of jurisprudence, which derived their au­thority from the law of the prophet; with the interpre­ters of the Koran, and orthodox tradition; and with thewhole theological tribe, polemics, mystics, scholastics,and moralists, the first or the last of writers, accordingto the different estimate of sceptics or believers. Theworks of speculation or science may be reduced to thefour classes of philosophy, mathematics, astronomy, andphysic. The sages of Greece were translated and illus­trated in the Arabic language, and some treatises, nowlost in the original, have been recovered in the versionsof the east,k which possessed and studied the writings ofAristotle and Plato, of Euclid and Apollonius, of Ptolemy,Hippocrates, and Galen.1 Among the ideal systems,which have varied with the fashion of the times, theArabians adopted the philosophy of the Stagirite, alikeintelligible or alike obscure for the readers of every age.Plato wrote for the Athenians, and his allegorical geniusis too closely blended with the language and religion ofGreece. After the fall of that religion, the Peripateticsemerging from their obscurity, prevailed in the contro­versies of the oriental sects, and their founder was longafterward restored by the Mahometans of Spain to the


k As for instance, the fifth, sixth, and seventh books (the eighth is still van ting)of the Conic Sections of Apollonius PergscuS, tvhich *ete printed from the Flo­rence MSS. 1661. (Fabric. Bibliot , Grac. torn. t.f. 558.) Yet the fifth bookhad been previously restored by the mathematical divination of Vivian!. See biseloge in Fontenelle, torn. 5. p. 59, &o-)
1 The merit of these Arabic versions is freely discussed by Renaudot, (Fabric.Bibliot. Gra-c. torn. 1. p. 812—816.) and piously defended by Gasira. (Bibliot.Arab. Hispana, torn. 1. p. 3S6—440.) Most of the versions of Plato, Aristotle,Hippocrates, Galen, &c. are ascribed to Honain, a physician of the Nestoriansect, Vho flourished at Bagdad in the court of the caliphs, and died A. D. 876.He was at the head of a school or manufactory of translations, and the works ofhis sons and disciples were published under his name. See Abulpharagios,(Dynast, p. 88. 115. 171—174. and Apud Asseman, Bibliot. Orient, torn. ?.p. 438.} d'Herbelot, (Bibliot. Orientale, p. 456. Asseman, (Bibliot. Orient, torn. 3.p. 164.) and Casiri. (Bibliot. Arab. Hispana, torn. 1. p. 238, &c. 251. 386—990.303. 304, &c.)







OCR Output








220 ROMAN EMPIRE.


or succeeding ages;* the walls of Rome, the sacredpatrimony, the ruin of the Lombards, and the friendshipof Charlemagne, were the trophies of his fame: hesecretly edified the throne of his successors, and dis­played in a narrow space the virtues of a great prince.His memory was revered; but in the next election, apriest of the Lateran, Leo III. was preferred to thenephew and the favourite of Hadrian, whom he hadpromoted to the first dignities of the church. Their ac­quiescence or repentance disguised, above four years, theblackest intention of revenge, till the day of. a proces­sion, when a furious band of conspirators dispersed theunarmed multitude, and assaulted with blows andwounds the sacred person of the pope. But their en­terprise on his life or liberty was disappointed, perhapsby their own confusion and remorse. Leo was left fordead on the ground: on his revival from the swoon, theeffect of his loss of blood, he recovered his speech andsight; and this natural event was improved to the mira­culous restoration of his eyes and tongue, of which hehad been deprived, twice deprived, by the knife of theassassins/ From his prison, he escaped to the Vatican;the duke of Spoleto hastened to his rescue, Charlemagnesympathized in his injury, and in his camp of Pader-born in Westphalia accepted or solicited a visit from theRoman pontiff. Leo repassed the Alps with a com­mission of counts and bishops, the guards of his safety


Post pattem lacrymans Carolns tee carmina scipsi.Tu mihi dulcis amor, te modo plango pater . . .Nomina jungo simul titulis, clarissime, nostraAdrianus, Carolns, rex ego, tuque pater.
The poetry might be supplied by Alcuin; but the tears, the most glorious tribute,can only belong to Charlemagne.
* Every new pope is admonished—" Sancte Pater, non videbis annos Petri,"twenty-five years. On the whole series the average is about eight years—a shorthope for an ambitious cardinal.
J The assurance of Anastasius (torn. 3. pars 1. p. 197, 198.) is supported by thecredulity of some French annalists ; but Egmhard, and other writers of the same age,are more natural and sincere. "Unus ei oculus paullulum est liesus," says John thedeacon of Naples. (Vit. Episcop. Napol. in Scriptores Muratori, torn. 1. pars •.'.p. 31t.) Theodolphus, a contemporary bishop of Orleans, observes with prudence,(lib. 3. cam. 3.) /
Reddita snnt? minim est: minim est auferre nequisse.Eat tamen in dubio, hinc mirer an inde magis.







OCR Output








266 ROMAN EMPIRE.


preferred to the simple, though important, office of com­posing disputes by their advice, and guiding valour bytheir example. Even a female of sense and spirit hasbeen permitted to command the countrymen of Zenobia.bThe momentary junction of several tribes produces anarmy; their more lasting union constitutes a nation;and the supreme chief, the emir of emirs, whose ban­ner is displayed at their head, may deserve, in the eyesof strangers, the honours of the kingly name. If theArabian princes abuse their power, they are quicklypunished by the desertion of their subjects, who hadbeen accustomed to a mild and parental jurisdiction.Their spirit is free, their steps are unconfined, the desertis open, and the tribes and families are held togetherby a mutual and voluntary compact. The softer nativesof Yemen supported the pomp and majesty of a mo­narch; but if he could not leave his palace withoutendangering his life,1 the active powers of governmentmust have been devolved on his nobles and magistrates.The cities of Mecca and Medina present, in the heartof Asia, the form, or rather the substance, of a common­wealth. The grandfather of Mahomet, and his linealancestors, appear in foreign and domestic transactions asthe princes of their country; but they reigned, like Pe­ricles at Athens, or the Medici at Florence, by the opi­nion of their wisdom and integrity; their influence wasdivided with their patrimony; and the sceptre was trans­ferred from the uncles of the prophet to a younger branchof the tribe of Koreish. On solemn occasions they con­vened the assembly of the people; and since mankindmust be either compelled or persuaded to obey, the useand reputation of oratory among the ancient Arabs is the


h Saraceni .... mulieres auint in eos regnare. (Expositio totius Mundi, p. 3.in Hudson, torn. 3.) The reign of Mavia is famous in ecclesiastical story. Focock,Specimen, p. 693 83.
1 Mn fgnui ex rm (WiXtiOT, is the report of Agatharades, (de Man Bubro, p. 63,64. in Hudson, torn. l.)DiodorusSiculus, (torn. 1. lib. 3. c. 47. p. 215.) and Strabo.(lib. 16. p. 1124.) But 1 much suspect that this is one of the popular tales, or ex­traordinary accidents, which the credulity of travellers so often transforms into afact, a custom, and a law.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 153


is lost in a vague constellation of virtues: and the per­petual strain of panegyric and apology awakens our jea­lousy,, to question the veracity of the historian and themerit of the hero. We cannot however refuse her ju­dicious and important remark, that the disorders of thetimes were the misfortune and the glory of Alexius; andthat every calamity which can afflict a declining empirewas accumulated on his reign by the justice of Heavenand the vices of his predecessors. In the east, the vic­torious Turks had spread, from Persia to Hellespont,the reign of the Koran and the crescent: the west wasinvaded by the adventurous valour of the Normans; and,in the moments of peace, the Danube poured forth newswarms, who had gained, in the science of war, whatthey had lost in the ferociousness of manners. The seawas not less hostile than the land; and while the fron­tiers were assaulted by an open enemy, the palace wasdistracted with secret treason and conspiracy. On asudden, the banner of the cross was displayed by theLatins: Europe was precipitated on Asia; and Constan­tinople had almost been swept away by this impetuousdeluge. In the tempest, Alexis steered the imperialvessel with dexterity and courage. At the head of hisarmies, he was bold in action, skilful in stratagem, pa­tient of fatigue, ready to improve his advantages, andrising from his defeats with inexhaustible vigour. Thediscipline of the camp was revived, and a new generationof men and soldiers was created by the example and theprecepts of their leader. In his intercourse with theLatins, Alexius was patient and artful: his discerningeye pervaded the new system of an unknown world;and I shall hereafter describe the superior policy withwhich he balanced the interests and passions of thechampions of the first crusade. In a long reign ofthirty-seven years, he subdued and pardoned the envyof his equals: the laws of public and private order wererestored: the arts of wealth and science were cultivated:







OCR Output








512 ROMAN EMPIRE.


iron chain was drawn across the stream to impede theascent of a hostile navy. The Romans were assured ofa short respite by the welcome news, that the siege ofGayeta had been raised, and that a part of the enemy,with their sacrilegious plunder, had perished in thewaves.
Victory But the storm which had been delayed, soonof ilo'fv. burst upon them with redoubled violence. TheA.D. 849. Aglabite,* who reigned in Africa, had inheritedfrom his fathers, treasure and an army: a fleet of Arabsand Moors, after a short refreshment in the harbours ofSardinia, cast anchor before the mouth of the Tyber, six­teen miles from the city; and their discipline and num­bers appeared to threaten, not a transient inroad, but aserious design of conquest and dominion. But the vigi­lance of Leo had formed an alliance with the vassals ofthe Greek empire, the free and maritime states of Gayeta,Naples, and Amaln; and in the hour of danger, theirgalleys appeared in the port of Ostia, under the com­mand of Caesarius, the son of the Neapolitan duke, anoble and valiant youth, who had already vanquishedthe fleets of the Saracens. With his principal com­panions, Caesarius was invited to the Lateran palace, andthe dexterous pontiff" affected to inquire their errand,and to accept with joy and surprise their providentialsuccour. The city bands, in arms, attended their fatherto Ostia, where he reviewed and blessed his generousdeliverers. They kissed his feet, received the commu­nion with martial devotion, and listened to the prayer ofLeo, that the same God who had supported St. Peter andSt. Paul on the waves of the sea, would strengthen thehands of his champions against the adversaries of hisholy name. After a similar prayer, and with equal re­solution, the Moslems advanced to the attack of the


'De Guignes, Hist. Generate des Huns, torn. 1. p. 363, 364. Cardonne, Hist,de 1'Afrique et de 1'Espagne, sous la Domination des Arabes, torn. 2. p. 34, S3.I observe, and canuot reconcile, the difference of these writers in the successionof the Aplabites.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 67


God was offensive to their ear, and they measured withscrupulous avarice the honours of the Virgin Mary,whom the superstition of the Latins had almost exaltedto the rank of a goddess. When her image was firstpresented to the disciples of St. Thomas, they indig­nantly exclaimed, "We are Christians, not idolaters!"and their simple devotion was content with the venera­tion of the cross. Their separation from the westernworld had left them in ignorance of the improvementsor corruptions of a thousand years: and their confor­mity with the faith and practice of the fifth century,would equally disappoint the prejudices of a Papist or aProtestant. It was the first care of the ministers ofRome to intercept all correspondence with the Nesto-rian patriarch, and several of his bishops expired in theprisons of the holy office. The flock, without a shep­herd, was assaulted by the power of the Portuguese,the arts of the Jesuits, and the zeal of Alexes de Me-nezes, archbishop of Goa, in his personal visitation ofthe coast of Malabar. The synod of Diamper, atwhich he presided, consummated the pious work of thereunion, and rigorously imposed the doctrine and dis­cipline of the Roman church, without forgetting auri­cular confession, the strongest engine of ecclesiasticaltorture. The memory of Theodore and Nestorius wascondemned, and Malabar was reduced under the domi­nion of the pope, of the primate, and of the Jesuits, whoinvaded the see of Angamala or Cranganor. Sixtyyears of servitude and hypocrisy were patiently en-A. D, dured; but as soon as the Portuguese empirelees. was shaken by the courage and industry of theDutch, the Nestorians asserted, with vigour and effect,the religion of their fathers. The Jesuits were incapa­ble of defending the power which they had abused: thearms of forty thousand Christians were pointed againsttheir falling tyrants: and the Indian archdeacon assumedthe character of bishop, till a fresh supply of episcopal,


F2







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 175


a larger scope was allowed in the revolutions of antiquity,titan in the smooth and solid temper of the modemworld, which cannot easily repeat either the triumph ofAlexander or the fall of Darius. But the peculiar infe­licity of the Byzantine princes exposed them to domes­tic perils, without affording any lively promise of foreignconquest. From the pinnacle of greatness, Andronicuswas precipitated by a death more cruel and shamefulthan that of the vilest malefactor; but the most gloriousof his predecessors had much more to dread from theirsubjects than to hope from their enemies. The armywas licentious without spirit, the nation turbulent with­out freedom; the barbarians of the east and west pressedon the monarchy, and the loss of the provinces was ter­minated by the final servitude of the capital*
The entire series of Roman emperors, from the firstof the Caesars to the last of the Constantines, extendsabove fifteen hundred years: and the term of dominion,unbroken by foreign conquest, surpasses the measure ofthe ancient monarchies; the Assyrians, or Medes, thesuccessors of Cyrus, or those of Alexander.


CHAP. XLIX.
Introduction, worship, and persecution, of images. — Revolt of Italyand Rome. — Temporal dominion of the popes. — Conquest ofkaly by the Franks. — Establishment of images. — Character andcoronation of Charlemagne. — Restoration and decay of theRoman empire in the west. — Independence of Italy. — Consti­tution of the Germanic body.


IN the connexion of the church and state, I haveconsidered the former as subservient only, andre^ativej *o tne latter; a salutary maxim, if infact, as well as in narrative, it had ever beenheld sacred. The oriental philosophy of the Gnostics,the dark abyss of predestination and grace, and thestrange transformations of the eucharist from the sign







OCR Output













OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 367


with art, or ostentatiously displayed: the gold and silver,the various wardrobes and precious furniture, surpassed(says Abulfeda) the estimate of fancy or numbers; andanother historian defines the untold and almost infinitemass, by the fabulous computation of three thousandsof thousands of thousands of pieces of gold." Someminute though curious facts represent the contrast ofriches and ignorance. From the remote islands of theIndian ocean,-a large provision of camphireb had beenimported, which is employed with a mixture of wax toilluminate the palaces of the east. Strangers to the nameand properties of that odoriferous gum, the Saracens,mistaking it for salt, mingled the camphire in their bread,and were astonished at the bitterness of the taste. Oneof the apartments of the palace was decorated with acarpet of silk, sixty cubits in length, and as many inbreadth: a paradise or garden was depictured on theground; the flowers, fruits, and shrubs, were imitatedby tbe figures of the gold embroidery, and the colours ofthe precious stones; and the ample square was encircledby a variegated and verdant border. The Arabiangeneral persuaded his soldiers to relinquish their claim,in the reasonable hope that the eyes of the caliph wouldbe delighted with the splendid workmanship of natureand industry. Regardless of the merit of art and thepomp of royalty, the rigid Omar divided the prize amonghis brethren of Medina: the picture was destroyed; butsuch was the intrinsic value of the materials, that thesnare of Ali alone was sold for twenty thousand drachms.A mule that carried away the tiara and cuirass, the beltand bracelets of Chosroes, was overtaken by the pur­


• Monte vix potest numerove comprehend! quanta spolia nosl ris ces-
serint. Abulfeda, p. 69. Yet I still suspect, that the extravagant numbers ofElmac in may be the error, not of the teit, but of t Uu version. The best translatorsfrom the Greek, for instance, 1 find to be very poor arithmeticians.
b The Camphire-tree grows in, China and Japan; but many hundred weight ofthose meaner sorts are exchanged for a single pound of the more precious gum ofBorneo and Sumatra (Haynal, Hist. Philosoph. torn. 1. p. 362—365. Dictionnairetl'Hist. Naturelle par Bomare; Millar's Gardener's Dictionary.) These may bethe islands of the first climate from whence the Arabians imported their camphire.(Geograph. Nub..p. 34, 35. D'Herbelot, p. 232.)







OCR Output








482 ROMAN EMPIRE.


of march had been prolonged above a thousand milesfrom the rock of Gibraltar to the banks of the Loire; therepetition of an equal space would have carried the Sa­racens to the confines of Poland and the Highlands ofScotland: the Rhine is not more impassible than theNile or Euphrates, and the Arabian fleet might havesailed without a naval combat into the mouth of theThames. Perhaps the interpretation of the Koran wouldnow be taught in the schools of Oxford, and her pulpitsmight demonstrate to a circumcised people the sanctityand truth of the revelation of Mahomet."Defeat of From such calamities was Christendom de-cens by* Hvercd by the genius and fortune of one man.Mart" Charles, the illegitimate son of the elder Pepin,A.D.732. \vas content with the titles of mayor or duke ofthe Franks, but he deserved to become the father of aline of kings. In a laborious administration of twenty-four years he restored and supported the dignity of thethrone, and the rebels of Germany and Gaul were suc­cessively crushed by the activity of a warrior, who, inthe same campaign, could display his banner on theElbe, the Rhone, and the shores of the ocean. In thepublic danger, he was summoned by the voice of hiscountry; and his rival, the duke of Aquitain, was re­duced to appear among the fugitives and suppliants."Alas ! (exclaimed the Franks) what a misfortune ! whatan indignity! We have long heard of the name and con­quests of the Arabs: we were apprehensive of their at­tack from the east; they have now conquered Spain,and invade our country, on the side of the west. Yettheir numbers, and (since they have no buckler) their


them no more than the intention. Ad domum beatissimi Martini evertandam de-stinant. At Carolus, &c. The French annalist was more jealous of the honour ofthe saint .
t Yet I sincerely doubt whether the Oxford mosch would have produced a vo­lume of controversy so elegant and ingenious as the sermons lately preached byMr. White, the Arabic professor, at Mr. Bampton's lecture. His observations onthe character and religion of Mahomet are always adapted to his argument, andgenerally founded in truth and reason. He sustains the part of a lively and elo­quent advocate, and sometimes rises to the merit of an historian and philosopher.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX 233


most dexterously seized the occasion of judging theclaims and merits of the candidates, and of bestowingon the most obsequious, or most liberal, the imperialoffice of advocate of the Roman church. The dregs ofthe Carlovingian race no longer exhibited any symp­toms of virtue or power, and the ridiculous epithets ofthe bald, the stammerer, the fat, and the simple, dis­tinguished the tame and uniform features of a crowd ofkings alike deserving of oblivion. By the failure of thecollateral branches, the whole inheritance devolved toCharles the Fat, the last emperor of his family; his in-Division sanity authorized the desertion of Germany,^^ Italy, and France: he was deposed in a diet,A.D. asa, an(l solicited his daily bread from the rebels bywhose contempt his life and liberty had been spared.According to the measure of their force, the governors,the bishops, and the lords, usurped the fragments of thefalling empire; and some preference was shewn to thefemale or illegitimate blood of Charlemagne. Of thegreater part, the title and possession were alike doubt­ful, and the merit was adequate to the contracted scaleof their dominions. Those who could appear with anarmy at the gates of Rome were crowned emperors inthe Vatican, but their modesty was more frequently sa­tisfied with the appellation of kings of Italy; and thewhole term of seventy-four years may be deemed a va­cancy, from the abdication of Charles the Fat to theestablishment of Otho I.
otho king Othob was of the noble race of the dukes ofofGennany gaxony . and if he tru]v descended from Witti-
kin(^, tlie adversary and proselyte of Charle-magne, the posterity of a vanquished people


b He was the son of ,Otho, the son of Ludolph, in whose favour the dutchy ofSaxony had been instituted, A. D. 858. Ruotgerus, the biographer of a St. Bruno,(Bibliot. BrunaviansE Catalog, torn 5. vol. 2. p. 679.) gives asplendid character ofbis family. Atavorum atavi usque ad hominum memoriam omnes nobilissimi;Eullisin eorura stripe ignotns, nullus degener facile reperitur. (apud Struvium, Corp.Hiat. German, p. 216.) Yet Gundling (in Hcnrico Aucupe) i s not satisfied of hisdescent from Wittikind.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 157


boar in the valley of Anazarbus, and had fixed his jave­lin in the body of the furious animal: but, in the strug­gle, a poisoned arrow dropped from his quiver, and aslight wound in his hand, which produced a mortifica­tion, was fatal to the best and greatest of the Comne-nian princes.
A premature death had swept away the twoA.aD.ii43, eldest sons of John the Handsome; of the twoAprils. survivorS, Isaac and Manuel, his judgment oraffection preferred the younger; and the choice of theirdying prince was ratified by the soldiers, who had ap­plauded the valour of his favourite in the Turkish war.The faithful Axuch hastened to the capital, secured theperson of Isaac in honourable confinement, and pur­chased with a gift of two hundred pounds of silver, theleading ecclesiastics of St. Sophia, who possessed a de­cisive voice in the consecration of an emperor. Withhis veteran and affectionate troops, Manuel soon visit­ed Constantinople; his brother acquiesced in the titleof Sebastocrator; his subjects admired the lofty statureand martial graces of their new sovereign, and listenedwith credulity to the flattering promise, that he blendedthe wisdom of age with the activity and vigour of youth.By the experience of his government, they were taught,that he emulated the spirit, and shared the talents, ofhis father, whose social virtues were buried in thegrave. A reign of thirty-seven years is filled by a per­petual though various warfare against the Turks, theChristians, and the hordes of the wilderness beyondthe Danube. The arms of Manuel were exercised onmount Taurus, in the plains of Hungary, on the coastof Italy and Egypt, and on the seas of Sicily andGreece: the influence of his negotiations extended fromJerusalem to Rome and Russia; and the Byzantinemonarchy, for awhile, became an object of respect orterror to the powers of Asia and Europe. Educatedin the silk and purple of the east, Manuel possessed







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 123


ments in which he should have blushed to excel. Yetthe studies of Nero in music and poetry, betrayed somesymptoms of a liberal taste: the more ignoble arts ofthe son of Theophilus were confined to the chariot-raceof the hippodrome. The four factions which had agi­tated the peace, still amused the idleness, of the capi­tal: for himself, the emperor assumed the blue livery;the three rival colours were distributed to his favour­ites, and in the vile, though eager contention, he forgotthe dignity of his person, and the safety of his dominions.He silenced the messenger of an invasion, who presumedto divert his attention in the most critical moment of therace; and by his command, the importunate beaconswere extinguished, that too frequently spread the alarmfrom Tarsus to Constantinople. The most skilful cha­rioteers obtained the first place in his confidence andesteem; their merit was profusely rewarded: the em­peror feasted in their houses, and presented theirchildren at the baptismal font; and while he applaud­ed his own popularity, he affected to blame the cold andstately reserve of his predecessors. The unnatural lustswhich had degraded even the manhood of Nero, werebanished from the world; yet the strength of Michaelwas consumed by the indulgence of love and intemper­ance. In his midnight revels, when his passions wereinflamed by wine, he was provoked to issue the mostsanguinary commands; and if any feelings of humanitywere left, he was reduced, with the return of sense, toapprove the salutary disobedience of his servants. Butthe most extraordinary feature in the character of Mi­chael, is the profane mockery of the religion of hiscountry. The superstition of the Greeks might indeedexcite the smile of a philosopher: but his smile wouldhave been rational and temperate, and he must havecondemned the ignorant folly of a youth who insultedthe objects of public veneration. A buffoon of the courtwas invested in the robes of the patriarch; the twelve







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 25


nister; who related his ineffectual efforts to prevent orannul the hasty violence of the Egyptian. With equalhaste and violence, the oriental synod of fifty bishop sdegraded Cyril and Memnon from their episcopal ho­nours, condemned, in the twelve anathemas, the purestvenom of the Apollinarian heresy, and described th eAlexandrian primate as a monster, born and educatedfor the destruction of the church.* His throne was dis­tant and inaccessible; but they instantly resolved tobestow on the flock of Ephesus the blessing of a faith­ful shepherd. By the vigilance of Memnon, the churcheswere shut against them, and a strong garrison wasthrown into the cathedral. The troops, under the com­mand of Candidian, advanced to the assault; the out-guards were routed and put to the sword, but the placewas impregnable: the besiegers retired; their retreatwas pursued by a vigorous sally; they lost their horses,and many of the soldiers were dangerously woundedwith clubs and stones. Ephesus, the city of the Virgin,was defiled with rage and clamour, with sedition andblood; the rival synods darted anathemas and excom­munications from their spiritual engines; and the courtof Theodosius was perplexed by the adverse and con­tradictory narratives of the Syrian and Egyptian fac­tions. During a busy period of three months, the em­peror tried every method, except the most effectualmeans of indifference and contempt, to reconcile thistheological quarrel. He attempted to remove or inti­midate the leaders by a common sentence of acquittal orcondemnation; he invested his representatives at Ephe­sus with ample power and military force; he summonedfrom either party eight chosen deputies to a free andcandid conference in the neighbourhood of the capital,far from the contagion of popular frenzy. But the ori-
> '» 5= He' c\i6(a tm uxXwism it^flti; iwi Tpa$ei;. After the coalition of John andCyril, these invectives were mutually forgotten. The style of declamation mustnever be confounded with the genuine sense which respectable enemies entertain,of each other's merit. (Concil. torn. 3. p. 1241.)







OCR Output








530 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Cretans was stimulated by the frequent aid of their bre­thren of Africa and Spain; and, after the massy walland double ditch had been stormed by the Greeks, ahopeless conflict was still maintained in the streets andhouses of the city. The whole island was subdued inthe capital, and a submissive people accepted, withoutresistance, the baptism of the conqueror.1 Constanti­nople applauded the long-forgotten pomp of a triumph;but the imperial diadem was the sole reward that couldrepay the services, or satisfy the ambition, of Nicephorus.Theeastem After the death of the younger Romanus, theconquests fourth in lineal descent of the Basilian race, his
of Nice- .'
phorus, widow Theophania successively married Nice-andjohn phorus Phocas, and his assassin John Zimisces,zimene., fae two heroes of the age. They reigned as963—975. the guardians and colleagues of her infant sons;and the twelve years of their military command form themost splendid period of the Byzantine annals. Thesubjects and confederates, whom they led to war, ap­peared, at least in the eyes of an enemy, two hundredthousand strong; and of these about thirty thousandwere armed with cuirasses :y a train of four thousandmules attended their march; and then* evening campwas regularly fortified with an enclosure of iron spikes.A series of bloody and undecisive combats is nothingmore than an anticipation of what would have been ef­fected in a few years by the course of nature; but I shallbriefly prosecute the conquests of the two emperorsfrom the hills of Cappadocia to the desert of Bagdad.Conquest The sieges of Mopsuestia and Tarsus in CiliciaofCiiicia. first exercised the skill and perseverance of their


x A Greek life of St. Nicon, the Armenian, was found in the Sforza library, andtranslated into Latin by the Jesuit Sirmond for the use of cardinal Baronius. Thiscontemporary legend casts a ray of light on Crete and Peloponnesus in the tenthcentury. He found the newly-recovered island, focdis detestandae Agarenorum »u-perstitionis vestigiis adhuc plenam ac refertam . . . but the victorious missionary,perhaps with some carnal aid, ad baptismum omnes veraque fidei disciplinam pe-pulit. Ecclesiis per tntam insulam asdificatis, &c. (Annal. Eccles. A. D. 961.)
J l'.hiKirin, Ili;-i. Saracen, p. 278, 279. Liutprand was disposed to depreciate theGreek poa-er, yet he ownt that Nicephorus led against Assyria an army of righiythousand men.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. Ifi


of his life, and the eloquence of his sermons; but thefirst homily which he preached before the devout Theo-dosius, betrayed the acrimony and impatience of hiszeal. Give me, O Caesar! (he exclaimed) give me theearth purged of heretics, and I will give you in exchangethe kingdom of heaven. Exterminate with me, the here­tics; and with you, I will exterminate the Persians.On the fifth day, as if the treaty had been already sign­ed, the patriarch of Constantinople discovered, surprised,and attacked a secret conventicle of the Arians: theypreferred death to submission; the flames, that werekindled by their despair, soon spread to the neighbour­ing houses, and the triumph of Nestorius was cloudedby the name of incendiary. On either side of the Hel­lespont, his episcopal vigour imposed a rigid formularyof faith and discipline; a chronological error concern­ing the festival of Easter was punished as an offenceagainst the church and state. Lydia and Caria, Sardes,and Miletus, were purified with the blood of the obsti­nate Quartodecimans; and the edict of the emperor, orrather of the patriarch, enumerates three-and-twenty de­grees and denominations in the guilt and punishment ofheresy.h But the sword of persecution, which Nestoriusso furiously wielded, was soon turned against his ownbreast. Religion was the pretence; but, in the judg­ment of a contemporary saint, ambition was the genuinemotive of episcopal warfare.1
His betes In ^e Sv"an school, Nestorius had been
A. D. «9 taught to abhor the confusion of the two natures,
and nicely to discriminate the humanity of his
master Christ from the divinity of the Lord Jesus.k The


k Cod. Theodos. lib. 16. tit. 5. leg. 65. with the illustrations of Baronius, (A. D.428. no. 25, &c.) Godefroy (ad locum), and Pagi. (Critics, torn. 2. p. 208.)
1 Isidore of Pelusium. (lib. 4. epist. 57.) His words are strong and scandalous—•n 3oui*a£u;, ti *ai w CTgt flrpayiwa &ltw xai Xoyou xfitTrov ^M^oenn wftmtntntnai wo4 i?.3;£ii; l*i3ax;csirtf*lMi. Isidore is a saint, but he never became a bishop; and Ihalf suspect, that the pride of Diogenes trampled on the pride of Plato.
k La Croze (Christianisme des hides, torn. 1. p. 44—53. Thesaurus EpistolicusLa Crozianus, torn. 3. p. 376—280.) has detected the use of i Jfcnramf, and o xvf a;lini*, which, in the fourth, fifth, and sixth centuries, discriminate the school of •Piodorus of Tarsus and his Nestorian disciples.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI1I. 141


most important triumph of the Roman arms. Yet in­stead of applauding their victorious prince, his subjectsdetested the rapacious and rigid avarice of Basil; andin the imperfect narrative of his exploits, we can onlydiscern the courage, patience, and ferociousness, of asoldier. A vicious education, which could not subduehis spirit, had, clouded his mind; he was ignorant ofevery science; and the remembrance of his learned andfeeble grandsire might encourage a real or affected con­tempt of laws and lawyers, of artists and arts. Of sucha character, in such an age, superstition took a firmand lasting possession: after the first licence of hisyouth, Basil II. devoted his life, in the palace and thecamp, to the penance of a hermit, wore the monastichabit under his robes and armour, observed a vow ofcontinence, and imposed on his appetites a perpetualabstinence from wine and flesh. In the sixty-eighthyear of his age, his martial spirit urged him to embarkin person for a holy war against the Saracens of Sicily;he was prevented by death, and Basil, surnamed theslayer of the Bulgarians, was dismissed from the world,with the blessings of the clergy and the curses of theConstan- people. After his decease, his brother Constan-
j» TV
AnD. 1025, tine enjoyed, about three years, the power, orDecember.rather the pleasures, of royalty; and his onlycare was the settlement of his succession. He had en­joyed sixty-six years the title of Augustus; and thereign of the two brothers is the longest, and most ob­scure, of the Byzantine history.
Komanus ^ lineal succession of five emperors, in a pe-*1L riod of one hundred and sixty years, had attach-A!D. loss, ed the loyalty of the Greeks to the Macedoniandynasty, which had been thrice respected by theusurpers of their power. After the death of Constan-tine IX., the last male of the royal race, a new andbroken scene presents itself, and the accumulated yearsof twelve emperors do not equal the space of his single







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 389


and conspicuous: they vanished on a sudden; but theSaracens were comforted by the assurance that the ca­ravan had turned aside into the mountains, and mustspeedily fall into their hands. In traversing the ridgesof the Libanus, they endured intolerable hardships, andthe sinking spirits of the veteran fanatics were sup­ported and cheered by the unconquerable ardour of alover. From a peasant of the country, they were in­formed that the emperor had sent orders to the colony ofexiles, to pursue without delay the road of the sea-coast,and of Constantinople; apprehensive, perhaps, that thesoldiers and people of Antioch might be discouragedby the sight and the story of their sufferings. The Sa­racens were conducted through the territories of Gabala'and Laodicea, at a cautious distance from the walls ofthe cities; the rain was incessant, the night was dark,a single mountain separated them from the Roman army;and Caled, ever anxious for the safety of his brethren,whispered an ominous dream in the ear of his compa­nion. With the dawn of day, the prospect again clear­ed, and they saw before them, in a pleasant valley, thetents of Damascus. After a short interval of repose andprayer, Caled divided his cavalry into four, squadrons,committing the first to his faithful Derar, and reservingthe last for himself. They successively rushed on thepromiscuous multitude, insufficiently provided with arms,and already vanquished by sorrow and fatigue. Excepta captive who was pardoned and dismissed, the Arabsenjoyed the satisfaction of believing that not a Christianof either sex escaped the edge of.their scimitars. Thegold and silver of Damascus was scattered over the camp,and a royal wardrobe of three hundred load of silk mightclothe an army of naked barbarians. In the tumult of


'The towns of Gabala and Laodicea, which the Arabs passed, still exist in astate of decay. (Maundrell, p. 11, 12. Focock, vol. 2. p. 13.) Had not theChristians been overtaken, they must have crossed the Orontes on some bridge inthe sixteen miles between Antioch and the sea, and might have rejoined the highroad of Constantinople at Alexandria. The itineraries will represent the direc­tions and distances, (p. 146.148. 581, 582. edit. Wesseling.)







OCR Output








380 ROMAN EMPIRE.


introduced to the tent of that venerable commanderHe received and dismissed them with courtesy. "Theyreturned with a written agreement, on the faith of acompanion of Mahomet, that all hostilities should cease;that the voluntary emigrants might depart in safety, withas much as they could carry away of their effects; andthat the tributary subjects of the caliph should enjoytheir lands and houses, with the use and possession ofseven churches. On these terms, the most respectablehostages, and the gate nearest to his camp, were deli­vered into his hands: his soldiers imitated the modera­tion of their chief; and he enjoyed the submissive gra­titude of a people whom. he had rescued from destruction.But the success of the treaty had relaxed their vigilance,and in the same moment the opposite quarter of thecity was betrayed and taken by assault. A party of ahundred Arabs had opened the eastern gate to a moreinexorable foe. No quarter (cried the rapacious andsanguinary Caled), no quarter to the enemies of the Lord.His trumpets sounded, and a torrent of Christian bloodwas poured down the streets of Damascus. When hereached the church of St. Mary, he was astonished andprovoked by the peaceful aspect of his companions; theirswords were in the scabbard, and they were surroundedby a multitude of priests and monks.—Abu Obeidahsaluted the general; God (said he) has delivered the cityinto my hands by way of surrender, and has saved the be­lievers the trouble of fighting.—And am I not (repliedthe indignant Caled), am I not the lieutenant of the com­mander of the faithful? Have I not taken the city bystorm? The unbelievers shall perish by the stvord. Fallon. The hungry and cruel Arabs would have obeyedthe welcome command; and Damascus was lost, if thebenevolence of Abu Obeidah had not been supported bya decent and dignified firmness. Throwing himself be­tween the trembling citizens and the most eager of thebarbarians, he adjured them by the holy name of God,







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 447


criminal cases to the subordinate jurisdiction of their ownlaws and magistrates. But if the justice of Tarik pro­tected the Christians, his gratitude and policy rewardedthe Jews, to whose secret or open aid he was indebtedfor his most important acquisitions. Persecuted by thekings and synods of Spain, who had often pressed thealternative of banishment or baptism, that outcast nationembraced the moment of revenge; the comparison oftheir past and present state was the pledge of their fide­lity; and the alliance between the disciples of Moses andof Mahomet, was maintained till the final era of theircommon expulsion. From the royal .seat of Toledo, theArabian leader spread his conquests to the north, overthe modern realms of Castile and Leon; but it is need­less to enumerate the cities that yielded on his approach,or again to describe the table of emerald,* transportedfrom the east by the Romans, acquired by the Gothsamong the spoils of Rome, and presented by the Arabsto the throne of Damascus. Beyond the Asturian moun­tains, the maritime town of Gijon was the term' of thelieutenant of Musa, who had performed, with the speedof a traveller, his victorious march, of seven hundredmiles, from the rock of Gibraltar to the bay of Biscay.The failure of land compelled him to retreat; and hewas recalled to Toledo, to excuse his presumption ofsubduing a kingdom in the absence of his general.Spain, which, in a more savage and disorderly state, hadresisted, two hundred years, the arms of the Romans,was over-run in a few months by those of the Saracens;and such was the eagerness of submission and treaty,


• In the Hiutoria Arabum, (c. 9. p. 17. ad calcem Elmacin), Roderic of Toledodescribes the emerald tables, and inserts the name of Medinat Almeyda in Arabicwords and letters. He appears to be conversant with the Mahometan writers; butI cannot agree with M. de (<ui;ues, (Hist, des Huns, torn. 1. p. 550.) that he badread and transcribed Novairi; because he was dead a hundred years before No-rairi composed his history. This mistake is founded on a still grosser error. M. deGuignes confounds the historian Roderic Ximenes. archbishop of Toledo, in thethirteenth century, with cardinal Ximenes, who governed Spain in the beginning ofthe sixteenth, and was the subject, not the author of historical compositions.
1 Tarik might have inscribed oa the last rock, the boast of Regnard and bis com­panions in their Lapland journey, " Hie tandem stetimns, nobis vbi defuit orbis."







OCR Output








214 ROMAN EMPIRE.


by danger and dissimulation, and she could onlylabour to protect and promote some favourite monkswhom she drew from their caverns, and seated on themetropolitan thrones of the east. But as soon as shereigned in her own name and that of her son, Irenemore seriously undertook the ruin of the Iconoclasts;and the first step of her future persecution, was ageneral edict for liberty of conscience. In the resto­ration of the monks, a thousand images were exposedto the public veneration; a thousand legends wereinvented of their sufferings and miracles. By the op­portunities of death or removal, the episcopal seats werejudiciously filled: the most eager competitors for earth­ly or celestial favour, anticipated and flattered thejudgment of their sovereign; and the promotion of hersecretary Tarasius, gave Irene the patriarch of Constan­tinople, and the command of the oriental church. Butthe decrees of a general council could only be repealedby a similar assembly;1 the Iconoclasts, whom she con­vened, were bold in possession, and averse to debate; andthe feeble voice of the bishops was re-echoed by the moreformidable clamour of the soldiers and people of Con­stantinople. The delay and intrigues of a year,general the separation of the disaffected troops, and thechoice of Nice for a second orthodox synod, re-moved these obstacles; and the episcopal con-Sept. 24-1 science was again, after the Greek fashion, inthe hands of the prince. No more than eigh­teen days were allowed for the consummation of thisimportant work: the Iconoclasts appeared, not asfudges, but as criminals or penitents; the scene was de­corated by the legates of pope Hadrian and the easternpatriarch,11 the decrees were framed by the president Ta­


'See the Acts, in Greek and Latin, of the second council of Nice, with a num­ber of relative pieces, in the seventh volume of the councils, p. 645—1600. Afaithful version, with some critical notes, would provoke, in different readers,»sigh or a smile.
k The pope's legates were casual messengers, two priests without any specialcommission, and who were disavowed on their return. Some vagabond monkt







OCR Output








360 ROMAN EMPIRE.


was consecrated to the expenses of peace and war; aprudent mixture of justice and bounty maintained thediscipline of the Saracens, and they united, by a rarefelicity, the dispatch and execution of despotism, withthe equal and frugal maxims of a republican government.The heroic courage of Ali,s the consummate prudenceof Moawiyah,h excited the emulation of their subjects;and the talents which had been exercised in the schoolof civil discord, were more usefully applied to propagatethe faith and dominion of the prophet. In the sloth'and vanity of the palace of Damascus, the succeedingprinces of the house of Ommiyah were alike destitute ofthe qualifications of statesman and of saints.1 Yet thespoils of unknown nations were continually laid at thefoot of their throne, and the uniform ascent of the Ara­bian greatness must be ascribed to the spirit of the nationrather than the abilities of their chiefs. A large de­duction must be allowed for the weakness of their ene­mies. The birth of Mahomet was fortunately placedin the most degenerate and disorderly period of thePersians, the Romans, and the barbarians of Europe;the empires of Trajan, or even of Constantine or Char­lemagne, would have repelled the assault of the nakedSaracens, and the torrent of fanaticism might have beenobscurely lost in the sands of Arabia.Their con- ^n tne victorious days of the Roman republic,quests, it had been the aim Of the senate to confine theirconsuls and legions to a single war, and completely tosuppress a first enemy before they provoked the hosti­lities of a second. These timid maxims of policy weredisdained by the magnanimity or enthusiasm of the Ara­bian caliphs. With the same vigour and success they


s His reign in Eutychius, p. 343. Elmacin, p. 51. Abulpharagius, p. 117. Abul-feda, p. 83. D'Herbelot, p. 89.
'' His reign in Eutychius, p. 344. Elmacin, p. 54. Abulpharagius, p. 123. Abul-feda, p. 101. D'Herbelot, p. 586.
'Their reigns in Eutychius, torn. 2. p. 360—395. Elmacin, p. 59—108. Abul­pharagius, dynast. 9. p. 124—139. Abulfeda, p. Ill—141. D'Herbelot, BibliotheqaeOrientale, p. 691. and the particular articles of the Ommiades.







OCR Output








506 ROMAN EMPIRE.


were inscribed in the military roll; and above three hun­dred thousand persons of every denomination marchedunder the black standard of the Abbassides. Theyswept the surface of Asia Minor far beyond Tyanaand Ancyra, and invested the Pontic Heraclea,h once aflourishing state, now a paltry town; at that time capa­ble of sustaining in her antique walls a month's siegeagainst the forces of the east. The ruin was complete,the spoil was ample; but if Harun had been conversantwith Grecian story, he would have regretted the statueof Hercules, whose attributes, the club, the bow, thequiver, and the lion's hide, were sculptured in massygold. The progress of desolation by sea and land, fromthe Euxine to the isle of Cyprus, compelled the emperorNicephorus to retract his haughty defiance. In the newtreaty the ruins of Heraclea were left for ever as a lessonand a trophy; and the coin of the tribute was marked withthe image and superscription of Harun and his threesons.' Yet this plurality of lords might contributeto remove the dishonour of the Roman name. After thedeath of their father, the heirs of the caliph were in­volved in civil discord, and the conqueror, the liberal Al-mamon, was sufficiently engaged in the restoration ofdomestic peace and the introduction of foreign science.The Arabs Under the reign of Almamon at Bagdad, ofsubdue the Michael, the Stammerer at Constantinople, theCrete, islands of Crete1 and Sicily were subdued by the
A T) R9'?
"""• Arabs. The former of these conquests is dis­


k M. D.Tournefort, in his coasting voyage from Constantinople to Trebizond,passed anightat Heraclea or Eregri. His eye surveyed the present state, hia read­ing collected the antiquities, of the city. (Voyage du Levant, torn. 3. lettre 16.p. 23—35.) We have a separate history of Heraclea in the fragments of Memnon,which are preserved by Photius.
I I he wars of Harun al Rashid against the Roman empire, are related by Theo-phanes, (384, 385. 391.396. 407, 408.) Zonaras, (torn. 3. lib. 15. p. 113. 1*4.)Cedrenus, (p. 477, 478.) EutycMus, (Anual. torn. 2. p. 407.) Elmacin. (Hist. Sa­racen, p. 136. 151,152.) Abulpharagius, (Dynast, p. 147.151.) and Abulfrda,(p. 156. 166—168.)
k The authors from whom I have learned the most of the ancient and modemstate of Crete, are Belon, (Observations, Sec. c. 3—20. Paris, 1555.) Tournefort,(Voyage du Levant, torn. 1. Irttrc 2 et 3.) and Meursius.(Crcta,inhis works, torn.







OCR Output








314 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Beder,0 three stations from Medina, he was informed byhis scouts of the caravan that approached on one side;of the Koreish, one hundred horse, eight hundred andfifty foot, who advanced on the other. After a shortdebate, he sacrificed the prospect of wealth to the pur­suit of glory and revenge; and a slight intrenchmentwas formed to cover his troops, and a stream of freshBattle of water that glided through the valley. O GodBedsr, (he exclaimed as the numbers of the Koreish de-'scended from the hills), O God, if these are de­stroyed, by whom wilt thou be worshipped on the earth?Courage, my children, close your ranks; discharge yourarrows, and the day is your own. At these words heplaced himself, with Abubeker, on a throne or pulpit/and instantly demanded the succour of Gabriel andthree thousand angels. His eye was fixed on the fieldof battle: the Mussulmans fainted and were pressed:in that decisive moment the prophet started from histhrone, mounted his horse, and cast a handful of sandinto the air. Let their faces be covered with confusion.Both armies heard the thunder of his voice: their fancybeheld the angelic warriors :q the Koreish trembled andfled; seventy of the bravest were slain; and seventycaptives adorned the first victory of the faithful. Thedead bodies of the Koreish were despoiled and insulted;


0 Bedder Houneene, twenty miles from Medina, and forty from Mecca, is onthe high road of the caravan from Egypt; and the pilgrims annually commemoratethe prophet's victory by illuminations, rockets, &c. Shaw's Travels, p. 477.
P The place to which Mahomet retired during the action is styled by Gagnier,(in Abulfeda, c. 27. p. 58. Vie de Mahomet, torn. 2. p. 30. 33.) Unhruculum, unetage di' bail aucc une porte. The same Arabic word is rendered by Reiske (Annaksde Moslemici Abulfeds, p. 23.) by Solium Suggestus editor; and the difference isof the utmost moment for the honour both of the interpreter and of the hero. I amsorry to observe the pride and acrimony with which fteiske chastises his fol­low labourer. Sspe sic vertit, ut Integra paginie nequeant nisi una lilurft corrigi:Aral ,irc. non satis callebat et carebat judicio critico. J. J. Reiske, prodidagmataad Hagji ChalistB-Tabulas, p. 228. ad calcem AbulfedtB Syris Tabuls; Lepmie,1766, in quarto.
1 The loose expressions of the Koran (c. 3. p. U4,125. c. 8. p. 9.) allow thecommentators to fluctuate between the numbers of one thousand, three thousand,or nine thousand angels ; and the smallest of these might suffice for the slaughterof seventy of the Koreish. (Maracci, Alcoran, torn. 2. p. 131.) Yet the scholiastsconfess, that this angelic band was not visible to any mortal eye. (Maracci,p. 297.j They refine on the words, (c. 8.16.) " not thou, but God." &c. (D'Her.Mot, Bibliot. Orientate, p. 600, 601.)







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 425


of the Greeks and Arabs, the Copts alone were found, onthe assessment, six millions of tributary subjects/ ortwenty millions of either sex, and of every age: thatthree hundred millions of gold or silver were annuallypaid to the treasury of the caliph.' Our reason must bestartled by these extravagant assertions; and they willbecome more palpable, if we assume the compass andmeasure the extent of habitable ground; a valley fromthe tropic to Memphis, seldom broader than twelve miles,and the triangle of the Delta, a flat surface of two thou­sand one hundred square leagues, compose a twelfth part ofthe magnitude of France.' A more accurate research willjustify a more reasonable estimate. The three hundredmillions, created by the error of a scribe, are reduced tothe decent revenue of four millions three hundred thou­sand pieces of gold, ofwhich nine hundred thousand wereconsumed by the pay of the soldiers." Two authenticlists, of the present and of the twelfth century, are cir­cumscribed within the respectable number of two thou­


etmmm opinion; and adds, that the generality of these villages contain two orthree thousand persons, and that many of them are more populous than our largecities-
'Eutych. Annal. torn. 2. p. 308. 311. The twenty millions are computed fromthe following data: one-twelfth of mankind above sixty, one-third below sixteen,the proportion of men to women as seventeen to sixteen. (Recherches sur la Po­pulation de la France, p. 71, 72.) The president Goguet (Origin des Arts, &c.torn. 3. p. 26, &c.) bestows twenty-seven millions on ancient Egypt, because theseventeen hundred companions of Sesostris were bom on the same day.
• Elmacin, Hist . Saracen, p. 218. and this gross lump is swallowed withoutscrupli- by d'Herbelot, (Bibliot. Orient, p. 1031.) Arbuthnot, (Tables of AncientCoins, p. 262.) and de Guignes. (Hist, des Huns, torn. 3. p. 135.) They mightallege the not less extravagant liberality of Appian in favour of the Ptolemies (inprfef.) of seventy-four myriads, seven hundred and forty thousand talents, an an­nual income of a hundred and eighty-five, or near three hundred, millions of poundssterling, according as we reckon by the Egyptian or the Alexandrian talent. (Ber­nard de Ponderibus Antiq. p. 186.)
1 See the measurement of d'Anville. (Mern. sur 1'Egypte, p. 23, &c.) After somepeevish cavils, M. Pauw (Recherches sur les Egyptians, torn. 1. p. 118—121.) canonly enlarge his reckoning to two thousand two hundred and fifty square leagues.
"Renaudot, Hist. Patriarch. Alexand. p. 334. who calls the common reading orversion of Elmacin, error librarii. His own emendation of four million three hun­dred thousand pieces, in the ninth century, maintains a probable medium betweenthe three millions which the Arabs acquired by the conquest of Egypt, (idem,p. 168.) and the two million four hundred thousand which the sultan of Constan­tinople levied in the last century. (Pietro della Valle, torn. 1. p. 352. Thevenot,part 1. p. 824.) Pauw (Recherches, torn. 2. p. 365—373.) gradually raises therevenue of the Pharaohs, the Ptolemies, and the Ctesars, from six to fifteen mil­lions of German crowns.







OCR Output








20 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Blessed Virgin he revered as the mother of Christ, buthis ears were offended with the rash and recent title ofmother of God,1 which had been insensibly adopted sincethe origin of the Arian controversy. From the pulpitof Constantinople, a friend of the patriarch, and after­ward the patriarch himself, repeatedly preached againstthe use or the abuse, of a word™ unknown to the apos­tles, unauthorized by the church, and which could onlytend to alarm the timorous, to mislead the simple, toamuse the profane, and to justify, by a seeming resem­blance, the old genealogy of Olympus." In his calmermoments Nestorius confessed, that it might be toleratedor excused by the union of the two natures, and thecommunication of their idioms:0 but he was exasperated,by contradiction, to disclaim the worship of anew-born,an infant Deity, to draw his inadequate similes from theconjugal or civil partnerships of life, and to describe themanhood of Christ as the robe, the instrument, the taber­nacle of his Godhead. At these blasphemous sounds,the pillars of the sanctuary were shaken. The unsuc­cessful competitors of Nestorius indulged their pious orpersonal resentment, the Byzantine clergy was secretlydispleased with the intrusion of a stranger: whateveris superstitious or absurd, might claim the protection


C — Deipara: as in zoology we familiarly speak of oviparous and vivipa­rous animals. It is not easy to fix the invention of this word , which La Croze (Chris-lianisme de» Indes, torn. 1. p. 16.) ascribes to Eusebius of Caesarea and the Arians.The orthodox testimonies are produced by Cyril and Petavius ; (Dogmat. Theolog.torn. 5. lib. 5. c. 15. p. 254, ficc.) but the veracity of the saint is questionable, andthe epithet of SIOTMOC so easily slides from the margin to the text of a Catholic MS.
"Basnage, in his Histoire de 1'Eglise, a work of controversy, (torn. 1. p. 505.)justifies the mother, by the blood of God. (Acts xx. 28. with Mill's various read­ings.) But the Greek MSS. are far from unanimous; and the primitive style ofthe blood of Christ is preserved in the Syriac version, even in those copies whichwere used by the Christians of St. Thomas on the coast of Malabar. (La Croze,'Christianisme des Indes, torn. 1. p. 547.) The jealousy of the Nestorians andMonophysites has guarded the purity of their text.
"The Pagans of Egypt already laughed at the new Cybele of the Christians;(Isidor. lib. 1. epist. 54.) a letter was forged in the name of Hypatia, to ridiculethe theology of her assassin. (Synodicon, c. 216. in 4 torn. Concil. p. 484.) In thearticle of NEsToRIUs, Bayle has scattered some loose philosophy on the worshipof the Virgin Mary.
"The am)on; of the Greeks, a mutual loan or transfer of the idioms or proper­ties of each nature to the other — of infinity to man, possibility to God,&c. Twelverules on this nicest of subjects compose the Theological Grammar of Petavius,(Dogmata Theolog. torn. 5. lib*, c. 14, 15. p. 209,&c.)







OCR Output








26 ROMAN EMPIRE.


cntals refused to yield, and the Catholics, proud of theirnumbers and of their Latin allies, rejected all terms ofunion or toleration. The patience of the meek Theo-dosius was provoked, and he dissolved in anger thisepiscopal tumult, which at the distance of thirteen cen­turies assumes the venerable aspect of the third ecu­menical council." God is my witness (said the piousprince), that I am not the author of this confusion. Hisprovidence will discern and punish the guilty. Returnto your provinces, and may your private virtues repairthe mischief and scandal of your meeting. They return­ed to their provinces; but the same passions whichhad distracted the synod of Ephesus were diffused overthe eastern world. After three obstinate and equalcampaigns, John of Antioch and Cyril of Alexandriacondescended to explain and embrace: but their seem­ing reunion must be imputed rather to prudence than toreason, to the mutual lassitude rather than to the Chris­tian charity of the patriarchs.
victory The Byzantine pontiff had instilled into theA.^431 royal ear a baleful prejudice against the cha-—*35. racter and conduct of his Egyptian rival. Anepistle of menace and invective,b which accompa­nied the summons, accused him as a busy, insolent,and envious priest, who perplexed the simplicity ofthe faith, violated the peace of the church and state,and, by his artful and separate addresses to the wife andsister of Theodosius, presumed to suppose, or to scatter,the seeds of discord in the imperial family. At the sterncommand of his sovereign, Cyril had repaired toEphe­


* See the Acts of the Synod of Ephesus, in the original Greek, and a Latin ver­sion almost contemporary, (Concil. torn. 3. p. 991—1339. with the Synodicon ad-versus Tragaediam Irensi, torn. 4. p. 235—497.) the Ecclesiastical Histories ofSocrates, (lib. 7. c. 34.) and Evagrius, (lib. 1. c. 3—5.) the Breviary of Liberatus,{in Concil. torn. 6. p. 419—459. c. 5, 6.) and the Memoires Eccles. of Tillemont.<torn. 14. p. 377—487.)
!l Tn;a^':i (says the emperor in pointed language) TO yt tin crai/rw, xai yj-:-tic,Tats lxxXna-jai; ilU£fCXnxa? .... a; dgaffvrf fac of JUQC TFfHFOvaTtf ^*aXX« il tutpBiMf«... xai irouuXiaf fjuAKn TWTW fywn ttpawfit nffip airXorHraf .... irarrnf/uaXXov i} tips*? . . . . T* Tf ten fXxXwiar, TA TI Tm CaffiXlwv /utXXuy %aifi£tu &w-Xe.-dai, w; cm aunt aftpfMt itifat lulfxijur-t*;. I should be curious to know howmuch Nestorius paid for these expressions so mortifying to his rival.







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 457


policy supplied the obligation of justice; and aftersomeacts of intolerant zeal, the Mahometan conquerors ofHindostan have spared the pagods of that devout andpopulous country. The disciples of Abraham, of Moses,and of Jesus, were solemnly invited to accept the moreperfect revelation of Mahomet; but if they prefer­red the payment of a moderate tribute, they were en­titled to the freedom of conscience and religious wor-Propaga- ship." In a field of battle, the forfeit lives of thetionof Ma-prisoners were redeemed by the profession of
bometisui.
Islam; the females were bound to embrace thereligion of their masters, and a race of sincere proselyteswas gradually multiplied by the education of the infantcaptives. But the millions of Asiatic and African con­verts, who swelled the native band of the faithful Arabs,must have been allured, rather than constrained, to de­clare their belief in one God and the apostle of God. Bythe repetition of a sentence and the loss of a foreskin,the subject or the slave, the captive or the criminal,arose in a moment the free and equal companion of thevictorious Moslems. Every sin was expiated, every en­gagement was dissolved: the vow of celibacy was su­perseded by the indulgence of nature; the active spi­rits who slept in the cloister were awakened by the trum­pet of the Saracens : and in the convulsion of the world,every member of a new society ascended to the naturallevel of his capacity and courage. The minds of themultitude were tempted by the invisible as well as tem­poral blessings of the Arabian prophet; and charity willhope, that many of his proselytes entertained a seriousconviction of the truth and sanctity of his revelation. In
God, worship the sun, moon, or idols. 2. Atheists. Utrique, quamdiu princepsaliquis inter Mohammedanos superest, oppugnari debent donee religionem amplec-tantur, nee requies us concedenda est, nee pretium acceptandum pro obtinendaconscientiae libertate : (Reland, Dissertat. 10. de jure Militari Mohammedan, torn.3. p. 14.) a rigid theory!
"The distinction between a proscribed and a tolerated sect, between the Harbiiand the people of the Book, the oelievers in some divine revelation, is correctly de­fined in the conversation of the caliph AI Mamun with the idolaters, or Sabaeans, ofCharra. Hottinger, Hist. Orient, p. 107, 108.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 203


zeal of his Transalpine allies, enforced his complaintand request by an eloquent letter in the name and per­son of St. Peter himself/ The apostle assures hisadoptive sons, the king, the clergy, and the nobles ofFrance, that dead in the flesh, he is still alive in thespirit; that they now hear, and must obey, the voice ofthe founder and guardian of the Roman church; thatthe Virgin, the angels, the saints, and the martyrs, andall the host of heaven, unanimously urge the request,and will confess the obligation; that riches, victory,and paradise, will crown their pious enterprise, andthat eternal damnation will be the penalty of their neg­lect, if they suffer his tomb, his temple, and his people,to fall into the hands of the perfidious Lombards. Thesecond expedition of Pepin was not less rapid and for­tunate than the first: St. Peter was satisfied, Rome wasagain saved, and Astolphus was taught the lessons ofjustice and sincerity by the scourge of a foreign mas­ter. After this double chastisement, the Lombardslanguished about twenty years in a state of languor anddecay. But their minds were not yet humbled to theircondition; and instead of affecting the pacific virtuesof the feeble, they peevishly harassed the Romans witha repetition of claims, evasions, and inroads, whichthey undertook without reflection and terminated with­out glory. On either side, their expiring monarchy waspressed by the zeal and prudence of Pope Adrian I.the genius, the fortune, and greatness, of Charle­magne the son of Pepin; these heroes of the churchand state were united in public and domestic friend­ship, and while they trampled on the prostrate, theyvarnished their proceedings with the fairest colours ofequity and moderation.8 The passes of the Alps, and


'See this most extraordinary letter in the Codex Carolines, epist. 3. p. 92.The enemies of the popes hare charged them with fraud and blasphemy; yet tkeysnrely meant to persuade rather than deceive. This introduction of the dead, orof immortals, was familiar to the ancient orators, though it is executed on thi-occasion in the rude fashion of the age.
f Except in the divorce of the daughter of Desiderius, whom Charlemagne re­







OCR Output








34 ROMAN EMPIRE.


would be still involved in theheresyof the Monophysites,if the emperor's horse had not fortunately stumbled;Theodosius expired, his orthodox sister, Pulcheria, witha nominal husband, succeeded to the throne; Chrysa-phius was burnt, Dioscorus was disgraced, the exileswere recalled, and the tome of Leo was subscribed by theoriental bishops. Yet the pope was disappointed in hisfavourite project of a Latin council: he disdained to pre­side in the Greek synod, which was speedily assembled,at Nice in Bithynia; his legates required in a peremp­tory tone the presence of the emperor; and the waryfathers were transported to Chalcedon under the imme­diate eye of Marcian and the senate of Constantinople.A quarter of a mile from the Thracian Bosphorus, thechurch of St. Euphemia was built on the summit of agentle though lofty ascent: the triple structure was ce­lebrated as a progidy of art, and the boundless prospectof the land and sea might have raised the mind of a sec­tary to the contemplation of the God of the universe.Six hundred and thirty bishops were ranged in orderin the nave of the church; but the patriarchs of the eastwere preceded by the legates, of whom the third was asimple priest: and the place of honour was reserved fortwenty laymen of consular or senatorian rank. Thegospel was ostentatiously displayed in the centre, butthe rule of faith was denned by the papal and imperialministers, who moderated the thirteen sessions of thecouncil of Chalcedon.q Their partial interposition si­lenced the intemperate shouts and execrations, whichdegraded the episcopal gravity: but, on the formal ac­cusation of the legates, Dioscorus was compelled to de­scend from his throne to the rank of a criminal, already


i The acts of the Council of Chalcedon (Concil. torn. 4. p. 761^9071) compre­hend thoseof Epheses, (p, 890—1189.) which again comprise the synod of Con­stantinople under Flavian; (p. 930—1072.) and it requires some attention to dis­engage this double involution. The whole business of Eutyches, Flavian, andDioscorus, is related by Evagrius (lib. 1. c. 9.—12. and lib, 2. c. 1—4.) and Libe-ratus. •(Brev. c. 11—14.) Once more, and almost for the last time, I appeal to thediligence of Tillemont. (Mern. Eccles. torn. 15.p. 479—719.) Theanualsof U.no­nius and Pagi will accompany me much farther on my long and laborious journey.







OCR Output








52 ROMAN EMPIRE.


pose their hands on his deacon and successor Pelagius,Yet the perseverance of the popes insensibly transferredto their adversaries the appellation of schismatics: theIllyrian, African, and Italian churches, were oppressedby the civil and ecclesiastical powers, not without someeffort of military force ;e the distant barbarians tran­scribed the creed of the Vatican, and in the period of acentury, the schism of the three chapters expired in anobscure angle of the Venetian province/ But the re­ligious discontent of the Italians had already promotedthe conquests of the Lombards, and the Romans them­selves were accustomed to suspect the faith, and to de­test the government, of their Byzantine tyrant.Heres of Justinian was neither steady nor consistent inJustinian, the nice process of fixing his volatile opinions
A. D. 564.
'and those of his subjects. In his youth, he wasoffended by the slightest deviation from the orthodoxline; in his old age he transgressed the measure of tem­perate heresy, and the Jacobites, not less than the Ca­tholics, were scandalized by his declaration, that thebody of Christ was incorruptible, and that his man­hood was never subject to any wants and infirmities, theinheritance of our mortal flesh. This fantastic opinionwas announced in the last edicts of Justinian; and atthe moment of his seasonable departure, the clergy hadrefused to transcribe, the prince was prepared to per­secute, and the people were resolved to suffer or resist.A bishop of Treves, secure beyond the limits of hispower, addressed the monarch of the east in thelanguage of authority and affection. Most gracious


'See the complaints of Liberatus and Victor, and the exhortations of popePelagius to the conqueror and exarch of Italy. Schisma .... per potestatespublicas opprimatur, &c. (Concil. torn. 6. p. 467, &c.) An army was detained tosuppress the sedition of an Illyrian city. See Procopius: de Iii.ll. Goth. lib. 4.c. 25.) m Vff svtxa tfv^wiv a.vrott ot Xginriavoi ^mfjtA'/orra.i, He seems to promise anecclesiastical history. It would have been curious and impartial.
f The bishops of the patriarchate of Aquileia were reconciled by pope Honorius,A. D. 638; (Muratori, Annali d'ltalia, torn. 5. p. 376.) but they again relapsed,and the schism was not finally extinguished till 698. Fourteen years before, thechurch of Spain had overlooked the fifth general council with contemptuous si­lence. (13 Concil. Toletan. in Concil. torn. 7. p. 487—494.)







OCR Output








478 ROMAN EMPIRE.


composition, of the Greek fire. It was at length eitherdiscovered or stolen by the Mahometans; and, in theholy wars of Syria and Egypt, they retorted an invention,contrived against themselves, on the heads of the Chris­tians. A knight, who despised the swords and lances ofthe Saracens, relates, with heartfelt sincerity, his ownfears, and those of his companions, at the sight and soundof the mischievous engine that discharged a torrent ofthe Greek fire, the feu G.regeois, as it sty led by the moreearly of the French writers. It came flying through theair, says Joinville/ like a winged long-tailed dragon,about the thickness of a hogshead, without the report ofthunder, and the velocity of lightning; and the darknessof the night was dispelled by this deadly illumination.The use of the Greek, or, as it might now be called, theSaracen fire, was continued to the middle of the four­teenth century," when the scientific, or casual compoundof nitre, sulphur, and charcoal, effected a new revolutionin the art of war, and the history of mankind."invasion Constantinople and the Greek fire might ex-elude the Arabs from the eastern entrance ofEurope; but in the west, on the side of the Py-rennees, the provinces of Gaul were threatenedand invaded by the conquerors of Spain.b The decline


> Histoire de St. Louis, p. 39. Paris, 1688, p. 44. Paris, de I'lmprimerieRoyale, 1761. The former of these editions is precious for the observations of Da-cange; the latterforthe pure and original text of Joinville. Wemosthave recourseto that text to discover, that the fen Gregeois was shot with a pile or javelin, froman engine that acted like a sling.
* The vanity, orenvy, of shakmg the established property of Fame, has temptedsome moderns to carry gunpowder above the fourteenth, (see sir William Temple,Datens, &c.) and the Greek fire above the seventh century; (see the Saloste da Pre­sident dos Brasses, torn. 2. p. 381.) but their evidence, which precedes the vulgarera of the invention, is seldom clear or satisfactory, and subsequent writers may besuspected of fraud or credulity. In the earliest sieges, some combustibles of oil andsulphur have been used, and the Greek fire has some affinities with gunpowder bothin nature and effects: for the antiquity of the first, a passage of Procopius; (deBell. Goth. lib. 4. c. 11.) for that of the second, some facts in the Arabic history ofSpain, (A. D. 1349, 1312,1332. Bibliot . Arab. Hisp. torn. 2. p. 6—8.) are the mostdifficult to elude.
m That extraordinary man. Friar Bacon, reveals two of the ingredients, sallpeoeand sulphur, and conceals the third in a sentence of mysterious gibberish, as if hedreaded the consequences of his own discovery. (Biographia Britannica, vol. l.p.430. new edition.)
'For the invasion of France, and the defeat of the Arabs by Charles Martel, seethe Historia Arabum (... 11—14.) of Roderic Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo, who







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 415


phet; but we are desirous of peace, and cheerfully submitto pay tribute and obedience to his temporal successors. Thetribute was ascertained at two pieces of gold for the headof every Christian: but old men, monks, women, andchildren, of both sexes, under sixteen years of age, wereexempted from this personal assessment; the Coptsabove and below Memphis swore allegiance to the caliph,and promised a hospitable entertainment of three days toevery Mussulman who should travel through their coun­try. By this charter of security, the ecclesiastical andcivil tyranny of the Melchites was destroyed :r the ana­themas of St. Cyril were thundered from every pulpit;and the sacred edifices, with the patrimony of the church,were restored to the national communion of the Jacobites,who enjoyed without moderation the moment of triumphand revenge. At the pressing summons of Amrou, theirpatriarch Benjamin emerged from his desert; and, afterthe first interview, the courteous Arab affected to declare,that he had never conversed with a Christian priest ofmore innocent manners and a more venerable aspect*In the march from Memphis to Alexandria, the lieutenantof Omar intrusted his safety to the zeal and gratitude ofthe Egyptians: the roads and bridges were diligentlyrepaired; and in every step of his progress, he coulddepend on a constant supply of provisions and intelli­gence. The Greeks of Egypt, whose numbers couldscarcely equal a tenth of the natives, were overwhelmedby the universal defection; they had ever been hated,they were no longer feared: the magistrate fled fromhis tribunal, the bishop from his altar; and the distantgarrisons were surprised or starved by the surrounding


r The prefecture of Egypt, and the conduct of the war, had been trusted by I !<•-radius to the patriarch Cyrus. (Theophan.p. 380, 281.) "In Spain," (saidJames II.) do you not consult your priests r" "We do (replied the Catholic am­bassador), and our affairs succeed accordingly." I know not how to relate the plansof Cyrus, of paying tribute without impairing the revenue, and of converting Omarby his marriage with the emperor's daughter. (Nicephor. Breviar. p. 17,18.)
• See the life of Benjamin, in Kenaudot, (Hist. Patriarch. Alexandrin. p. 156—172.) who has enriched the conquest of Egypt with some facts from the Arabictext of Severus the Jacobite historian.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLYIII. J07


cured by a supply., of five hundred sheep to the imperialcamp. His first service was in the guards of Justinian,where he soon attracted the notice, and, by degrees, thejealousy, of the tyrant. His valour and dexterity wereconspicuous in the Colchian war: from Anastasius hereceived the command of the Anatolian legions, and bythe suffrage of the soldiers he was raised to the empire,with the general applause of the Roman world. II. Inthis dangerous'elevation, Leo III. supported himselfagainst the envy of his equals, the discontent of a power­ful faction, and the assaults of his foreign and domesticenemies. The Catholics, who accuse his religious inno­vations, are obliged toconfess^that they were undertakenwith temper, and conducted with firmness. Their silencerespects the wisdom of his administration and the purityof his .manners. After a reign of twenty-four year*, hepeaceably expired in the palace of Constantinople; andthe purple which he had acquired, was transmitted bythe right of inheritance to the third generation.Constan- ^n tne ^onS reign of thirty-four years, the sontinev.co- and successor of Leo. Constantine V. surnamed
pronymus, .
A.D.7*i.Copronymus, attacked with Jess temperate zealthe images or idols of the church. Their vo­taries have exhausted the bitterness of religious gall, intheir portrait of this spotted panther, this antichrist,this flying dragon of the serpent's seed, who surpassedthe vices of Elagabalus and Nero. His reign was a longbutchery of whatever was most noble, or holy, or inno­cent, in his empire. In person, the emperor assist­ed at the execution of his victims, surveyed their ago­nies, listened to their groans, and indulged, withoutsatiating his appetite for blood: a plate of noses wasaccepted as a grateful offering, and his domestics wereoften scourged or mutilated by the royal hand. Hissurname was derived from his pollution of his baptismalfont. The infant might be excused; but the manlypleasures of Copronymus degraded him below the level







OCR Output








342 ROMAN EMPIRE.


predecessors, the esteem and confidence of the Moslems;during a siege of six weeks his water and provisions wereintercepted, and the feeble gates of the palace were pro­tected only by the scruples of the more timorous rebels.Forsaken by those who had abused his simplicity, thehelpless and venerable caliph expected the approach ofdeath: the brother of Ayesha marched at the head ofDeath of the assassins; and Othman, with the Koran inA^ixe^s, his lap, was pierced with a multitude of wounds.June is. A tumultuous anarchy of five days was appeasedby the inauguration of Ali; his refusal would have pro­voked a general massacre. In this painful situation hesupported the becoming pride of the chief of the Ha-shemites; declared that he had rather serve than reign:rebuked the presumption of the strangers; and requiredthe formal, if not the voluntary, assent of the chiefs of thenation. He: has never been accused of promoting the as­sassin of Omar; though Persia indiscreetly celebrates thefestival of that holy martyr. The quarrel between Othmanand his subjects was assuaged by the early mediation ofAli; and Hassan, the eldest of his sons, was insulted andwounded in the defence of the caliph. Yet it is doubt­ful whether the father of Hassan was strenuous and sin­cere in his opposition to the rebels; and it is certain thathe enjoyed the benefit of their crime. The temptationwas indeed of such magnitude as might stagger and cor­rupt the most obdurate virtue. The ambitious candidateno longer aspired to the barren sceptre of Arabia: theSaracens had been victorious in the east and west; andthe wealthy kingdoms of Persia, Syria, and Egypt, werethe patrimony of the commander of the faithful.
prayer and contemplation had not


AH, A. D. chilled the martial activity of Ali; but in a rna-
655—668. J . .
ture age, atter a long experience of mankind, hestill betrayed in his conduct the rashness and indiscre­tion of youth. In the first days of his reign, he neg­







OCR Output








212 ROMAN EMPIRE.


their debt of gratitude: and the nominal gifts of theCarlovingians were no more than the just and irrevo­cable restitution of a scanty portion of the ecclesiasticalstate. The sovereignty of Rome no longer dependedon the choice of a fickle people; and the successors ofSt. Peter and Constantine were invested with the pur­ple and prerogatives of the Caesars. So deep was theignorance and credulity of the times, that the mdfetabsurd of fables was received, with equal reverence, inGreece and in France, and is still enrolled among thedecrees of the canon law/ The emperors, and theRomans, were incapable of discerning a forgery, thatsubverted their rights and freedom; and the only oppo­sition proceeded from a Sabine monastery, which, inthe beginning of the twelfth century, disputed the truthand validity of the donation of Constantine.b In the re­vival of letters and liberty this fictitious deed was trans­pierced by the pen of Laurentius Valla, the pen of aneloquent critic and a Roman patriot.0 His contempora­ries of the fifteenth century were astonished at his sacri­legious boldness; yet such is the silent and irresistibleprogress of reason, that before the end of the next age,the fable was rejected by the contempt of historians'*


* In the year 1059, it was believed (was it believed ?) by pope Leo IX. cardinalPeter Damianus, &c. Muratori places (Annali d'lulia, torn. 2. p. 23, 24.) the fic­titious donations of Lewis the Pious, the Othos, &c. de Donatione Constantini.See a Dissertation of Natalia Alexander, seculum 4. diss. 25. p. 335—350.
b See a large account of the controversy (A.. D. 1105.) which arose from a pri­vate lawsuit, in the Cbronicon. Farsense, (Script. Rerum Italicarum, torn. 2. pars8. p. 637, &c.) a copious extract from the archives of that Benedictine abbey. 1 heywere formerly accessible to curious foreigners (Le Blanc and Mabillon), and wouldhave enriched the first volume of the Historia Monastica Italia of Quirini. But theyare now imprisoned (Muratori, Scriptures, R. I. torn. 2. pars. 2. p. 269.) by the timidpolicy of the court of Rome; and the future cardinal yielded to the voice of au­thority rxnd the whispers of ambition. (Quirini, Comment, pars 2. p. 123—136.)
'" I have read in the collection of Schardius (de Potestate Imperial Ecclesiastics,p. 734—780.) this animated discourse, which was composed by the author, A. D.1440, six years after the flight of pope Eugenius IV. It is a most vehement partypamphlet: Valla justifies and animates the revolt of the Romans, and would evenapprove the use of a dagger against their sacerdotal tyrant. Such a critic might ex­pect the persecution of the clergy; yet he made his peace, and is buried in the La-teran. (Bayle.Dictionnaire Critique, VALLA; Vossius, deHistoricis Latinis. p. 580.)
d See Guicciardini, a servant of the popes, in that long and valuable digression,which has resumed its place in the last edition, correctly published from the author'sMS. and printed in four volumes in quarto, under the name of Friburgo, 1775.(Istoria d'ltalia, torn. 1. p. 385—395.)







OCR Output








348 ROMAN EMPIRE.


He might still have escaped to a fortress in the desert,that had defied the power of Caesar and Chosroes, andconfided in the fidelity of the tribe of Tai, which wouldhave armed ten thousand warriors in his defence. In aconference with the chief of the enemy, he proposed theoption of three honourable conditions; that he should beallowed to return to Medina, or be stationed in a frontiergarrison against the Turks, or safely conducted to thepresence of Yezid. But the commands of the caliph,or his lieutenant, were stern and absolute; and Hoseinwas informed that he must either submit as a captiveand a criminal to the commander of the faithful, or ex­pect the consequences of his rebellion. Do you think(replied he) to terrify me with death? And, during theshort respite of a night, he prepared with calm and so­lemn resignation to encounter his fate. He checked thelamentations of his sister Fatima, who deplored the im­pending ruin of his house. Our trust (said Hosein) ifin God alone. All things, both in heaven and earth,must perish and return to their creator. My brother,my father, my mother, were better than me; and everyMussulman has an example in the prophet. He pressedhis friends to consult their safety by a timely flight; theyunanimously refused to desert or survive their belovedmaster; and their courage was fortified by a ferventprayer and the assurance of paradise. On the morningof the fatal day, he mounted on horseback, with hissword in one hand and the Koran in the other; his ge­nerous band of martyrs consisted only of thirty-two horseand forty foot: but their flanks and rear were secured bythe tent-ropes, and by a deep trench which they hadfilled with lighted faggots, according to the practice ofthe Arabs. The enemy advanced with reluctance; andone of their chiefs deserted, with thirty followers, toclaim the partnership of inevitable death. In every closeonset, or single combat, the despair of the Fatimites wasinvincible; but the surrounding multitude galled them







OCR Output








CHAP. LIT. 497


sufficient allowance was provided for the indigent scho­lars; and the merit or industry of the professors was re­paid with adequate stipends. In every city the produc­tion of Arabic literature were copied and collected by thecuriosity of the studious, and the vanity of the rich. Aprivate doctor refused the invitation of the sultan of Bo-chara, because the carriage of his books would have re­quired four hundred camels^ The royal library of theFatimites consisted of one hundred thousand manuscripts,elegantly transcribed and splendidly bound, which werelent, without jealousy or avarice, to the students of Cairo.But this collection must appear moderate, if we can be­lieve that the Ommiades of Spain had formed a libraryof six hundred thousand volumes, forty-four of whichwere employed in the mere catalogue. Their capital,Cordova, with the adjacent towns of Malaga, Almeria,and Murcia, had given birth to more than three hundredwriters, and above seventy public libraries were openedin the cities of the Andalusian kingdom. The age ofArabian learning continued about five hundred years,till the great irruption of the Moguls, and was coevalwith the darkest and most slothful period of Europeanannals; but since the sun of science has arisen in thewest, it should seem that the oriental studies have lan­guished and declined.11
Their real In the libraries of the Arabians, as in those ofprogress j;ur0pel tae far greater part of the innumerablesciences, volumes were possessed only of local value orimaginary merit,' The shelves were crowded with ora­tors and poets, whose style was adapted to the taste and


h These literary anecdotes are borrowed from the Bibliotheca Arabico-Hispana,(torn. 9. p. 38. 71.201, 205!.) Leo Africanus, (ile Arab. Medicia et Philosophis, inFabric. Bibliot. Grsx. torn. 13. p. 259—298. particularly 274.) and Renaudot,(Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p. 274, 275. 536,537.) besides the chronological remarks ofAbulpharagius.
'The Arabic catalogue of the Escurial will give a just idea of the proportion ofthe classes. In the library of Cairo, the MSS. of astronomy and medicine amounted^o six thousand five hundred, with two fair globes, the one of brass, the other ofsilver. (Bibliot. Arab. Hisp. torn. 1. p. 417.)
VOL. VI. 2 K







OCR Output








ROMAN KMPIRK.


courage and vigilance of the Romans; the Greeks wereoverthrown and massacred, their leaders suffered anignominious death, and the popes, however inclined tomercy, refused to intercede for these guilty victims.At Ravenna,q the several quarters of the city had longexercised a bloody and hereditary feud; in religiouscontroversy they found a new aliment of faction: butthe votaries of images were superior in numbers orspirit, and the exarch, who attempted to stem the tor­rent, lost his life in a popular sedition. To punish thisflagitious deed, and restore his dominion in Italy, theemperor sent a fleet and army into the Adriatic gulf.After suffering from the winds and waves much lossand delay, the Greeks made their descent in the neigh­bourhood of Ravenna: they threatened to depopulatethe guilty capital, and to imitate, perhaps to surpass,the example of Justinian II. who had chastised a for­mer rebellion by the choice and execution of fifty of theprincipal inhabitants. The women and clergy, in sack­cloth and ashes, lay prostrate in prayer; the men werein arms for the defence of their country; the commondanger had united the factions, and the event of abattle was preferred to the slow miseries of a siege. Ina hard-fought day, as the two armies alternately yieldedand advanced, a phantom was seen, a voice was heard,and Ravenna was victorious by the assurance of victory.The strangers retreated to their ships, but the populoussea-coast poured forth a multitude of boats; the watersof the Po were so deeply infected with blood, that du­ring six years, the public prejudice abstained from thefish of the river; and the institution of an annual feastperpetuated the worship of images, and the abhorrenceof the Greek tyrant. Amidst the triumph of the Ca­tholic arms, the Roman pontiff convened a synod of


i See the 1 iber Pontificalia of Agnellus, (in the Script-ores Return Italicarum ofMuratori, torn. 2. para 1.) whose deeper shade of barbarism marks the differencebetween Rome and Ravenna. Yet we are indebted to him for some curious anddomestic fact —the quarrels and factions of Ravenna, (p. 154.) the revenge ofJustinian II. (p. 160, 161.) the defeat of the Greeks, (p. 170,171.) &c.







OCR Output








328 ROMAN EMPIRE.


as they are named, and eleven women); minutely di­rected the order of his funeral, and moderated the lamen­tations of his weeping friends, on whom he bestowed thebenediction of peace. Till the third day before hisdeath, he regularly performed the function of publicprayer; the choice of Abubeker to supply his place, ap­peared to mark that ancient and faithful friend as hissuccessor in the sacerdotal and regal office; but he pru­dently declined the risk and envy of a more explicit no­mination. At a moment when his faculties were visiblyimpaired, he called for pen and ink to write, or more pro­perly to dictate, a divine book, the sum and accomplish­ment of all his revelations: a dispute arose in the cham­ber, whether he should be allowed to supersede the au­thority of the Koran; and the prophet was forced to re­prove the indecent vehemence of his disciples. If theslightest credit may be afforded to the traditions of hiswives and companions, he maintained, in the bosom of hisfamily, and to the last moments of his life, the dignityof an apostle and the faith of an enthusiast; describedthe visits of Gabriel, who bade an everlasting farewellto the earth, and expressed his lively confidence, not onlyof the mercy but of the favour of the Supreme Being.In a familiar discourse he had mentioned his special pre­rogative that the angel of. death was not allowed to takehis soul till he had respectfully asked the permission ofthe prophet. The request was granted; and Mahometimmediately fell into the agony of his dissolution: hishead was reclined on the lap of Ayesha, the best belovedof all his wives: he fainted with the violence of pain;recovering his spirits, he raised his eyes towards the roofof the house, and with a steady look, though a falteringvoice, uttered the last broken, though articulate, words.
O God! pardon my sins! Yes, ... /
come> among my fellow citizens on high; and thus
peaceably expired on a carpet spread upon the.floor. Anexpedition for the conquest of Syria was stopped by this







OCR Output








384 ROMAN EMPIRE.


tent. Damascus would have acquiesced in the trial ofAiznadin, as a final and peremptory sentence betweenthe emperor and the caliph; her courage was rekindledby the example and authority of Thomas, a noble Greek,illustrious in a private condition by the alliance of Hera-clius.™ The tumult and illumination of the night pro­claimed the design of the morning sally; and theChristian hero, who affected to despise the enthusiasmof the Arabs, employed the resource of a similar super­stition. At the principal gate, in the sight of botharmies, a lofty crucifix was erected; the bishop, withhis clergy, accompanied the march, and laid the volumeof the New Testament before the image of Jesus; andthe contending parties were scandalized or edified by aprayer, that the Son of God would defend his servantsand vindicate his truth. The battle raged with inces­sant fury; and the dexterity of Thomas," an incompara­ble archer, was fatal to the boldest Saracens, till theirdeath was revenged by a female heroine. The wife ofAban, who had followed him to the holy war, embracedher expiring husband. Happy (said she), happy artthou, my dear: thou art gone to thy Lord who first joinedus together, and then parted us asunder. I will revengethy death, and endeavour to the utmost of my power tocome to the place where thou art, because I love thee.Henceforth shall no man ever touch me more, for I havededicated my self to the service of God. Without a groan,without a tear, she washed the corpse of her husband,and buried him with the usual rites. Then grasping themanly weapons, which in her native land she was ac­customed to wield, the intrepid widow of Aban sought
the place where his murderer fought in the thickest ofi
"' Vanity prompted the Arabs to believe, that Thomas was the son-in-law of theemperor. We know the children of Heraclius by his two wives; and his augustdaughter would not have married in exile at Damascus. (See Ducange, Farn. liv-zantin.p. 118,119.) Had be been less religious, I might only suspect the legitimacyof the damsel.
» Al Wakidi (Ockley, p. 101.) says "with poisoned arrows;" but this savageinvention is so repugnant to the practice of the Greeks and Romans, that I mustsuspect, on this occasion, the malevolent credulity of the Saracens.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 35


condemned in the opinion of his judges. The orientals,less adverse to Nestorius than to Cyril, accepted theRomans as their deliverers: Thrace, and Pontus, andAsia, were exasperated against the murderer of Flavian,and the new patriarchs of Constantinople and Antiochsecured their places by the sacrifice of their benefactor.The bishops of Palestine, Macedonia, and Greece, wereattached to the faith of Cyril; but in the face of the sy­nod, in the heat of the battle, the leaders, with their ob­sequious train, passed from the right to the left wing,and decided the victory by this seasonable desertion.Of the seventeen suffragans who sailed from Alexandria,four were tempted from their allegiance, and the thir­teen, falling prostrate on the ground, implored the mercyof the council, with sighs and tears, and a pathetic de­claration, that if they yielded, they should be massacred,on their return to Egypt, by the indignant people. Atardy repentance was allotted to expiate the guilt orerror of the accomplices of Dioscorus: but their sinswere accumulated on his head; he neither asked norhoped for pardon, and the moderation of those whopleaded for a general amnesty, was drowned in the pre­vailing cry of victory and revenge. To save the repu­tation of his late adherents, some personal offences wereskilfully detected — his rash and illegal excommunicationof the pope, and his contumacious refusal (while he wasdetained a prisoner) to attend the summons of the synod.Witnesses were introduced to prove the special facts ofhis pride, avarice, and cruelty; and the fathers heardwith abhorrence, that the alms of the church were lavish­ed on the female dancers, that his palace, and even hisbath, was open to the prostitutes of Alexandria, and thatthe infamous Pansophia, or Irene, was publicly enter­tained as the concubine of the patriarch/


n iia\wftm Opium (perhaps Eifwii), wsfi «a$nxi $imv almt tt xai nu ffafrm fti(Concil. torn. 4. p. 1276.) A specimen of the wit and malice of the people is pre­served in the Greek Anthology (lib. 2. c. 5. p. 188. edit. Wechel), although the


D 2







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 329


mournful event; the army halted at the gates of Medina;the chiefs were assembled round their dying master.The city, more especially the house, of the prophet, wasa scene of clamorous sorrow or of silent despair: fana­ticism alone could suggest a ray of hope and consolation.How can he be dead, our witness, our intercessor, ourmediator with God? By God he is not dead; like Mosesand Jesus he is wrapt in a holy trance, and speedily willhe return to his faithful people. The evidence of sensewas disregarded; and Omar, unsheathing his scimitar,threatened to strike off the heads of the infidels, whoshould dare to affirm that the prophet was no more. Thetumult was appeased by the weight and moderation ofAbubeker. Is it Mahomet (said he to Omar and themultitude), or the God of Mahomet, whom you worship!The God of Mahomet livethfor ever, but the apostle wasa mortal like ourselves, and according to his own prediction,he has experienced the common fate of mortality. He waspiously interred by the hands of his nearest kinsman, onthe same spot on which he expired:" Medina has beensanctified by the death and burial of Mahomet: and theinnumerable pilgrims of Mecca often turn aside from theway, to bow in voluntary devotion,0 before the simpletomb of the prophet.p
His cha- At the conclusion of the life of Mahomet, itracier. raav perhaps be expected, that I should balance


n The Greeks and Latins have invented and propagated the vulgar and ridiculousstory that Mahomet's iron tomb is suspended in the air at Mecca (a-ii/ua /uiriaifi^o-l*tm; Laonicas Chalcocondyles des Rebus Turcicis, lib. 3. p. 6C.) by the action ofequal and potent loadstones, (Dictionnaire de Bayle, MAHoMET, Kem. EE. "FF.)Without any philosophical inquiries, it may suffice, that, l.'l'he prophet was notburied at Mecca; and, 2. That his tomb at Medina, which has been visited by mil­lions, is placed on the ground, (Reland de Relig. Moharn. lib. 2. c. 19. p. 209—111.) Gagnier. (Vie de Mahomet, torn. 3. p. 263—268.)
0A1 Jannabi enumerates (Vie de Mahomet, torn. 3. p. 373—391.) the multifa­rious duties of a pilgrim who visits the tomb of the prophet and his companions, andthe learned casuist decides, that this act of devotion is nearest in obligation andmerit to a divine precept. The doctors are divided which, of Mecca and Medina,be the most excellent, (p. 391—394.)
* The last sickness, death, and burial, of Mahomet, are described by Abulfedaand Gagnier. (Vit. Moharn. p. 133.—142. Vie de Mahomet, torn. 3. p. 220—271.)The most private and interesting circumstances were originally received fromAyesha, Ali, the sons of Abbas, &c. and as t y dwelt at Medina, and survivedthe prophet many years, they might repest the pious tale to a second or third pp-neration of pilgrims.







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 343


lected to secure, either by gifts or fetters, the doubtfulallegiance of Telha and Zobier, two of the most powerfulof the Arabian chiefs. They escaped from Medina toMecca, and from thence to Bassora; erected the stan­dard of revolt, and usurped the government of Irak, orAssyria, which they had vainly solicited as the rewardof their services. The mask of patriotism is allowed tocover the most glaring inconsistencies: and the enemies,perhaps the assassins, of Othman now demanded ven­geance for his blood. They were accompanied in theirflight by Ayesha, the widow of the prophet, who che­rished, to the last hour of her life, an implacable hatredagainst the husband and the posterity of Fatima. Themost reasonable Moslems were scandalized, that themother of the faithful should expose in a camp her personand character; but the superstitious crowd was confidentthat her presence would sanctify the justice, and assurethe success, of their cause. At the head of twenty thou­sand of his loyal Arabs, and nine thousand valiant auxi­liaries of Cufa, the caliph encountered and defeated thesuperior number of the rebels under the walls of Bassora.Their leaders, Telha and Zobeir, were slain in the firstbattle that stained with civil blood the arras of the Mos­lems. After passing through the ranks to animate thetroops, Ayesha had taken her post amidst the dangersof the field. In the heat of the action, seventy men,who held the bridle of her camel, were successivelykilled or wounded; and the cage or litter in which shesat, was struck with javelins and darts like the quills ofa porcupine. The venerable captive sustained withfirmness the reproaches of the conqueror, and was speed­ily dismissed to her proper station, at the tomb of Ma­homet, with the respect and tenderness that was still dueto the widow of the apostle. After this victory, whichwas styled the Day of the Camel, Ali marched againsta more formidable adversary; against Moawiyah, theson of Abu Sophian, who had assumed the title of ea­







OCR Output








2b'2 ROMAN EMPIRE.


ported above seventy miles from the gardens of Tayef.The fame and spirit of the Koreishites, who reigned inMecca, were conspicuous among the Arabian tribes; buttheir ungrateful soil refused the labours of agriculture,and their position was favourable to the enterprises oftrade. By the seaport of Gedda, at the distanceonly of forty miles, they maintained an easy cor­respondence with Abyssinia; and that Christian king­dom afforded the first refuge to the disciples of Maho­met. The treasures of Africa were conveyed over thepeninsula to Gerrha or Katiff, in the provinceof Bahrein,a city built, as it is said, of rock-salt, by the Chaldeanexiles :* and from thence, with the native pearls of the Per­sian gulf, they were floated on rafts to the mouth of theEuphrates. Meccais placed almost at an equal distance,amonth's journey, between Yemen on the right, and Syriaon the left, hand. The former was the winter, the latterthe summer, station of her caravans; and their seasonablearrival relieved the ships of India from the tedious andtroublesome navigation of the Red sea. In the marketsof Saana and Merab, in the harbours of Oman and Aden,the camels of the Koreishites were laden with a preciouscargo of aromatics; a supply of corn and manufactureswas purchased in the fairs of Bostra and Damascus; thelucrative exchange diffused plenty and riches in thestreets of Mecca; and the noblest of her sons unitedthe love of arms with the profession of merchandise."National The perpetual independence of the Arabs haseMaPofnd been the theme of praise among strangers andthe Arabs, llgjives. anj ^e arts Of controversy transform
this singular event into a prophecy and a miracle, infavour of the posterity of Ismael.* Some exceptions


'Strabo, lib. 16. p. 1110. See one of these salt-houses near Bassora. in d'Her-belot, Bibliot . Orient . p. 6.
"Mirum diem ex innumerii populis para aequain commerces aut in latrodniii de-git. (Plin. Hist. Nat . 6. 32.) See Hide's Koran, Sural. 106. p. 503. Pocock. Speci­men, p. 2. d'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orient, p. 361. Prideaux's Life of Mahomet, p. 5.Cagnier, Vie de Mahomet, torn. 1. p. 72. 120.126, &c.
* A nameless doctor (Universal Hist. vol. 20. octavo edition) has formally demon-ii rat til the truth of Christianity by the independence of the Arabs. A critic, besides







OCR Output








6 ROMAN EMPIRE.


that a celestial spirit, an undivided portion of the firstessence, had been personally united with a mass of im­pure and contaminated flesh: and, in their zeal for thedivinity, they piously abjured the humanity of Christ.While his blood was still recent on mount Calvary,1* theDocetes, a numerous and learned sect of Asiatics, invent­ed thefantastic system, which was afterward propagatedby the Marcionites, the Manichaeans, and the variousnames of the Gnostic heresy.1 They denied the truth andauthenticity of the gospels, as far as they relate the con­ception of Mary, the birth of Christ, and the thirty yearsthat preceded the exercise of his ministry. He first ap­peared on the banks of the Jordan in the form of perfectmanhood; but it was a form only, and not a substance;a human figure created by the hand of Omnipotence, toimitate the faculties and actions of a man, and to imposea perpetual illusion on the senses of his friends and ene­mies. Articulate sounds vibrated on the ears of thedisciples; but the image, which was impressed on theiroptic nerve, eluded the more stubborn evidence of thetouch; and they enjoyed the spiritual, not the corporeal,presence of the Son of God. The rage of the Jews wasidly wasted against an impassive phantom; and the mys­tic scenes of the passion and death, the resurrection andascension, of Christ, were represented on the theatre ofJerusalem for the benefit of mankind. If it were urged,that such ideal mimicry, such incessant deception, wasunworthy of the God of truth, the Docetes agreed withtoo many of their orthodox brethren in the justificationof pious falsehood. In the system of the Gnostics, theJehovah of Israel, the creator of this lower world, was


k Apostol is adhuc in seculo superstitibus, apud Judsam Christi sanguine recente,PHANTAsMA domini corpus asserebatur. Hieronyrn. advers. Lucifer, c. 8. Theepistle of Ignatius to the Symnsans, and even the Gospel according to St. John,are levelled against the growing error of tho Docetes, who had obtained too muchcredit in the world. (1 John iv. 1—5.)
1 About the year 200 of the Christian era, Irensus and Hippolytus refuted thethirty-two sects, Ti? xtvlaniftw ymffwt, which had multiplied to fourscore in thetime of Epiphanius. (Phot. Biblioth. Cod. 120—122.) The five books of Irenieusexist only in barbarous Latin'; but the original might perhaps be found in somemonastery of Greece.







OCR Output








64 ROMAN EMPIRE.


both of the Greeks and Persians. The missionaries ofBalch and Samarcand pursued without fear the footstepsof the roving Tartar, and insinuated themselves into thecamps of the valleys of Imaus and the banks of the Se-linga. They exposed a metaphysical creed to those il­literate shepherds: to those sanguinary warriors, theyrecommended humanity and repose. Yet a khan, whosepower they vainly magnified, is said to have received attheir hands the rites of baptism, and even of ordination;and the fame of Prester or Presbyter Johnb has longamused the credulity of Europe. The royal convert wasindulged in the use of a portable altar; but he dispatchedan embassy to the patriarch, to inquire how, in the sea­son of Lent, he should abstain from animal food, andhow he might celebrate the eucharist in a desert thatproduced neither corn nor wine. In their progress bysea and land, the Nestorians entered China by the portof Canton and the northern residence of Sigan. Unlikethe senators of Rome, who assumed with a smile thecharacters of priests and augurs, the mandarins, whoaffect in public the reason of philosophers, are devotedin private to every mode of popular superstition. Theycherished and they confounded the gods of Palestine andof India; but the propagation of Christianity awakenedthe jealousy of the state, and, after a short vicissitude offavour and persecution, the foreign sect expired in igno­rance and oblivion.0 Under the reign of the caliphs, theNestorian church was diffused from China to Jerusalem


b In its long progress to Mosul, Jerusalem, Rome, &c. the story of Prester Johnevaporated in a monstrous fable, of which some features have been borrowed fromthe Lama of Thibet, (Hist. Genealogique des Tartares, p. 2. p. 42. Hist, de Gen-giscan, p. 31, &c.) and were ignorantly transferred by the Portuguese to the emperorof Abyssinia. (Ludolph. Hist, .flithiop. Comment, lib. t. c. 1.) Yet it is probablethat, m the eleventh and twelfth centuries, Nestorian Christianity was professed inthe horde of Koraites.(d'Herbelot,,p. 256.915.959. Assemanni,torn. 4. p.468—504.)
c The Christianity of China, between the seventh and the thirteenth century, is in­vmcibly proved by the consent of Chinese, Arabian, Syriac, and Latin evidence. (As­semanni, Biblioth. Orient, torn. 4. p. 502—552. Mern. de 1'Academie des Inscript.torn. 30. p. 802—819.) The inscription of Sigansu, which describes the fortunes ofthe Nestorian church, from the first mission, A. D. 636, to the current year 781, isaccused of forgery by l.a Croze, Voltaire, &c. who become the dupes of their owntunning, while they are afraid of a Jesuitical fraud.







OCR Output








go ROMAN EMPIRE.


Were obeyed only under the pressure of military force.A generous effort might have redeemed the religion andliberty of Egypt, and he* six hundred monasteries mighthave pouted forth their myriads of holy warriors, fromwhom death should have no terrors, since life had nocomfort or delight. But experience has proved the disAtinction of active and passive courage; the fanatic wb.6endures without a groan the torture of the rack or thestake, would tremble and fly before the face of an armedenemy. Tire pusillanimous temper of the Egyptianscould only hope for a change of masters; the arms ofChosroes depopulated the land 5 yet under his reign theJacobites enjoyed a short and precarious respite. Thevictory of Heraclius renewed and aggravated the perse­cution, and the patriarch again escaped from Alexandriato the desert. In his flight, Benjamin was en-o,e jaco- couraged by a voice, which bade him expect, attriarc£ the end of ten years, the aid of a foreign nation,mar^e(l like the Egyptians themselves with theancient rite of circumcision. The character ofthese deliverers, and the nature of the deliverance,will be hereafter explained; and I shall step over theinterval of eleven centuries to observe the present mi^sery of the Jacobites of Egypt. The populous city 6fCairo affords a residence or rather a shelter for theirindigent patriarch, and a remnant of ten bishops: fortymonasteries have survived the inroads of the Arabs; andthe progress of servitude and apostacy has reduced theGoptid nation to the despicable number of twenty-five6* thirty thousand families ;k a race of illiterate beggars,whose only consolation is derived from the superior


k This number is taken from the cariousRecherchei sur Irs EgyptienR et IPS CM-nois, (torn. 2. p. 192,193.) and appears more probable than the six hundred thousandmini ut, or fiftron thousand modern, Copts of Gemelli < nrreri. Cyril Lucar, theProtestant patriarch of Constantinople, laments that those heretics were ten timesmore mnm-niiis than his orthodox Greeks, ingeniously applying the «hWu» xtv J.»=-St; )I[»UTO Mny_iM of Homer, (Iliad. 2. 128.) the most perfect expression of con­tempt, (fabric. Lux'tivahgelii, MO. i







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 163


t
orders were dispatched into the provinces for the reco­very of their fugitive; and his wife, on the suspicion of apious act, was basely imprisoned in the same tower. Atthe dead of night she beheld a spectre: she recognisedher husband; they shared their provisions; and a sonwas thefruitof these stolen interviews; which alleviatedthe tediousness of their confinement. In the custody ofa woman, the vigilance of the keepers was insensibly re­laxed; and the captive had accomplished his real escape,when he was discovered, brought back to Constanti­nople, and loaded with a double chain. At length hefound the moment and the means of his deliverance. Aboy. his domestic servant, intoxicated the guards, andobtained in wax the impression of the keys. By the di­ligence of his friends, a similar key, with a bundle ofropes, was introduced into the prison, in the bottom ofa hogshead. Andronicus employed, with industry andcourage, the instrument of his safety, unlocked the doors,descended from the tower, concealed himself all dayamong the bushes, and scaled in the night the garden-wall of the palace. A boat was stationed for his recep­tion; he visited his own house, embraced his children,cast away his chain, mounted a fleet horse, and directedhis rapid course towards the banks of the Danube. AtAnchialus in Thrace, an intrepid friend supplied him withhorses and money: he passed the river, traversed withspeed the desert of Moldavia and the Carpathian hills,and had almost reached the town of Halicz, in the PolishRussia, when he was intercepted by a party of Wala-chians, who resolved to convey their important captiveto Constantinople. His presence of mind again extricatedhim from this danger. Under the pretence of sickness,he dismounted in the night, and was allowed to stepaside from the troop: he planted in the ground his longstaff; clothed it with his cap and upper garment; and,stealing into the wood, left a phantom to amuse, forsome time, the eyes of the Wakchians. From Halicz


M 2







OCR Output








206 ROMAN EMPIRK.


assumed the character of a divine ambassador: a Ger­man chieftain was transformed into the Lord's anointed:and this Jewish rite has been diffused and maintainedby the superstition and vanity of modern Europe. TheFranks were absolved from their ancient oath; but adire anathema was thundered against them and theirposterity, if they should dare to renew the same freedomof choice, or to elect a king, except in the holy andmeritorious race of the Carlovingian princes. Withoutapprehending the future danger, these princes gloriedin their present security; the secretary of Charlemagneaffirms, that the French sceptre was transferred by theauthority of the popes;' and in their boldest enterprises,they insist, with confidence, on this signal and suc­cessful act of temporal jurisdiction.Patricians II. In the change of manners and language,of Rome. ^e patricians of Rome™ were far removed from
the senate of Romulus, or the palace of Constantine,from the free nobles of the republic, or the fictitiousparents of the emperor. After the recovery of Italy andAfrica by the arms of Justinian, the importance anddanger of those remote provinces required the presenceof a supreme magistrate; he was indifferently styledthe exarch or the patrician; and these governors ofRavenna, who fill their places in the chronology ofprinces, extended their jurisdiction over the Romancity. Since the revolt of Italy and the loss of the ex­archate, the distress of the Romans had exacted somesacrifice of their independence. Yet, even in this act,they exercised the right of disposing of themselves; and


foreign, Jewish, incomprehensible ceremony. Sea Selden's Titles of Honour, in hi>Works, vol. 3. part 1. p. 234—249.
1 See Eginhard, in Vitfi Caroli Magni, c. 1. p. 9, &c. c. 3. p. 24. Childeric wasdeposed—juati, Ihe Carlovingians were established—uuetorifote, Pontilices Ro­man i. Launoy, Sic. pretend that these strong words are susceptible of a very softinterpretation. Be it so; yet Eginhard understood the world, the court, and theLatin language.
111 For the title and powers of patrician of Rome, see Ducange, (Gloss. Latin,torn. 5. p. 149—151.) Pagi, (Critica, A.D. 740. no. 6—11.) Muratori, (Annalid'ltalia, torn. 6. p. 308—389.) and St. Marc. (Abr£ge Chronologique d'ltalie, torn. 1.p. 379—381.) Of these the Franciscan Pagi is the most disposed to make thepatrician a lieutenant of the church, rattier than of the empire.







OCR Output








THE


HISTORY


DECLINE AND FALL


ROMAN EMPIRE.


BY EDWARD GIBBON, ESQ.


COMPLETE IN EIGHT VOLUMES.VOL. VI.


 


Printed by J. F. Dove, St. John's square.


LONDON:
G. Cowie and Co. Poultry; W. liayncs and Son, Paternoster Row; J. Dowiling.Newgate Street; Richard liaynrs. Paternoster Row; Smith, Elder, and Co. Corn-hill; W. Mason, Pickett Street; T. Lester, Finsbury Place; J. Arnould, SpringGardens; J. Bain, Mews' pate; W. Booth, Duke Street; M. Iley, SomersetStreet; J. F. Setchel, King Street; H.Doyle, High Holborn; P.Wright, BroadStreet; H. Steel, Tower Hill; E. Wilson, Royal Exchange; T. Mason, GreatRoMell Street; H. Morley, Derby; M. Keene, J. dimming, C. P. Archer, andR.M. Tims, Dublin; and H. S. Baynes, Edinburgh.
1825.







OCR Output








ROMAN EMPIRE.


sieges of Syria," one of the countries that have been im-Heiiopo- proved by the most early cultivation, is not un-


worthy of the preference.7 The heat of the cli-
A T) fi^l**
'mate is tempered by the vicinity of the sea andmountains, by the plenty of wood and water; and theproduce of a fertile soil affords the subsistence, and en­courages the propagation, of men and animals. Fromthe age of David to that of Heraclius, the country wasoverspread with ancient and flourishing cities: the inha­bitants were numerous and wealthy; and, after the slowravage of despotism and superstition, after the recentcalamities of the Persian war, Syria could still attractand reward the rapacious tribes of the desert. A plain,of ten days' journey from Damascus to Aleppo and An-tioch, is watered, on the western side, by the windingcourse of the Orontes. The hills of Libanus and Anti-Libanus are planted from north to south, between theOrontes and the Mediterranean, and the epithet of hollow(Ccelesyria) was applied to a long and fruitful valley,which is confined in the same direction by the two ridgesof snowy mountains." Among the cities which are enu­merated by Greek and oriental names in the geographyand conquest of Syria, we may distinguish Emesa orHems, Heliopolis or Baalbec, the former as the metro­polis of the plain, the latter as the capital of the valley.Under the last of the Caesars, they were strong and popu­


* In the geography of Abulfeda, the description of Syria, his native country, athe most interesting and authentic portion. It was published in Arabic and Latin,i.ipsiiv, 1766, in quarto, with the learned notes of Kochler and Beiske, and someextracts of geography and natural history from the Ibn Ol Wardii. Among the mo­dern travels, Pocock's description of the east (of Syria and Mesopotamia, vol. 2.p. 88 — 209.) is a work of superior learning and dignity; but the author too oftenconfounds what he had seen and what he had read.
J The praises of Dionysius are just and lively. Kai tn fjtn (Syria) sreXX« TI nuoXgioi ai>{tf txown. (in Periegesi, v. 902. in torn. 4. Geograph. Minor. Hudson.)In another place he styles the country f«XuirniXiv ainy (v. 898.) He proceeds to say,
llacrft Sfi TOf XlWafH tt Xrti fUlSoTOf ITTXlTO £OffH
MnXa TS itiff£t;unai tuu Jn$;«ri xafiror at£i». v. 9tl, 922.
This poetical geographer lived in the age of Augustus, and his description of theworld is illustrated by the Greek commentary of Eustathius, who paid the samecompliment to Homer and Dionysius. (Fabric. Bibliot. Grac. lib. 4. c. 2. torn. 3.p. 21, &c.)
* The topography of the Libanus and Anti-Libanus, is excellently described bythe learning and sense of Reland. (Palestin. torn. 1. p. 311 — 926.)







OCR Output













OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 97


their sovereign; but these servile Greeks were unworthyand regardless of freedom; and in his mind, the lessonof an hour was quickly erased by the prejudices of theage and the habits of despotism. He retained only ajealous fear lest the senate or people should one dayinvade thg right of primogeniture, and seat his brotherTheodosius on an equal throne. By the imposition ofholy orders, the grandson of Heraclius was disqualifiedfor the purple; but this ceremony, which seemed toprofane the sacraments of the church, was insufficientto appease the suspicions of the tyrant, and the deathof the deacon Theodosius could alone expiate thecrime of his royal birth. His murder was avenged bythe imprecations of the people, and the assassin, in thefulness of power, was driven from his capital into volun­tary and perpetual exile. Constans embarked for Greece;and, as if he meant to retort the abhorrence which he de­served, he is said, from the imperial galley, to have spitagainst the walls of his native city. After passing thewinter at Athens, he sailed to Tarentum in Italy, visitedRome, and concluded a long pilgrimage of disgrace andsacrilegious rapine, by fixing his residence at Syracuse.But if Constans could fly from his people, he could notfly from himself. The remorse of his conscience createda phantom who pursued him by land and sea, by dayand by night; and the Visionary Theodosius, present­ing to his lips a cup of blood, said, or seemed to say,Drink, brother, drink; a sure emblem of the aggrava­tion of his guilt, since he had received from the handsof the deacon the mystic cup of the blood of Christ.Odious to himself and to mankind, Constans perishedby domestic, perhaps by episcopal, treason, in the capi­tal of Sicily. A servant who waited in the bath, afterpouring warm water on his head, struck him violentlywith the vase. He fell, stunned by the blow, andsuffocated by the water; and his attendants, who won­dered at the tedious delay, beheld with indifference
VOL. VI. H







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIH.


himself, that emperor had chosen a bar-tine vi. barian wife, the daughter of the khan of theA.D.7so) Chozars: but in the marriage of his heir,Sept'8' he preferred an Athenian virgin, an orphan,seventeen years old, whose sole fortune must haveconsisted in her personal accomplishments. The nup­tials of Leo and Irene were celebrated with royalpomp; she soon acquired the love and confidence of afeeble husband, and in his testament he declared the em­press guardian of the Roman world, and of their son,Constan tine VI. who was no more than ten years of age.During his childhood Irene most ably and assiduouslydischarged in her public administration the duties of afaithful mother; and her zeal in the restoration of imageshas deserved the name and honours of a saint, which shestill occupies in the Greek calendar. But the emperorattained the maturity of youth; the maternal yoke be­came more grievous; and he listened to the favouritesof his own age, who shared his pleasures, and were am­bitious of sharing his power. Their reasons convincedhim of his right, their praises of his ability, to reign;and he consented to reward the services of Irene by aperpetual banishment to the isle of Sicily. But hervigilance and penetration easily disconcerted their rashprojects: a similar, or more severe punishment wasretaliated on themselves and their advisers; and Ireneinflicted on the ungrateful prince the chastisementof a boy. After this contest the mother and the sonwere at the head of two domestic factions; and, in­stead of mild influence and voluntary obedience, sheheld in chains a captive and an enemy. The em­press was overthrown by the abuse of victory; theoath of fidelity which she exacted to herself alone,was pronounced with reluctant murmurs; and thebold refusal of the Armenian guards encouraged afree and general declaration, that Constantine VI.was the lawful emperor of the Romans. In this cha-







OCR Output








290 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the gospel was the way of truth and salvation; but theChristians insensibly forgot both the laws and theexample of their founder; and Mahomet was instructedby the Gnostics to accuse the church, as well as thesynagogue, of corrupting the integrity of the sacredtext." The piety of Moses and of Christ rejoiced inthe assurance of a future prophet, more illustrious thanthemselves: the evangelic promise of the Paraclete, orHoly Ghost, was prefigured in the name, and accom­plished in the person, of Mahomet," the greatest andlast of the apostles of God.
fj,e The communication of ideas requires a simili-
Koran. tude of thought and language; the discourse ofa philosopher would vibrate without effect on the ear ofa peasant; yet how minute is the distance of their un­derstandings, if it be compared with the contact of aninfinite and a finite mind, with the word of God ex-pres"sed by the tongue or the pen of a mortal? The in­spiration of the Hebrew prophets, of the apostles andevangelists of Christ, might not be incompatible withthe exercise of their reason and memory; and the diver­sity of their genius is strongly marked in the style of theOld and New Testament. But Mahomet was contentwith a character, more humble, yet more sublime, of asimple editor; the substance of the Koran/ according


objects est cis similitudo: an expression that may suit with the system of theDocetes; but the commentators believe (Maracci, torn. 2. p. 113—115. 173,Sale, p. 42, 43. 79.) that another man, a friend or an enemy, was crucified in thelikeness of Jesus; a fable which they had read in the gospel of St. Barnabue.and which had been started as early as the time of Irena.us, by some Ebioniteheretics. (Beausobre, Hist, du Manicheisme, torn. 2. p. 35. Mosheim, de Reb.Christ, p. 353.)
"This charge is obscurely urged in the Koran: (c. 3. p. 45.) but neither Ma­homet, nor hisfollowers, are sufficiently versed in languages ami criticism to giveany weight or colour to their suspicions. Yet the Arians and Nrstoriann contdrelate some stories, and the illiterate prophet might listen to the bold assertionsof the Manichieans. See Beausobre, torn. 1. p. 291—305.
* Among the prophecies of the Old and New Testament, which are pervertedby the fraud or ignorance of the Mussulmans, they apply to the prophet the promiseof the I'<irnrlfte, or Comforter, which had been already usurped by the Memoiristsand Manichawms; (Beausobre, Hiat. Critique dn Manicheisme, torn. 1. p. 163,&c.) and the easy change of letters aipixXvni; for «.-.-< JaaXBTO:, affords the etymologyof the name of Mohammed. (Maracci, torn. 1. part 1. p. 15—28.)
T For the Koran, sec d'Herbelot, p. 85—88. Maracci, torn. 1. in Vit . Moham­med, p. 3«—+5. Sale, Preliminary Discourse, p. 56—70,







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 135


senate, and the clergy, approached in due order toadore and kiss the inanimate corpse of their sovereign.Before the procession moved towards the imperial se­pulchre, a herald proclaimed this awful admonition:—Arise, O king of the world, and obey the summons of theKing of kings!
Roman™ The death of Constantine was imputed toA.'0^959, poison; and his son Romanus, who derivedNoV. is. that name from his maternal grandfather,ascended the throne of Constantinople. A princewho, at the age of twenty, could be suspected of anti­cipating his inheritance, must have been already lostin the public esteem; yet Romanus was rather weak thanwicked; and the largest share of the guilt was trans­ferred to his wife, Theophano, a woman of base origin,masculine spirit, and flagitious manners. The sense ofpersonal glory, and public happiness, the true pleasuresof royalty, were unknown to the son of Constantine;and while the two brothers, Nicephorus and Leo, tri­umphed over the Saracens, the hours which the empe­ror owed to his people were consumed in strenuousidleness. In the morning he visited the circus; atnoon he feasted the senators; the greater part of theafternoon he spent in the sphceristerium, or tennis-court, the only theatre of his victories; from thence hepassed over to the Asiatic side of the Bosphorus,hunted and killed four wild boars of the largest size,and returned to the palace, proudly content with thelabours of the day. In strength and beauty he wasconspicuous above his equals: tall and straight as ayoung cypress, his complexion was fair and florid, hiseyes sparkling, his shoulders broad, his nose long andaquiline. Yet even these perfections were insufficientto fix the love of Theophano; and, after a reign of fouryears, she mingled for her husband the same deadlydraught which she had composed for his father. .







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 283


They applauded his commanding presence, his majesticaspect, his piercing eye, his gracious smile, his flowingbeard, his countenance that painted every sensation ofthe soul, and his gestures that enforced each expressionof the tongue. In the familiar offices of life he scru­pulously adhered to the grave and ceremonious polite­ness of his country: his respectful attention to the richand powerful was dignified by his condescension andaffability to the poorest citizens of Mecca: the frank­ness of his manner concealed the artifice of his views:and the habits of courtesy were imputed to personalfriendship or universal benevolence. His memory wascapacious and retentive, his wit easy and social, hisimagination sublime, his judgment clear, rapid, anddecisive. He possessed the courage both of thoughtand action; and, although his designs might graduallyexpand with his success, the first idea which he enter­tained of his divine mission bears the stamp of an ori­ginal and superior genius.. The son of Abdallah waseducated in the bosom of the noblest race, in the use ofthe purestdialectof Arabia; and the fluency of his speechwas corrected and enhanced by the practice of discreetand seasonable silence. With these powers of eloquence,Mahomet was an illiterate barbarian: his youth hadnever been instructed in the arts of reading and writ­ing;* the common ignorance exempted him from shameor reproach, but he was reduced to a narrow circle ofexistence, and deprived of those faithful mirrors, which


\
* Those who believe that Mahomet could read or write, are incapable of readingwhat is written, with another pen, in the Surata, or chapters of the Koran, 7. 29.96. These texts, and the tradition of the Sonna, are admitted without doubt byAbulfeda, (in Vit. c. 7.) Gagnier, ("Not. ad Abulfed. p. 15.) Pocock, (Specimen,p. 151.) Reland, (de Religione Mohammedica, p. 236.) and Sale. (PreliminaryDiscourse, p. 42.) Mr. White, almost alone, denies the ignorance, to accuse theimposture of the prophet. His arguments are far from satisfactory. Two shorttrading journeys to the fairs of Syria, were surely not sufficient to infuse a scienceso rare among the citizens of Mecca: it was not in the cool deliberate act of atreaty that Mahomet would have dropped the mask; nor can any conclusion bedrawn from the words of disease and deliriurn. The lettered youth, before heaspired to the prophetic character, must have often exercised, in private life, thearts of reading and writing; and his first converts of his own family, would havebeen the first to detect and uphraid his scandalous hypocrisy. (White's Sermons,p.203, 204. Notes, p. 36—38.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 121


compelled to leave the inheritance of the empire. Buthis jealousy was exasperated by envy and disease: hefeared the dangerous virtues which might either sup­port or oppress their infancy and weakness; and thedying emperor demanded the head of the Persian prince.With savage delight, he recognised the familiar featuresof his brother: Thou art no longer Theophobus, he said:and sinking on his couch, he added, with a faulteringvoice, Soon, too soon, I shall be no more Theophilus!
The Russians, who have borrowed from the Greeksthe greatest part of their civil and ecclesiastical policy,preserved, till the last century, a singular institution inthe marriage of the czar. They collected, not the vir­gins of every rank and of every province, a vain and ro­mantic idea, but the daughters of the principal nobles,who awaited in the palace the choice of their sovereign.It is affirmed, that a similar method was adopted in thenuptials of Theophilus. With a golden apple in hishand, he slowly walked between two lines of contendingbeauties: his eye was detained by the charms of Icasia,and, in the awkwardness of a first declaration, the princecould only observe, that in this world, women had beenthe cause of much evil: And surely, sir (she pertly re­plied), they have likewise been the occasion of much good.This affectation of unseasonable wit displeased the im­perial lover: he turned aside in disgust; Icasia concealed her mortification in a convent: and the modestsilence of Theodora was rewarded with the golden apple.She deserved the love, but did not escape the severity,of her lord. From the palace garden he beheld a ves­sel deeply laden, and steering into the port: on thediscovery that the precious cargo of Syrian luxury wasthe property of his wife, he condemned the ship to theflames, with a sharp reproach, that her avarice had de­graded the character of an empress into that of a mer-Michaei chant. Yet his last choice intrusted her withA*b 84?, the guardianship of the empire and her sonJan. 20. 'Michael, who was left an orphan in the fifth







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 313


which would extinguish both industry and virtue, if theactions of man were governed by his speculative belief.Yet their influence in every age has exalted the courageof the Saracens and Turks. The first companions ofMahomet advanced to battle with a fearless confidence:there is no danger where there is no chance: they wereordained to perish in their beds; or they were safe andinvulnerable amidst the darts of the enemy.™His defen- Perhaps the Koreish would have been contentwith the flight of Mahomet, had they not beenProvoked and alarmed by the vengeance of anMecca, enemy, who could intercept their Syrian trade asit passed and repassed through the territory of Medina.Abu Sophian himself, with only thirty or forty followers,conducted a wealthy caravan of a thousand camels: thefortune or dexterity of his march escaped the vigilanceof Mahomet; but the chief of the Koreish was informedthat the holy robbers were placed in ambush to wait hisreturn. He dispatched a messenger to his brethren ofMecca, and they were roused, by the fear of losing theirmerchandise and their provisions, unless they hastenedto his relief with the military force of the city. Thesacred band of Mahomet was formed of three hundredand thirteen Moslems, of whom seventy-seven werefugitives, and the rest auxiliaries: they mounted byturns a train of seventy camels (the camels of Yathrebwere formidable in war): but such was the poverty ofhis first disciples, that only two could appear on horse­back in the field." In the fertile and famous vale of
"The doctrine of absolute predestination, on which few religions can reproacheach other, is sternly exposed in the Koran, (c. 3. p. 52, 53. c. 4. p. 70, Sec. withthe notes of Sale, and c. 17. p. 413. with those of Maracci.) Reland (de Relig. Mo-hanun. p. 61—64.) and Sale (Prelirn. Discourse, p. 103.) represents the opinion*of the doctors, and our modern travellers the confidence, the fading confidence, ofthe Turks.
-., Al Jannabi (apud Gagnier, torn. 2. p. 9.) allows him seventy or eighty horse;and on two other occasions prior to the battle of Ohud, he enlists a body of thirty(p. 10.) and of five hundred Cp. 66.) troopers. Yet the Mussulmans, in the field ofOimd, had no more than two horses, according to the better sense of Abulfeda. (in\ it. Mohamrn. p. 31. p. 65.) In the Stony province, the camels were numerous;but the horse appears to have been less common than in tie Happy or the DaertArabia.







OCR Output








182 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the east and west have been decorated by the pencil ofSt. Luke; and the evangelist, who was perhaps a phy­sician, has been forced to exercise the occupation of apainter, so profane and odious in the eyes of the pri­mitive Christians. The Olympian Jove, created bythe muse of Homer and the chisel of Phidias, mightinspire a philosophic mind with momentary devotion;but these Catholic images were faintly and flatly deli­neated by monkish artists, in the last degeneracy oftaste and genius."
The worship of images had stolen into thechurch by insensible degrees, and each pettyworship. step was pleasing to the superstitious mind,as productive of comfort and innocent of sin. But inthe beginning of the eighth century, in the full magni­tude of the abuse, the more timorous Greeks wereawakened by an apprehension, that, under the maskof Christianity, they had restored the religion of theirfathers: they heard, with grief and impatience, thename of idolaters; the incessant charge of the Jewsand Mahometans/ who derived from the law and theKoran an immortal hatred to graven images and allthe relative worship. The servitude of the Jews mightcurb their zeal and depreciate their authority; but thetriumphant Mussulmans, who reigned at Damascus,and threatened Constantinople, cast into the scale ofreproach the accumulated weight of truth and victory.The cities of Syria, Palestine, and Egypt, had been for­tified with the images of Christ, his mother and hissaints; and each city presumed on the hope or promiseof miraculous defence. In a rapid conquest of ten years,the Arabs subdued those cities and these images; and,


0 " Your scandalous figures stand quite out from the canvas: they are as bada* a groupe of statues!" It was thus that the ignorance and bigotry of a Greekpriest applauded the picture of Titian, which he had ordered, and refused to
P By Cedrenus, ZonaraJ, Glycas, and Manasses, the origin of the Iconoclasts isimputed to the caliph Yezid and two Jews, who promised the empire to Leo; andthe reproaches of these hostile sectaries are turned into an absurd conspiracy forrestoring the purity of the Christian worship. (Sec Spanheim, Hist. inag. c. P.)







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 459


vate zeal and public toleration.1 Under the payment ofan annual tribute, the Mahometan law secured to theGhebers of Herat their civil and religious liberties: butthe recent and humble mosch was overshadowed by theantique splendour of the adjoining temple of fire. A fa­natic imam deplored, in his sermons, the scandalousneighbourhood, and accused the weakness or indiffer­ence of the faithful. Excited by his voice, the peopleassembled in tumult; the two houses of prayer were con­sumed by the flames, but the vacant ground was imme­diately occupied by the foundations of a new mosch.The injured Magi appealed to the sovereign of Chorasan;he promised justice and relief; when, behold! four thou­sand citizens of Herat, of a grave character and matureage, unanimously swore that the idolatrous fane hadnever existed; the inquisition was silenced, and theirconscience was satisfied (says the historian Mirchond1)with this holy and meritorious perjury." But the great­est part of the temples of Persia were ruined by the in­sensible and general desertion of their votaries. It wasinsensible, since it is not accompanied with any memo­rial of time or place, of persecution or resistance. Itwas general, since the whole realm, from Shiraz to Sa-marcand, imbibed the faith of the Koran; and thepre­


• This singular story is related by d'Herbelot, (Bibliot. Orient, p. 448, 449.)on the faith of Khondemir, and by Mirchond himself. (Hist, priorum RegumPersaruio, &c. p. 9,10. not. p. 88,99.)
'Mirchond (Mohammed Emir Khoondah Shah), a native of Herat, composedin the Penian language a general history of the east, from the creation to theyear of the Hegira 875. (A. D. 1471.) In the year 904, (A. D. 1498.) the his­torian obtained the command of a princely library, and his applauded work, inseven or twelve parts, was abbreviated in three volumes by his son Khondemir,A. H. 927. A.D. 1520. The two writers, most accurately distinguished by Petitde la Croix, (Hist, de Genghizcan, p. 537, 538. 544,545.) are loosely confoundedby d'Herbelot: (p. 358. 410. 994, 995.) but his numerous extracts, under theimproper name of Khondemir, belong to the father rather than the son. The his­torian of Gonghizcan refers to a MS. of Mirchond, which he received from thehands of his friend d' Herbelot himself. A curious fragment (the Tahcrian andSofiarian Dynasties) has been lately published in Persic and Latin; (Vienna,1782, in quarto, cum notis Bernard de Jenisch) and the editor allows us to hopefor a continuation of Mirchond.
"Quo testimtmio boni se quidpiam praestitisse opinabantur. Yet Mirchondmust have condemned their zeal, since he approved the legal toleration of theMagi, cui (the fire temple) peracto singulis annis censfl, uti sacra Mobammedwlege cautum, ab omnibus molestiis ac oneribus libero esse limit.







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 315


two of the most obnoxious prisoners were punished withdeath; and the ransom of the others, four thousanddrachms of silver, compensated in some degree the escapeof the caravan. But it was in vain that the camels ofAbu Sophian explored a new road through the desertand along the Euphrates: they were overtaken by thediligence of the Mussulmans; and wealthy must havebeen the prize, if twenty thousand drachms could be setapart for the fifth of the apostle. The resentment of thepublic and private loss stimulated Abu Sophian to col­lect a body of three thousand men, seven hundred ofwhom were armed with cuirasses, and two hundred weremounted on horseback; three thousand camels attendedhis march; and his wife Henda, with fifteen matrons ofMecca, incessantly sounded their timbrels to animate theor ohud, troops, and to magnify the greatness of Hobal, theA. D. ess. most popular deity of the Caaba. The standardof God and Mahomet was upheld by nine hundred andfifty believers: the disproportion of numbers was notmore alarming than in the field of Beder; and their pre­sumption of victory prevailed against the divine and hu­man sense of the apostle. The second battle was foughton mount Ohud, six miles to the north of Medina :T theKoreish advanced in the form of a crescent: and theright wing of cavalry was led by Caled, the fiercest andmost successful of the Arabian warriors. The troops ofMahomet were skilfully posted on the declivity of thehill; and their rear was guarded by a detachment offifty archers. The weight of their charge impelled andbroke the centre of the idolaters; but in the pursuit theylost the advantage of their ground: the archers desertedtheir station: the Mussulmans were tempted by thespoil, disobeyed their general, and disordered their ranks.The intrepid Caled, wheeling his cavalry on their flankand rear, exclaimed, with a loud voice, that Mahometwas slain. He was indeed wounded in the face with a


'Geograph. Nubiensis, p. 47,







OCR Output








CHAP. LII. 503


despotism, diffused a liberal spirit of inquiry and tole­ration, and encouraged the Arabian sages to suspect thattheir caliph was a tyrant and their prophet an impostor.'The instinct of superstition was alarmed by the intrp-fduction even of the abstract sciences; and the more ri­gid doctors of the law condemned the rash and peini­cious curiosity of Almamon.d To the thirst of martyr­dom, the vision of paradise, and the belief of predesti­nation, we must ascribe the invincible enthusiasm of theprince and people. And the sword of the Saracensbecame less formidable, when their youth was drawnaway from the camp to the college, when the armies pfthe faithful presumed to read and to reflect. Yet thefoolish vanity of the Greeks was jealous of their studies,and reluctantly imparted the sacred fire to the barba­rians of the east.0
War. of ln tne bloody conflict of the Qmmiades andHarumai Abbassides, the Greeks had stolen the oppor-againstthetunity of avenging their wrongs, and enlargingRomans, ^^ umits gut a severe retribution was ex-781-805. acted by Mohadi, the third caliph of the newdynasty, who siezed in his turn the favourable oppor­tunity, while a woman and a child, Irene and Constan-tine, were seated on the Byzantine throne. An army ofninety-five thousand Persians and Arabs was sent fromthe Tigris to the Thracian Bosphorus, under the com­mand of Harun/ or Aaron, the second son of the com­mander of the faithful. His encampment on the opposite


c Among the Arabian philosophers, Averroes has been accused of despising thereligion of the Jews, the Christians, and the Mahometans. See his article in Bay le'sDictionary.) Each of these sects would agree, that in two instances out of three, hiscontempt was reasonable.
ii D'Herbelot, Bibliotheque Onentale, p. 546.
» 9u«iXi;« irr«rov Xfint n TIJ» TOT CVTKW yimrn, Ji m TO VxpaMn j«o; flau/ua^irmix»im» wunm *M< iBnn, &c. Cedrenus, p. 548, who relates how manfully theemperor refused a mathematician to the instances and offers of the caliph Alma-mon. This absurd scruple is expressed almost in the same words by the conti-nuator of Theophaues. (Scriptores post Theophaaem, p. 118.)
f See the reign and character of Harun al Kashid, in the Bibliotheque Onentale,p. 431—433. under his proper title; and in the relative articles to which M. d|Her-belot refers. That learned collector has shewn much taste in stripping the orientalchronicles of their instructiye and amusing anecdotes.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 133


His three sons, Christopher, Stephen, and Con-pher, ste- stantine, were successively adorned with the
phen, Con- *


same honours, and the lawful emperor was de­graded from the first to the fifth rank in this col­lege of princes. Yet, in the preservation of his lifeand crown, he might still applaud his own fortune andthe clemency of the usurper. The examples of ancientand modern history would have excused the ambitionof Romanus: the powers and the laws of the empirewere in his hand: the spurious birth of Constantinewould have justified his exclusion; and the grave orthe monastery was open to receive the son of the con­cubine. But Lecapenus does not appear to have pos­sessed either the virtues or the vices of a tyrant. Thespirit and activity of his private life dissolved away inthe sunshine of the throne; and in his licentious plea­sures, he forgot the safety both of the republic and ofhis family. Of a mild and religious character, he re­spected the sanctity of oaths, the innocence of the youth,the memory of his parents, and the attachment of thepeople. The studious temper and retirement of Con­stantine disarmed the jealousy of power: his books andmusic, his pen and his pencil, were a constant sourceof amusement; and if he could improve a scanty allow­ance by the sale of his pictures, if their price was notenhanced by the name of the artist, he was endowedwith a personal talent, which few princes could employin the hour of adversity.
Constan- The fall of Romanus was occasioned by hisA0D?945, own vices and those of his children. After theJan. 27. decease of Christopher, his eldest son, the twosurviving brothers quarrelled with each other, and con­spired against their father. At the hour of noon, whenall strangers were regularly excluded from the palace,they entered his apartment with an armed force, andconveyed him, in the habit of a monk, to a small islandin the Propontis, which was peopled by a religious com­







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 413


and drove the remnant of the Greeks to their boats, andthe isle of Rouda. The spot was afterward recom­mended to the conqueror by the easy communicationwith the gulf and the peninsula of Arabia: the remainsof Memphis were deserted; the tents of the Arabs wereconverted into permanent habitations: and the firstmosch was blessed by the presence of fourscore compa­nions of Mahomet."1 A new city arose in their camp onthe eastward bank of the Nile; and the contiguousquarters of Babylon and Fostat are confounded in theirpresent decay by the appellation of old Misrah or Cairo,of which they form an extensive suburb. But the nameof Cairo, the town of victory, more strictly belongs tothe modern capital, which was founded in the tenthcentury by the Fatimite caliphs. n It has gradually re­ceded from the river; but the continuity of buildingsmay be traced by an attentive eye from the monumentsof Sesostris to those of Saladin."
Voluntary Yet the Arabs, after a glorious and profitablesubmis- enterprise, must have retreated to the desert, hadthe Copts they not found a powerful alliance in the heartac0b of the country. The rapid conquest of Alexan-


A. D. ess. <l€r was assisted by the superstition and revolt ofthe natives; they abhorred their Persian oppressors, thedisciples of the Magi, who had burnt the temples ofEgypt, and feasted with sacrilegious appetite on theflesh of the god Apis.p After a period of ten centuries


« Murtacli, Merveilles de 1'Egypte, 243 — 259. He expatiates on the subject withthe zeal and minuteness of a citizen and a bigot, and his local traditions have astrong air of truth and accuracy.
» D'Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientate, p. 233.
0 The position of New and Old Cairo is -well known, and has been often de­scribed. Two writers, who were intimately acquainted with ancient and modernEgypt, have fixed, after a learned inquiry, the city of Memphis at Gitth, directlyopposite the Old Cairo. (Sicard, Nouveaux Memoircs des Missions du Levant,torn. 6. p. 5, 6. Shaw's Observations and Travels, p. 39o — 304.) Yet we may notdisregard the authority or the arguments of Pococlt, (vol. 1. p. 33—41.) Niebuhr,(Voyage, torn. 1. p. 77 — 106.) and, above all, of d'Anville, Description de 1'Egypte,p. 1ll, 112. 130—149.) who have removed Memphis towards the village of Mo-hannah, some miles farther to the south. In their heat, the disputants have forgotthat the ample space of a metropolis coven and annihilates the far greater part ofthe controversy.
f See Herodotus, lib. 2. c. 27—29, /Elian Hist. Var. lib. 4. c, 8. Suidas in O^tf,







OCR Output








126 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Theophilus; who, though himself of a diminutive per­son, was always followed by a train of tall and handsomedomestics. Basil attended his patron to the governmentof Peloponnesus; eclipsed, by his personal merit, thebirth and dignity of Theophilus, and formed an usefulconnexion with a wealthy and charitable matron of Pa-tras. Her spiritual or carnal love embraced the youngadventurer, whom she adopted as her son. Danielis pre­sented him with thirty slaves; and the produce of her, bounty was expended in the support of his brothers, andthe purchase of some large estates in Macedonia. Hisgratitude or ambition still attached him to the service ofTheophilus; and a lucky accident recommended him tothe notice of the court. A famous wrestler, in the trainof the Bulgarian ambassadors, had defied, at the royalbanquet, the boldest and most robust of the Greeks.The strength of Basil was praised; he accepted the chal­lenge; and the barbarian champion was overthrown atthe first onset. A beautiful but vicious horse was con­demned to be hamstrung; it was subdued by the dexte­rity and courage of the servant of Theophilus; and hisconqueror was promoted to an honourable rank in theimperial stables. But it was impossible to obtain theconfidence of Michael, without complying with his vices;and his new favourite, the great chamberlain of the pa­lace, was raised and supported by a disgraceful marriagewith a royal concubine, and the dishonour of his sister,who succeeded to her place. The public administrationhad been abandoned to the Caesar Bardas, the brotherand enemy of Theodora; but the arts of female influ­ence persuaded Michael to hate and to fear his uncle: hewas drawn from Constantinople, under the pretext of aCretan expedition, and stabbed in the tent of audience,by the sword of the chamberlain, and in the presence ofthe emperor. About a month after this execution, Basilwas invested with the title of Augustus and the govern­ment of the empire. He supported this unequal assor







OCR Output








438 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Under the standard of their queen Cahina, the inde­pendent tribes acquired some degree of union and dis­cipline; and as the Moors respected in their femalesthe character of a prophetess, they attacked the invaderswith an enthusiasm similar to their own. The veteranbands of Hassan were inadequate to the defence of Africa:the conquests of an age were lost in a single day; andthe Arabian chief, overwhelmed by the torrent, retiredto the confines of Egypt, and expected, five years, thepromised succours of the caliph. After the retreat ofthe Saracens, the victorious prophetess assembled theMoorish chiefs, and recommended a measure of strangeand savage policy. "Our cities (said she), and thegold and silver which they contain, perpetually attractthe arms of the Arabs. These vile metals are not theobjects of our ambition; we content ourselves with thesimple productions of the earth. Let us destroy thesecities; let us bury in their ruins those pernicious trea­sures; and when the avarice of our foes shall be desti­tute of temptation, perhaps they will cease to disturb thetranquillity of a warlike people." The proposal wasaccepted with unanimous applause. From Tangier toTripoli the buildings, or at least the fortifications, weredemolished, the fruit-trees were cut down, the means ofsubsistence were extirpated, a fertile and populous gardenwas changed into a desert, and the historians of a morerecent period could discern the frequent traces of theprosperity and devastation of their ancestors. Such isthe tale of the modern Arabians. Yet I strongly suspectthat their ignorance of antiquity, the love of the mar­vellous, and the fashion of extolling the philosophy ofbarbarians, has induced them to describe, as one volun­tary act, the calamities of three hundred years, since thefirst fury of the Donatists and Vandals. In the progressof the revolt, Cahina had most probably contributed hershare of destruction; and the alarm of universal ruinmight terrify and alienate the cities that had reluctantly







OCR Output








144 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Zoe and forced the gates, recalled their mothers, Zoe fromA. D.1042, her prison, Theodora from her monastery, andApril 21. condemned the son of Calaphates to the lossof his eyes or of his life. For the first time the Greeksbeheld with surprise the two royal sisters seated on thesame throne, presiding in the senate, and giving au­dience to the ambassadors of the nations. But thissingular union subsisted no more than two months: thetwo sovereigns, their tempers, interests, and adherents,were secretly hostile to each other; and as Theodorawas still adverse to marriage, the indefatigable Zoe, atthe age of sixty, consented, for the public good, to sus­tain the embraces of a third husband, and the censuresof the Greek church. His name and number wereConstan- Constantine X. and the epithet of Monomachus,Sonoma- the single combatant, must have been expressivech<is- of his valour and victory in some public or pri-A.D. io4z, vate quarrel. But his health was broken by the
tortures of the gout, and his dissolute reign wasspent in the alternative of sickness and pleasure. A fairand noble widow had accompanied Constantine in hisexile to the isle of Lesbos, and Sclerena gloried in theappellation of his mistress. After his marriage andelevation, she was invested with the title and pomp ofAugusta, and occupied a contiguous apartment in thepalace. The lawful consort (such was the delicacy orcorruption of Zoe) consented to this strange and scan­dalous partition; and the emperor appeared in publicbetween his wife and his concubine. He survived themboth; but the last measures of Ccnstantine to changethe order of succession were prevented by the more vi-Theodoia g'lant friends of Theodora; and after his de-A.D.1054, cease, she resumed, with the general consent, the
possession of her inheritance. In her name, andby the influence of four eunuchs, the eastern world waspeaceably governed about nineteen months; and as they







OCR Output








424 ROMAN EMPIRE.


through the realm of Egypt: the folds are overspread bythe salutary flood; and the. villages communicate witheach other in their painted barks. The retreat of the in­undation deposits a fertilizing mud for the reception of thevarious seeds; the crowds of husbandmen who blacken theland may be compared to a swarm of industrious ants;and their native indolence is quickened by the lash of thetaskmaster, and the promise of the flowers and fruits ofa plentiful increase. Their hope is seldom deceived; butthe riches which they extract from the wheat, the barley,and the rice, the legumes, the fruit-trees, and the cattle, areunequally shared between those who labour and those whopossess. According to the vicissitudes of the seasons, theface of the country is adorned with a silver wave, a verdantemerald, and the deep yellow of a golden harvest.0 Yetthis beneficial order is sometimes interrupted; and thelong delay and sudden swell of the river in the first yearof the conquest might afford some colour to an edifyingfable. It is said, that the annual sacrifice of a virginphad been interdicted by the piety of Omar; and that theNile lay sullen and inactive in his shallow bed, till themandate of the caliph was cast into the obedient stream,which rose in a single night to the height of sixteencubits. The admiration of the Arabs for their new con­quest encouraged the licence of their romantic spirit. Wemay read, in the gravest authors, that Egypt was crowdedwith twenty thousand cities or villages :q that, exclusive


0 In a twenty years' residence at Cairo, tin- consul Maillet had contemplatedthat varying scene, the Nile: (lettre 2, particularly p. 70. 75.) the fertility of theland, (lettre 9.) From a college at Cambridge, the poetic eye of Gray had smthe same objects with a keener glance.—
What wonder in the sultry climes that spread,Where Nile, redundant o'er his summer bed,From his broad bosom life and verdure flings,And broods o'er Egypt with his wat'ry wings;If with advent'rous oar, and ready sail,The dusky people drive before the gale:Or on frail floats to neighbouring cities ride,That rise and glitter o'er the ambient tide.
(Mason's Works, and Memoirs of Gray, p. 199, 200.)
i' Murtadi, p. 164—167. The reader will not easily credit a human sacrificeunder the Christian emperors, or a miracle of the successors of Mahomet.
1 Maillet, Description de 1'Egypte, p. 22. He mentions this number as th^







OCR Output








394 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the Saracens proceeded to Heliopolis and Emesa; butI shall decline the repetition of the sallies and combatswhich have been already shewn on a large scale. In theprosecution of the war, their policy was not less effectualthan their sword. By short and separate truces they dis­solved the union of the enemy; accustomed the Syriansto compare their friendship with their enmity; famili­arized the idea of their language, religion, and manners;and exhausted, by clandestine purchase, the magazinesand arsenals of the cities which they returned to besiege.They aggravated the ransom of the more wealthy or themore obstinate; and Chalcis alone was taxed at fivethousand ounces of gold, five thousand ounces of silver,two thousand robes of silk, and as many figs and olivesas would load five thousand asses. But the terms oftruce or capitulation were faithfully observed; and thelieutenant of the caliph, who had promised not to enteithe walls of the captive Baalbec, remained tranquil andimmoveable in his tent till the jarring factions solicitedthe interposition of a foreign master. The conquest ofthe plain and valley of Syria was achieved in less thantwo years. Yet the commander of the faithful reprovedthe slowness of their progress, and the Saracens, bewail­ing their fault with tears of rage and repentance, calledaloud on their chiefs to lead them forth to fight the bat­tles of the Lord. In a recent action, under the walls ofEmesa, an Arabian youth, the cousin of Caled, was heardaloud to exclaim—Mcthinks I see the black-eyed girlslooking upon me; one of whom, should she appear in thisworld, all mankind would die for love of her. And I seein the hand of one of them, a handkerchief of green silk,and a cup of precious stones, and she beckons me, and callsout, Come hither quickly, for I love thee. With thesewords, charging the Christians, he made havoc where-ever he went, till observed at length by the governor ofHems, he was struck through with a javelin.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV1lI. 143


summoned to his aid; and his hopes were amused byfrequent pilgrimages to the baths, and to the tombs ofthe most popular saints: the monks applauded his pe­nance, and, except restitution (but to whom should hehave restored?) Michael sought every method of expi­ating his guilt. While he groaned and prayed in sack­cloth and ashes, his brother, the eunuch John, smiledat his remorse, and enjoyed the harvest of a crime ofwhich himself was the secret and most guilty author.His administration was only the art of satiating hisavarice, and Zoe became a captive in the palace of herfathers and in the hands of her slaves. When he per­ceived the irretrievable decline of his brother's health,he introduced his nephew, another Michael, who derivedhis surname of Calaphates from his father's occupationin the careening of vessels: at the command of the eu­nuch, Zoe adopted for her son the son of a mechanic:and this fictitious heir was invested with the title andpurple of the Caesars, in the presence of the senate andclergy. So feeble was the character of Zoe, that shewas oppressed by the liberty and power which she re­covered by the death of the Paphlagonian; and at theend of four days, she placed the crown on the head ofMichael v. Michael V. who had protested, with tears andoiia- oaths, that he should ever reign the first andA. D. 1041, most obedient of her subjects. The only actof his short reign was his base ingratitude tohis benefactors, the eunuch and the empress. The dis­grace of the former was pleasing to the public; but themurmurs, and at length the clamours, of Constantinopledeplored the exile of Zoe, the daughter of so many em­perors; her vices were forgotten, and Michael wastaught, that there is a period in which the patience ofthe tamest slaves rises into fury and revenge. The citi­zens of every degree assembled in a formidable tumukwhich lasted three days; they besieged the palace,







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 199


nature.1 By the necessity of their situation, the iaha-bitants of Rome were cast into the rough model of arepublican government: they were compelled to electsome judges in peace, and some leaders in war; thenobles assembled to deliberate, and their resolves couldnot be executed without the union and consent of themultitude. The style of the Roman senate and peoplewas revived/ but the spirit was fled: and their newindependence was disgraced by the tumultuous conflictof licentiousness and oppression. The want of lawscould only be supplied by the influence of religion,and their foreign and domestic counsels were mode­rated by the authority of the bishop. His alms, hissermons, his correspondence with the kings and pre­lates of the west, his recent services, their gratitude, anoath, accustomed the Romans to consider him as thefirst magistrate or prince of the city. The Christianhumility of the popes was not offended by the name ofDominus, or Lord; and their face and inscription arestill apparent on the most ancient coins.2 Their tem­poral dominion is now confirmed by the reverence of athousand years; and their noblest title is the free choiceof a people, whom they had redeemed from slavery.
In the quarrels of ancient Greece, the holytackeYb PeoP^e of El is enjoyed a perpetual peace, underthe Lom- the protection of Jupiter, and in the exerciseof the Olympic games.8 Happy would it havebeen for the Romans if a similar privilege had


* Quoi (Romanes) nos, Langobardi scilicet, Saiones, Franci, Lotharingi, Ba-joari, Suevi, Burgundiones, tanto dedignamur ut inimicos nostros commotii, nilaliud, contuffieliarumnisi Romane, dicamus: hoc solo, id est Roinanorum nomine,quicquid ignobilitatis, quicquid timidilatis, quicquid avaritiae, quicquid luxuruci,quicquid mendacii, imttio quicquid vitiorum eat comprehendentes. (Liutprand. inLegat. Script. Ital. torn. 2. pars 1. p. 481.) For the sins of Cato or Tully, Minosmight have imposed, as a fit penance, the daily perusal of this barbarous passage.
i Pipino regi Francorum, omuls senatus atque tmiversa pppuli generalitus a Deoeervate Romanic urbis. (Codex Carolin. epist. 36. in Script. Ital. torn. 3. para 2.p. 160.) The names of senatus and senator were never totally extinct: (Dissert.Chorograph. p. 216, 217.) but in the middle age they signified little more thannobiles optimates, Sec. (Ducange, Gloss. Latin.)
1 See Muratori Antiquit. Italia> Medii , K\ i, torn. 2. dissert at. 37. p. 548. Onone of these coins we read Hadrianus Papa (A. D. 772); on the reverse, Viet.DDNN, with the word COJVOB, which the peie Joubert (Science des Medailles,torn. 2. p. 42.) explains by CO.V-stantinopoli Officina ft, (secunda.)
'- See West s Dissertation on the Olympic games (Pindar, vol. 2. p. 32 — 36.


~7°2'







OCR Output








332 ROMAN EMPIRE.


tues, which are necessary to maintain the reputation ofa prophet among his sectaries and friends. Of his lastyears, ambition was the ruling passion; and a politicianwill suspect, that he secretly smiled (the victorious im­postor!) at the enthusiasm of his youth, and the credu­lity of his proselytes.1 A philosopher would observethat their cruelty and his success would tend morestrongly to fortify the assurance of his divine mission,that his interest and religion were inseparably connect­ed, and 'that his conscience would be soothed by thepersuasion, that he alone was absolved by the Deity fromthe obligation of positive and moral laws. If he retainedany vestige of his native innocence, the sins of Mahometmay be allowed as the evidence of his sincerity. In thesupport of trurti, the arts of fraud and fiction may bedeemed less criminal; and he would have started at thefoulness of the means, had he not been satisfied of theimportance and justice of the end. Even in a conqueroror a priest, I can surprise a word or action of unaffectedhumanity; and the decree of Mahomet, that, in the saleof captives, the mother should never be separated fromtheir children, may suspend or moderate the censure ofthe historian.'
private The good sense of Mahomet" despised thelife of pomp of royalty; the apostle of God submitted
Mahomet, f .if • , m r i' r .i i- i • ji j
to the menial offices of the family; he kindledthe fire, swept the floor, milked the ewes, and mendedwith his own hands his shoes and his woollen garment.


• In some passage of his voluminous writings, \roltaire compares the prophet,in his old age, to a fakir,—" qui detache le chaine de son cou pour en donnersurles oreilles a ses confreres."
1 Gagnier relates, with the same impartial pen, this humane law of the prophet,and the murders of Caab and Sophian, which he prompted and approved. (Vie deMahomet, torn. 2. p. 69. 97. 20R.)
• For the domestic life of Mahomet, consult Gagnier, and the correspondingchapters of Abulfeda; for his diet, (torn. 3. p. 285—288.) his children, (p. 189.239.) his wives, (p.290—303.) his marriage with Zeineb, (torn. 2. p. 152—16O.)his amour with Mary, (p 303—309.) the false accusation of Ayesha. (p. 186—199.) The most original evidence of the three last transactions, is contained inthe twenty-fourth, thirty-third, and sixty-sixth chapters of the Koran, with Sale'scommentary. Prideaux (Life of Mahomet, p. 80—90.) and Maracci (Prodrorn.Alcoran, part 4. p. 49—51.) have maliciously exaggerated the frailties of Mahomrt.







OCR Output








128 ROMAN EMPIRE.


served that rare and salutary moderation, which pursueseach virtue, at an equal distance between the oppositevices. His military service had been confined to thepalace; nor was the emperor endowed with the spiritor the talents of a warrior. Yet under his reign theRoman arms were again formidable to the barbarians.As soon as he had formed a new army by discipline andexercise, he appeared in person on the banks of the Eu­phrates, curbed the pride of the Saracens, and suppressedthe dangerous though just revolt of the Manichaeans.His indignation against a rebel who had long eluded hispursuit, provoked him to wish and to pray, that, by thegrace of God, he might drive three arrows into the headof Chrysochir. That odious head, which had been ob­tained by treason rather than by valour, was suspendedfrom a tree, and thrice exposed to the dexterity of theimperial archer: a base revenge against the dead, moreworthy of the times, than of the character of Basil. Buthis principal merit was^in the civil administration of thefinances and of the laws. To replenish an exhaustedtreasury, it was proposed to resume the lavish and ill-placed gifts of his predecessor: his prudence abated onemoiety of the restitution; and a sum of 1,200.000/.was instantly procured to answer the most pressing de­mands, and to allow some space for the mature opera­tions of economy. Among the various schemes for theimprovement of the revenue, a new mode was suggested,of capitation, or tribute, which would have too muchdepended on the arbitrary discretion of the assessors.A sufficient list of honest and able agents was instantlyproduced by.the minister; but on the more.carefulscrutiny of Basil himself, only two could be found, whomight be safely intrusted with such dangerous powers;and they justified his esteem by declining his confidence.But the serious and successful diligence of the emperorestablished by degrees an equitable balance of propertyand payment, of receipt and expenditure; a peculiar







OCR Output








244 ROMAN EMPIRE.


visit was a scene of tumult and bloodshed.0 A faintremembrance of their ancestors still tormented theRomans; and they beheld with pious indignation thesuccession of Saxons, Franks, Swabians, and Bohemi­ans, who usurped the purple and prerogatives of theCaesars.
There is nothing perhaps more advere to na-domof ture and reason, than to hold in obedience re-A.l5'.774 mote countries and foreign nations, in opposi-—1«50. tion {0 their inclination and interest. A torrentof barbarians may pass over the earth, but an extensiveempire must be supported by a refined system of po­licy and oppression; in the centre, an absolute power,prompt in action, and rich in resources; a swift andeasy communication with the extreme parts: fortifi­cations to check the first effort of rebellion: a regularadministration to protect and punish; and a well dis­ciplined army to inspire fear, without provoking dis­content and despair. Far different was the situationof the German Caesars, who were ambitious to enslavethe kingdom of Italy. Their patrimonial estates werestretched along the Rhine, or scattered in the pro­vinces; but this ample domain was alienated by the im­prudence or distress of successive princes; and theirrevenue, from minute and vexatious prerogative, wasscarcely sufficient for the maintenance of their house­hold. Their troops were formed by the legal or vo­luntary service of their feudal vassals, who passed theAlps with reluctance, assumed the licence of rapineand disorder, and capriciously deserted before the endof the campaign. Whole armies were swept away bythe pestilential influence of the climate: the survivorsbrought back the bones of their princes and nobles/


e In a quarrel at the coronation of Conrad II. Muratori takes leave to observe—doveano ben essere allora, indisciplinati, Barbario, beaiali i Tedeschi. Annal..torn. 8. p. 368.
* After boiling away the flesh. The caldrons for that purpose were a necessarypiece of travelling furniture; and a German who was using it for bis brother, pro­mised it to a friend, after it should have been employed for himself. (Schmidt,







OCR Output








14 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Cyril, pa. The name of CYRIL of Alexandria is famousttriarchof in controversial story, and the title of saint is
Alexandria , •'
A. D. 412, a mark that his opinions and his party haveA?b.444, finally prevailed. In the house of his uncle,Junesr. the archbishop Theophilus, he imbibed the or­thodox lessons of zeal and dominion, and five years ofhis youth were profitably spent in the adjacent monas­teries of Nitria. Under the tuition of the abbot Sera-pion, he applied himself to ecclesiastical studies, withsuch indefatigable ardour, that, in the course of one sleep­less night, he has perused the four gospels, the Catholicepistles, and the Epistle to the Romans. Origen he de­tested: but the writings of Clemens and Dionysius, ofAthanasius and Basil, were continually in his hands : bythe theory and practice of dispute, his faith was con­firmed, and his wit was sharpened: he extended roundhis cell the cobwebs of scholastic theology, and medi­tated the works of allegory and metaphysics, whose re­mains, in seven verbose folios, now peaceably slumberby the side of their rivals." Cyril prayed and fasted inthe desert, but his thoughts (it is the reproach of afriend") were still fixed on the world; and the call ofTheophilus, who summoned him to the tumult of citiesand synods, was too readily obeyed by the aspiring her­mit. With the approbation of his uncle, he assumedthe office, and acquired the fame, of a popular preacher.His comely person adorned the pulpit, the harmony ofhis voice resounded in the cathedral, his friends werestationed to lead or second the applause of the congre­gation/ and the hasty notes of the scribes preserved hisdiscourses, which, in their effect, though not in their


"La Croze (Hist, da Christianisme des Indes, torn. 1. p. 24.) avows In- con­tempt for the genius and writings of CyriL De tous les ouvrages des anciens, 11y en a peu qu'on lise avec moins d'utilite; and Dupin,(Bibliotheque Ecclesiastique,torn. 4. p. 42—52.) in words of respect, teaches us to despise thern.
* Of Isidore of Pelusiurn. (lib. 1. epist. 25. p. 8.) As the letter is not of themost creditable sort, Tillemont, less sincere than the Bollandists, affects a doubtwhether this Cyril is the nephew of Theophilus. (Mern. Eccles. torn. 13. p. 268.)
* A grammarian is named by Socrates, (lib. 7. 13) Jiairupo; Jf axpoam; tta ttn<r-xmrw KvgiXtou xafctrrw;, nai iripi •n s{OTW? a rtu; iifanfaXiai; atmv lyttpn m rirtvian-•nrtf.







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 451


son of Nassir, and Theodemir, prince of the Goths. Inthe name of the most merciful God, Abdelaziz makespeace on these conditions: that Theodemir shall not bedisturbed in his principality: nor any injury be offeredto the life or property, the wives and children, the reli­gion and temples, of the Christians: that Theodemirshall freely deliver his seven cities, Orihuela, Valentola,Alicant, Mola, Vacasora, Bigerra (now Bejar), Ora (orOpta), and Lorca: that he shall not assist or entertainthe enemies of the caliph, but shall faithfully communi­cate his knowledge of their hostile designs : that himself,and each of the Gothic nobles, shall annually pay onepiece of gold, four measures of wheat, as many of bar­ley, with a certain proportion of honey, oil, and vinegar;and that each of their vassals shall be taxed at one moietyof the said imposition. Given the fourth of Regeb, inthe year of the Hegira ninety-four, and subscribed withthe names of four Mussulman witnesses. "b Theodemirand his subjects were treated with uncommon lenity:but the rate of tribute appears to have fluctuated from atenth to a fifth, according to the submission or obstinacyof the Christians.0 In this revolution, many partial ca­lamities were inflicted by the carnal or religious passionsof the enthusiasts; some churches were profaned by thenew worship; some relics or images were confoundedwith idols; the rebels were put to the sword; and onetown (an obscure place between Cordova and Seville)was rased to its foundations. Yet if we compare the in­vasion of Spain by the Goths, or its recovery by the


11 See the treaty in Arabic and Latin, in the Bibliotheca Arabico-Hispana, torn.2. p. 105,106. It is signed the 4th of the month of Regeb, A. H. 94, the 5th ofApril, A. D. 713; a date which seems to prolong the resistance of Theodemir andthe government of Musa.
c From the history of Sandoval, p. 87. Fleury (Kist. Eccles. torn. 9.p. 261.) hasgiven the substance of another treaty concluded A. A'.. C. 781, A.D.784, betweenan Arabian chief, and the Goths and Romans, of the territory of Conimbra in Por­tugal. The tax of the churches is filed at twenty-fire pounds of gold; of the mona­steries, fifty; of the cathedrals, one hundred: the Christians are judged by theircount, but in capital cases he must consult the alcaide. The church-doors mustbe shut, and they must respect the name of Mahomet. I have not the originalbefore me; it would confirm or destroy a dark suspicion, that the piece had beenforged to introduce the immunity of a neighbouring convent. .'


2 G 2







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 333


Disdaining the penance and merit of a hermit, he ob­served without effort or vanity, the abstemious diet ofan Arab and a soldier. On solemn occasions he feastedhis companions with rustic and hospitable plenty; butin his domestic life, many weeks would elapse withouta fire being kindled on the hearth of the prophet. Theinterdiction of wine was confirmed by his example; hishunger was appeased with a sparing allowance of barley-bread; he delighted in the taste of milk and honey; buthis ordinary food consisted of dates and water. Per­fumes and women were the two sensual enjoymentswhich his nature required and his religion did not forbid:and Mahomet affirmed, that the fervour of his devotionwas increased by these innocent pleasures. The heatof the climate inflames the blood of the Arabs; and theirlibidinous complexion has been noticed by the writersof antiquity.1 Their incontinence was regulated by thecivil and religious laws of the Koran: their incestuousalliances were blamed, the boundless licence of poly­gamy was reduced to four legitimate wives or concu­bines; their right both of bed and of dowry were equi­tably determined; the freedom of divorce was discou­raged, adultery was condemned as a capital offence, andfornication, in either sex, was punished with a hundredstripes.7 Such were the calm and rational precepts ofthe legislator: but in his private conduct, Mahomet in­dulged the appetites of a man, and abused the claims ofa prophet. A special revelation dispensed him fromthe laws which he had imposed on his nation; the femalesex, without reserve, was abandoned to his desires; andthis singular prerogative excited the envy, rather thanthe scandal, the veneration rather than the envy, of thedevout Mussulmans. If we remember the seven.' hundred wives and three hundred concubines of


1 Incredible est quo ardore apud eos in venerem uterque solvitur sexus. (Am-mian. Marcellin. lib. 14. c. 4.)
T Sale (Preliminary Discourse, p. 133—137.) has recapitulated the laws of mar­riage, divorce, &c. and the curious reader of Selden's Uxor Hebraica will recog­nize many Jewish ordinances.







OCR Output








CHAP. LI.


the forest, or rather wilderness, was cleared, the vestigesof a Roman town were discovered in a sandy plain : thevegetable food of Cairoan is brought from afar; and thescarcity of springs constrains the inhabitants to collect incisterns and reservoirs a precarious supply of rain-water.These obstacles were subdued by the industry of Akbah;he traced a circumference of three thousand and six hun­dred paces, which he encompassed with a brick wall;in the space of five years, the governor's palace was sur­rounded with a sufficient number of private habitations;a spacious mosch was supported by five hundred columnsof granite, porphyry, and Numidian marble; and Cai­roan became the seat of learning as well as of empire.But these were the glories of a later age; the new colonywas shaken by the successive defeats of Akbah and Zo-beir, and the western expeditions were again interruptedby the civil discord of the Arabian monarchy. The sonof the valiant Zobeir maintained a war of twelve years,a siege of seven months, against the house of Ommiyah.Abdallah was said to unite the fierceness of the lion withthe subtlety of the fox; but if he inherited the courage,he was devoid of the generosity, of his father.*_ The return of domestic peace allowed the
of car- caliph Abdalmalek to resume the conquest ofA*$.' Africa; the standard was delivered to Hassan69*—ess. gOVernor Of Egypt, and the revenue of that king-dom,with an army of forty thousand men,was consecratedto the important service. In the vicissitudes of war, theinterior provinces had been alternately won and lost bythe Saracens. But the sea-coast still remained in thehands of the Greeks; the predecessors of Hassan had re­spected the name and fortifications of Carthage; and thenumber of its defenders was recruited by the fugitives of
• Besides the Arabic chronicles of Abulfeda, Elmacin, and Abalpharagius, underthe seventy-third year of the Hegira, we may consult d'Herbelot (Bibliot. Orient.p. 7.) and Ockley. (Hist, of the Saracens, vol. 2. p. 339—3490 The latter has giventhe last and pathetic dialogue between Abdallah and bis mother; but be has forgota physical effect of fcw grief for his death, the return, at the age of ninety, and fatalconsequences, of her men wi.


2 F2







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 351


of the Mussulman empire, allowed an ample scope forevery bold and artful impostor, who claimed affinitywith the holy seed; the sceptre of the Almohades inSpain and Africa, of the Fatimites in Egypt and Syria,1of the sultans of Yemen, and of the sophis of Persia,"has been consecrated by this vague and ambiguous title.Under their reigns it might be dangerous to dispute thelegitimacy of their birth; and one of fthe Fatimite ca­liphs silenced an indiscreet question, by drawing hisscimitar. This (said Moez) is my pedigree; and these(casting a handful of gold to his soldiers), and these aremy kindred and my children. In the various conditionsof princes, or doctors, or nobles, or merchants, or beg­gars, a swarm of the genuine or fictitious descendantsof Mahomet and Al i is honoured with the appellation ofsheiks, or sherifs, or emirs. In the Ottoman empirethey are distinguished by a green turban, receive astipend from the treasury, are judged only by their chief,and, however debased by fortune or character, still as­sert the proud pre-eminence of their birth. A familyof three hundred persons, the pure and orthodox branchof the caliph Hassan, is preserved without taint or sus­picion in the holy cities of Mecca and Medina, and stillretains, after the revolutions of twelve centuries, the cus­tody of the temple and the sovereignty of their nativeland. The fame and merit of Mahomet would ennoblea plebeian race, and the ancient blood of the Koreishtranscends the recent majesty of the kings of the earth."


1D'Horbelot, p. 32.1. The enemies of the Fatimites disgraced them by a Jew­ish origin. Yet they accurately deduced their genealogy from Jaafar, the sixthImam; and the impartial Abulfeda allows (Annal. Moslem, p. 230.) that theywere owned by many, qui absque controversi fLgenuini snnt Alidarum, homine pro-paginum su:c gentis exacte callentes. He quotes eome lines from the celebratedSkenfar Rhadi,—Egone humilitatem induam in terris hostium? (I suspect him tobe an Edrissite of Sicily) cum in .lEgypto sit Chalifa de gente Alii, quocum egocommunem habeo patrem ct vindicern.
a The kings of Persia of the last dynasty are descended from Sheik Sefi, a saintof the fourteenth century and through him from Moussa Cassem, the son of Hosein,the son of All. (Clearms, p. 957. Chardin, torn. 3. p. S88.) But I cannot tracethe intermediate degrees in any genuine or fabulous pedigree. If they were trulyFatunitfs, they might draw their origin from the princes of Mazanderan, whoreigned in the ninth century. (d'Herbelot, p. 96.)
b The present state of the family of Mahomet and Ali is most accurately de­







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 411


the enterprise, he condemned his own rashness, and list­ened to his timid companions. The pride and the great­ness of Pharaoh were familiar to the readers of the Koran;and a tenfold repetition of prodigies had been scarcelysufficient to effect, not the victory, but the flight, of sixhundred thousand of the children of Israel: the cities ofEgypt were many and populous; their architecture wasstrong and solid; the Nile> with its numerous branches,was alone an insuperable barrier; and the granary ofthe imperial city would be obstinately defended by theRoman powers. In this perplexity, the commander ofthe faithful resigned himself to the decision of chance,or, in his opinion, of Providence. At the head of onlyfour thousand Arabs, the intrepid Amrou had marchedaway from his station of Gaza when he was overtakenby the messenger of Omar. If you are still in Syria(said the ambiguous mandate), retreat without delay; butif, at the receipt of this epistle, you have already reachedthe frontiers of Egypt, advance with confidence, and de­pend on the succour of God and of your brethren. Theexperience, perhaps the secret intelligence, of Amrou hadtaught him to suspect the mutability of courts; and hecontinued his march till his tents were unquestionablypitched on Egyptian ground. He there assembled hisofficers, broke the seal, perused the epistle, gravely in­quired the name and situation of the place, and declaredhis ready obedience to the commands of the caliph.After a siege of thirty days, he took possession of Far-mah or Pelusium, and that key of Egypt, as it has beenjustly named, unlocked the entrance of the country, as-far as the ruins of Heliopolis and the neighbourhood ofthe modern Cairo.
The cities ^n *^e western s*de of ^e Nile, at a smallof Mem- distance to the east of the pyramids, at a smallSyion, and distance to the south of the Delta, Memphis,0' one hundred and fifty furlongs in circumference,displayed the magnificence of ancient kings. Under







OCR Output








CHAP. L, 337


exalted him above the rest of his countrymen,rf Ah' might justify his claim to the vacant throne ofArabia. The son of Abu Taleb was, in his own right,the chief of the family of Hashem, and the hereditaryprince or guardian of the city and temple of Mecca. Thelight of prophecy was extinct; but the husband of Fatimamight expect the inheritance and blessing of her father:the Arabs had sometimes been patient of a female reign;and the two grandsons of the prophet had often beenfondled in his lap, and shewn in his pulpit, as the hopeof his age, and the chief of the youth of paradise. Thefirst of the true believers might aspire to march beforethem in this world and in the next; and if some wereof a graver and more rigid cast, the zeal and virtue of Aliwere never out-stripped by any recent proselyte. Heunited the qualifications of a poet, a soldier, and a saint:his wisdom still breathes in a collection of moral and re­ligious sayings ;f and every antagonist, in the combats ofthe tongue or of the sword, was subdued by his eloquence and valour. From the first hour of his missionto the last rites of his funeral, the apostle was never forsaken by a generous friend, whom he delighted to namehis brother, his vicegerent, and the faithful Aaron of asecond Moses. The son of Abu Taleb was afterward re­proached for neglecting to secure his interest by a solemndeclaration of his right, which would have silenced allcompetition, and sealed his succession by the decrees ofheaven. But the unsuspecting hero confided in himself;the jealousy of empire, and perhaps the fear of opposition,might suspend the resolutions of Mahomet; and the bedof sickness was besieged by the artful Ayesha, thedaughter of Abubeker, and the enemy of Ali.


'Ockley (at the end of his second volume) has riven an English version of onehundred and siity-nine sentences, which he ascribes, with some hesitation, toAli. the son of Aba Taleb. His preface is coloured by the enthusiasm of a trans­lator; vet these sentences delineate a characteristic, though dark, picture of hu­man life.
VOL. VI . Z







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 41$>


sult, and the obstinacy of the resistance, provoked himto swear, that if a third time he drove the infidels intothe sea, he would render Alexandria as accessible on allsides as the house of a prostitute. Faithful to hispromise, he dismantled several parts of the walls andtowers, but the people were spared in the chastisementof the city, and the mosch of Mercy was erected on thespot where the victorious general had stopped the furyof his troops.
.. r I should deceive the expectation of the reader,andnan if I passed in silence the fate of the Alexandrianra library, as it is described by the learned Abul-pharagius. The spirit of Amrou was more curious andliberal than that of his brethren, and in his leisure hours,the Arabian chief was pleased with the conversation ofJohn, the last disciple of Ammonius, and who derivedthe surname of Philoponus from his laborious studies ofgrammar and philosophy." Emboldened by this familiarintercourse, Philoponus presumed to solicit a gift, ines­timable in his opinion, contemptible in that of the bar­barians; the royal library, which alone among the spoilsof Alexandria, had not been appropriated by the visitand the seal of the conqueror. Amrou was inclined togratify the wish of the grammarian, but his rigid inte­grity refused to alienate the minutest object without theconsent of the caliph; and the well-known answer ofOmar was inspired by the ignorance of a fanatic. Ifthese writings of the Greeks agree with the book of God,they are useless and need not be preserved: if they dis­agree, they are pernicious, and ought to be destroyed. Thesentence was executed with blind obedience: the vo­lumes of paper or parchment were distributed to the four


1 Many treatises of this lover of labour (ifiX*BroMf) are still extant; but for readersof the present age, the printed and unpublished are nearly in the same predicament.Moses and Aristotle are the chief objects of his verbose commentaries, one of whichis dated as early as May 10, A. D. 617. (Fabric. Bibliot. Grsc. torn. 9. p. 458—468.) A modem (John Le Clerc), who sometimes assumes the same name, wasequal to old Philoponus in diligence, and far superior in good sense and realknowledge.


2E2







OCR Output








470 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the house of Ommiyahs was reduced to the kingdoms ofSyria and Egypt: their distress and fear enforced theircompliance with the pressing demands of the Christians;and the tribute was increased to a slave, a horse, and athousand pieces of gold, for each of the three hundredand sixty-five days of the solar year. But as soon as theempire was again united by the arms and policy ofAbdalmalek, he disclaimed a badge of servitude not lessinjurious to his conscience than to his pride; he discon­tinued the payment of the tribute; and the resentmentof the Greeks was disabled from action by the madtyranny of the second Justinian, the just rebellion of hissubjects, and the frequent change of his antagonists andsuccessors. Till the reign of Abdalmalek, the Saracenshad been content with the free possession of the Persianand Roman treasures, in the coin of Chosroes andCaesar. By the command of that caliph, a nationalmint was established, both of silver and gold, and theinscription of the dinar, though it might be censured bysome timorous casuists, proclaimed the unity of the Godof Mahomet.'1 Under the reign of the caliph Waled,the Greek language and characters were excluded fromthe accounts of the public revenue.1 If this change was


.... irattina, xaxa, isiite&vi n Tufjuntia ixo vm Afaffvr f**Xft TOU M». (Chro­nograph. p. 302, 303.) The series of these events may be traced in the AnnaU ofTheophanes, and in the Abridgment of the Patriarch Nicephorus, p. 24 — 24.
• These domestic revolutions are related in a clear and natural style, in thesecond volume of < irklr v V History of the Saracens, p. 253 — 370. Besides omprinted authors, he draws his materials from the Arabic MSS. of Oxford, which hewould have more deeply searched, had he been confined to the Bodleian library in­stead of the city jail; a fate how unworthy of the man and of his country!
11 Elmacin, who dates the first coinage A. H. 76, A. D. 695, five or six yeanlater than the Greek historians, has compared the weight of the best or commongold dinar, to the dracham or dirhem of Egypt, (p. 77.) which may be equal totwo pennies (forty-eight grains) of our Troy weight, (Hooper's Enquiry into An­cient Measures, p. 2-1 — 36.) and equivalent to eight shillings of our sterling money.From the same Elmacin and the Arabian physicians, some dinars as high as twodirhems, as low as half a dirhem, may be deduced. The piece of silver was thedirhem, both in value and weight; but an old, though fair coin, struck at VVasset,A. H. 88, and preserved in the Bodleian library, wants four grains of the Cairostandard. (See the Modern Univ. Hist. torn. 1. p. 548. of the French translation.)
* Kai I
aura
ta, n -.-, I,- Sj , 1; o»™ ,:/ti-'': i Tpia y.e^i:0m. Theophan. Chronograph, p. 314. Thwdefect, if it really existed, must have stimulated the ingenuity of the Arabs to in-v.cnt or boriow.







OCR Output








CHAP. xLTir. oa


and Cyprus; and their numbers, with those of the Jaco­bites, were computed to surpass the Greek and Latincommunions.* Twenty-five metropolitans or archbishopscomposed their hierarchy; but several of these were dis­pensed, by the distance and danger of the way, from theduty of personal attendance, on the easy condition thatevery six years they should testify their faith and obe-'dience to the Catholic or patriarch of Babylon, a vagueappellation, which has been successively applied to theroyal seats of Seleucia, Ctesiphon, and Bagdad. Theseremote branches are long since Withered, and the oldpatriarchal trunk0 is now divided by the Elijahs of Mo­sul, the representatives, almost in lineal descent, of thegenuine and primitive succession, the Josephs of Amida,%ho are reconciled to the church of Rome/ atid theSimeons of Van or Ortnia, whose revolt at the head offorty thousand families was promoted in the sixteenthcentury by the Sophists of Persia. The number of threehundred thousand is allowed for the whole body of theNestorians, who, under the name of Chaldeans or As­syrians, are confounded with the most lefcrined or themoat powerful nation of eastern antiquity.The Chris- According to the legend of antiquity, the go3-tians of St. pel was preached in India by St. Thomas.* Atindu. the end of the ninth century, his shrine, perhapsA. D. t»3, JQ ^ neighbourhood of Madras, was devoutlyvisited by the ambassadors of Alfred, and their return


J Jacobite et NestoWail* prafesqiiam Graeci el Latini. Jacob a Vitriac6i Hist.Hlerosol. lib. 2. e. 16. p. 1093. in the Gesta Dei per Francos. The numbers aregiven by Thomassin, Discipline de 1'Eglise, torn. t. p. 17'.'..
* The division of the patriarchate may be traced in the BrbHotbeca Oriehu of A*-Fcmanni, torn. 1. p. 523—549. torn. 2. p. 457, &c. torn. 3. p. 603. p. 621—623.torn. 4. p. 164-^169. p. 443. p. 622—6*9, etc.
'The pompous language of Rome, on the submission of a Nestorian patriarch, iselegafifly representedih the seventh book of Pra-Paolo, Babylon, Nineveh, Arbera,and the trophies of Alexander, Tauris, and Ecbatana, the Tigris and Indus.
S The Indian missionary St. Thomas, an apostle, a Manichaan, or an Armenianmerchant, ( La Croze, Ghristianisme des Indcs, torn. 1. p. 57—70.) was famous,howeveT) as early as the time of Jerome, (ad Mercelium, cpist. 148.) MarcoPolo was infomied oil the spot that he suffered martyrdom in thc city of Malabar',dr HefiapOur, a league only from Madras, (d'Anville, Eclaircissemens sUT 1'lnde,f l§5.y where the fbrtugaese founded .aa episcopal church under the name ofSt. 'Chomp, add where the saint performed an annual miracle, till he was silencedby the profane neighbourhood of the English. (La Cioze, torn. 2. p. 7—16.)


vi. F







OCR Output








100 ROMAN HISTORY.


smallest community would not have chosen him for theirlocal magistrate. His favourite ministers were twobeings the least susceptible of human sympathy; a eu­nuch and a monk: to the one he abandoned the palace,to the other the finances; the former corrected the em­peror's mother with a scourge, the latter suspended theinsolvent tributaries, with their heads downwards, overa slow and smoky fire. Since the days of Commodusand Caracalla, the cruelty of the Roman princes hadmost commonly been the effect of their fear: but Jus­tinian, who possessed some vigour of character, enjoyedthe sufferings, and braved the revenge, of his subjectsabout ten years, till the measure was full of his crimesand of their patience. In a dark dungeon, Leontius, ageneral of reputation, had groaned above three yearswith some of the noblest and most deserving of the pa­tricians: fee was suddenly drawn forth to assume thegovernment of Greece; and this promotion of an injuredman was a mark of the contempt rather than of the con­fidence of his prince. As he was followed to the portby the kind offices of his friends, Leontius observed, witha sigh, that he was a victim adorned for sacrifice, andthat inevitable death would pursue his footsteps. Theyventured to reply, that glory and empire might be therecompense of a generous resolution; that every orderof men abhorred the reign of a monster; and that thehands of two hundred thousand patriots expected onlythe voice of a leader. The night was chosen for theirdeliverance; and in the first effort of the conspirators,the prefect was slain, and the prisons were forced open:the emissaries of Leontius proclaimed in every street,—Christians, to St* Sophia: and the seasonable text of thepatriarch, This is the day of the Lord! was the preludeof an inflammatory sermon. From the church the peo­ple adjourned to the hippodrome: Justinian, in whosecause not a sword had been drawn, was dragged beforethese tumultuary judges, and their clamours demanded


 







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 353


rious rites in that magnificent temple: at Oxford orGeneva, they would experience less surprise; but itmight still be incumbent on them to peruse the cate­chism of the church, and to study the orthodox com­mentators on their own writings, and the words of theirmaster. But the Turkish dome of St. Sophia, with anincrease of splendour and size, represents the humbletabernacle erected at Medina by the hands of MahometThe Mahometans have uniformly withstood the tempta­tion of reducing the object of their faith and devotionto a level with the senses and imaginations of man. Ibelieve in one God, and Mahomet the apostle of God,is the simple and invariable profession of Islam. Theintellectual image of the Deity has never been degradedby any visible idol: the honours of the prophet havenever transgressed the measure of human virtue; andhis living precepts have restrained the gratitude of hisdisciples within the bounds of reason and religion. Thevotaries of Ali have indeed consecrated the memory oftheir hero, his wife, and his children, and some of thePersian doctors pretend that the divine essence was in­carnate in the person of the Imams; but their super­stition is universally condemned by the Sonnites; andtheir impiety has afforded a seasonable warning againstthe worship of saints and martyrs. The metaphysicalquestions on the attributes of God, and the liberty ofman, have been agitated in the schools of the Mahome­tans, as well as m those of the Christians; but amongthe former they have never engaged the passions of thepeople, or disturbed the tranquillity of the state. Thecause of this important difference may be found in theseparation or union of the regal and sacerdotal charac­ters. It was the interest of the caliphs, the successorsof the prophet and commanders of the faithful, to repressand discourage all religious innovations: the order, thediscipline, the temporal and spiritual ambition, of theclergy, are unknown to the Moslems: and the sages ofVOL. vi. 2 A







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. . 385


the battle. Her first arrow pierced the hand of hisstandard-bearer: her second wounded Thomas in theeye; and the fainting Christians no longer beheld theirensign or their leader. Yet the generous champion ofDamascus refused to withdraw to his palace: his woundwas dressed on the rampart; the fight was continued tillthe evening; and the Syrians rested on their arms. Inthe silence of the night, the signal was given by a strokeon the great bell; the gates were thrown open, and eachgate discharged an impetuous column on the sleepingcamp of the Saracens. Caled was the first in arms; atthe head of four hundred horse he flew to the post ofdanger, and the tears trickled down his iron cheeks, ashe uttered a fervent ejaculation. O God! who neverdeepest, look upon thy servants, and do not deliver theminto the hands of their enemies. The valour and victoryof Thomas were arrested by the presence of the sword ofGod; with the knowledge of the peril, the Moslems re­covered their ranks, and charged the assailants in theflank and rear. After the loss of thousands, the Chris­tian general retreated with a sigh of despair, and thepursuit of the Saracens was checked by the military en­gines of the rampart.
The city After a siege of seventy days," the patience,by'storm and perhaps the provisions, of the Damascenesand capi- were exhausted; and the bravest of their chiefs
tulation,
A.D.654. submitted to the hard dictates of necessity. Inthe occurrences of peace and war, they had been taughtto dread the fierceness, of Caled, and to revere the mildvirtues of Abu Obeidah. At the hour of midnight, onehundred chosen deputies of the clergy and people were


0 Abulfeda allows only seventy days for the siege of Damascus (Annal. Moslem.p. 67. vers. Keiske) ; but Elmacin, who mentions this opinion, prolongs the term to•U months, and notices the use of balistic by the Saracens. (Hist. Saracen, p. 25.32.)Even this longer period ia insufficient to fill the interval between the battle of Aiz-naditi (July, A. D. 633.) and the accession of Omar, (24th July, A. D. 634.) towhose reign the conquest of Damascus is un;uu m < msl y ascribed. ( AI Wakidi, apudOckley, vol. 1. p. 115. Abulpharagiue, Dynast, p. 112. vers. Pocock.) Perhaps,as in the Trojan war, the operations were interrupted by excursions and detach-nents, till the last seventy days of the siege.
VOL. VI. 2 C







OCR Output








466 ROMAN EMPIRE.


CHAP. LII.
The two sieges of Constantinople by the Arabs. — Their invasion ofFrance, and defeat by Charles Martel. — Civil war of the Om-miades and Abassides. — Learning of the Arabs. — Luxury of thecaliphs. — Naval enterprises on Crete, Sicily, and Rome. — Decayand division of the empire of the caliphs. — Defeats and victoriesof the Greek emperors.
The limits WHEN the Arabs first issued from the desert, theyArabian must have been surprised at the ease and rapi-


of their own success. But when they ad­vanced in the career of victory to the banks of the Indusand the summit of the Pyrennees; when they had repeat­edly tried the edge of their scimitars and the energy oftheir faith, they might be equally astonished that anynation could resist their invincible arms, that any boun­dary should confine the dominion of the successor of theprophet. The confidence of soldiers and fanatics mayindeed be excused, since the calm historian of the pre­sent hour, who strives to follow the rapid course of theSaracens> must study to explain by what means thechurch and state were saved from this impending, and,as it should seem, from this inevitable danger. Thedeserts of Scythia and Sarmatia might be guarded bytheir extent, their climate, their poverty, and the courageof the northern shepherds; China was remote and inac­cessible; but the greatest part of the temperate zone wassubject to the Mahometan conquerors, the Greeks wereexhausted by the calamities of war and the loss of theirfairest provinces, and the barbarians of Europe mightjustly tremble at the precipitate fall of the Gothic mo­narchy. In this inquiry I shall unfold the events thatrescued our ancestors of Britain, and our neighbours ofGaul, from the civil and religious yoke of the Koran;that protected the majesty of Rome, and delayed the ser­vitude of Constantinople; that invigorated the defence







OCR Output








414 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the same revolution was renewed by a similar cause:and in the support of an incomprehensible creed, thezeal of the Coptic Christians was equally ardent. Ihave already explained the origin and progress of theMonophysite controversy, and the persecution of theemperors, which converted a sect into a nation, andalienated Egypt from their religion and government.The Saracens were received as the deliverers of the Ja­cobite church; and a secret and effectual treaty wasopened during the siege of Memphis between a victoriousarmy and a people of slaves. A rich and noble Egyp­tian, of the name of Mokawkas, had dissembled his faithto obtain the administration of his province; in the dis­orders of the Persian war he aspired to independence;the embassy of Mahomet ranked him among princes; buthe declined, with rich gifts and ambiguous compliments,the proposal of a newreligion.q The abuse of his trust ex­posed him to the resentment of Heraclius; his submissionwas delayed by arrogance and fear; and his consciencewas prompted by interest to throw himself on the favourof the nation and the support of the Saracens. In hisfirst conference with Amrou, he heard without indigna­tion the usual option of the Koran, the tribute, or thesword. The Greeks (replied Mokawkas) are determinedto abide the determination of the sword; but with theGreeks I desire no communion, either in this world or inthe next, and I abjure for ever the Byzantine tyrant, hitsynod of Chalcedon, and his Melchite slaves. For my­self and my brethren, we are resolved to live and die inthe profession of the gospel and unity of Christ. Itis impossible for us to embrace the revelations ofyourpro­


tom. 2. p. 774. Mentor. Sicul. torn. 3. lib. 17. p. 197. edit. Wesseling. Tm ni:-ra na-iBwTort tit TO !•{»i says the last of these historians.
i Mokawkas sent the prophet two Coptic damsels, with two maids, and one eu­nuch, an alabaster vase, an ingot of pure gold, oil, honey, and the finest white linen
locations,year of the*56. 303.) from Al Jannabi.


 







OCR Output








344 ROMAN EMPIRE.


liph, and whose claim was supported by the forces ofSyria and the interest of the house of Ommiyah. Fromthe passage of Thapsacus, the plain of Siffin" extendsalong the western banks of the Euphrates. On thisspacious and level theatre, the two competitors waged adesultory war of one hundred and ten days. In thecourse of ninety actions or skirmishes, the loss of AHwas estimated at twenty-five, that of Moawiyah at forty-five, thousand soldiers; and the list of the slain was dig­nified with the names of five-and-twenty veterans whohad fought at Beder under the standard of Mahomet. Inthis sanguinary contest, the lawful caliph displayed asuperior character of valour and humanity. His troopswere strictly enjoined to await the first onset of theenemy; to spare their flying brethren, and to respectthe bodies of the dead, and the chastity of the femalecaptives. He generously proposed to save the blood ofthe Moslems by a single combat; but his trembling rivaldeclined the challenge as a sentence of inevitable death.The ranks of the Syrians were broken by the charge ofa hero who was mounted on a piebald horse, and wieldedwith irresistible force his ponderous and two-edgedsword. As often as he smote a rebel, he shouted theAllah Acbar,—God is victorious; and in the tumult ofa nocturnal battle, he was heard to repeat four hundredtimes that tremendous exclamation. The prince of Da­mascus already meditated his flight, but the certain vic­tory was snatched from the grasp of Ali by the disobe­dience and enthusiasm of his troops. Their consciencewas awed by the solemn appeal to the books of the Koranwhich Moawiyah exposed on the foremost lances; andAli was compelled to yield to a disgraceful truce andan insidious compromise. He retreated with sorrow andindignation to Cufa: his party was discouraged; thedistant provinces of Persia, of Yemen, and of Egypt,


determined by d'Anville (1'Euphrate et le Tigre, p. t9.)Procopius.


 







OCR Output








204 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the walls of Pavia, were the only defence of the Lom­bards; the former were surprised, the latter were in­vested, by the son of Pepin; and after a blockade ofConquest two years, Desiderius, the last of their nativebanty'by princes, surrendered his sceptre and his capi-Charie- tal Under the dominion of a foreign king,
magne,' . .
A.D.774. but in the possession of their national laws, theLombards became the brethren rather than the subjectsof the Franks; who derived their blood, and manners,and language, from the same Germanic origin.11Pepin and The mutual obligations of the popes and theCharie- Carlovingian family, form the important link ofkings of ancient and modern, of civil and ecclesiastical,A.D. 75i. history. In the conquest of Italy, the champions


rss. 768. Qf i^e Roman church obtained a favourable oc­casion, a specious title, the wishes of the people, theprayers and intrigues of the clergy. But the most es­sential gifts of the popes to the Carlovignian race werethe dignities of king of France,1 and of patrician ofRome. I. Under the sacerdotal monarchy of St. Peter,the nations began to resume the practice of seeking, onthe banks of the Tiber, their kings, their laws, and theoracles of their fate. The Franks were perplexed be­tween the name and substance of their government. Allthe powers of royalty were exercised by Pepin, mayorof the palace; and nothing, except the regal title, waswanting to his ambition. His enemies were crushedby his valour; his friends were multiplied by his libera­


pudiated sine aliquo crimine. Pope Stephen IV. had most furiously opposed thealliance of a noble Frank — cum perfida, horrida, nee dicenda, ffetentissima nationeLangobardorum — to whom he imputes the first stain of leprosy. (Cod. Carolin.efiist. 45. p. 178, 179.) Another reason against the marriage was the existence ofa first wife. (Muratori, Annali d'ltalia, torn. 6. p. 232, *33. 236, 237.) But'Charlemagne indulged himself in the freedom of polygamy or concubinage.
'1 See the Annali d'ltalia of Muratori, torn. 6. and the three first dissertationsof bis Antiquitatea Italis Medii /Kvj , torn. 1.
'Besides the common historians, three French critics, Launoy, (Opera, torn. 5.pars 2. lib. 7. epist. 9. p. 477 — 487.) Pagi,(Critica. A.D. 751. no. 1. 6. A.D.T5S.no. 1-10.) and Natalis Alexander, (Hist . NoviTestamenti.dissertat. 2. p. «6— 107.)have treated this subject of the deposition of Childeric with learning and attention,but with a strong bias to save the independence of the crown. Vet they are hardpressed by the text which they produce of Eginhard, Theophanes, and the oldannals, Laureshamemus, Fuldensis, Loisielani.







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 325


enthusiasm of the rising sect, that the noblest chiefsserved without reluctance under the slave of the prophet.On the event of his decease, Jaafar and Abdallah weresuccessively substituted to the command; and if thethree should perish in the war, the troops were autho­rized to elect their general. The three leaders wereslain in the battle of Muta,h the first military action whichtried the valour of the Moslems against a foreign enemy.Zeid fell, like a soldier, in the foremost ranks; the death ofJaafar was heroic and memorable; he lost his right hand;he shifted the standard to his left; the left was severedfrom his body; he embraced the standard with his bleed­ing stumps, till he was tranfixed to the ground with fiftyhonourable wounds. Advance (cried Abdallah,who steptinto the vacant place), advance with confidence; eithervictory or paradise is our own. The lance of a Romandecided the alternative; but the falling standard wasrescued by Caled, the proselyte of Mecca; nine swordswere broken in his hand; and his valour withstood and re­pulsed the superior numbers of the Christians. Inthenoc-turnal council of the camp he was chosen to command: hisskilful evolutions of the ensuing day secured either thevictory or the retreat of the Saracens: and Caled is re­nowned among his brethren and his enemies by theglorious appellation of the Sword of God. In the pulpit,Mahomet described, with prophetic rapture, the crownsof the blessed martyrs; but in private he betrayed thefeelings of human nature: he was surprised as he weptover the daughter of Zeid. What do I see? said the as­tonished votary.—You see (replied the apostle) a friendwho is deploring the loss of his most faithful friend. Afterthe conquest of Mecca, the sovereign of Arabia affectedto prevent the hostile preparations of Heraclius; and so­lemnly proclaimed war against the Romans, without at­tempting to disguise the hardhips and dangers of the en-
"For the battle of Muta, and its consequences, see Abulfeda (p. 100—101.) andGagnier. (torn. 1. p. 3J7—313.) KaXiJi; (says Theophanes) « XiyouTi f*a£iiilai T«i
0MV.







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 379


s. of cus,' encouraged the Arabs to besiege the ancientDamascus,capital of Syria.8 At some distance from the walls,°'they encamped among the groves and fountainsof that delicious territory,11 and the usual option of theMahometan faith, of tribute or of war, was proposed tothe resolute citizens, who had been lately strengthenedby a reinforcement of five thousand Greeks. In the de­cline as in the infancy of the military art, a hostile de­fiance was frequently offered and accepted by the gene-nerals themselves:' many a lance was shivered in theplain of Damascus, and the personal prowess of Caledwas signalized in the first sally of the besieged. Afteran obstinate combat, he had overthrown and made pri­soner one of the Christian leaders, a stout and worthy an­tagonist. He instantly mounted a fresh horse, the giftof the governor of Palmyro, and pushed forwards to thefront of the battle. Repose yourself for a moment (saidhis friend Der&r) and permit me to supply your place: youare fatigued with fighting with this dog.—O Derar! (re­plied the indefatigable Saracen) we shall rest in theworld to come. He that labours to-day shall rest to-mor-rmv. With the same unabated ardour, Caled answered,encountered, and vanquished a second champion; andthe heads of his two captives, who refused to abandon


1 Damascus is amply described by the Sherif al Edrisi, (Geograph. Nub. p. 116,117.) and his translator, Sionita, (Appendix, c. 4.) Abulfeda,.(TabulaSyria, p. 100.)Schultens, (Index, Geograph. ad. Vit. Saladin.) d'Herbelot, (Bibliot. Orient.p. 291.) Thevenot, Voyage du Levant, (part 1. p. 688—698.) Maundrell, (Jour­ney from Aleppo to Jerusalem, p. 122—130.) and Pocock- (Description of theEast, vol. «. p. 117—127.)
s Nobilissima civitas, says Justin. According to the oriental traditions, it wasolder than Abraham or Semiramis. Joseph. Antiq. Jud. lib. 1. c. 6, 7. p. 24. 29.-edit. Havercamp.. Justin, 36. 2.
*' El« yag oifAai iuy Ato; ffoXiy aXqda;, xaf Tiif *Eaa; afra?it? o$daXlUly, TIJY ffpar y.aifivyimt Aa/uawxer Xiyv, TO*? n aXXoi; ey/Airo-a-a, oiov iigav xaXXif, xai vliv ltttyffU*. KenSaftn ivKMfla xai irqyay ayXaia Xdl fftra/uvv TXsOii, xai yr,- tv$ifui vuttway, &c. Julian,epist. 24. p. 392. The.'e splendid epithets are occasioned by the figs of Damascus,of which the author sends a hundred to his friend Serapion, and this rhetorical themeis inserted by Petavius, Spanheim, &c. (p. 390—396.) among the genuine epistlesof Julian. How could they overlook that the writer is an inhabitant of Damascus(he thrice affirms, that this peculiar.fig grows only *»{' n/wir), a city which Juliannever entered or approached?
1 Voltaire, who caste a keen and lively glance over the surface of history, has beenetruck with the resemblance of the first Moslems and the heroei of the Iliad; thesiege of Troy and that of Damascus. (Ilist. Generate, torn. 1. p, 348.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 201


jects obeyed the exhortations of Gregory himself, in se­parating the personal guilt of Leo from the generalcause of the Roman empire.c The Greeks were lessmindful of the service, than the Lombards of the injury:the two nations, hostile in their faith, were reconciled ina dangerous and unnatural alliance; the king and theexarch marched to the conquest of Spoleto and Rome:the storm evaporated without effect, but the policy ofLiutprand alarmed Italy with a vexatious alternative ofhostility and truce. His successor Astolphus declaredhimself the equal enemy of the emperor and the pope;Ravenna was subdued by force or treachery/ and thisfinal conquest extinguished the series of the exarchs,who had reigned with the subordinate power since thetime of Justinian and the ruin fff the Gothic kingdom.Rome was summoned to acknowledge the victoriousLombard as her lawful sovereign: the annual tribute ofa piece of gold was fixed as the ransom of each citizen,and the sword of destruction was unsheathed to exactthe penalty of her disobedience. The Romans hesitated;they entreated; they complained; and the threateningbarbarians were checked by arms and negotiations, tillthe popes had engaged the friendship of an ally andavenger beyond the Alps."Her deli- IQ his distress, the first Gregory had implored
byTepln. the aid of tae nero of the aee» of Charles Mar-A.D.751. tel, who governed the French monarchy withthe humble title of mayor or duke; and who, by hissignal victory over the Saracens, had saved his coun­


c The Venetian historians, John Sagorninus, (Chron. Venet. p. 13.) and thedoge Andrew Dandolo, (Scriptores Rer. Ital. torn. 12. p. 135.) have preservedthin epistle of Gregory. The loss and recovery of Ravenna are mentioned byPanlus Diaconus; (de Gest. Langobard. lib. 6. c. 49. 5+. in Script. Ital. torn. 1.pan 1. p. 506. 508.) but our chronologists, Pagi, Muratori, &c. cannot ascertainthe date or circumstances.
d The option will depend on the various readings of the MSS. of Anastasius—decepcrat, or decerjnerat, (Script. Ital. torn. 3. pare 1. p. 167.)
• The Codex Carolinus is a collection of the epistles of the popes to CharlesMartel (whom they style Subregulus), Pepin, and Charlemagne, as far as the year791, when it was formed by the last of these princes. His original and authenticMS. (Bibliothecae Cubicularis) is now in the imperial library of Vienna, and has.been published by Lambecius and Muratori. (Script. Hcrurn Ital. torn .3. pars 2.P.75.&C.)







OCR Output








.516 ROMAN EMPIRE.


himself commanded the centre, and the vanguard wasgiven to his son Abbas, who, in the trial of the firstadventures, might succeed with the more glory, or failwith the least reproach. In the revenge of his injury,the caliph prepared to retaliate a similar affront. Thefather of Theophilus was a native of Amorium* inPhrygia: the original seat of the imperial house hadbeen adorned with privileges and monuments; andwhatever might be the indifference of the people, Con­stantinople itself was scarcely of more value in the eyesof the sovereign and his court. The name of Amoriumwas inscribed on the shields of the Saracens; and theirthree armies were again united under the walls of thedevoted city. It had been proposed by the wisest coun­sellors, to evacuate Amorium, to remove the inhabitants,and to abandon the empty structures to the vain resent­ment of the barbarians. The emperor embraced themore generous resolution of defending, in a siege andbattle, the country of his ancestors. When the armiesdrew near, the front of the Mahometan line appeared toa Roman eye more closely planted with spears andjavelins; but the event of the action was not glorious oneither side to the national troops. The Arabs werebroken, but it was by the swords of thirty thousand Per­sians, who had obtained service and settlement in theByzantine empire. The Greeks were repulsed and van­quished, but it was by the arrows of the Turkish cavalry:and had not their bow-strings been damped and relaxedby the evening rain, very few of the Christians couldhave escaped with the emperor from the field of battle.They breathed at Doryleeum, at the distance of threedays; and Theophilus, reviewing his trembling squa­drons, forgave the common flight both of the prince andpeople. After this discovery of his weakness, he vainly


z Amorium is seldom mentioned by the old geographers, and totally forgotten inthe Roman Itineraries. After the sixth century, it became an episcopal see, and atlength the metropolis of the new Galatia. (Carol. Seto. Paulo, Geograph. Sacra,p. 234.) "The city rose again from its ruins, if we should read Ammvria, not An-gvria, in the text of the Nubian Geographer, (p. 236.)







OCR Output








396 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the camp of their brethren, they found the pleasing in­telligence, that Caled had already defeated and scatteredthe Christian Arabs of the tribe of Gassan. In theneighbourhood of Bosra, the springs of mount Hermondescend in a torrent to the plain of Decapolis, or tencities; and the Hieromax, a name which has been cor­rupted to Yermuk, is lost after a short course in the lakeof Tiberias.0 The banks of this obscure stream were il­lustrated by a long and bloody encounter. On this mo­mentous occasion, the public voice, and the modesty ofAbu Obediah, restored the command to the most de­serving of the Moslems. Caled assumed his station inthe front, his colleague was posted in the rear, that thedisorder of the fugitives might be checked by his vene­rable aspect and the sight of the yellow banner whichMahomet had displayed before the walls of Chaibar.The last line was occupied by the sister of Derar, withthe Arabian women who had enlisted in this holy war,who were acccustomed to wield the bow and the lance,and who in a moment of captivity had defended, againstthe uncircumcised ravishers, their chastity and religion/The exhortation of the general was brief and forcible.Paradise is before you, the devil and hell-fire in your rear.Yet such was the weight of the Roman cavalry, that theright wing of the Arabs was broken and separated fromthe main body. Thrice did they retreat in disorder, andthrice were they driven back to the charge by the re­proaches and blows of the women. In the intervals ofaction, Abu Obeidah visited the tents of his brethren, -prolonged their repose by repeating at once the prayersof two different hours; bound up their wounds with his


» See Reland, Palestin. torn. 1. p. 272. 283. torn. 2. p. 773.775. This learnrdprofessor was equal to the task of describing the Holy Land, since be was alikeconversant with Greek and Latin, with Hebrew and Arabian literature. TheYermuk, or Hieromax, is noticed by Cellarius (Geograph. Antiq. torn. 2. p. 39?.)and d'Anville. (Geographic Ancienne, torn. 2. p. 185.) The Arabs, and evenAbulfeda himself, do not seem to recognize the scene of their victory.
f These women were of the tribe of the Hamyarites.'who derived their originfrom the ancient Amalekites. Their females were accustomed to ride on horseback,and to fight like the Amazons of old. (Ockley, vol. 1. p. 67.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVHI. 131


were preached by the monks and entertained by the
Greeks. Marriage was allowed as a necessary means
for the propagation of mankind: after the death of ei­
ther party, the survivor might satisfy, by a. second union,
the weakness or the strength of the flesh; but a third
marriage was censured as a state of legal fornication;
and a. fourth was a sin or scandal yet unknown to the
Christians of the east. In the beginning of his reign,
Leo himself had abolished the state of concubines, and
condemned, without annulling, third marriages; but his
patriotism and love soon compelled him to violate his
own laws, and to incur the penance, which in a similar
case he had imposed on his subjects. In his three first
alliances, his nuptial bed was unfruitful; the emperor
required a female companion, and the empire a legiti­
mate heir. The beautiful Zoe was introduced into the
palace as a concubine ; and after a trial of her fecundity,
and the birth of Constantine, her lover declared his in­
tention of legitimating the mother and the child, by the
celebration of his fourth nuptials. But the patriarch
Nicholas refused his blessing: the imperial baptism of
the young prince was obtained by a promise of separa­
tion; and the contumacious husband of Zoe was ex­
cluded from the communion of the faithful. Neither
the fear of exile, or the desertion of his brethren, nor the
authority of the Latin church, nor the danger of failure
or doubt in the succession to the empire, could bend
the spirit of the inflexible monk. After the death of
Leo, he was recalled from exile to the civil and ecclesi­
astical administration; and the edict of union which
•was promulgated in the name of Constantine, condemn­
ed the future scandal of fourth marriages, and left a
tacit imputation on his own birth.
In the Greek language purple and porphyryH- 'are the same word: and as the colours of nature


Ftob "o- are invariable, we may learn, that a dark deep redwas tne Tyrian dye which stained the purple of


K 2







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 2«9


to decide; and those who most firmly believe her imma­terial nature, are at a loss to understand how she canthink or act without the agency of the organs of sense.Hell and The reunion of the soul and body will be fol-paradise. lOWed by the final judgment of mankind: and,in his copy of the Magian picture, the prophet has toofaithfully represented the forms of proceeding, and eventhe slow and successive operations of an earthly tribunal.By his intolerant adversaries he is upbraided for ex­tending, even to themselves, the hope of salvation; forasserting the blackest heresy, that every man who be­lieves in God, and accomplishes good works, may expectin the last day a favourable sentence. Such rationalindifference is ill adapted to the character of a fanatic;nor is it probable that a messenger from heaven shoulddepreciate the value and necessity of his own revelation.In the idiom of the Koran,q the belief of God is inse­parable from that of Mahomet; the good works arethose which he has enjoined; and the two qualificationsimply the profession of Islam, to which all nations andall sects are equally invited. Their spiritual blindness,though excused by ignorance and crowned with virtue,will be scourged with everlasting torments; and thetears which Mahomet shed over the tomb of his mother,for whom he was forbidden to pray, display a strikingcontrast of humanity and enthusiasm/ The doom ofthe infidels is common: the measure of their guilt andpunishment is determined by the degree of evidencewhich they have rejected, by the magnitude of the errorswhich they have entertained: the eternal mansions ofthe Christians, the Jews, the Sabians, the Magians, and


i The candid Reland has demonstrated, that Mahomet damns all unbelievers;(de Religion. Moharn. p. 128—142.) that devils will not be finally saved; (]i. 196—199.) that paradise will not lolely consist of corporeal delights; (p. 199—205.)and that women's souls are immortal, (p. 205—209.)
'Al Beidawi, apod Sale, Koran, c. 9. p. 164. The refusal to pray for as. un­believing kindred, is justified, according to Mahomet, by the duty of a prophet,and the example of Abraham, who reprobated his own father as an enemy of God.Yet Abraham, (he adds, c. 9. v. 116. Maracci, torn. t. p. 317.) fuit sane pius,mitis.







OCR Output








172 ROMAN EMPIRE.


was dragged to the presence of Isaac Angelus, loadedwith fetters, and along chain round his neck. His elo­quence, and the tears of his female companions, plead­ed in vain for his life; but, instead of the decencies ofa legal execution, the new monarch abandoned thecriminal to the numerous sufferers, whom he had de­prived of a father, a husband, or a friend. His teethand hair, an eye and a hand, were torn from him, as apoor compensation for their loss; and a short respitewas allowed, that he might feel the bitterness of death.Astride on a camel, without any danger of rescue, hewas carried through the city, and the basest of the po­pulace rejoiced to trample on the fallen majesty of theirprince. After a thousand blows and outrages, Andro-nicus was hung by the feet between two pillars that sup­ported the statues of a wolf and sow; and every hand,that could reach the public enemy, inflicted on his bodysome mark of ingenious or brutal cruelty, till two friend­ly Italians, plunging their swords into his body, releasedhim from all human punishment. In this long and pain­ful agony—Lord have mercy on me! and why will youbruise a broken reed? were the only words that escapedfrom his mouth. Our hatred for the tyrant is lost inpity for the man; nor can we blame his pusillanimousresignation, since a Greek Christian was no longer mas­ter of his life.
Isaac ii. I have been tempted to expatiate on the extra-A^1JSS ordinary character and adventures of Androni-Sept. 12. cus • but I shall here terminate the series of theGreek emperors since the time of Heraclius. Thebranches that sprang from the Comnenian trunk hadinsensibly withered; and the male line was continuedonly in the posterity of Andronicus himself, who, in thepublic confusion, usurped the sovereignty of Trebizond,so obscure in history, and so famous in romance. Aprivate citizen of Philadelphia, Constantine Angelus,.had emerged to wealth and honours by his marriage







OCR Output








174 ROMAN EMPIRE.


was often contemptible or tragic. A being of the natureof man, endowed with the same faculties, but with alonger measure of existence, would cast down a smile ofpity and contempt on the crimes and follies of humanambition, so eager, in a narrow span, to grasp at a pre­carious and short-lived enjoyment. It is thus that theexperience of history exalts and enlarges the horizon ofour intellectual view. In a composition of some days,in a perusal of some hours, six hundred years have rolledaway, and the duration of a life or reign is contracted toa fleeting moment: the grave is ever beside the throne;the success of a criminal is almost instantly followed bythe loss of his prize; and our immortal reason survivesand disdains the sixty phantoms of kings who have pass­ed before our eyes, and faintly dwell on our remembrance.The observation, that in every age and climate, ambitionhas prevailed with the same commanding energy, mayabate the surprise of a philosopher; but while he con­demns the vanity, he may search the motive, of thisuniversal desire to obtain and hold the sceptre of domi­nion. To the greater part of the Byzantine series, wecannot reasonably ascribe the love of fame and of man­kind. The virtue alone of John Comnenus was benefi­cent and pure: the most illustrious of the princes, whoprecede or follow that respectable name, have trod withsome dexterity and vigour the crooked and bloody pathsof a selfish policy; in scrutinizing the imperfect charac­ters of Leo the Isaurian, Basil I. and Alexius Comnenus,of Theophilus, the second Basil, and Manuel Comnenus,our esteem and censure are almost equally balanced;and the remainder of the imperial crowd could only de­sire and expect to be forgotten by posterity. Was per­sonal happiness the aim and object of their ambition?I shall not descant on the vulgar topics of the miseryof kings; but I may surely observe, that their condition,of all others, is the most pregnant with fear, and theleast susceptible of hope. For these opposite passions,







OCR Output








CHAP. L.


to the south-east of Mecca, a fortress of strength, whosefertile lands produce the fruits of Syria in the midst ofthe Arabian desert. A friendly tribe, instructed (I knownot how) in the art of sieges, supplied him with a trainof battering-rams and military engines, with a body offive hundred artificers. But it was in vain that he offeredfreedom to the slaves of Tayef; that he violated his ownlaws by the extirpation of the fruit-trees; that the groundwas opened by the miners; that the breach was assaultedby the troops. After a siege of twenty days the prophetsounded a retreat; but he retreated with a song of de­vout triumph, and affected to pray for the repentance andsafety of the unbelieving city. The spoil of this fortunateexpedition amounted to six thousand captives, twenty-four thousand camels, forty thousand sheep, and fourthousand ounces of silver: a tribe who had fought atHonain, redeemed their prisoners by the sacrifice of theiridols; but Mahomet compensated the loss, by resigningto the soldiers his fifth of the plunder, and wished fortheir sake, that he possessed as many head of cattle asthere were trees in the province of Tehama. Instead ofchastising the disaffection of the Koreish,he endeavouredto cut out their tongues (his own expression), and to se­cure their attachment by a superior measure of liberality:Abu Sophian alone was presented with three hundredcamels and twenty ounces of silver; and Mecca was sin­cerely converted to the profitable religion of the Koran.The fugitives and auxiliaries complained, that theywho had bore the burden were neglected in the seasonof victory. Alas (replied their artful leader), suffer meto conciliate these recent enemies, these doubtful proselytes,by the gift of 'some perishable goods. To your guard 1intrust my life and fortunes. You are the companionsof my exile, of my kingdom, of my paradise. He was fol­lowed by the deputies of Tayef, who dreaded the repe­tition of a siege. Grant us, O apostle of God, a truce ofthree years, with the toleration of our ancient worship.—


v2







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 387


to respect his promise, to suspend their fury, and to waitthe determination of- their chiefs. The chiefs retiredinto the church of St. Mary; and after a vehement de­bate, Caled submitted in some measure to the reasonand authority of his colleague; who urged the sanctityof a covenant, the advantage as well as the honour whichthe Moslems would derive from the punctual perform­ance of their word, and the obstinate resistance whichthey must encounter from the distrust and despair of therest of the Syrian cities. It was agreed that the swordshould be sheathed; that the part of Damascus whichhad surrendered to Abu Obeidah, should be immediatelyentitled to the benefit of his capitulation; and that thefinal decision should be referred to the justice and wis­dom of the caliph.p A large majority of the peopleaccepted the terms of toleration and tribute; and Da­mascus is still peopled by twenty thousand Christians.But the valiant Thomas, and the freeborn patriots whohad fought under his banner, embraced the alternativeof poverty and exile. In the adjacent meadow, a nu­merous encampment was formed of priests and laymen,of soldiers and citizens, of women and children: theycollected, with haste and terror, their most preciousmoveables; and abandoned with loud lamentations orsilent anguish their native homes, and the pleasant banksof the Pharphar. The inflexible soul of Caled was nottouched by the spectacle of their distress; he disputedwith the Damascenes the property of a magazine of corn;endeavoured to exclude the garrison from the benefit ofthe treaty; consented, with reluctance, that each of thefugitives should arm himself with a sword, or a lance, ora bow; and sternly declared, that, after a respite of three4ays, they might be pursued and treated as the enemiesof the Moslems.


i' It appears from Abulfeda (p. 125.) and Elmacin, (p. :,'„,.) that this distinctionof the two parts of Damascus was long remembered, though not always respected,by the Mahometan sovereigns. See likewise Eutychius. (Anna1, torn. 2. p. 379.380. 383.)


2c 2







OCR Output








110' ROMAN EMPIRE:


pronymus by a second marriage; and the story of theseprinces is singular and tragic. The right of primoge­niture excluded them from the throne; the injustice oftheir elder brother defrauded them of a legacy of abouttwo millions sterling; some vain titles were not deem­ed a sufficient compensation for wealth and power;and they repeatedly conspired against their nephew,before, and after, the death of his father. Their firstattempt was pardoned: for the second offence theywere condemned to the ecclesiastical state; and for thethird treason, Nicephorus, the eldest and most guilty,was deprived of his eyes, and his four brothers, Chris­topher, Nicetas, Anthemeus, and Eudoxas, were punish­ed, as a milder sentence, by the amputation of theirtongues. After five years'confinement, they escaped tothe church of St. Sophia, and displayed a pathetic spec­tacle to the people. Countrymen and Christians (criedNicephorus for himself and his mute brethren), beholdthe sons of your emperor, if you can still recognize ourfeatures in this miserable state. A life, an imperfect life,is all that the malice of our enemies has spared. It isnow threatened, and we now throw ourselves on yourcompassion. The rising murmur might have produceda revolution, had it not been checked by the presence ofa minister, who soothed the unhappy princes with flat­tery and hope, and gently drew them from the sanctuaryto the palace. They were speedily embarked for Greece,and Athens was allotted for the place of their exile. Inthis calm retreat, and in their helpless condition, Nice­phorus and his brothers were tormented by the thirst ofpower, and tempted by a Sclavonian chief, who offeredto break their prison, and to lead them in arms, and inthe purple, to the gates of Constantinople. But theAthenian people, ever zealous in the cause of Irene,prevented her justice or cruelty; and the five- sonsof Copronymus were plunged in eternal darkness andoblivion.







OCR Output








CHAP. L.


the reproach of idolatry and polytheism. The creed ofMahomet is free from suspicion or ambiguity; and theKoran is a glorious testimony to the unity of God. Theprophet of Mecca rejected the worship of idols and men,of stars and planets, on the rational principle that what­ever rises must set, that whatever is born must die, thatwhatever is corruptible must decay and perish.h In theauthor of the universe, his rational enthusiasm confessedand adored an infinite and eternal being, without formor place, without issue or similitude, present to ourmost secret thoughts, existing by the necessity of hisown nature, and deriving from himself all moral andintellectual perfection. These sublime truths, thus an­nounced in the language of the prophet,1 are firmly heldby his disciples, and defined with metaphysical preci­sion by the interpreters of the Koran. A philosophictheist might subscribe the popular creed of the Maho­metans :* a creed too sublime perhaps for our presentfaculties. What object remains for the fancy, or eventhe understanding, when we have abstracted from theunknown substance all ideas of time and space, of mo­tion and matter, of sensation and reflection? The firstprinciple of reason and revelation was confirmed by thevoice of Mahomet: his proselytes, from India to Mo­rocco, are distinguished by the name of Unitarians;arid the danger of idolatry has been prevented by theinterdiction of images. The doctrine of eternal decreesand absolute predestination is strictly embraced by theMahometans; and they struggle with the common dif­ficulties, how to reconcile the prescience of God withthe freedom and responsibility of man; how to explain


fc This train of thought is philosophically exemplified in the character Of Abra­ham, who opposed in Chaldea the first introduction of idolatry. (Kor.ui, c. 6.p. 106. d'Herbelot. Bibliot. Orient, p. 13.)
'See the Koran, particularly the second, (p. 30.) the fifty-seventh,(p. 437.) thefifty-eighth, (p. 441.) chapter, which proclaim the omnipotence of the Creator.
* The most orthodox creeds are translated by Pocock, (Specimen, p. 274.284—292.) Ockley, (Hist, of the Saracens, vol. 2. p. 82—9.5.) Reland, (de Reli-nipn. Moharn. lib. 1. p. 7—13.) and Chardin. (Voyages en Perse, torn. p. 4—-28.)The great truth that God is without similitude, is foolishly criticised by Maracci,(Alcoran, torn. 1. part. 3. p. 87—94.) because he made man after his own image.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 160


strained to join his voice to the general acclamation,and to solicit the association of a colleague, who in­stantly degraded him from the supreme rank, secludedhis person, and verified the rash declaration of the pa­triarch, that Alexius might be considered as dead, sosoon as he was committed to the custody of his guar­dian. But his death was preceded by the imprison­ment and execution of his mother. After blackeningher reputation, and inflaming against her the passionsof the multitude, the tyrant accused and tried the em­press for a treasonable correspondence with the kingof Hungary. His own son, a youth of honour and hu­manity, avowed his abhorrence of this flagitious act,and three of the judges had the merit of preferringtheir consciences to their safety; but the obsequious tri­bunal, without requiring any proof, or hearing any de­fence, condemned the widow of Manuel; and her un­fortunate son subscribed the sentence of her death.Maria was strangled, her corpse was buried in the sea,and her memory was wounded by the insult most offen­sive to female vanity, a false and ugly representation ofher beauteous form. The fate of her son was not longdeferred: he was strangled with a bowstring, and thetyrant, insensible to pity or remorse, after surveying thebody of the innocent youth, struck it rudely with hisfoot:—Thy father (he cried) was a knave, thy mother awhore, and thyself a fool!
Androni- The Roman sceptre, the reward of his crimes,CUs i. was held by Andronicus about three years and
Comnenus, • • i« i
A. D.I 183, a half, as the guardian or sovereign of the em­pire. His government exhibited a singularcon-trast of vice and virtue. ,When he listened to his pas­sions he was the scourge; when he consulted his rea­son, the father of his people. In the exercise of privatejustice, he was equitable and rigorous: a shameful andpernicious venality was abolished, and the offices werefilled with the most deserving candidates by a prince







OCR Output








88 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Belisarius, recedes on all sides from our view: theRoman name, the proper subject of our inquiries, isreduced to a narrow corner of Europe, to the lonelysuburbs of Constantinople; and the fate of the Greekempire has been compared to that of the Rhine, whichloses itself in the sands, before its waters can minglewith the ocean. The scale of dominion is dimi­nished to our view by the distance of time and place:nor is the loss of external splendour compensatedby the nobler gifts of virtue and genius. Inthe last moments of her decay, Constantinople wasdoubtless more opulent and populous than Athens ather most flourishing era, when a scanty sum of sixthousand talents, or twelve hundred thousand poundssterling, was possessed by twenty-one thousand malecitizens of an adult age. But each of these citizenswas a freeman who dared to assert the liberty of histhoughts, words, and actions; whose person and pro­perty were guarded by equal law; and who exercisedhis independent vote in the government of the republic.Their numbers seem to be multiplied by the strong andvarious discriminations of character: under the shieldof freedom, on the wings of emulation and vanity, eachAthenian aspired to the level of the national dignity:from this commanding eminence, some chosen spiritssoared beyond the reach of a vulgar eye; and thechances of superior merit in a great and populouskingdom, as they are proved by experience, would ex­cuse the computation of imaginary millions. The, ter­ritories of Athens, Sparta, and their allies, do not ex­ceed a moderate province of France or England: butafter the trophies of Salamis and Plataea, they expandin our fancy to the gigantic size of Asia, which hadbeen trampled under the feet of the victorious Greeks.But the subjects of the Byzantine empire, who assumeand dishonour the names both of Greeks and Romans,present a dead uniformity of abject vices, which are







OCR Output








404 ROMAN EMPIRE.


more; and the loss of Damascus and Jerusalem, thebloody fields of Aiznadin and Yermuk, may be imputedin some degree to the absence or misconduct of the so­vereign. Instead of defending the sepulchre of Christ,he involved the church and state in a metaphysical con­troversy for the unity of his will; and while Heracliuscrowned the offspring of his second nuptials, he wastamely stripped of the most valuable part of their inhe­ritance. In the cathedral of Antioch, in the presence ofthe bishops, at the foot of the crucifix, he bewailed thesins of the prince and people; but his confession in­structed the world, that it was vain, and perhaps impious,to resist the judgment of God. The Saracens were in­vincible in fact, since they were invincible in opinion;and the desertion of Youkinna, his false repentance andrepeated perfidy, might justify the suspicion of the em­peror, that he was encompassed by traitors and apos­tates, who conspired to betray his person and their coun­try to the enemies of Christ. In the hour of adversity,his superstition was agitated by the omens and dreamsof a falling crown; and, after bidding an eternal farewellto Syria, he secretly embarked with a few attendants, andabsolved the faith of his subjects.1 Constantine, his eldestson, had been stationed with forty thousand men at Cae-sarea, the civil metropolis of the three provinces of Pa­lestine. But his private interest recalled him to the By­zantine court; and, after the flight of his father, he felthimself an unequal champion to the united force of thecaliph. His vanguard was boldly attacked by threehundred Arabs and a thousand black slaves, who, in thedepth of winter, had climbed the snowy mountains ofLibanus, and who were speedily followed by the victo­rious squadrons of Caled himself. From the north andsouth the troops of Antioch and Jerusalem advanced
« See Ockley, (vol. 1. p. 308, 312.) who laughs at the credulity of his author.When Heraclius bade farewell to Syria, Vale Syria et ultinium vale, he prophesiedthat the Romans should never re-enter the provmce till the birth of an inauspiciouschild, the future scourge of the empire. Abulfeda, p. 68. I am perfectly ignorantof the mystic sense, or nonsense, of this prediction.







OCR Output








02 ROMAN EMPIRE.


GARIANS, and V. RUSSIANS, who assaulted by sea orby land the provinces and the capital: but the last ofthese, so important in their present greatness, will ex­cite some curiosity in their origin and infancy. VI.The NORMANS: or rather the private adventures ofthat warlike people, who founded a powerful kingdomin Apulia and Sicily, shook the throne of Constanti­nople, displayed the trophies of chivalry, and almostrealized the wonders of romance. VII. The LATINS;the subjects of the pope, the nations of the west, whoenlisted under the banner of the cross for the recoveryor relief of the holy sepulchre. The Greek emperorswere terrified and preserved by the myriads of pilgrimswho marched to Jerusalem with Godfrey of Bouillonand the peers of Christendom. The second and thirdcrusades trod in the footsteps of the first: Asia and Eu­rope were mingled in a sacred war of two hundredyears; and the Christian powers were bravely resisted,and finally expelled, by Saladin and the Mamalukes ofEgypt. In these memorable crusades, a fleet and armyof French and Venetians were diverted from Syria to theThracian Bosphorus: they assaulted the capital, theysubverted the Greek monarchy; and a dynasty of Latinprinces was seated near threescore years on the throneof Constantine. VIII. The GREEKS themselves,during this period of captivity and exile, must be consi­dered as a foreign nation; the enemies, and again thesovereigns, of Constantinople. Misfortune had rekin­dled a spark of national virtue; and the imperial seriesmay be continued with some dignity from their resto­ration to the Turkish conquests. IX. The MOGULSand TARTARS. By the arms of Zingis and his de­scendants, the globe was shaken from China to Polandand Greece; the sultans were overthrown; the caliphsfell, and the Caesars trembled on their throne. Thevictories of Timour suspended above fifty years thefinal ruin of the Byzantine empire. X. I have already







OCR Output








124 ROMAN EMPIRE.


metropolitans, among whom the emperor was ranked,assumed their ecclesiastical garments: they used orabused the sacred vessels of the altar; and in theirbacchanalian feasts, the holy communion was adminis­tered in a nauseous compound of vinegar and mustard.Nor were these impious spectacles concealed from theeyes of the city. On the day of a solemn festival, theemperor, with his bishops or buffoons, rode on assesthrough the streets; encountered the true patriarch atthe head of his clergy; and by their licentious shoutsand obscene gestures, disordered the gravity of theChristian procession. The devotion of Michael ap­peared only in some offence to reason or piety: he re­ceived his theatrical crowns from the statue of theVirgin; and an imperial tomb was violated for the sakeof burning the bones of Constantine the Iconoclast.By this extravagant conduct, the son of Theophilusbecame as contemptible as he was odious; every citizenwas impatient for the deliverance of his country; andeven the favourites of the moment were apprehensivethat a caprice might snatch away what a caprice hadbestowed. In the thirtieth year of his age, and inthe hour of intoxication and sleep, Michael III. wasmurdered in his chamber by the founder of a newdynasty, whom the emperor had raised to an equalityof rank and power.
Basa i r^ne genealogy of Basil the Macedonian (ifthe Mace- it be not the spurious offspring of pride andA.D. 867, flattery) exhibits a genuine picture of the re-Sept , **' volution of the most illustrious families. TheArsacides, the rivals of Rome, possessed the sceptreof the east near four hundred years: a younger branchof these Parthian kings continued to reign in Armenia;and their royal descendants survived the partition andservitude of that ancient monarchy. Two of these,Artabanus and Chlienes, escaped or retired to the courtof Leo I.; his bounty seated them in a safe and hos­







OCR Output








CHAP. XL1X. 187


siiteenth century, freedom and knowledge had expandedall the faculties of man; the thirst of innovation super­seded the reverence of antiquity, and the vigour of Eu­rope could disdain those phantoms which terrified thesickly and servile weakness of the Greeks.
The scandal of an abstract heresy can be onlyI^tio^of proclaimed to the people by the blast of thethoimages ecclesiastical trumpet; but the most ignorant
andmonks, . r . , ., , .
A.D.726 can perceive, the most torpid must ieel, the~n' profanation and downfall of their visible deities.The first hostilities of Leo were directed against a loftyChrist on the vestibule, and above the gate, of the palace.A ladder had been planted for the assault, but it wasfuriously shaken by a crowd of zealots and women:they beheld, with pious transport, the ministers ofsacrilege tumbling from on high, and dashed againstthe pavement; and the honours of the ancient martyrswere prostituted to these criminals, who justly sufferedfor murder and rebellion." The execution of the im­perial edict was resisted by frequent tumults in Con­stantinople and the provinces: the person of Leo wasendangered, his officers were massacred, and the popu­lar enthusiasm was quelled by the strongest efforts ofthe civil and military power. Of the Archipelago, orHoly sea, the numerous islands were filled with imagesand monks: their votaries abjured, without scruple, theenemy of Christ, his mother, and the saints: they armeda fleet of boats and galleys, displayed their consecratedbanners, and boldly steered for the harbour of Constan­tinople, to place on the throne a new favourite of Godand the people. They depended on the succour of amiracle; but their miracles were inefficient against theGreekJire; and, after the defeat and conflagration oftheir fleet, the naked islands were abandoned to the cle-


* The holy confessor Theophanes approves the principle of their rebellion, &u»xnmipMa {rXi;. (p. 339.) Gregory II. (in Epist. 1. ad Imp. Leon. Concil. torn. 8.p. 661. 664.) applauds the zeal of the Byzantine women who killed the imperialofficers.







OCR Output








500 ROMAN EMPIRE.


great circle of the earth, and determined at twenty-fourthousand miles the entire circumference of our globe.pFrom the reign of the Abbassides to that of the grand­children of Tamerlane, the stars, without the aid ofglasses, were diligently observed; and the astronomicaltables'1 of Bagdad, Spain, and Samarcand, correct someminute errors, without daring to renounce the hypothesisof Ptolemy, without advancing a step towards the disco­very of the solar system. In the eastern courts, thetruths of science could be recommended only by ig­norance and folly, and the astronomer would have beendisregarded, had he not debased his wisdom or honestyby the vain predictions of astrology/ But in the scienceof medicine, the Arabians have been deservedly ap­plauded. The names of Mesua and Geber, of Razis andAvicenna, are ranked with the Grecian masters; in thecity of Bagdad, eight hundred and sixty physicians werelicensed to exercise their lucrative profession ;s in Spain,the life of the Catholic princes was intrusted to the skillof the Saracens,' and the school of Salerno, their legiti­mate offspring revived in Italy and Europe the preceptsof the healing art." The success of each professor musthave beeri influenced by personal and accidental causes;


i' Abulfeda (Annal. Moslem, p. 210,311. vrrs Reiske) describes this operationaccording to 1 bn Challecan, and the best historians. This degree most accuratelycontains two hundred thousand royal or Hashemite cubits, which Arabia had de­rived from the sacred and legal practice both of Palestine and Egypt. Thisancient cubit is repeated four hundred times in each bans of the great pyramid,and seems to indicate the primitive and universal measures of the east. See theMetrologie of the laborious M. Paucton, p. 101—105.
i See the Astronomical Tables of Ulugh Begh, with the preface of Dr. Hyde,in the first volume of Ms Syntagma Dissertationum, Oxon. 1767.
'The truth of astrology was allowed by Albumazar, and the best of the Arabianastronomers, who drew their most certain predictions, not from Venus and Mer­cury, but from Jupiter and the sun. (Abulpharag. Dynast, p. 161—163.) Forthe state and science of the Persian astronomers, see Chardin. (Voyages en Perse,torn. 3. p. 16«—203.)
'Bibliot. Arabico-Hispana, torn. 1. p. 438. The original relates a pleasanttale, of an ignorant but harmless practitioner.
'In the year 956, Sancho the Fat, king of Leon, was cured by the physiciansof Cordova. (Mariana, lib. 1. c. 7. torn. 1. p. 318.)
"The School of Salerno, and the introduction of the Arabian sciences into Italy,are discussed with learning and judgment by Muratori (Antiquat. Italiie Medii.Kvi. torn. 3. p. 932—940.) and Giannone. (Istoria Civili di Napoli, torn. 3.p. 119—127.)







OCR Output








378 ROMAN EMPIRE.


drew their forces into the plain, and swore to die in thedefence of their religion. But a religion of peace wasincapable of withstanding the fanatic cry of Fight,Jight!Paradise, paradise! that re-echoed in the ranks of theSaracens; and theuproar of the town, the ringing of bells,'and the exclamations of the priests and monks, increasedthe dismay and disorder of the Christians. With theloss of two hundred and thirty men, the Arabs remainedmasters of the field; and the ramparts of Bosra, in expec­tation of human or divine aid, were crowded with holycrosses and consecrated banners. The governor Roma-nus had recommended an early submission: despised bythe people, and degraded from his office, he still retain­ed the desire and opportunity of revenge. In a noctur­nal interview, he informed the enemy of a subterraneouspassage from his house under the wall of the city: theson of the caliph, with a hundred volunteers, were com­mitted to the faith of this new ally, and their successfulintrepidity gave an easy entrance to their companions.After Caled had imposed the terms of servitude and tri­bute, the apostate or convert avowed in the assembly ofthe people his meritorious treason. / renounce yoursociety (said Romanus), both in this world, and theworld to come. And I deny him tliat was crucified, andwhosoever worships him. And I choose God for myLord, Islam for my faith, Mecca for my temple, theMoslems for my brethren, and Mahomet for my pro­phet; who was sent to lead us into the right way, and toexalt the true religion in spite of those who join partnerswith God.
The conquest of Bosra, four day's journey from Damas­


a The bells rung.' Ockley, vol. 1. p. 38. Vet I much doubt whether this expres­sion can be justified by the text of Al Wakidi, or the practice of the times. AdGraces, says the learned Ducange, (Glossar. med. et in HIM. Grecitat. torn. 1. p.774.) campanarum usus serius transit et etiam num rarissimus est. Tin oldestexample winch he can find in the Byzantine writers in of the year 1040; but theVenetians pretend, that they introduced bells at Constantinople in the ninthcentury.







OCR Output








370 ROMAN EMPIRE.


over the desert of Kirman, implored the aid of thewarlike Segestans, and sought an hwnble refuge on theverge of the Turkish and Chinese power. But a vic­torious army is insensible of fatigue: the Arabs dividedtheir forces in the pursuit of a timorous enemy; and thecaliph Othman promised the government of Chorasanto the first general who should enter that large andpopulous country, the kingdom of the ancient Bactrians.The condition was accepted; the prize was deserved;the standard of Mahomet was planted on the walls ofHerat, Merou, and Batch; and the successful leaderneither halted nor reposed till his foaming cavalry hadtasted the waters of the Oxus. In the public anarchy,the independent governors of the cities and castles ob­tained their separate capitulations; the terms weregranted or imposed by the esteem, the prudence, or thecompassion of the victors; and a simple profession offaith established the distinction between a brother and aslave. After a noble defence, Harmozan, the prince orsatrap of Ahwaz and Susa, was compelled to surrenderhis person and his state to the discretion of the caliph;and their interview exhibits a portrait of the Arabianm&ntiers. In the presence, and by the command ofOmar, the gay barbarian was despoiled of his silkenrobes embroidered with gold, and of his tiara bedeckedwith rubies and emeralds. Are you now sensible {saidthe conqueror to his naked captive), are you now sensibleof the judgment of God, and of the different rewards ofinfidelity and obedience?—Alas! (replied Harmoean) Ifeel them too deeply. In the days of our common igno­rance, we fought with the weapons of the flesh, and mynation was superior. God was then neuter: since hehas espoused your quarrel, you have subverted our king­dom and religion. Oppressed by this painful dialogue,the Persian complained of intolerable thirst, but dis­covered some apprehensions lest he should be killedwhilst he was drinking a cup of water. Be of good







OCR Output








366 ROMAN EMPIRE.


miles from the gulf, the Euphrates and Tigris unite ina broad and direct current, which is aptly styled the riverof the Arabs. In the midway, between the junctionand the mouth of these famous streams, the new settle­ment was planted on the western bank: the first colonywas composed of eight hundred Moslems: but the in­fluence of the situation soon reared a flourishing aad po­pulous capital. The air, though Excessively hot, is pureand healthy: the meadows are filled with palm-treesand cattle; and one of the adjacent valleys has been ce­lebrated among the four paradises or gardens of Asia.Foundation Under the first caliphs, the jurisdiction of thisof Bassora. Arabian colony extended over the southern pro­vinces of Persia: the city has been sanctified by thetombs of the companions and martyrs; and the vesselsof Europe still frequent the port of Bassora, as a conve­nient station and passage of the Indian trade.Sack of After the defeat of Cadesia, a country inter-JU>.a637, sected by rivers and canals might have opposedMarch, an insuperable barrier to the victorious cavalry;and the walls of Ctesiphon or Madayn, which had re­sisted the battering-rams of the Romans, would not haveyielded to the darts of the Saracens. But the flyingPersians were overcome by the belief, that the last dayof their religion and empire was at hand; the strongestposts were abandoned by treachery or cowardice; andthe king, with a part of his family and treasures, escapedto Holwan at the foot of the Median hills. In the thirdmonth after the battle, Said, the lieutenant of Omar,passed the Tigris without opposition; the capital wastaken by assault; and the disorderly resistance of thepeople gave a keener edge to the sabres of the Moslems,who shouted with religious transport,—This is the whitepalace of Chosroes, this is the promise of the apostle ofGod! The naked robbers of the desert were suddenlyenriched beyond the measure of their hope or know­ledge. Each chamber revealed a new treasure secreted







OCR Output








200 ROMAN EMPIRE.


and a reservoir of fresh water is preserved in a large bag,a fifth stomach of the animal, whose body is imprintedwith the marks of servitude: the larger breed is capableof transporting a weight of a thousand pounds; and thedromedary, of a lighter and more active frame, outstripsthe fleetest courser in the race. Alive or dead, almostevery part of the camel is serviceable to man: her milkis plentiful and nutritious: the younger and tender fleshhas the taste of veal:" a valuable salt is extracted fromthe urine: the dung supplies the deficiency of fuel; andthe long hair,-which falls each year and is renewed, iscoarsely manufactured into the garments, the furniture,and the tents, of the Bedoweens. In the rainy seasonsthey consume the rare and insufficient herbage of the de­sert: during the heats of summer and the scarcity of win­ter, they remove their encampments to the sea-coast, thehills of Yemen, or the neighbourhood of the Euphrates,and have often extorted the dangerous licence of visit­ing the banks of the Nile, and the villages of Syria andPalestine. The life of a wandering Arab is a life ofdanger and distress; and though sometimes, by rapineor exchange, he may appropriate the fruits of industry,a private citizen in Europe is in the possession of moresolid and pleasing luxury, than the proudest emir, whomarches in the field at the head of ten thousand horse,cities of Yet an essential difference may be found be-Arabia. tween the nordes of Scythia and the Arabiantribes, since many of the latter were collected into townsand employed in the labours of trade and agriculture.A part of their time and industry was still devoted tothe management of their cattle: they mingled, in peaceand war, with their brethren of the desert; and theBedoweens derived from their useful intercourse, somesupply of their wants, and some rudiments of art and
"Qui camibus camelorum vesci solent odii tenaces sunt, was the opinion of anArabian Physician. (Pocock, Specimen, p. 8R ) Mahomet himself, who was fond ofmilk, prefers the cow, and does not even mention the camel; but the diet of Mecca,and Medina was already more luxurious. (Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet, torn. 3. p. 4O4.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 227


with the additions of the Netherlands and Spain,as far as the Rhine. II. The Saracens had beenexpelled from France by the grandfather and father ofCharlemagne; but they still possessed the greatest partof SPAIN, from the rock of Gibraltar to the Pyrenees.Amidst their civil divisions, an Arabian emir of Sara-gossa implored his protection in the diet of Paderborn.Charlemagne undertook the expedition, restored theemir, and, without distinction of faith, impartiallycrushed the resistance of the Christians, and rewardedthe obedience and service of the Mahometans. In hisabsence he instituted the Spanish march,'* which ex­tended from the Pyrenees to the river Ebro: Barcelonawas the residence of the French governor: he possessedthe counties of Rousillon and Catalonia; and the infantkingdoms of Navarre and Arragon were subjectto his jurisdiction. III. As king of the Lom­bards, and patrician of Rome, he reigned over thegreatest part of ITALY,' a tract of a thousand milesfrom the Alps to the borders of Calabria. The dutchyof Beneventum, a Lombard fief, had spread, at the ex­pense of the Greeks, over the modern kingdom of Na­ples. But Arrechis, the reigning duke, refused to beincluded in the slavery of his country; assumed the in­dependent title of prince; and opposed his sword tothe Carlovingian monarchy. His defence was firm,his submission was not inglorious, and the emperorwas content with an easy tribute, the demolition of hisfortresses, and the acknowledgment, on his coins, of asupreme lord. The artful flattery of his son Grimoald,added the appellation of father, but he asserted hisdignity with prudence, and Beneventum insensibly


i The governors or counts of the Spanish march revolted from Charles dieSimple about the year 900; and a poor pittance, the Rousillon has been recover­ed in 1642 by the kings of France. (Longuerue, Description de la France, torn.1. p. 280—222.) Yet the Rousillon contains oue hundred and eighty-eight thou­sand nine hundred subjects, and annually pays two millions six bundled thousandlines; (Necker, Administration dies Finances, torn. 1. p. STB, 279.) more peopleperhaps, and doubtless more money, than the march of Charlemagne.'Schmidt, Hist, des Atlemands, tern. 2. p. 300, &c.


Q2







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 303


the command of armies, and the government of king­doms. Three years were silently employed in the con­version of fourteen proselytes, the first fruits of his mis­sion; but in the fourth year he assumed the propheticoffice, and resolving to impart to his family the light ofdivine truth, he prepared a banquet, a lamb, as it is said,and a bowl of milk, for the entertainment of forty guestsof the race of Hashem. Friends and kinsmen (said Ma­homet to the assembly), I offer you, and I alone can offer,the most precious of gifts, the treasures of this world andof the world to come. God has commanded me to callyou to his service. Who among you will support myburden? Who among you will be my companion and myvizir f" No answer was returned, till the silence ofastonishment, and doubt, and contempt, was at lengthbroken by the impatient courage of Ali, a youth, in thefourteenth year of his age. O prophet, I am the man;whosoever rises against thee, I will dash out his teeth,tear out his eyes, break his legs, rip up his belly. O pro­phet, I will be thy vizir over them. Mahomet acceptedhis offer with transport, and Abu Taleb was ironicallyexhorted to respect the superior dignity of his son. Ina more serious tone, the father of Ali advised his nephewto relinquish his impracticable design. Spare your re­monstrances (replied the intrepid fanatic to his-uncle andbenefactor), if they should place the sun on my right hand,and the moon on my left, they should not divert me frommy course. He persevered ten years in the exercise ofhis mission; and the religion which has overspread theeast and the west, advanced with a slow and painful pro­gress within the walls of Mecca. Yet Mahomet enjoyedthe satisfaction of beholding the increase of his infantcongregation of Unitarians, who revered him as a pro­phet, and to whom he seasonably dispensed the spiritualnourishment of the Koran. The number of proselytes


* l>:n Hs portitor, bajuha, ontu/ereru ; end this plebeian name was transferredl.y JITI apt metaphor to the pillars of the state. (Gagnier, Not. ad Abalfed. p. 19.)I endeavour to preserve the Arabian idiom, as far as I can feel it myself, in aLatin or French translation.







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 269


are recorded by tradition: hostility was imbittered withthe rancour of civil faction: and the recital, in prose orverse, of an obsolete feud, was sufficient to rekindle thesame passions among the descendants of the hostiletribes. In private life, every man, at least every family,was the judge and avenger of his own cause. The nicesensibility of honour, which weighs the insult ratherthan the injury, sheds its deadly venom on the quarrelsof the Arabs: the honour of their women, and of theirbeards, is most easily wounded; an indecent action, acontemptuous word, can be expiated only by the bloodof the offender; and such is their patient inveteracy,that they expect whole months and years the opportu­nity of revenge. A fine or compensation for murder isfamiliar to the barbarians of every age: but in Arabiathe kinsmen of the dead are at liberty to accept theatonement, or to exercise with their own hands the lawof retaliation. The refined malice of the Arabs refuseseven the head of the murderer, substitutes an innocentto the guilty person, and transfers the penalty to thebest and most considerable of the race by whom theyhave been injured. If he falls by their hands, they areexposed in their turn to the danger of reprisals, the in­terest and principal of the bloody debt are accumulated;the individuals of either family lead a life of malice andsuspicion, and fifty years- may sometimes elapse beforethe account of vengeance be finally settled.0 Thissanguinary spirit, ignorant of pity or forgiveness, hasbeen moderated, however, by the maxims of honour,which require in every private encounter some decentequality of age and strength, of numbers and weapons.Annual An annual festival of two, perhaps of four, months,trnce' was observed by the Arabs before the time of


the battles of the Arabs, lived in the ninth and tenth century. The famous war ofDalies and Gabrah was occasioned by two horses, lasted forty years, and endedin a proverb. (Pocock, Specimen, p. 48.)
0 The modern theory and practice of the Arabs in the revenge of murder, aredescribed byNiebuhr. (Description, p. 26—51.) The harsher features of antiquitymay be traced in the Koran, c. 3. p. 10. c. 17. p. ISO. with Sale's observations.







OCR Output








204 ROMAN EMPIRE.


virtues of a soldier are insensibly nursed in the habitsand discipline of a pastoral life. The care of the sheepand camels is abandoned to the women of the tribe; butthe martial youth under the banner of the emir, is everon horseback, and in the field, to practise the exerciseof the bow, the javelin, and the scimitar. The long me­mory of their independence is the firmest pledge of itsperpetuity, and succeeding generations are animated toprove their descent, and to maintain their inheritance.Their domestic feuds are suspended on the approach ofa common enemy; and in their last hostilities againstthe Turks, the caravan of Mecca was attacked and pil­laged by fourscore thousand of the confederates. Whenthey advance to battle, the hope of victory is in thefront; in the rear, the assurance of a retreat. Theirhorses and camels, who in eight or ten days can performa march of four or five hundred miles, disappear beforethe conqueror; the secret waters of the desert elude hissearch; and his victorious troops are consumed withthirst, hunger, and fatigue, in the pursuit of an invisiblefoe, who scorns his efforts, and safely reposes in the heartof the burning solitude. The arms and deserts of theBedoweens are not only the safeguards of their ownfreedom, but the barriers also of the happy Arabia,whose inhabitants, remote from war, are enervated by theluxury of the soil and climate. The legions of Augustusmelted away in disease and lassitude ;d and it is only bya naval power that the reduction of Yemen has been suc­cessfully attempted. When Mahomet erected his holystandard,0 that kingdom was a province of the Persianempire; yet seven princes of the Homerites still reignedin the mountains: and the vicegerent of Chosroes was


i> Strabo, lib. 16. p. 1127—1129. Plin. Hist. Natur. 6. 3«. .lElius Gallus landednear Medina, and marched near a thousand miles into the part of Yemen betweenMareb and the ocean. The non ante de victis Sabeae regibus, (Od. 1. p. 29.) and theintacti Arabum thesauii (Od. 3. 24.) of Horace, attest the virgin parity of Arabia.
'See the imperfect history of Yemen in Pocock, Specimen, p. 55—-66. of Hira,p. 66—74. of Gassan, p. 75—78. as fai as it could be known or preserved in thetime of ignoiance.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 173


with a daughter of the emperor Alexius. His son An-dronicus is conspicuous only by his cowardice. Hisgrandson Isaac punished and succeeded the tyrant;but he was dethroned by his own vices and the ambi-A D 1204i tion of his brother; and their discord intro-Apni 12. (Juced the Latins to the conquest of Constan­tinople, the first great period in the fall of the easternempire.
If we compute the number and duration of the reigns,it will be found, that a period of six hundred years isfilled by sixty emperors, including in the Augustan listsome female sovereigns; and deducting some usurperswho were never acknowledged in the capital, and someprinces who did not live to possess their inheritance.The average proportion will allow ten years for eachemperor, far below the chronological rule of Sir IsaacNewton, who, from the experience of more recent andregular monarchies, has defined about eighteen or twentyyears as the term of an ordinary reign. The Byzantineempire was most tranquil and prosperous when it couldacquiesce in hereditary succession; five dynasties, theHeraclian, Isaurian, Amorian, Basilian, and Comnenianfamilies, enjoyed and transmitted the royal patrimonyduring their respective series of five, four, three, six, andfour generations; several princes number the years oftheir reign with those of their infancy: and Constan-tine VII. and his two grandsons occupy the space of anentire century. But in the intervals of the Byzantinedynasties, the succession is rapid and broken, and thename of a successful candidate is speedily erased by amore fortunate competitor. Many were the paths thatled to the summit of royalty; the fabric of rebellion wasoverthrown by the stroke of conspiracy, or underminedby the silent arts of intrigue; the favourites of the sol­diers or people, of the senate or clergy, of the womenand eunuchs, were alternately clothed with the purple;.the means of their elevation were base, and their end







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 443


The first Before Musa would trust an army of the faith-descent of ful to the traitors and infidels of a foreign land,A.eD.rr 10. he made a less dangerous trial of their strength andJuly' veracity. One hundred Arabs, and four hundredAfricans, passed over, in four vessels, from Tangier, orCeuta; the place of their descent on the opposite shore ofthe strait, is marked by the name of Tarif their chief;and the date of this memorable event"1 is fixed to the monthof Ramadan, of the ninety-first year of the Hegira, tothe month of July, seven hundred and forty-eight yearsfrom the Spanish era, of Caesar,1 seven hundred and tenafter the birth of Christ. From their first station, theymarched eighteen miles through a hilly country to thecastle and town of Julian ;m on which (it is still calledAlgezire) they bestowed the name of the Green Island,from a verdant cape that advances into the sea. Theirhospitable entertainment, the Christians who joined theirstandard, their inroad into a fertile and unguarded pro­vince, the richness of their spoil and the safety of theirreturn, announced to their brethren the most favourableomens of victory. In the ensuing spring, five thousandveterans and volunteers were embarked under the com­mand of Tarik, a dauntless and skilful soldier, who sur­passed the expectation of his chief; and the necessarytransports were provided by the industry of their too


k A mistake of Roderic of Toledo, in comparing the lunar years of the Hegirawith the Julian years of the era, has determined Baronius, Mariana, and thecrowd of Spanish historians, to place the first invasion in the year 713, and thebattle of Xeres in November 714. This anachronism of three years has been de­tected by the more correct industry of modern chronologists, above all, of Pagi,(Critica, torn. 3. p. 169. 171—174.) who have restored the genuine state of therevolution. At the present time an Arabian scholar like Cardonne, who adoptsthe ancient error, (torn. 1. p. 75.) is inexcusably ignorant or careless.
I The era of Ca:sar, which in Spain was in legal and popular use till the four­teenth century, begins thirty-eight years before the birth of Christ. I would referthe origin to the general peace by sea and land, which confirmed the power amipartition of the triumvirs. (Dion Cassius, lib. 41!. p. 547. 553. Appian. de Bell.Civil, lib. 5. p. 1034. edit, fol.) Spain was a province of Osar Octavian ; andTarragona, which raised the first temple to Augustus, (Tacit. Annal. 1.78.) mightborrow from the orientals this mode of flattery.
m The road, the country, the old castle of count Julian, and the superstitious be­lief of the Spaniards of hidden treasures, &c. are described byPere Labat (Voyagesen Espagne et en Italie, torn. 1. p. 207—217.) with his usual pleasantry.







OCR Output








42 ROMAN EMPIRE,


death of holy), Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts! isA^D.Iwt9'supposed, by the Greeks, to be the identical—SIB. hymn which the angels and cherubim eternallyrepeat before the throne of God, and which, about themiddle of the fifth century, was miraculously revealedto the church of Constantinople. The devotion of An-tioch soon added, who was crucified for us.' and thisgrateful address, either to Christ alone, or to the wholeTrinity, may be justified by the rules of theology, andhas been gradually adopted by the Catholics of the eastand west. But it had been imagined by a Monophysitebishop :b the gift of an enemy was at first rejected as adire and dangerous blasphemy, and the rash innovationhad nearly cost the emperor Anastasius his throne andhis life.1 The people of Constantinople was devoid ofany rational principles of freedom; but they held, asa lawful cause of rebellion, the colour of a livery in theraces, or the colour of a mystery in the schools. TheTrisagion, with and without this obnoxious addition,was chanted in the cathedral by two adverse choirs, and,when their 1 ungs were exhausted, they had recourse tothe more solid arguments of sticks and stones: the ag­gressors were punished by the emperor, and defendedby the patriarch; and the crown and the mitre werestaked on the event of this momentous quarrel. Thestreets were instantly crowded with innumerable swarmsof men, women, and children; the legions of monks, inregular array, marched, and shouted, and fought at theirhead,—Christians! this is the day of martyrdom; let usnot desert our spiritual father; anathema to the Mani-chcean tyrant; he is unworthy to reign. Such was the


who was taken up into heaven before the bishop and people of Constantinople,the song was considerably improved. The boy heard the angels sing " Holy God!Holy Strong! Holy Immortal!
h Peter Guapheus, the fuller (a trade which he had exercised in his monastery),patriarch of Antioch. His tedious story is discussed in the Annals of Pagi,(A. D. 477—490.) and a dissertation of M. de Valois at the end of his Evagrius.
1 The troubles under the reign of Anastasius must be gathered from the chroniclesof Victor, Marcelliuus, and Theophanes. As the last was not published in thetime of Baionius, his critic Fagi is more copius, as well as more correct.







OCR Output








232 ROMAN EMPIRE.


this occasion to have foreseen and prevented the latentclaims of the clergy. The royal youth was com­manded to take the crown from the altar, andwith his own hands to place it on his head, as a giftwhich he held from God, his father, and the nation."The same ceremony was repeated, though with lessenergy, in the subsequent associations of Lothaire andLewis II.; the Carlovingian sceptre was transmittedfrom father to son in a lineal descent of four genera­tions; and the ambition of the popes was reduced tothe empty honour of crowning and anointing thesehereditary princes who were already invested with theirLewis the power and dominion. The pious Lewis sur-^'Ps' vived his brothers, and embraced the whole814—840. empire of Charlemagne; but the nations and thenobles, his bishops and his children, quickly descernedthat this mighty mass was no longer inspired by thesame soul; and the foundations were undermined tothe centre, while the external surface was yet fair andentire. After a war, or battle, which consumed onehundred thousand Franks, the empire was divided bytreaty between his three sons, who had violated everyfilial and fraternal duty. The kingdoms of GermanyLothaire I.and France were for ever separated; the pro-A-P.- vinces of Gaul, between the Rhone and theAlps, the Meuse and the Rhine, were assigned,with Italy, to the imperial dignity of Lothaire. In thepartition of his share, Lorraine and Arles, two recentand transitory kingdoms, were bestowed on the youngerLewis ii children; and Lewis II. his eldest son, was con-A. D. sae tent with the realm of Italy, the proper and suf­ficient patrimony of a Roman emperor. On hisdeath without any male issue, the vacant throne wasdisputed by his uncles and cousins, and the popes
• Thegan, the biographer of Lewis, relates this coronation; and Baronius hashonestly transcribed it, (A. D. 813. no. 13, &c. see Gaillard, torn. 3. p. 506—508.)howsoever adverse to the claims of the popes. For the series of the Carlovingians,see the historians of France, Italy, and Germany ; Pfeffel, Schmidt, Velly, Mura-tori, and even Voltaire, whose pictures are sometimes just, and always pleasing.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 235


mom equal and familiar appellation of brother.* Per­haps in his connexion with Irene he aspired to the nameof husband; his embassy to Constantinople spoke thelanguage of peace and friendship, and might conceal atreaty of marriage with that ambitious princess, who hadrenounced the most sacred duties of a mother. The na­ture, the duration, the probable consequences, of such aunion between two distant and dissonant empires, it isimpossible to conjecture: but the unanimous silence ofthe Latins may teach us to suspect, that the report wasinvented by the enemies of Irene, to charge her with theguilt of betraying the church and state to the strangersof the west/ The French ambassadors were the spec­tators, and had nearly been the victims, of the conspiracyof Nicephorus, and the national hatred. Constantino­ple was exasperated by the treason and sacrilege ofancient Rome: a proverb, That the Franks were goodfriends and bad neighbours, was in every one's mouth;but it was dangerous to provoke a neighbour who mightbe tempted to reiterate, in the church of St. Sophia,the ceremony of his imperial coronation. After a tedi­ous journey of circuit and delay, the ambassadors ofNicephorus found him in his camp, on the banks of theriver Sala; and Charlemagne affected to confound theirvanity by displaying, in a Franconian village, the pomp,or at least the pride, of the Byzantine palace.8 TheGreeks were successively led through four halls ofaudience: in the first, they were ready to fall prostratebefore a splendid personage in a chair of state, till he


• Inviduim tamen suscepti nominis. (C. F. imperatoribus super hoc uulignanli-Iras magni, tulit patient ift, vicitque eorum contumaciarn...mittendo ad eos crebras le-gationes, et in fipistolisfortreseo» appellando; Eginbard, c. 28. p. 128.) Perhapeitwas on their account that, like Augustus, he affected some reluctance to receive
''l In uphancs spcakH of the coronation and auction of Charles, KopouXXo;, (Chro­nograph, p. 399.) and of his treaty of marriage with Irene, (p. 402.) which is un­known to the Latins. Gaillard relates his transactions with the Greek empire,(torn. 2. p. 446—468.)
( Giiillard very properly observes, that this pageant was a farce suitable tochildren only; but that it was indeed represented in the presence, and for (he be­nefit, of children of a larger growth.







OCR Output








CHAP. LII. 501


but we may form a less fanciful estimate of their generalknowledge of anatony,x botany/ and chemistry," thethreefold basis of their theory and practice. A super­stitious reverence for the dead confined both the Greeksand the Arabians to the dissection of apes and quadru­peds; the more solid and visible parts were known in thetime of Galen, and the finer scrutiny of the human framewas reserved for the microscope and the injections ofmodern artists. Botany is an active science, and thediscoveries of the torrid zone might enrich the herbal ofDioscorides with two thousand plants. Some traditionaryknowledge might be secreted in the temples- and monas­teries of Egypt; much useful experience had been ac­quired in the practice of arts and manufactures; but thescience of chemistry owes its origin and improvement tothe industry of the Saracens. They first invented andnamed the alembic for the purposes of distillation, ana­lyzed the substances of the three kingdoms of nature,tried the distinction and affinities of alkalis and acids,and converted the poisonous minerals into soft and sa­lutary medicines. But the most eager search of Ara­bian chemistry was the transmutation of metals, and theelixir of immortal health: the reason and the fortunes ofthousands were evaporated in the crucibles of alchymy,and the consummation of the great work was promotedby the worthy aid of mystery, fable, and superstition.Want of But the Moslems deprived themselves of thetMMMBnd Prmcipal benefits of a familiar intercourse withfreedorn. Greece and Rome, the knowledge of antiquity,


* See a good view of the progress of anatomy in Wolton. (Reflections on an­cient and modern Learning, p. 2OB—266.) His reputation has been unworthilydepreciated by the wits in the controversy of Boyle and Bentley.
J Bibliot. Arab. Hispana, torn. l.p. 275. AlBeithar of Malaga, their greatestbotanist, had travelled into Africa, Persia, and India.
* Dr. Watson (Elements of Chemistry, vol. 1. p. 17, &c.) allows the originalmerit of the Arabians. Yet he quotes the modest confession of the famous Geberof the ninth century, (d'Herbelot, p. 317.) that he had drawn most of his science,perhaps of the transmutation of metals, from the ancient sages. Whatever mightbe the origin or extent of their knowledge, the arts of chemistry and alchymy ap­pear to have been known in Egypt at least three hundred years before Mahomet.(Wotton's Reflections, p. 121—133. Fauw, Recherches sur les Egyptiens et lesChinois, torn. 1 p. 376—'129.) •







OCR Output








192 ROMAN EMPIRE.


monarchy. During ten pure and fortunate years (saysGregory to the emperor), we have tasted the annualcomforts of your royal letters, subscribed in purple inkwith your own hand, the sacred pledges of your attach­ment to the orthodox creed of our fathers. How deplor­able is the change! how tremendous the scandal! Younow accuse the Catholics of idolatry: and, by the accusa­tion, you betray your own impiety and ignorance. Tothis ignorance we are compelled to adapt the grossness ofour style and arguments: the first elements of holy let­ters are sufficient for your confusion; and were you toenter a grammar-school, and avow yourself the enemy ofour worship, the simple and pious children would be pro­voked to cast their horn-books at your head. After thisdecent salutation, the pope attempts the usual distinc­tion between the idols of antiquity and the Christianimages. The former were the fanciful representationsof phantoms or demons, at a time when the true Godhad not manifested his person in any visible likeness.The latter are the genuine forms of Christ, his mother,and his saints, who had approved, by a crowd of mira­cles, the innocence and merit of this relative worship.He must indeed have trusted to the ignorance of Leo,since he could assert the perpetual use of images, fromthe apostolic age, and their venerable presence in thesix synods of the Catholic church. A more speciousargument is drawn from the present possession andrecent practice: the harmony of the Christian worldsupersedes the demand of a general council; and Gre­gory frankly confesses, that such assemblies can onlybe useful under the reign of an orthodox prince. Tothe impudent and inhuman Leo, more guilty than a he­retic, he recommends peace, silence, and implicit obe­dience to his spiritual guides of Constantinople andRome. The limits of civil and ecclesiastical powersare defined by the pontiff. To the former he ap­propriates the body; to the latter the soul: the sword







OCR Output








284 ROMAN EMPIRE.


reflect to our mind the minds of sages and heroes. Yetthe book of nature and of man was open to his view;and some fancy has been indulged in the political andphilosophical observations which are ascribed to theArabian traveller? He compares the nations and thereligions of the earth; discovers the weakness of thePersian and Roman monarchies; beholds, with pityand indignation, the degeneracy of the times; and re­solves to unite, under one God and one king, the invin­cible spirit and primitive virtues of the Arabs. Ourmore accurate inquiry will suggest, that instead of vi­siting the courts, the camps, the temples, of the east,the two journies of Mahomet into Syria were confinedto the fairs of Bostra and Damascus; that he was onlythirteen years of age when he accompanied the caravanof his uncle, and that his duty compelled him to returnas soon as he had disposed of the merchandize of Ca-dijah. In these hasty and superficial excursions, theeye of genius might discern some objects invisible tohis grosser companions; some seeds of knowledgemight be cast upon a fruitful soil: but his ignorance ofthe Syriac language must have checked his curiosity;and I cannot perceive in the life or writings of Maho­met, that his prospect was far extended beyond the li­mits of the Arabian world. From every region of thatsolitary world, the pilgrims of Mecca were annuallyassembled, by the calls of devotion and commerce: inthe free concourse of multitudes, a simple citizen, inhis native tongue, might study the political state andcharacter of the tribes, the theory and practice of theJews and Christians. Some useful strangers might betempted or forced, to implore the rights of hospitality;and the enemies of Mahomet have named the Jew, the


b The count de Boulainvilliers (Vie de Mahomed, p. 202—228.) leads his Ara­bian pupil, like the Telemachus of Fenelou, or the Cyrus of Ramsay. His journeyto the court of Persia is probably a fiction; nor can 1 trace the origin of his ex­clamation, " Les Grccs sont pourtant dee hommes." The two Syrian journeys areexpressed by almort all the Arabian writers, both Mahometans and Christians.(Gagnier, ad Abulfed. p. 10.)







OCR Output








CHAP. LII. 495


and prosperity: they sought riches in the occupations ofindustry, fame in the pursuits of literature, and happinessin the tranquillity of domestic life. War was no longerthe passion of the Saracens; and the increase of pay, therepetition of donatives, were insufficient to allure theposterity of those voluntary champions who had crowdedto the standard of Abubeker and Omar for the hopes ofspoil and of paradise.
introduc- Under the reign of the Ommiades, the studiestionof of the Moslems were confined to the interpreta-among thetion of the Koran, and the eloquence and poetryA. D*.8113' of their native tongue. A people continually ex-sis' &c Posed to the dangers of the field must esteem thehealing powers of medicine, or rather of surgery;but the starving physicians of Arabia murmured a com­plaint, that exercise and temperance deprived them ofthe greatest part of their practice.* After their civil anddomestic wars, the subjects of the Abbassides, awakeningfrom this mental lethargy, found leisure, and felt cu­riosity, for the acquisition of profane science. Thisspirit was first encouraged by the caliph Almansor, who,besides his knowledge of the Mahometan law, had ap­plied himself with success to the study of astronomy.But when the sceptre devolved to Almamon, the seventhof the Abbassides, he completed the designs of his grand­father, and invited the Muses from their ancient seats.His ambassadors at Constantinople, his agents in Arme­nia, Syria, and Egypt, collected the volumes of Grecianscience: at his command they were translated by the mostskilful interpreters into the Arabic language; his subjectswere exhorted assiduously to peruse these instructivewritings; and the success of Mahomet assisted withpleasure and modesty at the assemblies and disputationsof the learned. He was not ignorant (says Abulpha-


1 'I lie Gulislan (p. 289.) relates the conversation of Mahomet and a physician.(Epistol. Renaudot. in Fabricius, Bibliot. Grec. torn. 1. p. 815.) The prophet him­self was skilled in the art of medicine ; and Gagnier (Vie de. Mahomet, torn. 3. p.394—105.) has given an extract of the aphorisms which are extant under his name.







OCR Output








514 ROM'AN EMPIRE.


first efforts were assisted by a gift of horses and cattle;and the hardy exiles, who breathed revenge against theSaracens, swore to live and die under the standard ofSt. Peter. The nations of the west and north who visitedthe threshold of the apostles, had gradually formed thelarge and populous suburb of the Vatican, and their va­rious habitations were distinguished, in the language ofthe times, as the schools of the Greeks and Goths, of theLombards and Saxons. But this venerable spot was stillopen to sacrilegious insult: the design of enclosing itwith walls and towers exhausted all that authority couldcommand, or charity would supply; and the pious la­bour of four years was animated in every season, and atevery hour, by the presence of the indefatigable pontiff.The love of fame, a generous but worldly passion, mayFounda- ^e detected in the name of the Leonine city,tionofthe which he bestowed on the Vatican; yet the
Leonine i . «_
city, pride of the dedication was tempered withChristian penance and humility. The boundarywas trod by the bishop and his clergy, barefoot in sack­cloth and ashes; the songs of triumph were modulatedto psalms and litanies; the walls were besprinkled withholy water; and the ceremony was concluded with aprayer, that under the guardian care of the apostles andthe angelic host, both the old and the new Rome mightever be preserved pure, prosperous, and impregnable.1The Amo- The emperor Theophilus, son of Michael thenan war Stammerer, was one of the most active and high-
between . . ,' . . „. . °.
M- spirited princes who reigned at Constantinople


Motassem, during the middle age. In offensive or defensiveA. D. ass. waf, |ie marched m person five times against theSaracens, formidable in his attack, esteemed by the


x The Arabs and the Greeks are alike silent concerning the invasion of Romeby the Africans. The Latin chronicles do not afford much instruction. (See theAnnals of Baronios and Pagi.) Our authentic and contemporary guide for thepopes of the ninth century is Anastasius, librarian of the Koman church. His lifeof Leo IV. contains twenty-four pages (p. 175 — 199. edit. Paris'); and if a greatpart consist of superstitious trifles, we must blame or commend his hero, who wasmuch oftener in a church than in a camp.







OCR Output








140 ROMAN EMPIRE.


guardians: the childless ambition of those guardianshad no temptation to violate their right of succession:their patrimony was ably and faithfully administered;and the premature death of Zimiscea was a loss, ratherthan a benefit, to the sons of Romanus. Their want ofexperience detained them twelve years longer the ob­scure and voluntary pupils of a minister, who extendedhis reign by persuading them to indulge the pleasuresof youth, and to disdain the labours of government.In this silken web, the weakness" of Constantine wasfor ever entangled; but his elder brother felt the im­pulse of genius and the desire of action: he frowned,and the minister was no more. Basil was the acknow­ledged sovereign of Constantinople and the provincesof Europe; but Asia was oppressed by two veterangenerals, Phocas and Sclerus, who, alternately friendsand enemies, subjects and rebels, maintained their inde­pendence, and laboured to emulate the example of suc­cessful usurpation. Against these domestic enemies, theson of Romanus first drew his sword, and they trembledin the presence of a lawful and high-spirited prince.The first, in the front of battle, was thrown from hishorse, by the stroke of poison, or an arrow; the second,who had been twice loaded with chains, and twice in­vested with the purple, was desirous of ending in peacethe small remainder of his days. As the aged sup­pliant approached the throne, with dim eyes and faulter-ing steps, leaning on his two attendants, the emperorexclaimed, in the insolence of youth and power,—And isthis the man who has so long been the object of our ter­ror? After he had confirmed his own authority, andthe peace of the empire, the trophies of Nicephorusand Zimisces would not suffer their royal pupil to sleepin the palace. His long and frequent expeditionsagainst the Saracens were rather glorious, than usefulto the empire; but the final destruction of the kingdomof Bulgaria appears, since the time of Belisarius, the







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 371


courage (said the caliph), your life is safe till you havedrank this water: the crafty satrap accepted the assur­ance, and instantly dashed the vase against the ground.Omar would have avenged the deceit; but his compa­nions represented the sanctity of an oath; and the speedyconversion of Harmozan entitled him not only to a freepardon, but even to a stipend of two thousand pieces ofgold. The administration of Persia was regulated by anactual survey of the people, the cattle, and the fruits ofthe earth;' and this monument, which attests the vigi-'-lance of the caliphs, might have instructed the philoso­phers of every age.k
Death of The flight of Yezdegerd had carried him be-the last yond the Oxus, and as far as the Jaxartes, twoA.D.' 65i. rivers1 of ancient and modern renown, which de­scend from the mountains of India towards the Caspiansea. He was hospitably entertained by Tarkhan, princeof Fargana,"' a fertile province on the Jaxartes; the kingof Samarcand, with the Turkish tribes of Sogdiana andScythia, were moved by the lamentations and promisesof the fallen monarch; and he solicited by a suppliantembassy, the more solid and powerful friendship of theemperor of China." The virtuous Taitsong,0 the first ofthe dynasty of the Tang, may be justly compared withthe Antonines of Rome: his people enjoyed the blessings


1 After the conquest of Persia, Theophanes adds, aurtt it TW x"j'':': txixti/crevOv/uofo; avaj.pa4.rvti wacray TUT iiv tuna cuuv/unny. rynnt it n avayfttyv HSU atSfxvaiMI vrrsm xai ifurta. (Chronograph, p. 383.)
k Amidst our meagre relations, I must regret, that d'Herbelot has not found andused a Persian translation of Tabari, enriched, as he says, with many extractsfrom the native historians of the Ghebers or Magi. (Bibliotheque Orientale,p. 1014.)
1 The most authentic accounts of the two rivers, the Sihon (Jaxartes) and theCihon (Oxus), may be found in Sherif al Kdrisi, (Geograph. Nubiens. p. 138.)Abulfeda, (Descript. Chorasan. in Hudson, torn. 3. p. 23.) Abulghazi Khan, whoreigned on their banks, (Hist. Genealogique des Tartars, p. 32. 57. 766.) and theTurkish Geographer, a MS. in the king of France's library. (Eiamen CritiquedesHistoriens d'Alexandra, p. 194—360.)
™ The territory of Fargana is described by Abulfeda, p. 76,77.
» Eo redegit angustiarum eundem regem exsulem, ut Turcici regis et Sogdtoni,et Sinensis, auxilia missis literis imploraret. (Abulfed. Annal. p. 74.) The con­nexion of the Persian and Chinese history is illustrated by Freret (Mern. dei'Academie, torn. 16. p. 845—255.) and de Guignes. (Hist, des Huns, torn. 2. p.54—59. and for the geography of the borders, torn. 2. p. 1—43.)
• Hist. Sinica, p. 41—46. in the third part of the Relations Curieuses of Thevenot.


2 B 2







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 251


Weakness It is in the fourteenth century, that we maytyc/the" view in the strongest light the state and con-emneior trast o^tae Roman empire of Germany, whichchariesiv. no longer held, except on the borders of the—1378. Rhine and Danube, a single province of Trajanor Constantine. Their unworthy successors were thecounts of Hapsburg, of Nassau, of Luxemburgh, and ofSchwartzenburg: the emperor Henry VII. procured forhis son the crown of Bohemia, and his grandsonCharles IV. was born among a people, strange andbarbarous in the estimation of the Germans themselves."1After the excommunication of Lewis of Bavaria, hereceived the gift or promise of the vacant empire fromthe Roman pontiffs, who, in the exile and captivity ofAvignon, affected the dominion of the earth. Thedeath of his competitors united the electoral college,and Charles was unanimously saluted king of the Ro­mans, and future emperor: a title which in the sameage was prostituted to the Caesars of Germany andGreece. The German emperor was no more than theelective and impotent magistrate of an aristocracy ofprinces, who had not left him a village that he might callhis own. His best prerogative was the right of presidingand proposing in the national senate, which was con­vened at his summons; and his native kingdom of Bo­hemia, less opulent than the adjacent city of Nurem-burg, was the firmest seat of his power and the richestsource of his revenue. The army -with which he


author of the best legal and constitutional history that I know of any country.(Nouvel Abrege Chronologique de 1'Histoire et du Droit Public d'Allemagne,Paris, 1776, 2 vols. in 4to.) His learning and judgment have discerned the moatinteresting facts; his simple brevity comprises them in a narrow space; his chro­nological order distributes them under the proper dates; and an elaborate indexcollects them under their respective heads. To this work, in a less perfect state,Dr. Robertson was gratefully indebted for that masterly sketch which traces eventhe modem changes of the Germanic body. The Corpus Historia e Germanica e ofStruvius has been likewise consulted, the more usefully, as that huge compilationis fortified in every page with the original texts.
"Yet personally, Charles IV. must not be considered as a barbarian. After hiseducation at Paris, he recovered the use of the Bohemian, his native, idiom; andthe emperor conversed and wrote with equal facility in French, Latin, Italian,and German. (Struvius, p. 613, 616.) Petrarch always represents him as a politeand learned prince.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 29


.with honour from Ephesus to his old monastery ofAntioch; and after a short pause, his successors, Max-imian and Proclus, were acknowledged as the lawfulbishops of Constantinople. But in the silence ofthe cell, the degraded patriarch could no longer resumethe innocence and security of a private monk. Thepast he regretted, he was discontented with the pre­sent, and the future he had reason to dread: the orientalbishops successively disengaged their Yiause from hisunpopular name, and each day decreased the numberof the schismatics who revered Nestorius as the confes­sor of the faith. After a residence at Antioch of fouryears, the hand of Theodosius subscribed an edict,gwhich ranked him with Simon the magician, proscribedhis opinions and followers, condemned his writings tothe flames, and banished his person first to Petra inArabia, and at length to Oasis, one of the islands of theLibyan desert.h Secluded from the church and fromthe world, the exile was still pursued by the rage ofbigotry and war. A wandering tribe of the Blemmyesor Nubians invaded his solitary prison; in their retreatthey dismissed a crowd of useless captives; but nosooner had Nestorius reached the banks of the Nile,than he would gladly have escaped from a Roman andorthodox city to the milder servitude of the savages.His flight was punished as a new crime: the soul of thepatriarch inspired the civil and ecclesiastical powers ofEgypt; the magistrates, the soldiers, the monks, de-appearance of a voluntary resignation, which is asserted by Ehed- Jesu, a Nestorianwriter, apud Aaseman. Biblioth. Oriental, torn. 3. p. 299—302.
( See the imperial letters in the Acts of the Synod of Ephesus. (Concil. torn.3. p. 1730—1735.) The odious name of Simonians, which was affixed to the disci­ples of this Tiynm&ws ^ifaffiiaXia;, was designed arf av oni&irt ffgo^Xndnrt; aitaym viro-fOxxo .nftufuu, rm ifut^nfULtm, aAi /UaTI ('•..;--~,: Ti/uxpia;, ftin Sarara; CTI^IS-iraf WTOJ^IW. Yet these were Christians! who differed only in names and inshadows.
kThe metaphor of islands is applied by the grave civilians (Pandect, lib. 48. tit.22. leg. 7.) to those happy spots which are discriminated by water and verdurefrom the Libyan sands. Three of these under the common name of Oasis, orAlvahat—1. The temple of Jupiter Ammon. 2. The middle Oasis, three days'journey to the west of Lycopolis. 3. The southern, where Nestorius was banish­ed, in the first climate, and only three days'journey from the confines of Nubia.See a learned note of Michaelis. (ad Descript . ./Egypt. Abulfedn, p. 21—34.)







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 401


Of Aleppo To achieve what yet remained of the Syriantioc*n war, ^6 caliph had formed two separate armies;A.D.638. a chosen detachment, under Amrou and Yezid,was left in the camp of Palestine; while the larger di­vision, under the standard of Abu Obeidah and Caled,marched away to the north against Antioch and Aleppo.The latter of these, the Beraa of the Greeks, was not yetillustrious as the capital of a province or a kingdom;and the inhabitants, by anticipating their submission,and pleading their poverty, obtained a moderate com­position for their lives and religion. But the castle ofAleppo,q distinct from the city, stood erect on a loftyartificial mound: the sides were sharpened to a preci­pice, and faced with free stone; and the breadth of theditch might be filled with water from the neighbouringsprings. After the loss of three thousand men, the gar­rison was still equal to the defence; and Youkinna, theirvaliant and hereditary chief, had murdered his brother,a holy monk, for daring to pronounce the name of peace.In a siege of four or five months, the hardest of theSyrian war, great numbers of the Saracens were killedand wounded: their removal to the distance of a milecould not seduce the vigilance of Youkinna: nor couldthe Christians be terrified by the execution of three hun­dred captives, whom they beheaded before the castlewall. The silence, and at length the complaints, ofAbu Obeidah informed the caliph, that their hope andpatience were consumed at the foot of this impregnablefortress. I am variously affected (replied Omar) by thedifference of your success: but I charge you by no meansto raise the siege of the castle. Your retreat would dimi­nish the reputation of our arms, and encourage the infi-
1 The Persian historian of Timor (torn. 3. lib. 5. c. 21. p. 300.) describes thecastle of Aleppo, as founded on a rock one hundred cubite in height; a proof, sayithe French translator, that he had never visited the place. It is now in the midstof the city, of no strength, with a single gate; the circuit is about five or six hun­dred paces, and the ditch half full of stagnant water. (Voyages de Tavernier.torn. 1. p. 149. Pocock, vol. 1. part. 1. p. 150.) The fortresses of the east ancontemptible to a European eye.
VOL. vi. 2 n







OCR Output








450 ROMAN EMPIRE.


those who had fallen in the siege, or retired to Gallicia,was confiscated as the reward of the faithful. In themidway between Merida and Toledo, the lieutenant ofMusa saluted the vicegerent of the caliph, and con­ducted him to the palace of the Gothic kings. Theirfirst interview was cold and formal: a rigid accountwas exacted of the treasures of Spain; the character ofTarik was exposed to suspicion and obloquy; and thehero was imprisoned,reviled, and ignominiouslyscourgedby the hand, or the command, of Musa. Yet so strictwas the discipline, so pure the zeal, or so tame the spirit,of the primitive Moslems, that after this public indignity,Tarik could serve and be trusted in the reduction of theTarragonese province. A mosch was erected at Sara-gossa, by the liberality of the Koreish: the port of Bar­celona was opened to the vessels of Syria; and the Goths'were pursued beyond thePyrennean mountains into theirGallic province of Septimania or Languedoc.* In thechurch of St. Mary at Carcassone, Musa found, but itis improbable that he left, seven equestrian statues ofmassy silver; and from his term or column of Narbonne,he returned on his footsteps to the Gallician and Lusi-tanian shores of the ocean. During the absence of thefather, his son Abdelaziz chastised the insurgents of Se­ville, and reduced, from Malaga to Valentia, the sea-coast of the Mediterranean: his original treaty with thediscreet and valiant Theodemir," will represent the man­ners and policy of the times. " The conditions of peaceagreed and sworn between Abdelaziz, the son of Musa, the


* Both the interpreters of Novairi.de Guignes (Hist, des Huns, torn. 1. p. 549.)and Cardonne, (Hist . de 1'Afriqne et de 1'Espagne, torn. l.p. 93, 94.104,105.) leadMusa into the Narbonnese Gaul. But I find no mention of this enterprise eitherin Roderic of Toledo, or the MSS. of the Eicurial, and the invasion of the Sara­cens is postponed by a French chronicle till the ninth year after the conquest ofSpain, A. D. T3l. (Fagi, Critica, torn. 3. p. 177.193. Historians of France, torn.3.) I much question whether Musa ever crossed the Pyrennees.
• Four hundred years afterTheodemir, his territories of Murcia and Carthagenaretain in the Nubian geographer Edrisi(p. 154.161.) the name of Tadmir. (D'An-ville, Etats de 1'Europe, p. 1o6. Pagi, torn. 3. p. 174.) In the present decay ofSpanish agriculture, Mr. Swinburne (Travels into Spain, p. 119.) surveyed withpleasure the delicious valley from Murcia to Orihuela, four leagues and a half ofthe finest corn, pulse, lucern, oranges, &c. •







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 305


loured with the pretence of religion; in the age of Job,the crime of impiety was punished by the Arabian ma­gistrate;' and Mahomet was guilty of deserting and de­nying the national deities. But so loose was the policyof Mecca, that the leaders of the Koreish, instead of ac­cusing a criminal, were compelled to employ the mea­sures of persuasion or violence. They repeatedly ad­dressed Abu Taleb in the style of reproach and menace.Thy nephew reviles our religion; he accuses our msefore­fathers of ignorance and folly; silence him quickly, lesthe kindle tumult and discord in the city. If he persevere,we shall draw our swords against him and his adherents,andthou wilt be responsible for the blood of thy fellow-ci­tizens. The weight and moderation of Abu Taleb eludedthe violence of religious faction; the most helpless ortimid of the disciples retired to Ethiopia, and the pro­phet withdrew himself to various places of strength inthe town and country. As he was still supported by hisfamily, the rest of the tribe of Koreish engaged them­selves to renounce all intercourse with the children ofHashem, neither to buy nor sell, neither to marry nor togive in marriage, but to pursue them with implacableenmity, till they should deliver the person of Mahometto the justice of the gods. The decree was suspendedin the Caaba before the eyes of the nation; the messen­gers of the Koreish pursued the Mussulman exiles in theheart of Africa: they besieged the prophet and his mostfaithful followers, intercepted their water, and inflamedtheir mutual animosity by the retaliation of injuries andinsults. A doubtful truce restored the appearances ofconcord, till the death of Abu Taleb abandoned Maho­met to the power of his enemies, at the mdment when hewas deprived of his domestic comforts by the loss of hisfaithful and generous Cadijah. Abu Sophian, the chief
• In the time of Job, the crime of impiety was punished by the Arabian magi-gietrate. (c. 13. v. 26. 28.) I blush for a respectable prelate, (de Poesi Hebrae-cmm, p. 650, 651. edit. Michaelis; and letter of a late professor in the universityof Oxford, p. 15—53.) who lustifies and applauds this patriarchal inquisition.
VOL. VI. X







OCR Output








GHAP. XLIX. 817


accepted and announced the decrees of the Nicene as­sembly, which is now revered by the Catholics as the se­venth in rank of the general councils. Rome and Italywere docile to the voice of their father; but the greatestpart of the Latin Christians were far behind in the raceReluctance of superstition. The churches of France, Ger-ofthe many, England, and Spain, steered a middle
Franks and f* ° * r.
e- course between the adoration and the destruc-tion of images, which they admitted into their&c' temples, not as objects of worship, but as livelyand useful memorials of faith and history. An angrybook of controversy was composed and published un­der the name of Charlemagne;" under his authority asynod of three hundred bishops was assembled atFrankfort;° they blamed the fury of the Iconoclasts,but they pronounced a more severe censure againstthe superstition of the Greeks, and the decrees of theirpretended council, which was long despised by the bar­barians of the west.p Among them the worship of imagesadvanced with silent and insensible progress; but a largeatonement is made for their hesitation and delay, by thegross idolatry of the ages which precede the Reforma­tion, and of the countries, both in Europe and America,which are still immersed in the gloom of superstition.Final - It was after the Nicene synod, and under theration of reign of the pious Irene, that the popes con-from the summated the separation of Rome and Italy, by


• The libri Carolini, (Spanheim, p. 443—529.) composed in the palace or win­ter-quarters of Charlemagne, at Worms, A. D. 790, and cent by Engebert to popeHadrian I. who answered them by a grandis et verbosa epistola. (Condi, torn. 8.p. 1553.) The Carolines propose one hundred and twenty objections against theNicene synod, and such words as these are the flowers of their rhetoric—demen-
tiam priscae Gentilitatis obsoletum errorem arguments insanissima et ab-
Burdissima .... derisione dignas naenias, &c. &c.
° The assemblies of Charlemagne were political as well as ecclesiastical; andthe three hundred members (Nat. Alexander, sec. 8. p. 53.) who sat and voted atFrankfort, must include not only the bishops, but the abbots, and even the princi­pal laymen.
i' Qui supra aanctissima patres nostri (episcopi et sacerdotes) vmnimodit serri-tinm et adorationem imaginum renuentes contempserunt, atque consentientescondemnaverunt. (Concil. torn. 9. p. 101. canon t. Frankfurd.) A polemic mustbe hard-hearted indeed, who does not pity the efforts of Buronius, Pagi, Alex­ander, Maimburg, &c. to elude this unlucky sentence.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 71


and Armenians, who forgot their disputes, and mingledtheir tears over the grave of an enemy. The sect whichwas honoured by the virtues of Abulpharagius, appears,however, to sink below the level of their Nestorianbrethren. The superstition of the Jacobites is moreabject, their fasts more rigid,q their intestine divisionsare more numerous, and their doctors (as far as I canmeasure the degrees of nonsense) are more remote fromthe precincts of reason. Something may possibly beallowed for the rigour of the Monophysite theology ;rmuch more for the superior influence of the monasticorder. In Syria, in Egypt, in Ethiopia, the Jacobitemonks have ever been distinguished by the austerity oftheir penance and the absurdity of their legends. Aliveor dead they are worshipped as the favourites of theDeity; the crosier of bishop and patriarch is reservedfor their venerable hands; and they assume the govern­ment of men, while they are yet reeking with the habitsand prejudices of the cloister.
in.THE ^' ^n the sty^e of t^e oriental Christians,the Monothelites of every age are describedunder the appellation of Maronites,* a namewhich has been insensibly transferred from a hermit toa monastery, from a monastery to a nation. Maron, asaint or savage of the fifth century, displayed his reli­gious madness in Syria; the rival cities of ApameaandEmesa disputed his relics, a stately church was erectedon his tomb, and six hundred of his disciples unitedtheir solitary cells on the banks of the Orontes. Onthe controversies of the incarnation, they nicely threaded


i This excessive abstinence is censored by La Croze, (p. 352.) and even by theSyrian Assemannus, (torn. 1. p. 226. torn. 2. p. 304, 305.)
'The state of the Monophysites is excellently illustrated in a dissertation at thebeginning of the second volume of Assemannus, which contains one hundred andforty-two pages. The Syriac Chronicle of Gregory Bar-Hebraus, or Abulphara­gius, (Bibliot. Orient, torn. 2. p. 321—463.) pursues the double series of the Nes­torian Catholics, and the maphrians of the Jacobites.
'The synonymous use of the two words may be proved from Eutychius, (An­na1, torn. Z. p. 191. 207. 333.) and many similar passages which may be found inthe methodical table of Pocock. He was not actuated by any prejudice againsttiie Maronites of the tenth century; and we may believe a Mclchite, whose testi­mony is confirmed by the Jacobins and Latins.







OCR Output








180 ROMAN EMPIRE.


of Christ ;k the perfect impression of his face on alinen, with which he gratified the faith of the royalstranger, who had invoked his healing power, andoffered the strong city of Edessa to protect him againstthe malice of the Jews. The ignorance of the primi­tive church is explained by the long imprisonment ofthe image in a niche of the wall, from whence, after anoblivion of five hundred years, it was released by someprudent bishop, and seasonably presented to the devo­tion of the times. Its first and most glorious exploitwas the deliverance of the city from the arms of Chos-roes Nushirvan; and it was soon revered as a pledgeof the divine promise, that Edessa should never betaken by a foreign enemy. It is true, indeed, that thetext of Procopius ascribes the double deliverance ofEdessa to the wealth and valour of her citizens, whopurchased the absence, and repelled the assaults, of thePersian monarch. He was ignorant, the profane histo­rian, of the testimony which he is compelled to deliverin the ecclesiastical page of Evagrius, that the Palla­dium was exposed on the rampart; and that the water,which had been sprinkled on the holy face, instead ofquenching, added new fuel to the flames of the besieged.After this important service, the image of Edessa waspreserved with respect and gratitude; and if the Arme­nians rejected the legend, the more credulous Greeksadored the similitude, which was not the work of anymortal pencil, but the immediate creation of the divineoriginal. The style and sentiments of a Byzantinehymn will declare how far their worship was removedfrom the grossest idolatry. How can we with mortaleyes contemplate this image, whose celestial splendour the


k From the silence of James of Sarug, (Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, p. f89. 318.)and the testimony of Evagrins, (Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. c. 27,) I conclude (hat thisfable was invented between the years 521 and 594, most probably after the siegeof Kdrssu in 540. (Asseman, torn. 1. p. 416. Procopius, de Bell. Persic, lib. 2.)It u the sword and buckler of Gregory II. (in Epist. 1. and Leon. Isaur. Council,torn. 8. p. 656, 657.) of John Damascenus, (Opera, torn. 1. p. (81. edit. Lequien)and of the second Nicene council. (Actio, 5. p. 1030.) The most perfect edi­tion may be found in Cedrenns. (Compend. p. 175—178.)







OCR Output








296 ROMAN EMPIRE.


was practised of old by the Arabs, is solemnly enjoinedby the Koran; and a permission is formally granted tosupply with sand the scarcity of water. The words andattitudes of supplication, as it is performed either sitting,or standing, or prostrate on the ground, are prescribedby custom or authority, but the prayer is poured forth inshort and fervent ejaculations; the measure of zeal isnot exhausted by a tedious liturgy; and each Mussul­man, for his own person, is invested with the characterof a priest. Amongst the theists, who reject the use ofimages, it has been found necessary to restrain the wan­derings of the fancy, by directing the eye and thethought towards a kebla, or visible point of the horizon.The prophet was at first inclined to gratify the Jews bythe choice of Jerusalem; but he soon returned to a morenatural partiality; and five times every day the eyes ofthe nations at Astracan, at Fez, at Delhi, are devoutlyturned to the holy temple of Mecca. Yet every spot forthe service of God is equally pure; the Mahometans in­differently pray in their chamber or in the street. As adistinction from the Jews and Christians, the Friday ineach week is set apart for the useful institution of publicworship: the people are assembled in the mosch; andthe iman, some respectable elder, ascends the pulpit, tobegin the prayer and pronounce the sermon. But theMahometan religion is destitute of priesthood or sacrifice;and the independent spirit of fanaticism looks down withcontempt on the ministers and the slaves of superstition.II. The voluntary1* penance of the ascetics, the tormentand glory of their lives, was odious to a prophet whocensured in his companions a rash vow of abstainingfrom flesh, and women, and sleep; and firmly declaredthat he would suffer no monks in his religion.1 Yet he


* Mahomet (Sale's Koran, c. 9. p. 153.) reproaches the Christiana with takingtheir priests and monks for their lords, besides God. Yet Maracci (Prodromus,part 3. p. 69, 70.) excuses the worship, especially of the pope, and quotes, from theKoran itself, the case of Eblis, or Satan, who was cast from heaven for refusing toadore Adarn.
1 Koran, c. 5. p. 94. and Sale's note, which refers to the authority of Jallaloddin







OCR Output








334 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the wise Solomon, we shall applaud the modesty of theArabian, who espoused no more than seventeen or fifteenwives; eleven are enumerated, who occupied at Medinatheir separate apartments round the house of the apostle,and enjoyed in their turns the favour of his conjugalsociety. What is singular enough, they were all widows,excepting only Ayesha, the daughter of Abubeker. Shewas doubtless a virgin, since Mahomet consummated hisnuptials (such is the premature ripeness of the climate)when she was only nine years of age. The youth, thebeauty, the spirit, of Ayesha, gave her a superior as­cendant: she was beloved and trusted by the prophet;and, after his death, the daughter of Abubeker was longrevered as the mother of the faithful. Her behaviourhad been ambiguous and indiscreet: in a nocturnalmarch, she was accidentally left behind; and in themorning Ayesha returned to the camp with a man. Thetemper of Mahomet was inclined to jealousy; but adivine revelation assured him of her innocence: he chas­tised her accusers, and published a law of domestic peace,that no woman should be condemned unless four malewitnesses had seen her in the act of adultery." In hisadventures with Zeineb, the wife of Zeid, and with Mary,an Egyptian captive, the amorous prophet forgot theinterest of his reputation. At the house of Zeid, hisfreedman and adopted son, he beheld, in a loose undress,the beauty of Zeineb, and burst forth into an ejaculationof devotion and desire. The servile, or grateful, freed­man, understood the hint, and yielded without hesitationto the love of his benefactor. But as the filial relationhad excited some doubt and scandal, the angel Gabrieldescended from heaven to ratify the deed, to annul theadoption, and gently to reprove the apostle for distrust­ing the indulgence of his God. One of his wives,Hafno, the daughter of Omar, surprised him on her own


a In a memorable case, the caliph Omar decided that all presumptive evidencewas of no avail; and that all the four witnesses must have actually seen styfamin pyiide. (Abulfede Annales Moslemici, p. 71. vers. Reiske.)







OCR Output








142 ROMAN EMPIRE.


reign. His elder brother had preferred his private chas­tity to the public interest, and Constantine himself hadonly three daughters, Eudocia, who took the veil, andZoe and Theodora, who were preserved till a matureage in a state of ignorance and virginity. When theirmarriage was discussed in the council of their dyingfather, the cold or pious Theodora refused to give a heirto ,the empire, but her sister Zoe presented herself awilling victim at the altar. Romanus Argyrus, a pa­trician of a graceful person and fair reputation, waschosen for her husband, and, on his declining thathonour, was informed, that blindness or death was thesecond alternative. The motive of his reluctance wasconjugal affection; but his faithful wife sacrificed herown happiness to his safety and greatness; and herentrance into a monastery removed the only bar to theimperial nuptials. After the decease of Constantine,the sceptre devolved to Romanus III.; but his laboursat home and abroad were equally feeble and fruitless;and the mature age, the forty-eight years of Zoe, wereless favourable to the hopes of pregnancy than to theindulgence of pleasure. Her favourite chamberlainwas a handsome Paphlagonian of the name of Michael,whose first trade had been that of a money-changer;and Romanus, either from gratitude or equity, conniredat their criminal intercourse, or accepted a slight assu­rance of their innocence. But Zoe soon justified theRoman maxim, that every adulteress is capable of poi­soning her husband; and the death of Romanus was in­stantly followed by the scandalous marriage and eleva-tion of Michael IV. The expectations of Zoeo- were, however, disappointed: instead of a vi-^, A. D. gOrous and grateful lover, she had placed in herra 11. bed a miserable wretch, whose health and rea­son were impaired by epileptic fits, and whose con­science was tormented by despair and remorse. Themost skilful physicians of the mind and body were







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 293


splendid prodigies; and Mahomet was repeatedly urged,by the inhabitants of Mecca and Medina, to produce asimilar evidence of his divine legation; to call downfrom heaven the angel or the volume of his revelation,to create a garden in the desert, or to kindle a confla­gration in the unbelieving city. As often as he ispressed by the demands of the Koreish, he involveshimself in the obscure boast of vision and prophecy,appeals to the internal proofs of his doctrine, and shieldshimself behind the providence of God, who refusesthose signs and wonders that would depreciate the meritof faith and aggravate the guilt of infidelity. But themodest or angry tone of his apologies betrays his weak­ness and vexation; and these passages of scandal, esta­blish beyond suspicion, the integrity of the Koran.dThe votaries of Mahomet are more assured than himselfof his miraculous gifts, and their confidence and credu­lity increase as they are farther removed from the timeand place of his spiritual exploits. They believe or af­firm that trees went forth to meet him: that he was sa­luted by stones; that water gushed from his fingers,that he fed the hungry, cured the sick, and raised thedead; that a beam groaned to him; that a camel com­plained to him; that a shoulder of mutton informed himof its being poisoned; and that both animate and inani­mate nature were equally subject to the apostle of God.*His dream of a nocturnal journey is seriously describedas a real and corporeal transaction. A mysterious ani­mal, the borak, conveyed him from the temple of Meccato that of Jerusalem: with his companion Gabriel, he


* See more remarkably, Koran, c.2. 6.12,13. 17. Prideaux (Life of Mahomet,p. 18,19.) has confounded the impostor. Maracci, with a more learned appara­tus, has shewn that the passages which deny his miracles are clear and positive,(Alcoran, torn. 1. part 2. p. 7—12.) and those which seem to assert them, are am­biguous and insufficient, (p. 12—22. j
'• See the Specimen Hist. Arabum, the text of Abulpharagius, p. 17. the no es ofPocock, p. 187—190. d'Herbelot Bibliotheque Orientale, p. 76, 77. Voyages deCbardin, torn. 4. p. 200—203. Maracci (Alcoran, torn. 1. p. 22—64.) has mostlaboriously collected and confuted the miracles and prophecies of Mahomet, which,according to some writers, amount to three thousand.







OCR Output








480 ROMAN EMPIRE.


title of king. The Goths, the Gascons, and the Franks,assembled under the standard of this Christian hero: herepelled the first invasion of the Saracens; and Zama,lieutenant of the caliph, lost his army and his life underthe walls of Thoulouse. The ambition of his successorswas stimulated by revenge; they repassed the Pyrenneeawith the means and the resolution of conquest. The ad­vantageous situation which had recommended Narbonne,as the first Roman colony, was again chosen by the Mos­lems; they claimed the province of Septemania or Lan-guedoc as a just dependence of the Spanish monarchy;the vineyards of Gascony and the city of Bourdeauxwere possessed by the sovereign of Damascus and Samar-cand; and the south of France, from the mouth of theGaronne to that of the Rhone, assumed the manners andreligion of Arabia.
Expedition But tnese narrow limits were scorned by theand Ticto- spirit of Abdalrahman, or Abderame, who hadAbderame, been restored by the caliph Hashem to the wishesA. D. 731. Of the sofers and people of Spain. That veteranand daring commander adjudged to the obedience of theprophet whatever yet remained of France or of Europe,and prepared to execute the sentence, at the head of aformidable host, in the full confidence of surmountingall opposition either of nature or of man. His first carewas to suppress a domestic rebel, who commanded themost important passes of the Pyrennees: Munuza, aMoorish chief, had accepted the alliance of the duke ofAquitain; and Eudes, from a motive of private or publicinterest, devoted his beauteous daughter to the embracesof the African misbeliever. But the strongest fortressesof Cerdagne were invested by a superior force: the rebelwas overtaken and slain in the mountains; and his widowwas sent captive to Damascus, to gratify the desires, or
• Even before that colony, A. U. C. 630, (Velleius Patercul. 1. 15.) in the timeof Polybius, (Hist. lib. 3. p. 865. edit. Gronov.) Narbonne was a Celtic town of thefirst eminence, and one of the most northern places of the known world. (D'Aa-ville. Notice de I'Ancienne Gaule, p. 473.) I







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 377


bio, ;b and the first arms of the Saracens were justified bythe semblance of a national right. The country was en­riched by the various benefits of trade; by the vigilanceof the emperors it was covered with a line of forts; andthe populous cities of Gerasa, Philadelphia, and Bosra,cwere secure, at least from a surprise, by the solid struc­ture of their walls. The last of these cities was the eigh­teenth station of Medina: the road was familiar to thecaravans of Hejaz and Irak, who annually visited thisplenteous market of the province and the desert: theperpetual jealousy of the Arabs had trained the inha­bitants to arms; and twelve thousand horse could sallyfrom the gates of Bosra, an appellation which signifies,in the Syriac language, a strong tower of defence. En­couraged by their first success against the open townsand flying parties of the borders, a detachment of fourthousand Moslems presumed to summon and attack thefortress of Bosra. They were oppressed by the numbersof the Syrians; they were saved by the presence of Caled,with fifteen hundred horse: he blamed the enterprise,restored the battle, and rescued his friend, the venerableSerjabil, who had vainly invoked the unity of God andthe promise of the apostle. After a short repose, theMoslems performed their ablutions with sand instead ofwater ;d and the morning prayer was recited by Caledbefore they mounted on horseback. Confident of theirstrength, the people of Bosra threw open their gates,


1 Hoic Arabia est conserta, ex alio latere Nabathaeis contigua; opima varietatecommeruorum, castrisque oppleta validis et castellis, quse ad repellendo* gentiumvicinarum excursus, solicitude per vigil neterum per opportunos saltus erexit etcautes. Ammian. Marcellin. it. 8. Reland. Palestin. torn. 1. p. 85, 86.
'With Gerasa and Philadelphia, Ammianus praises the fortifications of Bosrannnitate cautissimas. They deserved the same praise in the time of Abulfeda,(Tabul. Syria, p. 99.) who describes this city, the metropolis of Hawran (Aura-nitis) four days' journey from Damascus. The Hebrew etymology 1 learn fromReland. Palestin. torn. 2. p. 666.
ii The apostle of a desert and an army was obliged to allow this ready succeda-neum for water ; (Koran, c. 3. p. 66. c. 5. p. 83.) but the Arabian and Persian ca-suists have embarrassed his free permission with many niceties and distinctions.(Reland. de Relig. Mohammed, lib. 1. p. 82, 83. Chardin, Voyages en Perse,torn. 4.)







OCR Output








2Ifi ROMAN EMPIRE.


neral liberty of speech and practice; and the only vir­tue of his reign is accused by the monks as the causeof his temporal and eternal perdition. Superstition andweakness formed the character of Michael I. but thesaints and images were incapable of supporting their vo­tary on the throne. In the purple, Leo V. asserted thename and religion of an Armenian; and the idols, withtheir seditious adherents, were condemned to a secondexile. Their applause would have sanctified the murderof an impious tyrant; but his assassin and successor, thesecond Michael, was tainted from his birth with the Phry­gian heresies: he attempted to mediate between the con­tending parties; and the intractable spirit of the Catho­lics insensibly cast him into the opposite scale. His mo­deration was guarded by timidity; but his son Theophi-lus, alike ignorant of fear and pity, was the last and mostcruel of the Iconoclasts. The enthusiasm of the timesran strongly against them: and the emperors, who stem­med the torrent, were exasperated and punished by thepublic hatred. After the death of Theophilus the finalvictory of the images was achieved by a second female,his widow Theodora, whom he left the guardian of theempire. Her measures were bold and decisive. Thefiction of a tardy repentance absolved the fame and thesoul of her deceased husband ; the sentence of the Icono­clast patriarch was commuted from the loss of his eyesto a whipping of two hundred lashes: the bishops trem­bled, the monks shouted, and the festival of orthodoxypreserves the annual memory of the triumph of theimages. A single question yet remained, whether theyare endowed with any proper and inherent sanctity; itwas agitated by the Greeks of the eleventh century;™and as this opinion has the strongest recommendation ofabsurdity, I am surprised that it was not more explicitlydecided in the affirmative. In the west, pope Hadrian I.
"' See an account of this controversy in the Alerius of Anna Comnena (lib. 5.p. 199.)and Mosheirn. (Institut. Hist. Eccles. p. 371, 37*.)







OCR Output













OCR Output








254 ROMAN EMPIRE.


man, who disguised his strength under the semblanceof modesty. At the head of his victorious legions, inhis reign over the sea and land, from the Nile and Eu­phrates to the Atlantic ocean, Augustus professed him­self the servant of the state and the equal of his fellow-citizens. The conqueror of Rome and her provincesassumed the popular and legal form of a censor, a con­sul, and a tribune. His will was the law of mankind,but in the declaration of his laws he borrowed the voiceof the senate and people; and, from their decrees, theirmaster accepted and renewed his temporary commissionto administer to the republic. In his dress, his domes­tics/ his titles, in all the offices of social life, Augustusmaintained the character of a private Roman: and hismost artful flatterers respected the secret of his abso­lute and perpetual monarchy.


CHAP. L.
Description of Arabia and its inhabitants.—Birth, character, anddoctrine of Mahomet.—He preaches at Mecca.—Flies to Medina.—Propagates his religion by the sword.—Voluntary or reluctantsubmission of the Arabs.—His death and successors.—Theclaims and fortunes of Ali and his descendants.
AFTER pursuing above six hundred years the fleetingCzesars of Constantinople and Germany, I now descend,in the reign of Heraclius, on the eastern borders of theGreek monarchy. While the state was exhausted bythe Persian war, and the church was distracted by theNestorian and Monophysite sects, Mahomet, with thesword in one hand and the Koran in the other, erected


'Six thousand urns have been discovered of the slaves and freedmen of Augus­tus and Livia. So minute was the division of office, that one slave was appointedto weigh the wool which was spun by the empress's maids, another for the care ofher lap-dog, &c. (Camere Sepolchrale. &c. by Bianchini. Extract of his work, inthe Bibliotheque Italique, torn. 4. p. 175. His Eloge, by Fontenelle, torn. 6. p. 356.)But these servants were of the same rank, and possibly not more numerous thanthose of Pollio or Lentulus. They only prove the general riches of the city.







OCR Output








452 ROMAN EMPIRE.


kings of Castile and Arragon, we must applaud the mo­deration and discipline of the Arabian conquerors.
The exploits of Musa were performed in theofMusa, evening of life, though he affected to disguise1 'his age by colouring with a red powder thewhiteness of his beard. But in the love of action andglory, his breast was still fired with the ardour of youth;and the possession of Spain was considered only as thefirst step to the monarchy of Europe. With a powerfularmament by sea and land, he was preparing to re-pass the Pyrennees, to extinguish in Gaul and Italy thedeclining kingdoms of the Franks and Lombards, and topreach the unity of God on the altar of the Vatican.From thence subduing the barbarians of Germany, heproposed to follow the course of the Danube from itssource to the Euxine sea, to overthrow the Greek orRoman empire of Constantinople, and, returning fromEurope to Asia, to unite his new acquisitions with An-tioch and the provinces of Syria.d But his vast enter­prise, perhaps of easy execution, must have seemedextravagant to vulgar minds; and the visionary con­queror was soon reminded of his dependance and servi­tude. The friends of Tarik had effectually stated hisservices and wrongs: at the court of Damascus, theproceedings of Musa were blamed, his intentions weresuspected, and his delay in complying with the first in­vitation was chastised by a harsher and more peremptorysummons. An intrepid messenger of the caliph enteredhis camp at Lugo in Gallicia, and in the presence of theSaracens and Christians arrested the bridle of his horse.His own loyalty, or that of his troops, inculcated theduty of obedience; and his disgrace was alleviated bythe recall of his rival, and the permission of investing


* This design, which is attested by several Arabian historians, (Cardonnt,torn. 1. p. 95, 96.) may be compared with that of Mithridates, to march from theCrimea to Rome; or with that of Ciesar, to conquer the east, and to return homeby the north: and all three ate perhaps surpassed by the resl and successful en­terprise of Hannibal.







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 417


by the peculiar fame and fertility of Egypt. Anxiousfor the ruin or expulsion of their tyrants, the faithfulnatives devoted their labours to the service of Amrou;some sparks of martial spirit were perhaps rekindled bythe example of their allies; and the sanguine hopes ofMokawkas had fixed his sepulchre in the church of St.John of Alexandria. Eutychius the patriarch observes,that the Saracens fought with the courage of lions; theyrepulsed the frequent and almost daily sallies of thebesieged, and soon assaulted in their turn the walls andtowers of the city. In every attack, the sword, the ban­ner of Amrou, glittered in the van of the Moslems. Ona memorable day, he was betrayed by his imprudentvalour: his followers who had entered the city weredriven back; and the general, with a friend and a slave,remained a prisoner in the hands of the Christians.When Amrou was conducted before the prefect, he re­membered his dignity and forgot his situation: a loftydemeanour, and resolute language, revealed the lieute­nant of the caliph, and the battle-axe of a soldier wasalready raised to strike off the head of the audaciouscaptive. His life was saved by the readiness of his slave,who instantly gave his master a blow on the face, andcommanded him, with an angry tone, to be silent in thepresence of his superiors. The credulous Greek wasdeceived; he listened to the offers of a treaty, and hisprisoners were dismissed in the hope of a more respect­able embassy, till the joyful acclamations of the campannounced the return of their general, and insulted thefolly of the infidels. At length, after a siege of four­teen months," and the loss of three and twenty thousand


* Both Eutychius (Annal. torn. 2. p. 319.) and Elmacin (Hist. Saracen, p. 28.)concur in fixing the taking of Alexandria to Friday of the new moon of Moharramof the twentieth year of the Hegira. (December 24. A. D. 640.) In reckoningbackwards fourteen months spent before Alexandria, seven months before Babylon,&c. Amrou might have invaded Egypt about the end of the year 638; but we areassured that he entered the country the twelfth of Bayni, sixth of June. (Murtadi,Merveilles de 1'Egyple, p. 164. Severus, apud Renaudot, p. 162.) The Saracen,and afterward Louis IX. of France, halted at Pelusium, or Damietta, during theseason of the inundation of the Nile.
VOL. VI. 2 E







OCR Output








416 ROMAN EMPIRE.


multitudes. Had not the Nile afforded a safe and readyconveyance to the sea, not an individual could have es­caped, who, by birth, or language, or office, or religion,was connected with their odious name.siege and By tne retreat of the Greeks from the pro-vmces of Upper Egypt, a considerable force wascollected in the island of Delta; the natural andartificial channels of the Nile afforded a succession ofstrong and defensible posts; and the road to Alexandriawas laboriously cleared by the victory of the Saracensin two-and-twenty days of general or partial combat.In their annals of conquest, the siege of Alexandria' isperhaps the most arduous and important enterprise. Thefirst trading city in the world was abundantly reple­nished with the means of subsistence and defence. Hernumerous inhabitants fought for the dearest of humanrights, religion and property; and the enmity of thenatives seemed to exclude them from the common benefitof peace and toleration. The sea was continually open;and if Heraclius had been awake to the public distress,fresh armies of Romans and barbarians might have beenpoured into the harbour to save the second capital ofthe empire. A circumference of ten miles would havescattered the forces of the Greeks, and favoured thestratagems of an active enemy; but the two sides of anoblong square were covered by the sea and the lakeMaraeotis, and each of the narrow ends exposed a frontof no more than ten furlongs. The efforts of the Arabswere not inadequate to the difficulty of the attempt andthe value of the prize. From the throne of Medina,the eyes of Omar were fixed on the camp and city: hi&voice excited to arms the Arabian tribes and the veteransof Syria; and the merit of a holy war was recommended
* The local description of Alexandria it perfectly ascertained by the master-handof tin- 6rst of geographers; (d'Anville, Memoire sur 1'Egypte, p. 52—63.) bat wemay borrow the eyes of the modern travellers, more especially of Thevenot,'Voyage au Levant, part 1. p. 381—395) Pocock, (vol. 1.p.2—13.) and Niebohr.
Voyage en Arable, torn. 1. p, 34—43.) Of the two modern rivals, Savory and
"olney, the one may amuse, the other will instruct.


TO
8V







OCR Output








CHAP. XLYIIJ. . 167


fixed his residence at a distance from the court, atOenoe, a town of Pontus, surrounded with rich vine­yards, and situate on the coast of the Euxine. Thedeath of Manuel, and the disorders of the minority,soon opened the fairest field for his ambition. Theemperor was a boy of twelve or fourteen years of age,without vigour, or wisdom, or experience; his mother,the empress Mary, abandoned her person and govern­ment to a favourite of the Comnenian name; and hissister, another Mary, whose husband, an Italian, wasdecorated with the title of Caesar, excited a conspiracy,and at length an insurrection, against her odious step­mother. The provinces were forgotten, the capital wasin flames, and a century of peace and order was over­thrown in the vice and weakness of a few months. Acivil war was kindled in Constantinople; the two fac­tions fought a bloody battle in the square of the palace,and the rebels sustained a regular siege in the cathe­dral of St. Sophia. The patriarch laboured with honestzeal to heal the wounds of the republic, the most re­spectable patriots called aloud for a guardian andavenger, and every tongue repeated the praise of thetalents and even the virtues of Andronicus. In his re­tirement, he affected to revolve the solemn duties of hisoath. If the safety or honour of the imperial family bethreatened, I will reveal or oppose the mischief to the ut­most in my power. His correspondence with the patri­arch and patricians was seasoned with apt quotationsfrom the Psalms of David and the epistles of St. Paul;and he patiently waited till he was called to her deli­verance by the voice of his country. In his march fromOenoe to Constantinople, his slender train insensiblyswelled to a crowd and an army; his professions of re­ligion and loyalty were mistaken for the language ofhis heart; and the simplicity of a foreign dress, whichshewed to advantage his majestic stature, displayeda lively image of his poverty and exHe. All opposition







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 309


the companion and brother of the noble youth. The ex­pedient was crowned with success; the holy fraternitywas respected both in peace and war, and the two par­ties vied with each other in a generous emulation ofcourage and fidelity. Once only the concord wasslightly ruffled by an accidental quarrel; a patriot ofMedina arraigned the insolence of the strangers, but thehint of their expulsion was heard with abhorrence, andhis own son most eagerly offered to lay at the apostle'sfeet the head of his father.
His regal From his establishment at Medina, MahometA.^.'ezs assumed the exercise of the regal and sacerdo-—63s. tal office; and it was impious to appeal from ajudge whose decrees were inspired by the divine wisdom.A small portion of ground, the patrimony of two orphans,was acquired by gift or purchase ;f on that chosen spot,he built a house and a mosch, more venerable in their rudesimplicity than the palaces and temples of the Assyriancaliphs. His seal of gold, or silver, was inscribed withthe apostolic title: when he prayed and preached inthe weekly assembly, he leaned against the trunk of apalm-tree; and it was long before he indulged himselfin the use of a chair or pulpit of rough timber.5 Aftera reign of six years, fifteen hundred Moslems, in armsand in the field, renewed their oath of allegiance; andtheir chief repeated the assurance of protection till thedeath of the last member, or the final dissolution of thepasty. It was in the same camp that the deputy ofMecca was astonished by the attention of the faithful to


f Prideaux (Life of Mahomet, p. 44.) reviles the wickednes of the impostor, whodespoiled two poor orphans, the sons of a carpenter; a reproach which he drewfrom the Disputatio contra Saracenos, composed in Arabic before the year 1130;but the honest Gagnier (ad Abulfed. p. 53.) has shewn that they were deceivedby the word At Nagjar, which signifies, in this place, not an obscure trade, bat anoble tribe of Arabs. The desolate state of the ground is described by Abulfeda;and his worthy interpreter has proved from Al Bochari, the offer of a price; fromAl Jannabi, the fair purchase; and from Ahmed Ben Joseph, the payment of themoney by the generous Abubeker. On these grounds the prophet must be honour­ably acquitted.
f Al Jannabi (apud Gagnier, torn. p. 246. 324.) describes the seal and pulpit,as two venerable relics of the apostle of God; and the portrait of his court »aien from Abolfeda. (c. 44. p. 85.)







OCR Output








228 ROMAN EMPIRE.


escaped from the French yoke.' IV. Charle­magne was the first who united GERMANY un­der the same sceptre. The name of Oriental France ispreserved in the circle of Franconia; and the peopleof Hesse and Thuringia were recently incorporated withthe victors, by the conformity of religion and govern­ment. The Alemanni, so formidable to the Romans,were the faithful vassals and confederates of the Franks;and their country was inscribed within the modern limitsof A Isace, Swabia, and Switzerland. The Bavarians, witha similar indulgence of their laws and manners, wereless patient of a master: the repeated treasons of Ta-sillo justified the abolition of her hereditary dukes;and their power was shared among the counts, whojudged fcnd guarded that important frontier. But thenorth of Germany, from the Rhine, and beyond theElbe, was still hostile and Pagan; nor was it till aftera war of thirty-three years that the Saxons bowed un­der the yoke of Christ and Charlemagne. The idolsand their votaries were extirpated: the foundation ofeight bishoprics, of Munster, Osnaburgh, Paderborn,and Minden, of Bremen, Verden, Hildesheim, andHalberstadt, define, on either side of the Weser, thebounds of ancient Saxony: these episcopal seats werethe first schools and cities of that savage land; and thereligion and humanity of the children atoned, in somedegree, for the massacre of the parents. Beyond theElbe, the Slavi, or Sclavonians, of similar manners andvarious denominations, overspread the modern domi­nions of Prussia, Poland, and Bohemia, and some tran­sient marks of obedience have tempted the French his­torian to extend the empire to the Baltic and the Vis­tula. The conquest or conversion of those countriesis of a more recent age; but the first union of Bohemiawith the Germanic body may be justly ascribed to thearms of Charlemagne. V. He retaliated on the Avars,
• See Giannone, torn. 1. p. 374, 375. and the Annals of Muratori.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 113


have been deceived or subdued by the authority ofBaronius; and Protestant zeal has re-echoed the wordsof a cardinal desirous, as it should seem, to favour thepatroness of images. Yet the blind son of Irene sur­vived many years, oppressed by the court, and for­gotten by the world; the Isaurian dynasty was silentlyextinguished; and the memory of Constantine was re­called only by the nuptials of his daughter Euphrosynewith the emperor Michael II.
, The most bigoted orthodoxy has justly exe-
A.D.792, crated the unnatural mother, who may not°8' ' easily be paralleled in the history of crimes.To her bloody deed superstition has attributed a sub­sequent darkness of seventeen days; during whichmany vessels in mid-day were driven from their course,as if the sun, a globe of fire so vast and so remote, couldsympathize with the atoms of a revolving planet. Onearth, the crime of Irene was left five years unpunish­ed; her reign was crowned with external splendour;and if she could silence the voice of conscience, sheneither heard or regarded the reproaches of man­kind. The Roman world bowed to the government ofa female; and as she moved through the streets of Con­stantinople, the reins of her four milk-white steeds wereheld by as many patricians, who marched on foot beforethe golden chariot .Jf their queen. But these patricianswere for the most part eunuchs; and their black ingra­titude justified, on this occasion, the popular hatred andcontempt Raised, enriched, intrusted with the firstdignities of the empire, they basely conspired againsttheir benefactress: the great treasurer Nicephorus was.secretly invested with the purple; her successor was in-.troduced into the palace, and crowned at St. Sophia bythe venal patriarch. In their first interview, she reca­pitulated with dignity the revolutions of her life, gentlyaccused the perfidy of Nicephorus, insinuated that heowed his life to her unsuspicious clemency, and, for theVOL. vi. i







OCR Output








36 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Faith of For these scandalous offences Dioscorus wasChaicedon. deposed by the synod, and banished by theemperor: but the purity of his faith was declared in thepresence, and with the tacit approbation, of the fathers.Their prudence supposed, rather than pronounced, theheresy of Eutyches, who was never summoned beforetheir tribunal; and they sat silent and abashed, whena bold Monophysite, casting at their feet a volume ofCyril, challenged them to anathematize in his personthe doctrine of the saint. If we fairly peruse the actsof Chalcedon as they are recorded by the orthodoxparty," we shall find that a great majority of the bishopsembraced the simple unity of Christ; and the ambi­guous concession, that he was formed OF OR FROM twonatures, might imply either their previous existence, ortheir subsequent confusion, or some dangerous intervalbetween the conception of the man and the assumptionof theGod. The Roman theology, more positive and pre­cise, adopted the term most offensive to the ears of theEgyptians, that Christ existed i N two natures: and thismomentous particle' (which the memory, rather thanthe understanding, must retain) had almost produced aschism among the Catholic bishops. The tome of Leo


application was unknown to the editor Brodnus. The nameless epigrammatistraises a tolerable pun, by confounding the episcopal salutation of " Peace be to all!"with the genuine or corrupted name of the bishop's concubine.—Eifim iramrm iirmmit turn iflXSm,rii,- tuMTai man in fttnt iiJ't ax" i
I am ignorant whether the patriarch, who seems to have been a jealous lover, isthe Cimon of a preceding epigram, whose mot imuut was viewed with envy andwondci by Priapus himself.
• Those who reverence the infallibility of synods, may try to ascertain theirsense. The leading bishops were attended by partial or careless scribes, who dis­persed their copies round the world. Our Greek MSS. are sullied with the falseand proscribed reading of tx tan $iwi», (Condi, torn. 3. p. 1460.) the authentictranslation of Pope Leo I. does not seem to have been executed; and the old Latinversions materially difier from the present Vnlgate, which was revised (A.D. 550.)by Rusticus, a Roman priest, from the best MSS. of the AUCI/UHTM at Constanti­nople, (Ducange, C. P. Christiana, lib. 4. p. 151.) a famous monastery of Latins,Greeks, and Syrians. See Coin. il. torn. 4. p. 1959—2049. and Paei Critica, torn.2. p. 326, &c.
1 It is darkly represented in the microscope of Petravius; (torn. 5. lib. 3. c. 5.)yet the subtle theologian is himself afraid—ne quis fortasse supervacaneam, etminis auxiam putet hujusmodi vocularum inquisitionem, et ab instituti theologicigravitate alienarn. (p. 124.)







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 30 J


blessed inhabitants with a liberal taste for harmony andscience, conversation and friendship, he idly celebratesthe pearls and diamonds, the robes of silk, palaces ofmarble, dishes of gold, rich wines, artificial dainties, nu­merous attendants, and the whole train of sensual andcostly luxury, which becomes insipid to the owner, evenin the short period of this mortal life. Seventy-twokauris, or black-eyed girls, of resplendent beauty, bloom­ing youth, virgin-purity, and exquisite sensibility, willbe created for the use of the meanest believer; a momentof pleasure will be prolonged to a thousand years, andhis faculties will be increased a hundred-fold, to renderhim worthy of his felicity. Notwithstanding a vulgarprejudice, the gates of heaven will be open to both sexes;but Mahomet has not specified the male companions ofthe female elect, lest he should either alarm the jealousyof their former husbands, or disturb their felicity, by thesuspicion of an everlasting marriage. This image of acarnal paradise has provoked the indignation, perhapsthe envy of the monks: they declaim against the impurereligion of Mahomet; and his modest apologists aredriven to the poor excuse of figures and allegories. Butthe sounder and more consistent party adhere, withoutshame, to the literal interpretation of the Koran; uselesswould be the resurrection of the body, unless it were re­stored to the possession and exercise of its worthiestfaculties; and the union of sensual and intellectual en­joyment is requisite to complete the happiness of thedouble animal, the perfect man. Yet the joys of theMahometan paradise will not be confined to the indul­gence of luxury and appetite; and the prophet has ex­pressly declared, that all meaner happiness will be for­gotten and despised by the saints and martyrs, who shallbe admitted to the beatitude of the divine vision."


'For the day of judgment, hell, paradise, &c. consult the Koran, (c. 2. v. 25.c. 56. 78, &c.) with Maracci's virulent, but learned, refutation, (in his notes, andin the Frodromus, part 4. p. 78.120. 122, &c.) d'Herbelot, (Bibliotheque Orien-tale, p. 368. 375.) Reland, (p. 47—61.) and Sale. (76—103.) The original







OCR Output








4UO ROMAN EMPIRE.


almost the same. The acclamations of the people sa­luted his landing on the coast of Andalusia; and, aftera successful struggle, Abdalrahman established thethrone of Cordova, and was the father of the Ommiadesof Spain, who reigned above two hundred and fifty yearsfrom the Atlantic to the Pyrennees.q He slew in battlea lieutenant of the Abbassides, who had invaded his do­minions with a fleet and army: the head of Ala, in saltand camphire, was suspended by a daring messengerbefore the palace of Mecca; and the caliph Almansorrejoiced in his safety, that he was removed by seas andlands from such a formidable adversary. Their mutualdesigns or declarations of offensive war evaporated with­out effect; but instead of opening a door to the conquestof Europe, Spain was dissevered from the trunk of themonarchy, engaged in perpetual hostility with the east,and inclined to peace and friendship with the Christiansovereigns of Constantinople and France. The exampleof the Ommiades was imitated by the real or fictitiousTriple di- progeny of Ali, the Edrissites of Mauritania, andthTca-°f the more powerful Fatimites of Africa and Egypt.Hphate. In the tenth century, the chair of Mahomet wasdisputed by three caliphs or commanders of the faithful,who reigned at Bagdad, Cairoan, and Cordova, excom­municated each other, and agreed only in a principle ofdiscord, that a sectary is more odious and criminal thanan unbeliever.1
Magni- Mecca was the patrimony of the line of Ha-of "the" shem, yet the Abbassides were never tempted torairphs, resi(ie either in the birth-place or the city of the750—790. prophet. Damascus was disgraced by the choice,and polluted with the blood, of the Ommiades; and after


i For the revolution of Spain, consult Roderic of Toledo, (c. 18. p. 34, &c.) theBibliotheca Arabico-Hispana, (torn.2. p. 30.198.) and Cardonne. (Hist, do 1'Afriqueet de riispagne.torn. 1. p. 180—197. 205. 272. 323, &c.)
'I shall not stop to refute the strange errors and fancies of sir William Temple(his works, vol. 3. p. 371—374. octavo edition) and Voltaire (Histoire General*,c. 28. torn. 2. p. 124, 125. edition de Lausanne), concerning the division of the Sa­racen empire. The mistakes of Voltaire proceeded from the want of knowledgeor reduction ; but sir William was deceived by a Spanish impostor, who has framedan apocryph al history of the conquest of Spain by the Arabs.







OCR Output








160 ROMAN EMPIRE.


\
ried; to the virtuous Bertha or Irene of Germany, andto the beauteous Maria, a French or Latin princess ofAntioch. The only daughter of his first wife was des­tined for Bela, a Hungarian prince, who was educatedat Constantinople under the name of Alexius; and theconsummation of their nuptials might have transferredthe Roman sceptre to a race of free and warlike barba­rians. But as soon as Maria of Antioch had given ason and heir to the empire, the presumptive rights ofBela were abolished, and he was deprived of his pro­mised bride: but the Hungarian prince resumed hisname and the kingdom of his fathers, and displayed suchvirtues as might excite the regret and envy of theGreeks. The son of Maria was named Alexius; and atthe age of ten years, he ascended the Byzantine throne,after his father's decease had closed the glories of theComnenian line.
The fraternal concord of the two sons of the
AlexiusII. A i .
A. D. 1180, great Alexius, had been sometimes clouded byter an opposition of interest and passion. By am-^*on, Isaac the Sebastocrator was excited toof Andro- flight and rebellion, from whence he was re­claimed by the firmness and clemency of Johnthe Handsome. The errors of Isaac, the father of theemperors of Trebizond, were short and venial; but John,the elder of his sons, renounced for ever his religion.Provoked by a real or imaginary insult of his uncle, heescaped from the Roman to the Turkish camp: hisapostacy was rewarded with the sultan's daughter, thetitle of Chelebi, or noble, and the inheritance of aprincely estate; and in the fifteenth century MahometII. boasted of his imperial descent from the Comnenianfamily. Andronicus, the younger brother of John, sonof Isaac, and grandson of Alexius Comnenus, is one ofthe most ^conspicuous characters of the age: and hisgenuine adventures might form the subject of a verysingular romance. To justify the choice of three ladies







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 229


or Huns, of Pannonia, the same calamitieswhich they had inflicted on the nations. Theirrings, the wooden fortifications which encircled theirdistricts and villages, were broken down by the tripleeffort of a French army, that was poured into theircountry by land and water, through the Carpathianmountains, and along the plain of the Danube. Aftera bloody conflict of eight years, the loss of some Frenchgenerals was avenged by the slaughter of the most no­ble Huns: the relics of the nation submitted: the royalresidence of the chagan was left desolate and unknown:and the treasures, the rapine of two hundred and fiftyyears, enriched the victorious troops, or decorated thechurches of Italy and Gaul.' After the reduction ofPannonia the empire of Charlemagne was boundedonly by the conflux of the Danube with the Teyss andthe Save: the provinces of Istria, Liburnia, and Dal-matia, were an easy, though unprofitable, accession;and it was an effect of his moderation, that he left themaritime cities under the real or nominal sovereigntyof the Greeks. But these distant possessions addedmore to the reputation than to the power of the Latinemperor; nor did he risk any ecclesiastical foundationsto reclaim the barbarians from their vagrant life andidolatrous worship. Some canals of communicationbetween the rivers, the Saone and the Meuse, theRhine and the Danube, were faintly attempted." Theirexecution would have vivified the empire; and morecost and labour were often wasted in the structure of acathedral.


1 Quot pralia in eo gesta! quantum sanguinis effusum sit! Testator vacuaoiuni habitations Pannonia, et locus in quo regia Cagani fuit ita desertus, ut nevestigium quidem humanIB habitationis appareat* Tota in hoc bello Hunnorumnobilitas periit, tota gloria decidit, omnis pecunia et congest! ex longo temporethesauri direpti sunt.
'- The junction of the Rhine and Danube was undertaken only for the serviceof the Pannonian war. (Gaillard, Vie de Charlemagne, torn. 2. p. 312—315.)The canal, which would have been only two leagues in length, and of which sometraces are still extant in Swabia, was interrupted by excessive rains, military avo­cations, and superstitious fears. (Schaepflin, Hist, de rAcademie des Inscriptions,torn. 18. p. 256. Molimina fluviorum, &c. jungendorum, p. 59—62.)







OCR Output








398 ROMAN EMPIRE.


share was allotted to a soldier and to his horse; and adouble portion was reserved for the noble coursers ofthe Arabian breed.
Conquest After the battle of Yermuk, the Roman armyof Jem- no longer appeared in the field: and'the Saracens
salem, .,1' i c. •/.
A. D. 637. might securely choose among the tortmed townsof Syria, the first object of their attack. They consultedthe caliph whether they should march to Ceesarea orJerusalem; and the advice of Al i determined the imme­diate siege of the latter. To a profane eye, Jerusalemwas the first or second capital of Palestine; but after Mec­ca and Medina, it was revered and visited by the devoutMoslems, as the temple of the Holy Land, which hadbeen sanctified by the revelation of Moses, of Jesus, andof Mahomet himself. The son of Abu Sophian was sentwith five thousand Arabs to try the first experiment ofsurprise or treaty ; but on the eleventh day, the town wasinvested by the whole force of Abu Obeidah. He ad­dressed the customary summons to the chief comman­ders and people of JElia? Health and happiness toevery one that follows the right way! We require of youto testify that there is but one God, and that Mahomet ishis apostle. If you refuse this, consent to pay tribute,and be under us forthwith. Otherwise I shall bringmen against you who love death better than you do thedrinking of wine or eating hog's jlesh. Nor will I everstir from you, if it please God, till I have destroyed thosethat fight for you, and made slaves of your children. Butthe city was defended on every side by deep valleysand steep ascents; since the invasion of Syria, the wallsand towers had been anxiously restored; the bravest ofthe fugitives of Yermuk had stopped in the nearest placeof refuge; and in the defence of the sepulchre of Christ,


k In the name of the city, the profane prevailed over the sacred; Jerusalem wasknown to the devout Christians; (Eusch. de Martyr. Palest, c. 9.) but the legaland popular appellation of /£im (the colony of ,!•'.!: i'- Hadrianus) has passed fromthe Romans to the Arabs. (Reland, Palestin. torn. 1. p. 207. torn. 2. p. 836. D'Her-belot, Bibliothenue Orientale, Codi, p «69. Ilia, p. 420.) The epithet of Al Cadi,the Holy, is used as the proper name of Jerusalern.







OCR Output








44 ROMAN EMPIRE.


rebellion he depopulated Thrace, besieged Constanti­nople, exterminated sixty-five thousand of his fellow-Christians, till he obtained the recall of the bishops, thesatisfaction of the pope, and the establishment of thecouncil of Chalcedon, an orthodox treaty, reluctantlysigned by the dying Anastasius, and more faithfully per­formed by the uncle of Justinian. And such
Firat reh- » .
war. was the event of tnejir'st of the religious wars,


'"'' which have been waged in the name, and by thedisciples, of the God of Peace.k
Theoiogi- Justinian has been already seen in the vari-cai charac- ous lights of a prince, a conqueror, and a law-vernment giver: the theologian' still remains, and it af-aa.A.'o! fords an unfavourable prejudice, that his theo-519— 565.i0gy should form a very prominent feature of his.portrait. The sovereign sympathized with his subjectsin their superstitious reverence for living and departedsaints; his code, and more especially his novels, con­firm and enlarge the privileges of the clergy; and inevery dispute, between a monk and a layman, the partialjudge was inclined to pronounce, that truth, and inno­cence, and justice, were always on the side of the church.In his public and private devotions, the emperor wasassiduous and exemplary; his prayers, vigils, and fasts,displayed the austere penance of a monk; his fancy wasamused by the hope, or belief, of personal inspiration;he had secured the patronage of the Virgin and St. Mi­chael the archangel: and his recovery from a dangerous


k The general history, from the council of Chalcedon to the death of Anastasius,maybe found in the Breviary of Liberatus, (c. 14 — 19.) the second and third booksof Evagrius, the Abstract of the two books of Theodore the Reader, the Acts of theSynods, and the Epistles of the Popes. (Concil. torn. 5.) The series is continuedwith some disorder in the fifteenth and sixteenth tomes of the Memoires Eccle-siastiques of Tillemont. And here I must take leave for ever of that incomparableguide— whose bigotry is overbalanced by the merits of erudition, diligence, vera­city, and scrupulous minuteness. He was prevented by death from completing,as he designed the sixth century of the church and empire.
'The strain of the Anecdotes of Procopius, (c. II. 13. 18. 27, 28.) with thelearned remarks on Almannus, is confirmed, rather than contradicted, by the Actsof the Councils, the fourth book of Evagrius, and the complaints of the African Fa-cundus in his twelfth book — de tribus capitulis, "cum videri doctus appetit impor­tune . . . spontaueis qutBstionibus ecclesiam turbat." See Procop. de Bell. Goth,lib. 3. c. 35.







OCR Output








3o6 ROMAN EMPIRE.


of Mecca, or had received the fugitive in the walls ofMedina. The increasing myriads, who acknowledgedMahomet as their king and prophet, had been compelledby his arms, or allured by his prosperity. The Poly-theists were confounded by the simple idea of a solitaryand invisible God: the pride of the Christians and Jewsdisdained the yoke of a mortal and contemporary legis­lator. Their habits of faith and obedience were not suf­ficiently confirmed; and many of the new converts re­gretted the venerable antiquity of the law of Moses, orthe rites and mysteries of the Catholic church, or theidols, the sacrifices, the joyous festivals, of their Paganancestors. The jarring interests and hereditary feuds ofthe Arabian tribes had not yet coalesced in a system ofunion and subordination; and the barbarians were im­patient of the mildest and most salutary laws that curbedtheir passions, or violated their customs. They sub­mitted with reluctance to the religious precepts of theKoran, the abstinence from wine, the fast of the Rama­dan, and the daily repetition of five prayers; and thealms and tithes, which were collected for the treasury ofMedina, could be distinguished only by a name from thepayment of a perpetual and ignominious tribute. Theexample of Mahomet had excited a spirit of fanaticism orimposture, and several of his rivals presumed to imitatethe conduct, and defy the authority,-ofj;he living prophet.At the head of thefugitives and auxiliaries, the first caliphwas reduced to the cities of Mecca, Medina, and Tayef;and perhaps the Koreish would have restored the idolsof the Caaba, if their levity had not been checked by aseasonable reproof. Ye men of 'Mecca, will ye be the last toembrace, and the first to abandon, the religion of Islam?After exhorting the Moslems to confide in the aid of Godand his apostle, Abubeker resolved, by a vigorous attack,to prevent the junction of the rebels. The women andchildren were safely lodged in the cavities of the moun­tains: the warriors marching under eleven banners, dif­







OCR Output








118 ROMAN EMPIRE.


t.'f ,


A memorable reverse of fortune was displayedin Michael II. who, from a defect in his speech,"was surnamed the Stammerer. He was snatched
. , . .
820, Dec. from the fiery furnace to the sovereignty ofan empire; and as in the tumult a smith couldnot readily be found, the fetters remained on his legsseveral hours after he was seated on the throne of theCeesars. The royal blood which had been the price ofhis elevation, was unprofitably spent; in the purple heretained the ignoble vices of his origin; and Michaellost his provinces with as supine indifference as if theyhad been the inheritance of his fathers. His titlewas disputed by Thomas, the last of the military trium­virate, who transported into Europe fourscore thousandbarbarians from the banks of the Tigris, and the shoresof the Caspian. He formed the siege of Constantino­ple; but the capital was defended wlth spiritual andcarnal weapons; a Bulgarian king assaulted the campof the orientals, and Thomas had the misfortune or theweakness to fall alive into the power of the conqueror.The hands and feet "of the rebel were amputated; hewas placed on an ass, and, amidst the insults of thepeople, was led through the streets, which he sprinkledwith his blood. The depravation of manners, as savageas they were corrupt, is marked by the presence of theemperor himself. Deaf to the lamentations of a fellow-soldier, he incessantly pressed the discovery of moreaccomplices, till his curiosity was checked by the ques­tion of an honest or guilty minister, — Would you givecredit to an enemy against the most faithful of yourfriends? After the death of his first wife, the emperor,at the request of the senate, drew from her monasteryEuphrosyne, the daughter of Constantine VI. Heraugust birth might justify a stipulation in the marriage*contract, that her children should equally share the em­pire with their elder brother. But the nuptials of Mi­chael and Euphrosyne were barren; and she was con­







OCR Output








CHAP. LII. 48U


welcome perhaps to the unfortunate than to the victoriouschief. The merciless inquisition of the conqueror eradi­cated the most distant branches of the hostile race: theirbones were scattered, their memory was accursed, andthe martyrdom of Hossein was abundantly revenged onthe posterity of his tyrants. Fourscore of the Ommi-ades, who had yielded to the faith or clemency of theirfoes, were invited to a banquet at Damascus. The lawsof hospitality were violated by a promiscuous massacre:the board was spread over their fallen bodies; and thefestivity of the guests was enlivened by the music of theirdying groans. By the event of the civil war the dy­nasty of the Abbassides was firmly established; but theChristians only could triumph in the mutual hatred andcommon loss of the disciples of Mahomet.pRevolt of Yet the thousands who were swept away bySpaio. the sword of war might have been speedily re­trieved in the succeeding generation, if the consequencesof the revolution had not tended to dissolve the powerand unity of the empire of the Saracens. In the pro­scription of the Ommiades, a royal youth of the name ofAbdalrahman alone escaped the rage of his enemies,who hunted the wandering exile from the banks of theEuphrates to the valleys of mount Atlas. His presencein the neighbourhood of Spain revived the zeal of thewhite faction. The name and cause of the Abbassideshad been first vindicated by the Persians; the west hadbeen pure from civil arms: and the servants of the ab­dicated family still held, by a precarious tenure, the in­heritance of their lands and the offices of government.Strongly prompted by gratitude, indignation, and fear,they invited the grandson of the caliph Hashem to as­cend the throne of his ancestors; and, in his desperatecondition, the extremes of rashness and prudence were
T See Abulfeda, (Annal. Moslem, p. 136—145.) Eutychius, (Annal.'torn. 2.p. 398. vers. Pocock.) Elmacin, (Hist. Saracen, p. 109—121.) Abulpharagius,(Hist. Dynast, p. 134—14O.) Roderic of Toledo, (Hist. Arabum, c. 18. p. 33.)Tbeophanes, (Chronograph, p. 356, 357. who speaks of the Abbassides under thenames of Xwfwawrai and M«:j./,f v:' >• and the Bibliotheque of d'Herbelot, in thearticles of Ommiades, Abbauides, Marian, Ibrahim, Saffah, Abou Moi(fm,







OCR Output








236 ROMAN EMPIRE.


informed them that he was only a servant, the constable,or master of the horse of the emperor. The same mis­take, and the same answer, were repeated in the apart­ments of the count palatine, the steward, and the cham­berlain; and their impatience was gradually heightened,till the doors of the presence-chamber were thrown open,and they beheld the genuine monarch, on his throne,enriched with the foreign luxury which he despised,and encircled with the love and reverence of his victo­rious chiefs. A treaty of peace and alliance was con­cluded between the two empires, and the limits of theeast and west were defined by the right of present pos­session. But the Greeks'1 soon forgot this humiliatingequality, or remembered it only to hate the barbariansby whom it was extorted. During the short union ofvirtue and power, they respectfully saluted the augustCharlemagne with the acclamations of basileus, andemperor of the Romans. As soon as these qualitieswere separated in the person of his pious son, the By­zantine letters were inscribed, To the king, or, as hestyles himself, the emperor of the Franks and Lombards.When both power and virtue were extinct, they de­spoiled Lewis II. of his hereditary title, and, with thebarbarous appellation of rex or rega, degraded himamong the crowd of Latin princes. His reply1 is ex­pressive of his weakness: he proves, with some learning,that both in sacred and profane history, the name ofking is synonymous with the Greek word basileus: if,at Constantinople, it were assumed in a more exclusiveand imperial sense, he claims from his ancestors, andfrom the pope, a just participation of the honours of theRoman purple. The same controversy was revived in


b Compare, in the original texts collected by Pagi, (torn. 3. A. D, 812. no. 7.A. D. 824. no. 10, &c.) the contrast of Charlemagne and his son: to the former theambassadors of Michael Cwho were indeed disavowed), more suo, id est lingua,Graci, laudes dixerunt, imperatorem eum et BiwiXu appellantes; to the latter,vocato imperatori Franeorvm, &c.
'See the epistle in Paralipoiuena, of the anonymous writer of Salerno, (Script.Ital. torn. t. pars 2. p. 243—254. c. 93—107.) whom Baronius (A. D. 871. no.51—71.) mistook for Erchempert, when he transcribed it in his Annals.







OCR Output








294 ROMAN EMPIRE.


successively ascended the seven heavens, and receivedand repaid the salutations of the patriarchs, the prophets,and the angels, in their respective mansions. Beyondthe seventh heaven, Mahomet alone was permitted toproceed: he passed the veil of unity, approached withintwo bow-shots of the throne, and felt a cold that piercedhim to the heart, when his shoulder was touched by thehand of God. After this familiar, though importantconversation, he again descended to Jerusalem, remount­ed the borak, returned to Mecca, and performed in thetenth part of a night the journey of many thousandyears/ According to another legend, the apostle con­founded in a national assembly the malicious challengeof the Koreish. His resistless word split asunder theorb of the moon: the obedient planet stooped from herstation in the sky, accomplished the seven revolutionsround the Caaba, saluted Mahomet in the Arabiantongue, and suddenly contracting her dimensions, en­tered at the collar, and issued forth through the sleeve,of his shirt.'' The vulgar are amused with these mar­vellous tales; but the gravest of the Mussulman doctorsimitate the modesty of their master, and indulge a lati­tude of faith or interpretation.11 They might speciouslyallege, that in preaching the religion, it was needless to


'The nocturnal journey is circumstantially related by Abolfeda, (in Vit. Mnhom-m<,d. c. 19. p. 33.) who wishes to think it a vision; by Prideaux, (p. 1. 40.) whoaggravates the absurdities; and by Gagnier, (torn. 1. p. 252—343.) who declares,from the zealous Ali Jannabi, that to deny this journey, is to dishelieve the Koran.Yet the Koran, without naming either heaven, or Jerusalem, or Mecca, has onlydropped a mysterious hint: Laus illi qui transtulit servum suum ab oratorio Haramad oratorinm remotissimurn. (Koran, c. 17. 5.1. in Maracci, torn. 2. p. 407. forSale's version is more licentious.) A slender basis for the aerial structure of tra­dition.
t In the prophetic style, which uses the present or past for t he future, Mahomethad said,—Appropinquavit horaet scissaest luna. (Koran, c. 54.5.1. in Maracci,torn. S. p. 688.) This figure of rhetoric has been converted into a fact, which issaid to be attested by the most respectable eye-witnesses. (Maracci, torn. 2.p. 690.) The festival is .still celebrated by the Persians; (Chardin, torn, i, p. 2 01.)and the legend is tediously spun out by Gaguier, (Vie de Mahomet, torn. 1. p. 183—234.) on the faith, as it should seem, of the credulous Al Jannabi. Yet a Ma­hometan doctor has arraigned the credit of the principal witness; (apud Focock,Specimen, p. 187.) the best interpreters are content with the simple sense of theKoran; (Al Beidawi, apud Holtinger, Hist. Orient, lib. t. p. 302.) and the silenceof Abulfeda is worthy of a prince and a philosopher.
h Abulpharagins, in Specimen. Hist. Arab. p. 17. and his scepticism is justifiedin the.notes of Pocock, p. 190—19.1. from the purest authorities.







OCR Output








CHAP. LIT. 513


Christian galleys, which preserved their advantageousstation along the coast. The victory inclined to the sideof the allies, when it was less gloriously decided in theirfavour by a sudden tempest, which confounded the skilland courage of the stoutest mariners. The Christianswere sheltered'in a friendly harbour, while the Africanswere scattered and dashed in pieces among the rocks andislands of a hostile shore. Those who escaped fromshipwreck and hunger, neither found nor deserved mercyat the hands of their implacable pursuers. The swordand the gibbet reduced the dangerous multitude of cap­tives; and the remainder was more usefully employed,to restore the sacred edifices which they had attemptedto subvert. The pontiff, at the head of the citizens andallies, paid his grateful devotion at the shrines of theapostles; and among the spoils of this naval victory,thirteen Arabian bows of pure and massy silver weresuspended round the altar of the fishermen of Galilee.The reign of Leo the Fourth was employed in the de­fence and ornament of the Roman state. The churcheswere renewed and embellished; near four thousandpounds of silver were consecrated to repair the losses ofSt. Peter; and his sanctuary was decorated with a plateof gold the weight of two hundred and sixteen pounds,embossed with the portraits of the pope and emperor,and encircled with a string of pearls. Yet this vain mag­nificence reflects less glory on the character of Leo, thanthe paternal care with which he rebuilt the walls of Hortaand A menu; and transported the wandering inhabitantsof Centumcellae to his new foundation of Leopolis,twelve miles from the sea-shore." By his liberality a co­lony of Corsicans, with their wives and children, wasplanted in the station of Porto at the mouth of the Tyber;the falling city was restored for their use, the fields andvineyards were divided among the new settlers: their
Beretti (Thorographia Italis Medii .I'.vi, p. 106. 108.,) has illustrated Cen-i'Ilu., Leopolia, Ciritaa Leonina, and the other places of the Roman dutchy.
VOL. VI. 2 L







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 223


of loving with too fond a passion. I shall be scarcelypermitted to accuse the ambition of a conqueror; but ina day of equal retribution, the sons of his brother Car*loman, the Merovingian princes of Aquitain, and the fourthousand five hundred Saxons who were beheaded on thesame spot, would have something to allege against thejustice and humanity of Charlemagne. His treatmentof the vanquished Saxonsf was an abuse of the right ofconquest; his laws were not less sanguinary than hisarms, and in the discussion of his motives, whatever issubstracted from bigotry must be imputed to temper.The sedentary reader is amazed by his incessant activityof mind and body; and his subjects and enemies werenotless astonished at his sudden presence, at the momentwhen they believed him at the most distant extremity ofthe empire; neither peace nor war, nor summer nor win­ter, were a season of repose: and our fancy cannot easilyreconcile the annals of his reign with the geography ofhis expeditions. But this activity was a national ratherthan a personal virtue; the vagrant life of a Frank wasspent in the chase, in pilgrimage, in military adventures;and the journeys of Charlemagne were distinguishedonly by a more numerous train and a more importantpurpose. His military renown must be tried by thescrutiny of his troops, his enemies, and his actions.Alexander conquered with the arms of Philip, but theitvo heroes who preceded Charlemagne, bequeathed himtheir name, their examples, and the companions of theirvictories. At the head of his veteran and superior armies,he oppressed the savage or degenerate nations, who wereincapable of confederating for their common safety: nordid he ever encounter an equal antagonist in numbers,


eels, without excepting his own wife (c. 19- p. 98—100, cum Notis Schmincke.)The husband most have been too strong for the historian.
1 Besides the massacres and transmigrations, the pain of death was pronouncedagainst the following crimes.—1. The refusal of baptisrn. 2. The false pretence ofbaptisrn. 3. A relapse to idolatry. 4. The murder of a priest or bishop. 5. Humansacrifices. 6. Eating meat in Lent. But every crime might be expiated by bap-tism or penance: (Gaillard, torn. 2. p. 241—247. )and the Christian Saxons becamethe friends and equals of the Franks. (Struv. Corpus Hist. Germanicae, p. 133.)







OCR Output








CHAP. LII. 487


a day of battle. In the visible separation of parties thegreen was consecrated to the Fatimites; the Ommiadeswere distinguished by the white; and the black, as themost adverse, was naturally adopted by the Abbassides.Their turbans and garments were stained with thatgloomy colour: two black standards, on pike staves ninecubits long, were borne aloft in the van of Abu Moslem;and their allegorical names of the night and the shadow,obscurely represented the indissoluble union and per­petual succession of the line of Hashem. From theIndus to the Euphrates, the east was convulsed by thequarrel of the white and the black factions; the Abbas-sides were most frequently victorious; but their publicsuccess was clouded by the personal misfortune of theirchief. The court of Damascus, awakening from a longslumber, resolved to prevent the pilgrimage of Mecca,which Ibrahim had undertaken with a splendid retinue,to recommend himself at once to the favour of the pro­phet and of the people. A detachment of cavalry in­tercepted his march and arrested his person; and theunhappy Ibrahim, snatched away from the promise ofuntasted royalty, expired in iron fetters in the dungeonsof Haran. His two younger brothers, Saffah and Al-mansor, eluded the search of the tyrant, and lay conceal­ed at Cufa, till the zeal of the people and the approachof his eastern friends allowed them to expose their per­sons to the impatient public. On Friday, in the dressof a caliph, in the colours of the sect, Saffah proceededwith religious and military pomp to the mosch: ascend­ing the pulpit, he prayed and preached as the lawfulsuccessor of Mahomet; and, after his departure, hiskinsmen bound a willing people by an oath of fidelity.But it was on the banks of the Zab, and not in the moschof Cufa, that this important controversy was determined.Every advantage appeared to be on the side of the whitefaction: the authority of established government; anarmy of a hundred and twenty thousand soldiers, against







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 101


the instant death of the tyrant. But Leontius, who wasalready clothed with the purple, cast an eye of pity on theprostrate son of his own benefactor and of so many em­perors. The life of Justinian was spared; the amputa­tion of his nose, perhaps of his tongue, was imperfectlyperformed: the happy flexibility of the Greek languagecould impose the name of Rhinotmetus; and the muti­lated tyrant was banished to Chersonae in Crim-Tartary,a lonely settlement, where corn, wine, and oil, wereimported as foreign luxuries.
On the edge of the Scythian wilderness, Jus-
His exile, ° ,
A. D. tinian still cherished the pride of his birth and'the hope of his restoration. After three years'exile, he received the pleasing intelligence that his in­jury was avenged by a second revolution, and that Leon­tius in his turn had been dethroned and mutilated bythe rebel Apsimar, who assumed the more respectablename of Tiberius. But the claim of lineal successionwas still formidable to a plebeian usurper; and his jea­lousy was stimulated by the complaints and charges ofthe Chersonites, who beheld the vices of the tyrant inthe spirit of the exile. With a band of followers, attach­ed to his person by common hope or common despair,Justinian fled from the inhospitable shore to the hordeof the Chozars, who pitched their tents between theTanais and Borysthenes. The khan entertained withpity and respect the royal suppliant: Phanagoria, oncean opulent city, on the Asiatic side of the lake Mceotis,was assigned for his residence; and every Roman pre­judice was stifled in his marriage with the sister of thebarbarian, who seems, however, from the name of Theo­dora, to have received the sacrament of baptism. Butthe faithless Chozar was soon tempted by the gold ofConstantinople; and had not the design been revealedby the conjugal love of Theodora, her husband musthave been assassinated, or betrayed into the power ofhis enemies. After strangling, with his own hands, the







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 33


of Constantinople :p it is certain, that the victim, beforehe could reach the place of his exile, expired, on thethird day, of the wounds and bruises which he had re­ceived at Ephesus. This second synod has been justlybranded as a gang of robbers and assassins; yet the ac­cusers of Dioscorus would magnify his violence, toalleviate the cowardice and inconstancy of their ownbehaviour.
Council of The faith of Egypt had prevailed: but theAhD°45i1' vancluished party was supported by the sameOct. s—' pope who encountered without fear the hostile
Nov 1
rage of Attila and Genseric. The theology of
Leo, his famous tome or epistle on the mystery of the in­
carnation, had been disregarded by the synod of Ephe­
sus; his authority, and that of the Latin church, was in­
sulted in his legates, who escaped from slavery and death
to relate the melancholy tale of the tyranny of Dioscorus
and the martyrdom of Flavian. His provincial synod
annulled the irregular proceedings of Ephesus; but as
this step was itself irregular, he solicited the convocation
of a general council in the free and orthodox provinces
of Italy. From his independent throne, the Roman bi­
shop spoke and acted without danger, as the head of the
Christians, and his dictates were obsequiously transcribed
by Placidia and her son Valentinian; who addressed
their eastern colleague to restore the peace and unity
of the church. But the pageant of oriental royalty was
moved with equal dexterity by the hand of the eunuch;
and Theodosius could pronounce, without hesitation,
that the church was already peaceful and triumphant,
and that the recent flame had been extinguished by the
just punishment of the Nestorians. Perhaps the Greeks


t EXiyf if (Eusebius, bishop of Dorylaum) TO oXsSww uu hiXaw; avoi;l&*wiwj« Aiwx°(ou utai/am -n xai Xaxri^qunn: and this testimony of Evagrius (lib. 2.c. 2.) is amplified by the Historian Zonaras, (torn. 2. lib. 13. p. 44.) who affirms thatDioscorus kicked like a wild ass. But the language of Liberatus (Brer. c. 12. inCbncil. torn. 6. p. 438.) is more cautious; and the Act* of Chalcedon, which lavishthe names of homicide, Cain, &c. do not justisfy so pointed a charge. The monkBaraumas it more particularly accused — io-if«{i in fisaiafut «X>uiayoy wrrt;tuu 1X1)4, rfa{or. (Conril. torn. 4. p. 1423.)
VOL. VI. D







OCR Output








458 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the eyes of an inquisitive Polytheist,it must appear wor­thy of the human and the divine nature. More purethan the system of Zoroaster, more liberal than the lawof Moses, the religion of Mahomet might seem less in­consistent with reason, than the creed of mystery andsuperstition, which, in the seventh century, disgracedthe simplicity of the gospel.
Fail of the 1° ^e extensive provinces of Persia andMagians Africa, the national religion has been eradicatedby the Mahometan faith. The ambiguous theo­logy of the Magi stood alone among the sects of the east:but the profane writings of Zoroaster0 might, under thereverend name of Abraham, be dexterously connectedwith the chain of divine revelation. Their evil prin­ciple, the demon Ahriman, might be represented as therival or as the creature of the God of light. The tem­ples of Persia were devoid of images; but the worshipof the sun and of fire might be stigmatized as a grossand criminal idolatry.11 The milder sentiment was con­secrated by the practice of Mahomef and the prudenceof the caliphs; the Magians or Ghebers were rankedwith the Jews and Christians among the people of thewritten law;r and as late as the third century of the He-gira, the city of Herat will afford a lively contrast of pri­


0 Ilif Zend or Pazend, the bible of the Ghebers, is reckoned by themselves, orat h'»st by the Mahometans, among the ten books which Abraham received fromheaven; and their religion is honourably styled the religion of Abraharn. (D'Her-belot, Bibliot. Orient, p. 701. Hyde, de Religione veterum Persarnm, c. 3. p. 17,38, &c.) I much fear that we do not possess any pure and/ree description of thesystem of Zoroaster. Dr. Prideaux (Connexion, vol. 1. p. 300. octavo) adopts 1heopinion, that he had been the slave and scholar of some Jewish prophet in thecaptivity of Babylon. Perhaps the Persians, who have been the masters of theJews, would assert the honour, a poor honour, of being tln'ir masters.
f The Arabian Nights, a faithful and amusing picture of the oriental world,represent in the most odious colours, the Magians, or worshippers of fire, to whomthey attribute the annual sacrifice of a Mussulman. The religion of Zoroasterhas not the least affinity with that of the Hindoos, yet they are often confoundedby the Mahometans; and the sword of Timonr was sharpened by this mistake.(Hist, de Timour Bee, par Cherefeddin Al i Yezdi, lib. 5.)
i Vie de Mahomet, par Gagnier, torn. 5. p. 114,115.
'Hsc tres sects, Jurtsi, Christiani, et qui inter Persas Magoruminstitntisad-dicti sunt, HUT' tjojc1"' fp«.\i liberi dicuntur. (Reland, Dissertat. torn. 3. p. 15.) Tbecaliph Al Mamun confirms this honourable distinction in favour of the three sects, •with the vague and equivocal religion of the Sabsans, under which the ancientPolytheisls of Charre were allowed to shelter theii idolatrous worship. (HottingCT.Hist. Orient, p. 167, 168.)







OCR Output













OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 59


founders. In the most abject state of ignorance, poverty,and servitude, the Nestorians and Monophysites rejectthe spiritual supremacy of Rome, and cherish the tole­ration of their Turkish masters, which allows them toanathematize; on one hand, St. Cyril and the synodof Ephesus; on the other, pope Leo and the council ofChalcedon. The weight which they cast into the down-fal of the eastern empire demands our notice; and thereader may be amused with the various prospects of,I. The Nestorians. II. The Jacobites." III. The Maro-nite.s. IV. The Armenians. V. The Copts; and, VI.The Abyssinians. To the three former, the Syriac iscommon; but of the latter, each is discriminated by theuse of a national idiom. Yet the modern natives ofArmenia and Abyssinia would be incapableof conversingwith their ancestors; and the Christians of Egypt andSyria, who reject the religion, have adopted the language,of the Arabians. The lapse of time has seconded thesacerdotal arts; and in the east, as well as in the west,the Deity is addressed in an obsolete tongue, unknownto the majority of the congregation.
I. Both in his native and his episcopal pro-vince, the heresy of the unfortunate Nestoriuswas speedily obliterated. The oriental bishops,who at Ephesus had resisted to his face the arroganceof Cyril, were mollified by his tardy concessions. Thesame prelates, or their successors, subscribed, not with­out a murmur, the decrees of Chalcedon: the powerof the Monophysites reconciled them with the Catho­lics in the conformity of passion, of interest, and insen­sibility of belief; and their last reluctant sigh wasbreathed in the defence of the three chapters. Theirdissenting brethren, less moderate or more sincerej
"On the account of the Honophysites and Nestorians, I am deeply indebted tothe Bibliotheca OrientaUs Clementine- Vaticana of Joseph Simon Assemannus.That learned Maronite was dispatched in the year 1715, by pope Clement XI. to»isit the monasteries of Egypt and Syiia in search of MSS. His four folio volumespublished at Ronvs in 1719—1728, contain a part only, though perhaps the mostvaloabla, of his extensive project. As a nativ« and as a scholar he possessed theSyriac literature; and, though a dependant of Rome, he wished to be moderateand candid.







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 407


death of Abu Obeidah might be lamented by the Chris­tians; but his brethren recollected that he was one of theten elect, whom the prophet had named as the heirs ofparadise.7 Caled survived his brethren about three years;and the tomb of the sword of God is shewn in the neigh­bourhood of Emesa. His valour, which founded in Ara­bia and Syria the empire of the caliphs, was fortified bythe opinion of a special providence; and as long as he•wore a cap, which had been blessed by Mahomet, hedeemed himself invulnerable amidst the darts of theinfidels.
Progress The place of the first conquerors was suppliedrfsmcon* ty a new generation of their children and coun-Tn0639 fry10611: Syria became the seat and support of—ess. the house of Ommiyah; and the revenue, thesoldiers, the ships of that powerful kingdom, were conse­crated to enlarge on every side the empire of the caliphs.But the Saracens despise a superfluity of fame; and theirhistorians scarcely condescend to mention the subordi­nate conquests which are lost in the splendour and rapi­dity of their victorious career. To the north of Syria,they passed mount Taurus, and reduced to their obedi­ence the province of Cilicia, with its capital Tarsus, theancient monument of the Assyrian kings. Beyond asecond ridge of the same mountains, they spread theflame of war, rather than the light of religion, as far asthe shores of the Euxine and the neighbourhood of Con­stantinople. To the east they advanced to the banksand sources of the Euphrates and Tigris :z the long dis­puted barrier of Rome and Persia was for ever con­


T Abnlfeda, Annal. Moslem, p. 73. Mahomet could artfully vary the praises ofbis disciples. Of Omar he was accustomed to say, that if a prophet could ariseafter himself, it would be Omar; and that in a general calamity, Omar would beaccepted by the divine justice. (Ockley, vol. 1. p. 221.)
* Al Wakidi had likewise written a history of the conquest of Diarbekir, orMesopotamia, (Ockley, at the end of the second vol.) which our interpreters donot appear to have seen. The chronicle of Dionysius of Telmar, the Jacobitepatriarch, records the taking of Edessa, A. D. 637, and of Dara, A. D. 641. (As-seman. Bibliot. Orient, torn. 2. p. 103.) and the attentive may glean some doubtfulinformation from the Chronography of Theophanes. (p. 285—287.) Most of thetowns of Mesopotamia yielded by surrender. (Abulpharag. p.







OCR Output








508 ROMAN EMPIRE.


emir. / have brought you to a land flowing with milkand honey. Here is your true country; repose fromyour toils, and forget the barren place of your nativity.—And our wives and children ?—Your beauteous captiveswill supply the place of your wives, and in their embracesyou will soon become the fathers of a new progeny. Thefirst habitation was their camp, with a ditch and ram­part, in the bay of Suda; but an apostate monk ledthem to a more desirable position in the eastern parts;and the name of Candax, their fortress and colony, hasbeen extended to the whole island, under the corruptand modern appellation ofCandia. The hundred citiesof the age of Minos were diminished to thirty; and ofthese, only one, most probably Cydonia, had courage toretain the substance of freedom and the profession ofChristianity. The Saracens of Crete soon repaired theloss of their navy; and the timbers of mount Ida werelaunched into the main. During a hostile period of onehundred and thirty-eight years, the princes of Constan­tinople attacked these licentious corsairs with fruitlesscurses and ineffectual anns.
and of The loss of Sicily" was occasioned by an actSicUy, Of superstitious rigour. An amorous youth,827—878. who had stolen a nun from her cloister, was sen­tenced by the emperor to the amputation of his tongue.Euphemius appealed to the reason and policy of theSaracens of Africa; and soon returned with the imperialpurple, a fleet of one hundred ships, and an army ofseven hundred horse and ten thousand foot. They land­ed at Mazara near the ruins of the ancient Selinus; butafter some partial victories, Syracuse" was delivered by


"Art:; (says the continuator of Theophanes, lib. 2. p. 61.) Ji twra. a-n^trrartn&t orXarDWTfpor ft TOTI y£*if,I(cra ©foywwTw jtai Kf 2C1'£*? ^-'J'a *f*m. This historyof the loss of Sicily is no longer extant. Muratori (Annali d'ltalia, torn. 7. p. 7.19.21, &c.) has added some circumstances from the Italian chronicles.
0 The splendid and interesting tragedy of Tancredc would adapt itself much betterto this epoch, than to the date (A. D. 1005.) which Voltaire himself has chosen.But I must gently reproach the poet, for infusing into the Greek subjects the spiritof modem knights and ancient republicans.







OCR Output













OCR Output








288 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the permission of evil under the reign of infinite powerand infinite goodness.
Mahomet The God of nature has written his existenceon all his works, and his law in the heart of


the last of mani To restore the knowledge of the one and
the pro- ~
pheu. the practice of the other, has been the real orpretended aim of the prophets of every age; the liberalityof Mahomet allowed to his predecessors the same cre­dit which he claimed for himself; and the chain of in­spiration was prolonged from the fall of Adam to thepromulgation of the Koran.1 During that period, somerays of prophetic light had been imparted to one hun­dred and twenty-four thousand of the elect, discrimi­nated by their respective measures of virtue and grace;three hundred and thirteen apostles were sent with aspecial commission to recall their country from idolatryand vice; one hundred and four volumes had beendictated by the holy spirit; and six legislators of trans­cendent brightness have announced to mankind the sixsuccessive revelations of various rites, but of one im­mutable religion. The authority and station of Adam,Noah. Abraham, Moses, Christ, and Mahomet, rise injust gradation above each other; but whosoever hatesor rejects any one of the prophets is numbered with theinfidels. The writings of the patriarchs were extant onlyin the apocryphal copies of the Greeks and Syrians:™ theconductof Adam had not entitled him to the gra­titude or respect of his children: the seven pre­cepts of Noah were observed by an inferior and imperfectclass of the proselytes of the synagogue," and the me­mory of Abraham was obscurely revered by the Sabians


I Reland, de Belig. Moharn. lib. 1. p. 17 — 47. (Sale's Preliminary Discourse,p. 73 — 76.; Voyage de dunlin, torn. 4. p. 18 — 37. and 37 — 47. for the Persianaddition, " Ali is the vicar of God - 1 Yet the precise number of prophets is not anarticle of faith.
a For the apocryphal books of Adam, see Fabricius, Codex PseudepigraphutV.T. p. 27—29; of Seth, p. 154—157; of Enoch, p. 160— 219. But the book ofEnoch is cansecrated, in some measure, by the quotation of the apostle of St. Jude;and a long legendary fragment is alleged by Syncellus and Scaliger.
II The seven precepts of Noah are explained by Marsham, (Canon Chronical,p. 154 — 180.) who adopts, on this occasion, the learnmg and credulity of Seldeu.







OCR Output








186 ROMAN EMPIRE.


tion of six months the three hundred and thirty-eightbishops pronounced and subscribed a unanimous decreethat all visible symbols of Christ, except in the eucharist,were either blasphemous or heretical; that image-wor­ship was a corruption of Christianity and a renewal ofPaganism; that all such monuments of idolatry shouldbe broken or erased; and that those who should refuseto deliver the objects of their private superstition, wereguilty of disobedience to the authority of the church andof the emperor. In their loud and loyal acclamations,they celebrated the merits of their temporal redeemer;and to his zeal and justice they intrusted the executionof their spiritual censures. At Constantinople, as in theformer councils, the will of the prince was the rule ofepiscopal faith; but, on this occasion, I am inclined tosuspect, that a large majority of the prelates sacrificedtheir secret conscience to the temptations of hope andThei, fear. In the long night of superstition, thecreed. Christians had wandered far away from thesimplicity of the gospel: nor was it easy for them todiscern the clue, and tread back the mazes, of thelabyrinth. The worship of images was inseparablyblended, at least to a pious fancy, with the cross, theVirgin, the saints, and their relics: the holy groundwas involved in a cloud of miracles and visions; andthe nerves of the mind, curiosity and scepticism, werebenumbed by the habits of obedience and belief. Con-stantine himself is accused of indulging a royal licenceto doubt, to deny, or deride, the mysteries of the Catho­lics," but they were deeply inscribed in the public andprivate creed of his bishops; and the boldest Icono­clast might assault with a secret horror, the monumentsof popular devotion, which were consecrated to the ho­nour of his celestial patrons. In the reformation of the


a He is accused of proscribing the title of saint; styling the Virgin, mother ofCkritt; comparing her after her delivery to an empty purse; of Arianism, Nesto-rianism, &c. lu his defence, Spanheim (c. 4. p. 207.) is somewhat embarrassedbetween the interest of a Protestant and the duty of an orthodox divine.







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. :J73


and imams was ennobled by the blood of their royalmothers.11
The After the fall of the Persian kingdom, the river
quest of Oxus divided the territories of the Saracens andia^a?0* of the Turks. This narrow boundary was soonA-D.no. overleaped by the spirit of the Arabs: the go­vernors of Chorasan extended their successive inroads;and one of their triumphs was adorned with the buskinof a Turkish queen, which she dropped in her precipitateflight beyond the hills of Bochara/ But the final con­quest of Transoxiana," as well as of Spain, was reservedfor the glorious reign of the inactive Walid; and thename of Catibah, the camel driver, declares the originand merit of his successful lieutenant. While one of hiscolleagues displayed the first Mahometan banner on thebanks of the Indus, the spacious regions between theOxus, the Jaxartes, and the Caspian sea, were reducedby the arms of Catibah to the obedience of the prophet,and of the caliph.' A tribute of two millions of piecesof gold was imposed on the infidels; their idols wereburnt or broken: the Mussulman chief pronounced asermon in the new mosch of Carizme; after several bat­tles, the Turkish hordes were driven back to the desert;and the emperors of China solicited the friendship of


i The two daughters of Yezdegerd married Hassan, the eon of Ali, and Mo­hammed, the son of Abubeker; and the first of these was the father of a numerousprogeny. The daughter of Phirouz became the wife of the caliph Walid, and theirson Yezid derived his genuine or fabulous descent from the Chosroes of Persia,the Caesars of Rome, and the Chagans of the Turks or Avars. (d'Herbelot, Bibliot.Orientale, p. 96. 487.)
'It was valued at two thousand pieces of gold, and was tin' prize of Obeidollah,the eon of Zivad, a name afterward infamous by the murder of Hosein. (Ockley'sHistory of the Saracens, vol. 2. p. 142,143.) His brother Salem was accompaniedby bis wife, the first Arabian woman (A. D. 680.) who passed the Oxus: sheborrowed, or rather stole, the crown and jewels of the princess of the Sogdians.(.231, 232.)
• A part of Abulfeda's geography is translated by Greaves, inserted in Hudson'scollection of the minor geographers, (torn. 3.) and entitled, Descriptio Chorasmki:et Mawaralnahra, id est, regionum extra fluvium, (.Hum, p. 80. The name ofTratuoxiana, softer in sound, equivalent in sense, is aptly used by Petit de la Croix,(Hist, de Gengiscan, &c.) and some modern orientalists; but they are mistaken inascribing it to the writers of antiquity.
'The conquests of Catibah are faintly marked by Elmacin, (Hist. Saracen, p.84.) d'Herbelot, (Bibliot. Orient. Catbah,Samarcand,Valid) andde Outgoes.4e> Huns, torn. 1. p. 58, 59.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 11


existence; that the Almighty had been scourged andcrucified; that his impassible essence had felt pain andanguish; that his omniscience was not exempt fromignorance, and that the source of life and immoralityexpired on mount Calvary. These alarming conse­quences were affirmed with unblushing simplicity byApollinaris,* bishop of Laodicea, and one of the lumi­naries of the church. The son of a learned gramma­rian, he was skilled in all the sciences of Greece; elo­quence, erudition, and philosophy, conspicuous in thevolumes of Apollinaris, were humbly devoted to theservice of religion. The worthy friend of Athanasius,the worthy antagonist of Julian, he bravely wrestledwith the Arians and Polytheists, and, though he affectedthe rigour of geometrical demonstration, his commen­taries revealed the literal and allegorical sense of theScriptures. A mystery, which had long floated in thelooseness of popular belief, was defined by his perversediligence in a technical form; and he first proclaimedthe memorable words,—One incarnate nature of Christ,which are still re-echoed with hostile clamours in thechurches of Asia, Egypt, and ^Ethiopia. He taughtthat the Godhead was united or mingled with the bodyof a man; and that the Logos, the eternal Wisdom,supplied in the flesh the place and office of a humansoul. Yet as the profound doctor had been terrified athis own rashness, Apollinaris was heard to mutter somefaint accents of excuse and explanation. He acqui­esced in the old distinction of the Greek philosophers,between the rational and sensitive soul of man; that hemight reserve the Logos for intellectual functions, andemploy the subordinate human principle in the meaneractions of animal life. With the moderate Docetes, he
• For Apollinaris and his sect, see Socrates, lib. 2. c. 46. lib. 3. c. 16. Sozomen,lib. 5. c. 18. lib. 6. c. 95—27. Theodoret, lib. 5. 3.10,11. Tillemont, MemoiresEccleaiastiques, torn. 7. p. 602—638. Not. p. 789—794. in quarto, Venise, 1732.The contemporary saints always mention the bishop of Laodieen, as a friend andbrother. The style of the more recent historians is harsh and hostile; yet Philp-•torghii compares him (lib. 8. c. 11—15.) to Basil and Gregory.







OCR Output








8 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the Gnostics, that both the form and the substance pro­ceeded from the divine essence. The idea of pure andabsolute spirit is a refinement of modern philosophy; theincorporeal essence, ascribed by the ancients to humansouls, celestial beings, and even the Deity himself, doesnot exclude the notion of extended space; and theirimagination was satisfied with a subtle nature of air, orfire, or ether, incomparably more perfect than the gross-ness of the material world. If we define the place, wemust describe the figure, of the Deity. Our experience,perhaps our vanity, represents the powers of reason andvirtue under a human form. The Anthropomorphites,who swarmed among the monks of Egypt, and the Ca­tholics of Africa, could produce the express declaration ofScripture, that man was made after the image of his Cre­ator."1 The venerable Serapian, one of the saints of theNitrian desert, relinquished with many a tear, his dar­ling prejudice, and bewailed, like an infant, his unluckyconversion, which had stolen away his God, and left hismind without any visible object of faith or devotion."in. DoU- III. Such were the fleeting shadows of theari"e Dc.cetes. A more substantial, though less sim-ple hypothesis, was contrived by Cerinthus ofAsia," who dared to oppose the last of the apostles.Placed on the confines of the Jewish and Gentile
"i The pilgrim Casaian, who visited Egypt in the beginning of the fifth century,observes and laments the reign of anthropomorphism among the monks, who werenot conscious that they embraced the system of Epicurus. (Cicero, de Nat. J 'co-rum, 1.18—34.] Ab universo propemodem genere monachorum, qui per totamprovinciam Egyptum morabantur, pro simplicitatis errore susceptum est, at e con-trario memoratum pontificem (Theophilus) vclut hsresi gravissima depravatum,pars maxima seniorum ab universe fraternitatu corpora decerneret detestandurn.(Cassian, Collation. 10. 2.) As long as St. Augustin remained a Manichsan, IIKwas scandalized by the anthropomorphism of the vulgar Catholics.
"Its est in oratione senez mente confusus, eo quod ilium i»&? oraro/uop fit imaginemDeitatis, quam proponere sibi in oratione consueveret aboleri de suo cordc sentiret,ut in amarissimos llrtus, crebrosque singultus repente prorumpens, in terr»in pros-tratus, cum ejulatu validissimo proclamaret,—" Heu me miserum! tolerant a meDrum meum, et quem nunc teneam non habeo, vel quern adorem, aut interpellemjam nescio." Caisian, Collat. 10 .2.
• St. John and Cerinthus (A. D. 80, Cleric. Hist. Eccles. p. 493.) accidentallymet in the public path of Ephesus; but the apostle fled from the heretic, lest thebuilding should tumble on their heads. This foolish story, reprobated by Dr. Middle-ton, (Miscellaneous Works, vol. 2.) is related however by Iremeus, (3. 3.) on the evi­dence of Polycarp, and was probably suited to the time and residence of Cerinthus.The obsolete, yet probably the true reading of 1 John iy. 3.—oXXini TOi 1nrow—alludes<o the double nature of that primitive heretic.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 243


has accused the second Otho of a perfidious and bloodyact, the massacre of the senators, whom he had invitedto his table under the fair semblance of hospitality andfriendship." In the minority of his son Otho III.,Rome made a bold attempt to shake off the Saxon yoke,and the consul Crescentius was the Brutus ofId Cres?"" ti1e republic. From the condition of a subjectcensus, and an exile, he twice rose to the command of
A.D.998. i
the city, oppressed, expelled, and created thepopes, and formed a conspiracy for restoring the autho­rity of the Greek emperors. In the fortress of St. Anrgelo, he maintained an obstinate siege, till the unfortu­nate consul was betrayed by a promise of safety: hisbody was suspended on a gibbet, and his head wasexposed on the battlements of the castle. By a reverseof fortune, Otho, after separating his troops, was be­sieged three days, without food, in his palace; and adisgraceful escape saved him from the justice or furyof the Romans. The senator Ptolemy was the leaderof the people, and the widow of Crescentius enjoyedthe pleasure or the fame of revenging her husband bya poison which she administered to her imperial lover.It was the design of Otho III. to abandon the rudercountries of the north, to erect his throne in Italy, andto revive the institutions of the Roman monarchy. Buthis successors only once in their lives appeared on thebanks of the Tiber, to receive their crown in the Vati­can.11 Their absence was contemptible, their presenceodious and formidable. They descended from theAlps, at the head of their barbarians, who were stran­gers and enemies to the country; and their transient


* Thia bloody feast is described in Leonine verse in the Pantheon of Godfrey ofViterbo, (Script. Ital. torn. 7. p. 436, 437.) who flourished towards the end of thetwelfth century; (Fabricius, Bibliot. Latin, med. et infimi tEvi, torn. 3. p. 69.edit Mansi) but his evidence, which imposed on Sigonius, is reasonably suspectedby Muratori. (Annali, torn. 8. p. 177.)
* The coronation of the emperor, and some original ceremonies of the tenthcentury, are preserved in the Panegyric on Berengarius, (Script. Ital. torn. 2.pare i. 405—414.) illustrated by the notes of Hadrian, Valerius, and Leibnitz.Sigonius has related the whole process of the Roman expedition in good Latin,but with some errors of time and fact. (lib. 7. p. 441—146.)


K2







OCR Output








380 ROMAN EMPIRE.


their religion, were indignantly hurled into the midst ofthe city. The event of some general and partial actionsreduced the Damascenes to a closer defence: but a mes­senger whom they dropped from the walls, returned withthe promise of speedy and powerful succour, and theirtumultuous joy conveyed the intelligence to the campof the Arabs. After some debate, it was resolved by thegenerals to raise, or rather to suspend, the siege of Da­mascus, till they had given battle to the "orces of the em­peror. In the retreat, Caled would have chosen themore perilous station of the rear-guard; he modestlyyielded to the wishes of Abu Obeidah. But in the hourof danger he flew to the rescue of his companion, whowas rudely pressed by a sally of six thousand horse andten thousand foot, and few among the Christians couldrelate at Damascus the circumstances of their defeat.The importance of the contest required the junction ofthe Saracens who were dispersed on the frontiers of Syriaand Palestine; and I shall transcribe one of the circularmandates which was addressed to Amrou the future con­queror of Egypt. In the name of the most merciful God:from Caled to Amrou, health and happiness. Know thatthy brethren the Moslems design to march to Aizna-din, where there is an army of seventy thousand Greeks,who propose to come against us, that they may extinguishthe light of God with their mouths; but God preservethhis light in spite of the infidels.k As soon, therefore,as this letter of mine shall be delivered to thy hands, comewith those that are with thee to Aiznadin, where thoushall find us, if it please the most high God. The sum­mons was cheerfully obeyed, and the forty-five thousandMoslems who met on the same day, on the same spot, as­cribed to the blessing of Providence the effects of theiractivity and zeal.


k These words are a text of the Koran, c. 9. 32. 61.8. Like our fanatics of thelast century, the Moslems, on every familiar or important occasion, spoke thelanguage of their scriptures; a style more natural in their mouths, than the Hebrewidiom transplanted into the climate and dialect of Britain.







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 365


day of succour. The day of concussion might expressthe disorder of one, or perhaps of both, of the contendingarmies. The third, a nocturnal tumult, received thewhimsical name of the night of barking, from the dis­cordant clamours, which were compared to the inarticu­late sounds of the fiercest animals. The morning of thesucceeding day determined the fate of Persia; and aseasonable whirlwind drove a cloud of dust against thefaces of the unbelievers. The clangour of arms was re­echoed to the tent of Rustam, who, far unlike the ancienthero of his name, was gently reclining in a cool andtranquil shade, amidst the baggage of his camp, and thetrain of mules that were laden with gold and silver. Onthe sound of danger he started from his couch; but hisflight was overtaken by a valiant Arab, who caught himby the foot, struck off his head, hoisted it on a lance,and instantly returning to the field of battle, carriedslaughter and dismay among the thickest ranks of thePersians. The Saracens confess a loss of seven thou­sand five hundred men; and the battle of Cadesia isjustly described by the epithets of obstinate and atro­cious.1 The standard of the monarchy was overthrownand captured in the field,—a leathern apron of a black­smith, who, in ancient times, had arisen the deliverer ofPersia; but this badge of heroic poverty was disguised,and almost concealed, by a profusion of precious gems.yAfter this victory, the wealthy province of Irak or Assy­ria submitted to the caliph, and his conquests werefirmly established by the speedy foundation of Bas-sora,z a place which ever commands the trade and navi­gation of the Persians. At the distance of fourscore


* Atrox, contumax, plus semel renovatum, are the well-chosen expressions ofthe translator of Abnlfeda. (Reiske, p. 69.)
r D'Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientate, p. 297. 348.
1The reader may satisfy himself on the subject of Bassora, by consulting thefollowing writers.—Geograph. Nubians, p.121. D'Herbelot, BibliothrqueOrientale,p. 199. D'Anville, 1'Euphrate et le Tigre, p. 13O. 133.145. Raynal, Hist. Philoso-phique des deux Indes, torn. 2. p. 92—10O. Voyages de Pietro della Valle, torn. p.370—391. De Tavcraier, torn. 1. p. 240—247. De Thevenot, torn. 2. p. 545—584.D'Otter, torn. 3. p. 45—78. De Niebuhr, torn. 2. p. 172—199.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 9


world, he laboured to reconcile the Gnostic with theEbionite, by confessing in the same Messiah the super­natural union of a man and a God: and this mysticdoctrine was adopted with many fanciful improvementsby Carpocrates, Basilides, and Valentine,1" the hereticsof the Egyptian school. In their eyes, JESUS of Nazarethwas a mere mortal, the legitimate son of Joseph andMary; but he was the best and wisest of the. humanrace, selected as the worthy instrument to restore uponearth the worship of the true and supreme Deity.When he was baptized in the Jordan, the CHRIST, thefirst of the aeons, the Son of God himself, descended onJesus in the form of a dove, to inhabit his mind, and di­rect his actions during the allotted period of his ministry.When the Messiah was delivered into the hands of theJews, the Christ, an immortal and impassible being, for­sook his earthly tabernacle, flew back to the pleroma orworld of spirits, and left the solitary Jesus to suffer, tocomplain, and to expire. But the justice and generosityof such a desertion are strongly questionable; and thefate of an innocent martyr, at first impelled, and at lengthabandoned by his divine companion, might provoke thepity and indignation of the profane. Their murmurswere variously silenced by the sectaries who espousedand modified the double system of Cerinthus. It wasalleged, that when Jesus was nailed to the cross, hewas endowed with a miraculous apathy of mind andbody, which rendered him insensible of his apparentsufferings. It was affirmed, that these momentary,though real pangs, would be abundantly repaid by thetemporal reign of a thousand years, reserved for theMessiah in his kingdom of the New Jerusalem. Itwas insinuated, that if he suffered, he deserved to suf­


v The Valentinians embraced a complex, and almost incoherent systern.—1.Both Christ and Jesus were aeons, though of different degrees; the one acting asthe rational soul, the other as the divine spirit of the Saviour. 2. At the time ofthe passion, they both retired, and left only a sensitive soul and a human body.3. Even that body was etherial and perhaps apparent.—Such are the laboriousconclusions of Mosheirn. But I much doubt whether the Latin translator under­stood Iren&us, and whether Irenaeus and the Valentinians understood themselves.







OCR Output








286 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the Jews of Mecca or Medina adored Ezra as the sonof God.' But the children of Israel had ceased to bea people; and the religions of the world were guilty,at least in the eyes of the prophet, of giving sons, ordaughters, or companions, to the supreme God. In therude idolatry of the Arabs, the crime is manifest andaudacious: the Sabians are poorly excused by the pre­eminence of the first planet, or intelligence in their ce­lestial hierarchy; and in the Magian system the conflictof the two principles betrays the imperfection of theconqueror. The Christians of the seventh century hadinsensibly relapsed into a semblance of Paganism; theirpublic and private vows were addressed to the relicsand images that disgraced the temples of the east: thethrone of the Almighty was darkened by a cloud ofmartyrs, and saints, and angels, the objects of popularveneration; and the Collyridian heretics who flourishedin the fruitful soil of Arabia, invested the Virgin Marywith the name and honours of a goddess/ The myste­ries of the Trinity and Incarnation appear to contradictthe principle of the divine unity. In their obvioussense, they introduce three equal deities, and transformthe man Jesus into the substance of the son of God :•an orthodox commentary will satisfy only a believingmind: intemperate curiosity and zeal had torn the veilof the sanctuary; and each of the oriental sects waseager to confess that all, except themselves, deserved


c Koran, c. 9. p. 153. Al Beidawi, and the other commentators quoted bySale, adhere to the charge; but I do not understand that it is coloured by the mostobscure or absurd tradition of the Talmudists.
'Iloltingi.r, Hist. Orient, p. 225—228. The Collyridian heresy was carriedfrom Thrace to Arabia by some women, and the name was borrowed from the«Xxu5-i;, or cake, which they offered to the goddess. This example, that of Urryl-lus bishop of Bostra, (Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. 6. c. 33.) and several others, mayexcuse the reproach, Arabia hsreeewn ferax.
f The three gods in the Koran (c. 4. p. 81. c. 5. p. 92.) are obviously directedagainst our Catholic mystery; but the Arabic commentators understand them of thefather, the Son, and the Virgin Mary, an heretical trinity, maintained, as it iseaid, by some barbarians at the council of Nice. (Eutych. Annal. torn. 1. p. 440.)But the existence of the Marianitii is denied by tin- candid Beausobre, (Hist, deManicheisme.tom. l.p. 532.)andhe derives the mistake from the word Rtush, theHoly Ghost, which in some oriental tongues is of the feminine gender, and Ufiguratively styled the mother of Christ in the Gospel of the Nazarenes.







OCR Output








292 ROMAN EMPIRE.


will not reach, in a version, the European infidel: hewill peruse with impatience the endless incoherent rhap­sody of fable, and precept, and declamation, which sel­dom excites a sentiment or an idea, which sometimescrawls in the dust, and is sometimes lost in the clouds.The divine attributes exalt the fancy of the Arabianmissionary; but his loftiest strains must yield to thesublime simplicity of the book of Job, composed in aremote age, in the same country, and in the same lan­guage.'1 If the composition of the Koran exceed thefaculties of a man, to what superior intelligence shouldwe ascribe the Iliad of Homer or the Philippics of De­mosthenes? In all religions, the life of the founder sup­plies the silence of his written revelation: the sayingsof Mahomet were so many lessons of truth; his actionsso many examples of virtue; and the public and privatememorials were preserved by his wives and companions.At the end of two hundred years, the Sonna, or orallaw, was fixed and consecrated by the labours of AIBochari, who discriminated seven thousand two hundredand seventy-five traditions, from a mass of three hun­dred thousand reports, of a more doubtful or spuriouscharacter. Each day the pious author prayed in thetemple of Mecca, and performed his ablutions with thewater of Zemzem; the pages were successively depo­sited on the pulpit, and the sepulchre of the apostle;and the work has been approved by the four orthodoxsects of the Sonnites.0
The mission of the ancient prophets, of Moses,and of Jesus, had been confirmed by many


too hard for the translator) derides the rhyming affectation of the most applaudedpassage, (torn. 1. part 2. p. 69—75.)
b Colloquia (whether real or fabulous) in media Arabia atque ab Arabibushabita. (Lowth. de Poesi Hebraorum Prelect. 32—34. with his German editorMichaelis, Epimetron 4.) Yet Michael is (p. 671—673.) has detected man;Egyptian images, the elephantiasis, papyrus, Nile, crocodile, &c. The langusgeis ambiguously styled, Arabico-Hebrea. The resemblance of the sister dialects wasmuch more visible in their childhood than in their mature age. (Michaelis, p. 68!.Schultens, in Prafat. Job.)
c Al Bochari died A. H. 224. See d'Herbelot, p. 208. 416. 827. Gagnier, Not.ad Abulfed. c. 19. p. 33.







OCR Output








.r)lO ROMAN EMPIRE.


and clothed on the same day with the son of the Fati-mite caliph. The Arabian squadrons issued from theharbours of Palermo, Biserta, and Tunis; a hundred andfifty towns of Calabria and Campania were attacked andpillaged; nor could the suburbs of Rome be defendedby the name of the Caesars and apostles. Had the Ma­hometans been united, Italy must have fallen an easyand glorious accession to the empire of the prophet. Butthe caliphs of Bagdad had lost their authority in thewest; the Aglabites and Fatimites usurped the pro­vinces of Africa; their emirs of Sicily aspired to inde­pendence; and the design of conquest and dominionwas degraded to a repetition of predatory inroads.*1invasion of 'n ^e sufferings of prostrate Italy, the name ofRome by Rome awakens a solemn and mournful reflec-cens, tion. A fleet of Saracens from the African coastpresumed to enter the mouth of the Tyber, and toapproach a city which even yet, in her fallen state, wasrevered as the metropolis of the Christian world. Thegates and ramparts were guarded by a trembling people;but the tombs and temples of St. Peter and St. Paul wereleft exposed in the suburbs of the Vatican and of theOstian way. Their invisible sanctity had protected themagainst the Goths, the Vandals, and the Lombards; butthe Arabs disdained both the gospel and the legend;and their rapacious spirit was approved and animated bythe precepts of the Koran. The Christian idols werestripped of their costly offerings; a silver altar was tornaway from the shrine of St. Peter; and if the bodies orthe buildings were left entire, their deliverance must beimputed to the haste, rather than the scruples, of the Sa­racens. In their course along the Appian way, they pil­laged Fundi and besieged Gayeta ; but they had turnedaside from the walls of Rome, and, by their divisions, the


i The extracts from the Arabic histories of Sicily are giren in Abulfeda, (Annal.Moslem, p. 271—273.) and in the first volume of Muratori's Scriptores Kenan It»-ficarnrn. M. de Guignes (Hist, des Huns, torn. 1. p. 363, 364.) has added someimportant facts.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 211


ancient claim, which, in a more prosperous age, theyhave revived and realized.
Forgery of Fraud is the resource of weakness and cun-timofCon- nnig; aQd the strong, though ignorant barba-•tantine. riail} was Often entangled in the net of sacerdotalpolicy. The Vatican and Lateran were an arsenal andmanufacture, which, according to the occasion, haveproduced or concealed a various collection of false orgenuine, of corrupt or suspicious acts, as they tendedto promote the interest of the Roman church. Beforethe end of the eighth century, some apostolical scribe,perhaps the notorious Isidore, composed the decretals,and the donation of Constantine, the two magic pillarsof the spiritual and temporal monarchy of the popes.This memorable donation was introduced to the worldby an epistle of Hadrian I., who exhorts Charlemagneto imitate the liberality, and revive the name, of thegreat Constantine/ According to the legend, the firstof the Christian emperors was healed of the leprosy,and purified in the waters of baptism, by St. Silvester,the Roman bishop; and never was physician moregloriously recompensed. His royal proselyte withdrewfrom his seat and patrimony of St. Peter; declared hisresolution of founding a new capital in the east; andresigned to the popes the free and perpetual sovereigntyof Rome, Italy, and the provinces of the west.' Thisfiction Was productive of the most beneficial effects.The Greek princes were convicted of the guilt of usur­pation; and the revolt of Gregory was the claim of hislawful inheritance. The popes were delivered from


i Piissimo Constantino magno, per cjus largitatem S. R. Ecclesia elevata et ex-oltata est, et potestatem in his Hesperiae partibus largiri dignatus est .... Qiiiaecce novus Constantinus his temporibus, &c. (Codex. Carolin. epist. 49. in torn. 3.pan 2. p. 195.) Pagi (Critica, A. D. 324, no. 16.) ascribes them to an impostor ofthe eighth centuiy, who borrowed the name of St. Isidore: his humble title of Pec-eator was ignorantly, but aptly, tamed into liercator: his merchandise was indeedprofitable, and a few sheets of paper were sold for much wealth and power.
* Fabricius (Bibliot. GTOC. torn. 6. p. 4—7.) has enumerated the several editionsof this Act, in Greek and Latin. The copy which Lanrcntius Valla recites and re­futes, appears to be taken either from the spurious Acts of St. Silvester or from Gra-ti an's Decree, to which, according to him and others, it has been surreptitiouslytacked.


p 2







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 423


Arabia; and a string of camels, laden with corn andprovisions, covered almost without an interval the longroad from Memphis to Medina.1 But the genius ofAmrou soon renewed the maritime communication whichhad been attempted or achieved by the Pharaohs, thePtolemies, or the Caesars; and a canal, at least eightymiles in length, was opened from the Nile to the Redsea. This inland navigation, which would have joinedthe Mediterranean and the Indian ocean, was soon dis­continued as useless and dangerous: the throne wasremoved from Medina to Damascus; and the Grecianfleets might have explored a passage to the holy cities ofArabia."1
Hichesand Of ^s new conquest the caliph Omar had anpopulous- imperfect knowledge from the voice of fame andthe legends of the Koran. He requested thathis lieutenant would place before his eyes the realm ofPharaoh and the Amalekites; and the answer of Amrouexhibits a lively and not unfaithful picture of that sin­gular country." 0 commander of (he faithful, Egypt isa compound of black earth and green plants, between apulverized mountain and a red sand. The distance fromSyene to the sea is a month's journey for a horseman.Along the valley descends a river, on which the blessingof the Most High reposes both in the evening and morn­ing, and which rises and falls with the revolutions ofthe sun and moon. When the annual dispensation ofProvidence unlocks the springs and fountains that nourishthe earth, the Nile rolls his swelling and sounding waters


1 Eutychius, Anna), torn. 2. p. 320. Elmacin, Hist. Saraocn, p. 35.
• On these obscure canals, the reader may try to satisfy himself from d'Anville,(Mern. sur 1'Egypte, p. 108—110.124.132.) and a learned thesis maintained andprinted at Strashurg in the year 1770. (Jungendorum marium fluviorumque moli-mina, p. 39—47. 68—70.) Even the supine Turks have agitated the old projectof joining the two fleas. (Memoires de Baron de Tott, torn. 4.)
"A small volume, des Merveilles, &c. de 1'Egypte, composed in the thirteenthcentury by Murtadi of Cairo, and translated from an Arabic MS. of cardinal Maza-rin, was published by Pierre Vatier, Paris, 1666. The antiquities of Egypt arewild and legendary: but the writer deserves credit and esteem for his account ofthe conquest and geography of his native country. (See the correspondence ofArarou and Omar, p. 279—289.)







OCR Output








480 ROMAN EMPIRE.


race, the pious Omar, was dissatisfied with his own title:their personal virtues were insufficient to justify a de­parture from the order of succession; and the eyes andwishes of the faithful were turned towards the line ofHashem and the kindred of the apostle of God. Of thesethe Fatimites were either rash or pusillanimous; but thedescendants of Abbas cherished, with courage and dis­cretion, the hopes of their rising fortunes. From an ob­scure residence in Syria, they secretly dispatched theiragents and missionaries, who preached in the easternprovinces their hereditary indefeasible right; and Mo­hammed, the son of Ali, the son of Abdallah, the son ofAbbas, the uncle of the prophet, gave audience to thedeputies of Chorasan, and accepted their free gift of fourhundred thousand pieces of gold. After the death ofMohammed, the oath of allegiance was administered inthe name of his son Ibrahim to a numerous band of vo­taries, who expected only a signal and a leader; and thegovernor of Chorasan continued to deplore his fruitlessadmonitions and the deadly slumber of the caliphs ofDamascus, till he himself, with all his adherents, wasdriven from the city and palace of Meru, by the rebel­lious arms of Abu Moslem."1 Thatmaker of kings, theauthor, as he is named, of the call of the Abbassides,was at length rewarded for his presumption of merit withthe usual gratitude of courts. A mean, perhaps a fo­reign, extraction, could not repress the aspiring energyof Abu Moslem. Jealous of his wives, liberal of hiswealth, prodigal of his own blood and of that of others,he could boast with pleasure, and possibly with truth,that he had destroyed six hundred thousand of his ene­mies; and such was the intrepid gravity of his mind andcountenance, that he was never seen to smile except on


10 The steed and the saddle, which had carried any of his wives, were instantlykilled or burnt, lest they should be afterward mounted by a male. Twelve hundredmules or camels were required for his kitchen furniture; and the daily consump­tion amounted to three thousand cakes, a hundred sheep, besides oxen, poultry,&c. (Abulpharagius, Hist. Dynast, p. 140.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 103


prostrate in chains beneath the throne of the emperor;and Justinian, planting a foot on each of their necks,contemplated above an hour the chariot-race, while theinconstant people shouted, in the words of the psalm­ist,—Thou shall trample on the asp and basilisk, and onthe lion and dragon shalt thou set thy foot! The uni­versal defection which he had once experienced mightprovoke him to repeat the wish of Caligula, that the Ro­man people had but one head. Yet I shall presume toobserve, that such a wish is unworthy of an ingenioustyrant, since his revenge and cruelty would have been ex­tinguished by a single blow, instead of the slow varietyof tortures which Justinian inflicted on the victims of hisanger. His pleasures were inexhaustible: neither privatevirtue nor public service could expiate the guilt of active,or even passive, obedience to an established government;and, during the six years of his new reign, he consideredthe axe, the cord, and the rack, as the only instrumentsof royalty. But his most implicable hatred was pointedagainst the Chersonites, who had insulted his exile,, andviolated the laws of hospita^ty. Their remote situationafforded some means of defence, or at least of escape;and a grievous tax was imposed on Constantinople, tosupply the preparations of a fleet and army. All areguilty, and all must perish, was the mandate of Justi­nian; and the bloody execution was intrusted to hisfavourite Stephen, who was recommended by the epithet-of the savage. Yet even the savage Stephen imper­fectly accomplished the intentions of his sovereign. Theslowness of his attack allowed the greater part of the in­habitants to withdraw into the country; and the minister6f vengeance contented himself with reducing the youthof both sexes to a state of servitude, with roasting aliveseven of the principal citizens, with drowning twenty inthe sea, and with reserving forty-two in chains to receivetheir doom from the mouth of the emperor. In theirreturn, the fleet was driven on the rocky shores of Ana-







OCR Output








210 ROMAN EMPIRE.


lives of a temporal princte; the choice of magistrates,the exercise of justice, the imposition of taxes, and thewealth of the palace of Ravenna. In the dissolution ofthe Lombard kingdom, the inhabitants of the dutchy ofSpoleto* sought a refuge from the storm, shaved theirheads after the Roman fashion, declared themselves theservants and subjects of St. Peter, and completed, bythis voluntary surrender, the present circle of the eccle­siastical state. That mysterious circle was enlarged toan indefinite extent, by the verbal or written donationof Charlemagne/ who, in the first transports of his vit-tory, despoiled himself and the GreeTc emperor of thecities and islands which had formerly been annexed tothe exarchate. But in the cooler moments of absenceand reflection, he viewed, with an eye of jealousy andenvy, the recent greatness of his ecclesiastical airy. Theexecution of his own and his father's promises was re­spectfully eluded: the king of the Franks and the Lom­bards asserted the inalienable rights of the empire; and,in his life and death, Ravenna," as well as Rome, wasnumbered in the list of his metropolitan cities. Thesovereignty of the exarchate melted away in the handsof the popes; they found in the archbishops of Ravennaa dangerous and domestic rival;" the nobles and peopledisdained the yoke of a priest: and, in the disorders ofthe times, they could only retain the memory of an


• Spoletini deprecati aunt, ut eos in servitio B. Petri reciperet et more Roma-norum tonsurari faceret. (Anastasius, p. 185.) Yet it may be a question whetherthey gave their own persons or their country.
» The policy and donations of Charlemagne are carefully examined by St. Marc,(Abrige, torn. 1. p. 390—408.) who has well studied the Codex Carolinus. I be-lieve, with him, that they were only verbal. The moat ancient act of donation thatpretends to be extant, is that of the emperor Louis the Pious: (Signonius, de RegnoItaliae, lib. 4. Opera, torn. 2. p. 267—270.) its authenticity, or at least its integrity,are much questioned; (Pagi, A. D. 817, no. 7, &c Muratori, AnnaK, torn. 6. p. 43t,&c.T)issertat, Chorographica, p. 33,34.) but I see no reasonable objection to theseprinces so freely disposing of what was not their own.
"Charlemagne solicited and obtained from the proprietor, Hadrian I. the mo­saics of the palace of Ravenna, for the decoration of Aix-la-Chapelle. (Cod.Carol in. epist. 67. p. 323.)
* The popes often complain of the. usurpation of Leo of Ravenna: (Coder, Ca-rolin. epist. 51—53. p. 200—205.) Si corpus St. Andreas fratris germani St. Petrihie bwmasset, nequaquam.nos Romatii pontificca sic subjugassrnt. (Agnellus, LiberFontincalis, in Scriptores Rerum Ital. torn. 2. pars 1. p. 107.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 11)1


loyalty,' On this occasion, the effects of love and hatredare the same; and the zealous Protestants, who seek tokindle the indignation, and to alarm the fears, of princes«id magistrates, expatiate on the insolence and trea­son of the two Gregories against their lawful sove­reign/ They are defended only by the moderate Ca­tholics, for the most part, of the Gallican church," whorespect the saint, without approving the sin. Thesecommon advocates of the crown and the mitre circum­scribe the truth of facts by the rule of equity, Scripture,and tradition; and appeal11 to the evidence of the Latins,and the liv-es' and epistles of the popes themselves.E . a s f '^wo orig'nal epistles from Gregory II. toGregory n. the emperor Leo, are still extant ;k and if theycannot be praised as the most perfect modelsojp elOqUence and logic, they exhibit the por­trait, or at least the mask, of the founder of the Papal


'Quod si Christiani ohm non deposuerunt Neronem aut .Tulkumm, id fait cluia'Ifi-tuuT vires temporalea Christianis. (Hours! Bellarmine, d» Rorn. Pont. lib. .'>.o. 7.) Cardinal Perron adds a distinction more banoorable to the first Christians,but not more satisfactory to modern princes—the treaum of heretics and apostates,who break their oath, belie their coin, and renounce their allegiance to Christ andhi* near. (Perroniana, p. 89-)
'Take, as a specimen, the cautious Basnage, (Hist, de' 1'Eglise, p. 1350,135J.)and the vehement Spanheim (Hist. Imaginum), who, with a huidred more, treadin the footsteps of the centuriators of Magdeburgh.
* SeeLannoy, {Opera, torn.5.pars2.-epist.7.7.p.456—*74.)NataIis Alexan­der, (Hist. Nov. Testamenti, secul. 8. dissert. 1. p. 92—96.) Pagi, (Critica, torn.3. p. 2)5, 316.) and Giannone, (Istoria Civile di Napoli, torn. 1. p. 317—320.) adisciple of the Gallican school. In the fieJd of controversy I always pity the mode­rate party, who stand on the open middle ground, exposed to the fire on both sides.b They appealed to Paul Warnefrid, or Diaconue, (de Gestis Langobard. lib. 6.c. 49. p 506, 507. in Script. Ital. Muratori, torn. 1. pars. 1.) and the nominalAnastasitn, (de Vit. Pont, in Muratori, torn. 3. pars. 1.) Gregorius II. p. 154.Oregorius III. p. 158. Zacharias, p. 161. Slephanus III. p. 165. Paulus, p. 173.Stephanas IV. p. 174. HaJrianus, p. 179. Leo III. p. 195. Yet 1 may remark,that the true Anastasius (Hist. Ecctes. p. 134. edit. Reg.) and the Historia Mis-cella, (lib. 21. p. 151. in torn. 1. Script. Ital.) both of the ninth century, translateand approve the Greek text of Thoophanes.
1 With some minute difference, the most learned critics, Lucas Holstenius,Schelestrate, Ciampini, Bianchini, Muratori, (Prolegomena ad torn. 3. pars. 1.)are agreed that the Liber Pontificalia was composed and continued by the aposto­lical librarians and notaries of the eighth and ninth centuries; and that the lastand smallest part is the work of Anastasius, whose name it bears. The style isbarbarous, the narrative partial, the details are trifling—yet it must be read as acurious and authentic record of the times. The epistles of the popes are dispersedin the volumes of Councils.
k The two epistles of Gregory II. have been preserved in the Acts of the \ieene Council, (torn. 8. p.6Sl—674.) They are without a date, which u variouslyfixed, by Baronius in the year 726, by Muratori (Annali d'ltalia, torn. 6. p. 120.)in 73,9, and by Pagi in 730. Such is the force of prejudice, that some Papistshave praised the good sense and moderation of thrse letters.







OCR Output








02 ROMAN EMPIRE.


forgotten; houses of charity were endowed for theeducation of orphans and foundlings; the law of celi­bacy, so forcibly recommended to the Greeks and La­tins, was disregarded by the Persian clergy; and thenumber of the elect was multiplied by the public andreiterated nuptials of the priests, the bishops, and eventhe patriarch himself. To this standard of natural andreligious freedom, myriads of fugitives resorted fromall the provinces of the eastern empire: the narrow bi­gotry of Justinian was punished by the emigration ofhis most industrious subjects; they transported intoPersia the arts both of peace and war: and those whodeserved the favour, were promoted in the service, ofa discerning monarch. The arms of Nushirvan, andhis fiercer grandson, were assisted with advice, andmoney, and troops, by the desperate sectaries whostill lurked in their native cities of the east: their zealwas rewarded with the gift of the Catholic churches;but when those cities and churches were recovered byHeraclius, their open profession of treason and heresycompelled them to seek a refuge in the realm of theirforeign ally. But the seeming tranquillity of the Nes-torians was often endangered, and sometimes over­thrown. They were involved in the common evils oforiental despotism: their enmity to Rome could not al­ways atone for their attachment to the gospel: and acolony of three hundred thousand Jacobites, the cap­tives of Apamea and Antioch, was permitted to erect a •hostile altar in the face of the Catholic, and in the sun­shine of the court. In his last treaty, Justinian intro­duced some conditions which tended to enlarge andfortify the toleration of Christianity in Persia. Theemperor, ignorant of the rights of conscience, was in­capable of pity or esteem for the heretics who deniedthe authority of the holy synods: but he flattered him-
Bibliotheca Orientalis, the extracts in the three preceding tomes (torn. 1. p. 903.9. p. 321—463. 3. 64—70. 378—395, &c. 403—408. 580—589.) may be use-fall; consulted.







OCR Output








102 ROMAN HISTORY.


r '!
two emissaries of the .khan, Justjnian sept back bis wife'to tier brother, and embarked on the Euxine in searchof new and more faithful allies. His vessel was assault­ed by a violent tempest; and one of his pious compa­nions advised him to deserve the mercy of God by a vowof general forgiveness, if he should be restored to thethrone. Of forgiveness? (replied the intrepid tyrant)may I perish this instant—may the Almighty whelm mein the waves—if I consent to spare a single head of myenemies! He survived this impious menace, sailed intothe mouth of the Danube, trusted his person in the royal.village of the Bulgarians, and purchased the aid of Ter-.belis, a Pagan conqueror, by the promise of his daugh­ter and a fair partition of the treasures of the empire.The Bulgarian kingdom extended to the confines ofThrace; and the two prinqes besieged Constantinople atthe head of fifteen thousand horse. Apsimar was dis­mayed by the sudden and hostile apparition, of his rival,whose head had been promised by the C^ozar, and ofwhose evasion he was yet ignorant. After an absenceof ten years, the crimes of Justinian were faintly remem­bered, and the birth and misfortunes of their hereditarysovereign excited the pity of the multitude, ever discon­tented with the ruling powers; and by the active dili­gence of his adherents, he was introduced into the cityand palace of Constantine.
His re In rewarding his allies and recalling his wife,storation Justinian displayed some sense of honour andA. D. 705' gratitude; and Terbelis retired, after sweeping~711' away a heap of gold coin, which he measuredwith his Scythian whip. But never was vow more re­ligiously performed than the sacred oath of revengewhich he had sworn amidst the storms of the Euxine.The two usurpers, for I must reserve the name of ty­rant for the conqueror, were dragged into the hippo­drome, the one from his prison, the other from his palace.Before their execution, Leontius and Apsimar were cast







OCR Output








490 ROMAN EMPIRE.


ragius) that they are the elect of God, his best andmost useful servants, whose lives are devoted to the im­provement of their rational faculties. The mean am­bition of the Chinese or the Turks may glory in the in­dustry of their hands, or (he indulgence of their brutalappetites. Yet these dexterous artists must view, withhopeless emulation, the hexagons and pyramids of thecells of a bee-hive / these fortitudinous heroes are awed bythe superior fierceness of the lions and tigers; and intheir amorous enjoyments, they are much inferior to thevigour of the grossest and most sordid quadrupeds. Theteachers of wisdom are the true luminaries and legislatorsof a world, which, without their aid, would again sink inignorance and barbarism.* The zeal and curiosity ofAlmamon were imitated by succeeding princes of the lineof Abbas: their rivals, the Fatimites of Africa and theOmmiades of Spain, were the patrons of the learned, aswell as the commanders of the faithful: the same royalprerogative was claimed by their independent emirs ofthe provinces; and their emulation diffused the taste andthe rewards of science from Samarcand and Bochara toFez and Cordova. The vizier of a sultan consecrateda sum of two hundred thousand pieces of gold to thefoundation of a college at Bagdad, which he endowedwith an annual revenue of fifteen thousand dinars. Thefruits of instruction were communicated, perhaps at dif­ferent times, to six thousand disciples of every degree,from the son of the noble to that of the mechanic: a


1 See their curious architecture in Reaumar. (Hist, dcs Insects, torn. 5. Ale-moire 8.) These hexagons are closed by a pyramid; the angles of the three sidesof a similar pyramid, such as would accomplish the given end with the smallestquantity possible of materials, were determined by a mathematician, at one hun­dred and nine degrees iweuty-six minutes for the larger, seventy degrees thirty-fourminutes for the smaller. The actusl measure is one hundred and nine degreestwenty-eight minutes, seventy degrees thirty-two minutes. Yet this perfect har­mony raises the work at the expense of the artist; the bees are not masters oftranscendant geometry.
f Saed Abu Ahmed, cadhi of Toledo, who died A. II. 462, A. D. 1069, has fur­nished Abulpharagius (Dynast, p. 160,) with this curious passage, as well as withthe text of Pocock e Specimen Historis Araburn. A number of literary anecdotesof philosophers, physicians, &c. who have flourished under each caliph, form theprincipal merit of the dynasties of Abulpharagius.







OCR Output













OCR Output








CHAP. L. 327


ness of their Arabian brethren had restrained them fromopposing his ambition: the disciples of Jesus were en­deared to the enemy of the Jews; and it was the inte­rest of a conqueror to propose a fair capitulation to themost powerful religion of the earth.Death of Till the age of sixty-three years, the strength^D°632 of Mahomet was equal to the temporal and spi-Juno 7. ritual fatigues of his mission. His epileptic fits,an absurd calumny of the Greeks, would be an object ofpity rather than abhorrence,1 but he seriously believedthat he was poisoned at Chaibar by the revenge of aJewish female.™ During four years, the health of theprophet declined; his infirmities increased; but his mor­tal disease was a fever of fourteen days, which deprivedhim by intervals of the use of reason. As soon as he wasconscious of his danger, he edified his brethren by thehumility of his virtue or penitence. If there be any man(said the apostle from the pulpit) whom I have unjustlyscourged, I submit my own back to the lash of retaliation.Have I aspersed the reputation of a Mussulman? let himproclaim my faults in the face of the congregation. Hasany one been despoiled of his goods? the little that I pos­sess shall compensate the principal and the interest of thedebt.— Yes (replied a voice from the crowd), / am en-tilled to threedrachms of silver. Mahometheard the com­plaint, satisfied the demand, and thanked his creditor foraccusing him in this world rather than at the day ofjudgment He beheld with temperate firmness the ap­proach of death; enfranchised his slaves (seventeen men,


quotes the impostor's treaty with the Nestorian patriarch; (Asseman. Bibliot.Orient, torn. 2. p. 418.) but Abulpharagius was primate of the Jacobites.
1 The epilepsy, or falling sickness, of Mahomet, is asserted by Theophanes, '/.i,-naras, and the rest of the Greeks; and is greedily swallowed by the gross bigotryof Hottinger, (Hist. Orient, p. 10, 11.) Prideaux, (Life of Mahomet, p. I3.) andMaracci. (torn. 2. Alcoran, (p. 762, 763.) The titles (|A» wrapptd up, tin- covered)of two chapters of the Koran (73, 74.) can hardly be strained to such an interpre­tation; the silence, the ignorance, of the Mahometan commentators, is more con­clusive than the most peremptory denial : and the charitable side is espoused bjrOdkley, (Hist, of the Saracens, torn. 1. p. 301.) Gagnier, (ad Abalfeda, p. 9. Viede Mahomet, torn. 1. p. 118.) and Sale. (Koran, p. 469—174.)
r" This poison (more ignominious since it was offered as a test of his propheticknowledge) is frankly confessed by his zealous votaries, Abulfeda (p. 92.) and A1Jannabi. (apud Gagnier, torn. -. p. 286—288.)







OCR Output








626 ROMAN EMPIRE.


vinces of Syria and Egypt were twice dismembered byThe Tou- their Turkish slaves, of the race of Toulon andIkshidf These barbarians, in religion and man-lif05'ners tne countrymen of Mahomet, emerged fromshidues, the bloody factions of the palace to a provincial934^-968. command and an independent throne: theirnames became famous and formidable in their time; butthe founders of these two potent dynasties confessed,either in words or actions the vanity of ambition. Thefirst on his death-bed implored the mercy of God to asinner, ignorant of the limits of his own power: the se­cond, in the midst of four hundred thousand soldiers andeight thousand slaves, concealed from every human eyethe chamber where he attempted to sleep. Their sons•were educated in the vices of kings; and both Egyptand Syria were recovered and possessed by the Abbas-sides during an interval of thirty years. In the declineof their empire, Mesopotamia, with the important citiesof Mosul and Aleppo, was occupied by the ArabianThe Hama- princes of the tribe of Hamadan. The poets ofAJcTsga tnQrr court could repeat, wrthout a blush, that—looi. nature had formed their countenances for beauty,their tongues for eloquence, and their hands for libera­lity and valour: but' the genuine tale of the elevationand reign of the Hamadanites exibits a scene of trea­chery, murder, and parricide. At the same fatal periodthe Persian kingdom was again usurped by the dynastyThe Bo- of the Bowides,by the sword of three brothers,A! D! 923 who, under various names, were styled the sup-—1005. p0rj. and columns Of the state, and who, from theCaspian sea to the ocean, would suffer no tyrants butthemselves. Under their reign, the language and geniusof Persia revived, and the Arabs, three hundred and fouryears after the death of Mahomet, were deprived of thesceptre of the east.
MVI. de Guignes (Hist, des Huns, torn. .". p. 124—154.) has exhausted theTou-lunidcs and Ikabidites of Egypt, and thrown some light on the Carmathiaos andHamadanites.







OCR Output








492 ROMAN EMPIRE.


banquet/ The courtiers would surely praise the libe­rality of his grandson Almamon, who gave away four-fifths of the income of a province, a sum of two millionsfour hundred thousand gold dinars, before he drew hisfoot from the stirrup. At the nuptials of the same prince,a thousand pearls of the largest size were showered onthe head of the bride,2 and a lottery of-lands and housesdisplayed the capricious bounty of fortune. The gloriesof the court were brightened rather than impaired in thedecline of the empire; and a Greek ambassador mightadmire or pity the magnificence of the feeble Moctader.The caliph's whole army (says the historian Abulfeba),both horse and foot, was under arms, which togethermade a body of one hundred and s'ucty thousand men. Hisstate-officers, the favourite slaves, stood near him insplendid apparel, their belts glittering with gold and gems.Near them were seven thousand eunuchs, four thousandof them white, the remainder black. The porters ordoorkeepers were in number seven hundred. Barges andboats, with the most superb decorations, were seen swim­ming upon the Tigris. Nor was thepalace itself less splen­did, in which were hung up thirty-eight thousand piecesof tapestry, twelve thousand Jive hundred of which wereof silk embroidered with gold. The carpets on the floorwere twenty-two thousand. A hundred lions were broughtout, with a keeper to each lion." Among the other spec­tacles of rure and stupendous luxury, was a tree of goldand silver spreading into eighteen larger branches, onwhich, and on the lesser boughs, sat a variety of birds


J D'Herbelot, p. 530. Abulfeda, p. 154. Nivem Meccam apportavit, rem ibiaut nunquam aut rarissime visarn.
'Abulfeda, p. 184.189. describes the splendour and liberality of Almamon.Milton has alluded to this oriental custom:
— Or where the gorgeous east, with richest band.Showers on her kings Barbaric pearls and gold.
I have used the modern word lottery, to express the mistitia of the Roman empe­ror*, which entitled to some prize the person who caught them, as they werethrown among the crowd.
> When Bell of Antermony (Travels, vol. 1. p. 99.) accompanied the Russianambassador to the audience of the unfortunate Shah Hussein of Persia, lira lionswere introduced, to denote the power of the king over ihe fiercest animals.







OCR Output








358 ROMAN EMPIRE.


skill and perseverance of their general prevailed: theirdefeat was avenged by the slaughter of ten thousand in­fidels; and Moseilama himself was pierced by an /Ethi­opian slave with the same javelin which had mortallywounded the uncle of Mahomet. The various rebels ofArabia, without a chief or cause, were speedily sup­pressed by the power and discipline of the rising mo­narchy; and the whole nation again professed, and moresteadfastly held, the religion of the Koran. The ambitionof the caliphs provided an immediate exercise for therestless spirit of the Saracens; their valour was unitedin the prosecution of a holy war; and their enthusiasmwas equally confirmed by opposition and victory,character From the rapid conquests of the Saracens apresumption will naturally arise, that the firstcaliphs commanded in person the armies of thefaithful, and sought the crown of martyrdom in the fore­most ranks of the battle. The courage of Abubeker,'1Omar,e and Othman/ had indeed been tried in the per­secution and wars of the prophet; and the personal as­surance of paradise must have taught them to despisethe pleasures and dangers of the present world. Butthey ascended the throne in a venerable or mature age,and esteemed the domestic cares of religion and justicethe most important duties of a sovereign. Except thepresence of Omar at the siege of Jerusalem, the longestexpeditions were the frequent pilgrimage from Medinato Mecca; and they calmly received the tidings of victoryas they prayed or preached before the sepulchre of theprophet. The austere and frugal measure of their liveswas the effect of virtue or habit, and the pride of theirsimplicity insulted the vain magnificence of the king*


d His reign in Eutychius, torn. 2. p. 251. Elmacin, p. 18. Abulpharagiiu, p-108. Abulfeda, p. 60. D'Herbelot, p. 58.
- His reign in Eutychius, p. 264. Elmacin, p. 24. Abulpharagius, p. 110. Abal-feda, p. 66. D'Herbelot, p. 686.
< His reign in Eutychius, p. 323. Elmacin, p. 36. Abolpharagins, p. 115. Abul­feda, p. 75. D'Herbelot, p. 695.







OCR Output








456 ROMAN EMPIRE.


number of helmets and lances.' The most powerful ofhis successors derived from the same kingdom the an­nual tribute of twelve millions and forty-five thousanddinars or pieces of gold, about six millions of sterlingmoney ;k a sum which, in the tenth century, most proba­bly surpassed the united revenues of the Christiian mo-narchs. His royal seat of Cordova contained six hun­dred moschs, nine hundred baths, and two hundredthousand houses: he gave laws to eighty cities of thefirst, to three hundred of the second and third, order;and the fertile banks of the Guadalquiver were adornedwith twelve thousand villages and hamlets. The Arabsmight exaggerate the truth, but they created and theydescribe the most prosperous era of the riches, the cul­tivation, and the populousness of Spain.1Religious The wars of the Moslems were sanctified bytoleration. tne prophet; but among the various preceptsand examples of his life, the caliphs selected the lessonsof toleration that might tend to disarm the resistance ofthe unbelievers. Arabia was the temple and patrimonyof the God of Mahomet; but he beheld with less jea­lousy and affection the nations of the earth. The Poly-theists and idolaters who were ignorant of his name,might be lawfully extirpated by his votaries,"1 but a wise


'Bibliot. Arabico-Hispana, torn. 2. p. 104. Casiri translates the original testi­mony of the historian Rasis, as it is alleged, in the Arabic (Biographia Hispanica,pars 9. But I am most exceedingly surprised at the address, Principibus cste-risque Christianis Hispanis suis CeattUa. The name of Castells was unknown inthe eighth, century ; the kingdom was not erected till the year 1022, a hundredyears after the time of Rasis, (Bibliot. torn. 2. p. 330.) and the appellation wasalways expressive, not of a tributary province, but of a line of outlet independentof the Moorish yoke. (D'Anville, Etats de 1'Europe, p. 166—170.) Had Casiribeen a critic, he would have cleared a difficulty, perhaps of his own making.
k Cardonne, torn. 1. p. 337, 338. He computes the revenue at one hundred andthirty millions of French livres. The entire picture of peace and prosperity relieve!the bloody uniformity of the Moorish annals.
1 I am happy enough to possess a splendid and interesting work, which has onlybeen distributed in presents by the court of Madrid; Bibliatheca Arabico-HifpawiEicuriatenris, opera, et studio Michaelis Casiri, Syro-Maronila : Marriti, in folio, lamiaprior, 1760, towns posterior, 1770. The execution of this work does honour to theSpanish press: the MSS. to the number of one thnusandeighthundred and fifty-one,are judiciously classed by the editor, and his copious extracts throw tome lighton the Mahometan literature and history of Spain. These relics are now secure,but the task has been supinely delayed, till, in the year 1671, a fire consumed thegreatest part of the Escurial library, rich in the spoils of Grenada and Morocco.
10 The Harbii, as they are styled, qui tolerari neqneunt, are, 1. Those who, tmvin







OCR Output








198 ROMAN EMPIRE.


mouth of the Tiber.' When the kings were banished,the republic reposed on the firm basis which had beenfounded by their wisdom and virtue. Their perpetualjurisdiction was divided between two annual magis­trates; the senate continued to exercise the powers ofadministration and counsel; and the legislative autho­rity was distributed in the assemblies of th.e people, bya well-proportioned scale of property and service. Ig­norant of the arts of luxury, the primitive Romans hadimproved the science of government and war: the willof the community was absolute; the rights of indivi­duals were saored; one hundred and thirty thousandcitizens were armed for defence or conquest; and aband of robbers and outlaws was moulded into a na­tion, deserving of freedom, and ambitious of glory."When the sovereignty of the'' Greek emperors was ex­tinguished, the ruins of Rome presented the sad imageof depopulation and decay; her slavery was a habit,her liberty an accident; the effect of superstition, andthe object of her own amazement and terror. The lastvestige of the substance, or even the forms, of the con­stitution, was obliterated from the practice and memoryof the Romans; and they were devoid of knowledge,or virtue, again to build the fabric of a common wealth.Their scanty remnant, the offspring of slaves and stran­gers, was despicable in the eyes of the victorious bar­barians. As often as the Franks or Lombards expressedtheir most bitter contempt of a foe, they called him aRoman; and in this name (says the bishop Liutprand)we include whatever is base, whatever is cowardly, what­ever is perfidious, the extremes of avarice and luxury,and every vice that can prostitute the dignity of human


1 I have traced the Roman datchy according to the maps, and the maps accord­ing to the excellent dissertation of father Barott i. (de Chorographia Italia: MediiXvi, sect. 20. p. 216—«32.) Yet I mast nicely observe, that Viterbo is of Lom­bard foundation, (p. 211.) and that Terracina was usurped by the Greeks.
- On the extent, population, &c. of the Roman kingdom, the reader may pe­ruse, with pleasure, the Discaurs PreHminaire to the Republique Romaine of M.du Beaufort, (torn. 1.) who will not be accused of too much credulity for the earlyages of Rome.







OCR Output








156 ROMAN EMPIRE.


loved by his people, John was never reduced to thepainful necessity of punishing, or even pardoning, hispersonal enemies. During his government of twenty-five years, the penalty of death was abolished in theRoman empire, a law of mercy most delightful to thehuman theorist, but of which the practice, in a largeand vicious community, is seldom consistent with thepublic safety. Severe to himself, indulgent to others,chaste, frugal, abstemious, the philosophic Marcus wouldnot have disdained the artless virtues of his successor,derived from his heart, and not borrowed from theschools. He despised and moderated the stately mag­nificence of the Byzantine court, so oppressive to thepeople, so contemptible to the eye of reason. Undersuch a prince, innocence had nothing to fear, and merithad every thing to hope; and without assuming the ty­rannic office of a censor, he introduced a gradual thoughvisible reformation in the public and private manners ofConstantinople. The only defect of this accomplishedcharacter, was the frailty of noble minds—the love ofarms and military glory. Yet the frequent expeditionsof John the Handsome may be justified, at least in theirprinciple, by the necessity of repelling the Turks fromthe Hellespont and the Bosphorus. The sultan of Ico-nium was confined to his capital, the barbarians weredriven to the mountains, and the maritime provinces ofAsia enjoyed the transient blessings of their deliverance.From Constantinople to Antioch and Aleppo, he repeat­edly marched at the head of a victorious army, and inthe sieges and battles of this holy war, his Latin allieswere astonished by the superior spirit and prowessof a Greek. As he began to indulge the ambitioushope of restoring the ancient limits of the empire, as herevolved in his mind, the Euphrates and the Tigris,the dominion of Syria, and the conquest of Jerusalem,the thread of his life and of the public felicity wasbroken by a singular accident. He hunted the wild







OCR Output








136 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Ni ho- By his marriage with this impious woman,n£ it Romanus the younger left two sons, Basil II.A. D. 963, and Constantine IX. and two daughters, Theo-ugust o. phano anti Anne. The eldest sister was given toOtho II. emperor of the west; the younger became thewife of Wolodomir, great duke and apostle of Russia,and, by the marriage of her grand-daughter with HenryI. king of France, the blood of the Macedonians, andperhaps of the Arsacides, still flows in the veins of theBourbon line. After the death of her husband, theempress aspired to reign in the name of her sons, theelder of whom was five, and the younger only two,years of age; but she soon felt the instability of athrone, which was supported by a female who couldnot be esteemed, and two infants who could not befeared. Theophano looked around for a protector, andthrew herself into the arms of the bravest soldier: herheart was capricious; but the deformity of the new fa­vourite rendered it more than probable that interestwas the motive and excuse of her love. NicephorusPhocas united, in the popular opinion, the doublemerit of a hero and a saint. In the former character,his qualifications were genuine and splendid: the de­scendant of a race, illustrious by their military exploits,he had displayed, in every station and in every pro­vince, the courage of a soldier and the conduct of achief: and Nicephorus was crowned with recent lau­rels, from the important conquest of the isle of Crete.His religion was of a more ambiguous cast; and hishair-cloth, his fasts, his pious idiom, and his wish toretire from the business of the world, were a conveni­ent mask for his dark and dangerous ambition. Yet heimposed on a holy patriarch, by whose influence, andby a decree of the senate, he was intrusted, during theminority of the young princes, with the absolute andindependent command of the oriental armies. As soon







OCR Output








258 ROMAN EMPIRE.


dom of Yemen displays the limits, or at least the situa­tion, of Arabia Felix: the name of Neged is extendedover the inland space; and the birth of'Mahomet hasillustrated the province of Hejaz along the coast 'ofthe Red sea.b •" • »
Manners of The measure of population is regulated by theweenfor means of subsistence; and the inhabitants of"J""*?1*1 this Vast peninsula might be outnumbered bythe subjects of a fertile and industrious province.Along the shores of the Persian gulf of the ocean, andeven of the Red sea, the Itthyophagi,' or fish eaters,continued to wander in quest of their precarious food.In this primitive and abject state, which ill deserves thename of society, the human brute, without 'art or laws,almost without sense or language, is poorly distinguishedfrom the rest of the animal creation. Generations andages might roll away in silent oblivion, and the helplesssavage was restrained from multiplying'his face, by thewants and pursuits which confined his existence to thenarrow margin of the sea-coast. But in an early periodof antiquity the great body of the Arabs had emergedfrom this scene of misery; and as the naked wilder­ness could not'maintain* a people of hunters, they roseat once to the more secure and plentiful condition ofthe pastoral life. The same life'is uniformly pursuedby the roving tribes of the desert, and in the portrait ofthe modern Bedoweens, we may trace the features oftheir ancestors,1* who, in the age of Moses or Mahomet
, :•'» l 1i 'i 1 Ji


'' Consult, peruse, and study, the Specimen 1 listom Arabum of Pocock! (Oxon.1650, in 4to.) The thirty pages of text and version are extracted from the Dynastiesof Gregory Abulpharagms, which Pocock afterward translated: (Oion. 1663, in4to.) the three hundred and fifty-eight notes from a classic and original work onthe Arabian antiquities. .
'Arrianremarks the Icthyophagi of the coast of Hejaz, (PeriplusMarisErythnEi,p. It.) and beyond Aden. (p. 15.) It seems probable that the shores of the Red sea(in the largest sense) were occupied by these savages in the time, perhaps, of Cy­rus; but I can hardly believe that any cannibals were left among the savages inthe reign of Justinian. (Procop. de Bell. Persic, lib. 1. c. 19.)
k See the Specimen Historis Arabum of Pocock, p. 2. 5. 86, &c. The journeyof M. d'Arvieux, in 1664, to the camp of the emir of mount Carmel, (Voyage de laPalestine, Amsterdam, 1718.) exhibits a pleasing and original picture of the life ofthe Bedoweens, which may be illustrated from Niebuhr (Description de 1'Arabic,







OCR Output








472 ROMAN EMPIRE.


was meditated, above the usual spirit of the Greeks, ofburning the naval stores of the enemy, the cypress tim­ber that had been hewn in mount Libanus, and was piledalong the sea-shore of Phoanicia, for the service of theEgyptian fleet. This generous enterprise was defeated bythe cowardice or treachery of the troops, who, in the newlanguage of the empire, were styled of the obsequiantheme} They murdered their chief, deserted their stand­ard in the isle of Rhodes, dispersed themselves over theadjacent continent, and deserved pardon or reward byinvesting with the purple a simple officer of the revenue.The name of Theodosius might recommend him to thesenate and people; but, after some months, he sunk intoa cloister, and resigned, to the firmer hand of Leo, theIsaurian, the urgent defence of the capital and empire.The most formidable of the Saracens, Moslemah, thebrother of the caliph, was advancing at the head of onehundred and twenty thousand Arabs and Persians, thegreater part mounted on horses or camels; and the suc­cessful sieges of Tyana, Amorium, and'Pergamus, wereof sufficient duration to exercise their skill, arid to elevate.their hopes. At the well-known passage of Abydus onthe Hellespont, the Mahometan arms were transported,for the first time, from Asia to Europe. From thence,wheeling round the Thracian cities of the Propontis,Moslemah invested Constantinople on the land side, sur­rounded his camp with a ditch and rampart, preparedand planted his engines of assault, and declared, bywords and actions, a patient resolution of expecting thereturn of seed-time and harvest, should the obstinacy ofthe besieged prove equal to his own. The Greeks wouldgladly have ransomed their religion and empire, by afine or assessment of a piece of gold on the head of each


1 In the division of the thema, or provinces described by Constantine Porphyro-genitus de Tkematibus, (lib. 1. p. 9, 10.) the obuqutum, a Latin appellation of thearmy and palace, was the fourth in the public order. Nice was the metropolisand its jurisdiction extended from the Hellespont over the adjacent parts ofBithynia and Phrygia. (See the two maps prefixed by Deliele to the ImperiumOrientals of Banduri,)







OCR Output








312 ROMAN EMPIRE.


achieved in ten years by himself or his lieutenants. TheArab continued to unite the professions of a merchantand a robber; and his petty excursions for the defenceor the attack of a caravan, insensibly prepared his troopsfor the conquest of Arabia. The distribution of thespoil was regulated by a divine law:' the whole wasfaithfully collected in one common mass: a fifth of thegold and silver, the prisoners and cattle, the moveablesand immoveables, was reserved by the prophet for piotisand charitable uses j the remainder was shared in ade­quate portions, by the soldiers who had obtained thevictory or guarded the camp; the rewards of the slaindevolved to their widows and orphans; and the increaseof cavalry was encouraged by the allotment of a doubleshare to the horse and to the man. From all sides theroving Arabs were allured to the standard of religionand plunder: the apostle sanctified the licence of em­bracing the female captives as their wives or concubines;and the enjoyment of wealth and beauty was a feebletype of the joys of paradise prepared for the valiantmartyrs of the faith. The sword (says Mahomet) is thekey of heaven and of hell; a drop of blood shed in thecause of God, a night spent in arms, is of more avail thantwo months of fasting or prayer: whoever falls in battle,his sins are forgiven: at the day of judgment his woundsshall be resplendent as vermilion and odoriferous as musk;and the loss of his limbs shall be supplied by the wings ofangels and cherubim. The intrepid souls of the Arabswere fired with enthusiasm: the picture of the invisibleworld was strongly painted on their imagination; andthe death which they had always despised became anobject of hope and desire. The Koran inculcates, in themost absolute sense, the tenets of fate and pedestination,


with a large white standard, a black banner, (p. 335.) twenty horses, (p. 322.) &c.Two of his martial sayings are recorded by tradition. (Gagnier, torn. 2.
1 The whole subject de jure belli Mohammedanorum, is exhausted in a separatedissertation by the learned Reland. (Dissertationes Miscellanea!, torn. 3. Dissert.







OCR Output








106 ROMAN EMPIRE.


church might sometimes impose a lesson of clemency;but it may be questioned whether it is for the public in­terest to diminish the perils of unsuccessful ambition.Leoin. I nave dwelt on the fall of a tyrant; I shallThe isau- .briefly represent the founder of a new dynasty,A. D. TIB, who is known to posterity by the invectives of"' his enemies, and whose public and private lifeis involved in the ecclesiastical story of the Iconoclasts.Yet in spite of the clamours of superstition, a favourableprejudice for the character of Leo the Isaurian, may bereasonably drawn from the obscurity of his birth, andthe duration of his reign.—I. In an age of manly spirit,the prospect of an imperial reward would have kindledevery energy of the mind, and produced a crowd ofcompetitors as deserving as they were desirous to reign.Even in the corruption and debility of the modernGreeks, the elevation of a plebeian from the last to thefirst rank of society, supposes some qualifications abovethe level of the multitude. He would probably be ig­norant and disdainful of speculative science; and in thepursuit of fortune, he might absolve himself from theobligations of benevolence and justice; but to his charac­ter we may ascribe the useful virtues of prudence andfortitude, the knowledge of mankind, and the importantart of gaining their confidence and directing their pas­sions. It is agreed that Leo was a native of Isauria,and that Conon was his primitive name. The writers,whose awkward satire is praise, describe him as an itine­rant pedlar, who drove an ass with some paltry mer­chandise to the country fairs; and foolishly relate thathe met on the road some Jewish fortune-tellers, whopromised him the Roman empire, on condition that heshould abolish the worship of idols. A more probableaccount relates the migration of his father from AsiaMinor to Thrace, where he exercised the lucrative tradeof a grazier; and he must have acquired considerablewealth, since the first introduction of his son was pro­







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 245


and the effects of their own intemperance were oftenimputed to the treachery and malice of the Italians,who rejoiced at least in the calamities of the barbarians.This irregular tyranny might contend on equal termswith the petty tyrants of Italy; nor can the people, orthe reader, be much interested in the event of thequarrel. But in the eleventh and twelfth centuries,the Lombards rekindled the flame of industry andfreedom; and the generous example was at length imi­tated by the republics of Tuscany. In the Italiancities a municipal government had never been totallyabolished; and their first privileges were granted bythe favour and policy of the emperors, who were desir­ous of erecting a plebeian barrier against the indepen­dence of the nobles. But their rapid progress, thedaily extension of their power and pretensions, werefounded on the numbers and spirit of these rising com­munities/ Each city filled the measure of her diocessor district: the jurisdiction of the counts and bishops,of the marquises and counts, was banished from theland; and the proudest nobles were persuaded or com­pelled to desert their solitary castles, and to embracethe more honourable character of freemen and magi­strates. The legislative authority was inherent in thegeneral assembly; but the executive powers were in­trusted to three consuls, annually chosen from the threeorders of captains, valvassors,1 and commons, into whichthe republic was divided. Under the protection ofequal law, the labours of commerce and agriculturewere gradually revived; but the martial spirit of theLombards was nourished by the presence of danger;


torn. 3. p. 423, 424.) The same author observes that the whole Saxon line wasextinguished in Italy, (torn. 1. p. 440.)
* Otbo, bishop of Frinsingen, has left an important passage on the Italian ci­ties; (lib. 2. c. 13. in Script. Ital. torn. 6. p. 707—710.) and the rise, progress,and government, of these republics are perfectly illustrated by Muratori, (Anti-cniitat. Ital. Medii ^Evi, torn. 4. dissert. 45—52. p. 1—675. Annal. torn. 8—10.)
'For these titles, see Selden, (Titles of Honour, vol. 3. part 1. p. 4BB.) Du-cange, (Gloss. Latin, torn. 2. p. 140. torn. 6. p. 776.) and St. Marc. (Abreg6Chroaologiflue, torn. t. p. 719.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 253


Cologne, and Treves, the perpetual arch-chancellors ofGermany, Italy, and Arles. The great marshal, onhorseback, exercised his function with a silver measureof oats, which he emptied on the ground, and immedi­ately dismounted to regulate the order of the guests.The great steward, the count palatine of the Rhine,placed the dishes on the table. The great chamberlain,the margrave of Brandenburg, presented, after the re­past, the golden ewer and basin, to wash. The king ofBohemia, as great cupbearer, was represented by theemperor's brother, the duke of Luxemburgh and Bra­bant; and the procession was closed by the greathuntsman, who introduced a boar and a stag, with aloud chorus of horns and hounds.0 Nor was the su­premacy of the emperor confined to Germany alone;the hereditary monarchs of Europe confessed the pre­eminence of his rank and dignity; he was the first ofthe Christian princes, the temporal head of the greatrepublic of the west :p to his person the title of majestywas long appropriated; and he disputed with the popethe sublime prerogative of creating kings and assemblingcouncils. The oracle of the civil law, the learned Bar-tolus, was a pensioner of Charles IV. and his school re­sounded with the doctrine, that the Roman emperor wasthe rightful sovereign of the earth, from the rising tothe setting sun. The contrary opinion was condemned,not as an error, but as a heresy, since even the gospelhad pronounced, And there went forth a decree fromCccsar Augustus, that all the world should be taxed?Contrast of If we annihilate the interval of time and spacethepower between Augustus and Charles, strong anddesty of striking will be the contrast between the twougustus' Caesars; the Bohemian, who concealed hisweakness under the mask of ostentation, and the Ro­


"See the whole ceremony in Struvius, p. 629.
P The republic of Europe, with the pope and emperor at its head, was neverrepresented with more dignity than in the council of Constance. See Leufant'aHistory of that assembly.
i Gravina, Origines Juris C'ivilis, p. 108.







OCR Output








66 ROMAN EMPIRE.


with a cargo of pearls and spices rewarded the zeal ofthe English monarch, who entertained the largest pro­jects of trade and discovery.11 When the Portuguesefirst opened the navigation of India, the Christians ofSt. Thomas had been seated for ages on the coast ofMalabar, and the difference of their character and colourattested the mixture of a foreign race. In arms, in arts,and possibly in virtue, they excelled the natives ofHin-dostan: the husbandman cultivated the palm-tree, themerchants were enriched by the pepper-trade, the sol­diers preceded the nairs or nobles of Malabar, and theirhereditary privileges were respected by the gratitude orthe fear of the king of Cochin and the Zamorin him­self. They acknowledged a Gentoo sovereign; butthey were governed, even in temporal concerns, by thebishop of Angamala. He still asserted his ancient titleof Metropolitan of India, but his real jurisdiction wasexercised in fourteen hundred churches, and he was in?trusted with the care of two hundred thousand souls.A. D. looo, Their religion would have rendered them the&c. firmest and mostcordial allies of the Portuguese,
but the inquisitors soon discerned in the Christians of St.Thomas, the unpardonable guilt of heresy and schism.Instead of owning themselves the subjects of the Romanpontiff, thespiritual and temporal monarch of the globe,they adhered, like their ancestors, to the communion ofthe Nestorian patriarch; and the bishops, whom he or­dained at Mosul, traversed the dangers of the sea andland to reach their diocess on the coast of Malabar. Intheir Syriac liturgy, the names of Theodore and Nesto-riuswerepiouslycommemorated: they united their adora­tion of the two persons of Christ; the title of Mother of


11 Neither the author of the Saxon Chronicle, (A.D. 833.) nor William ofMalmeshury, (de Gestis Regum Angliie, lib. 2. c. 4. p. 44.) were capable, in thetwelfth century, of inventing this extraordinary facf: they are incapable of ex­plaining the motives and measures of Alfred; and their hasty notice serves onlyto provoke our curiosity, William of Malmeshury feels the difficulty of the enter­prise, quod quivis in hoc seculo miretur; and I almost suspect that the Englishambassadors collected their cargo and legend in Egypt. The royal authority hasnot enriched his Orosius (see Harrington's Miscellanies) with an Indian as wellas a Scandinavian voyage.







OCR Output








134 ROMAN EMPIRE.


munity. The rumour of this domestic revolution ex­cited a tumult in the city; but Porphyrogenitus alone,the true and lawful emperor, was the object of the pub­lic care; and the sons of Lecapenus were taught, bytardy experience, that they had achieved a guilty andperilous enterprise for the benefit of their rival. Theirsister Helena, the wife of Constantine, revealed, or sup­posed, their treacherous design of assassinating her hus­band at the royal banquet. His royal adherents werealarmed; and the two usurpers were prevented, seized,degraded from the purple, and embarked for the sameisland and monastery where their father had been solately confined. Old Romanus met them on the beachwith a sarcastic smile, and, after a just reproach of theirfolly and ingratitude, presented his imperial colleagueswith an equal share of his water and vegetable diet.In the fortieth year of his reign, Constantine VII. ob­tained the possession of the eastern world, which heruled, or seemed to rule, near fifteen years. But hewas devoid of that energy of character which couldemerge into a life of action and glory: and the studieswhich had amused and dignified his leisure, were in­compatible with the serious duties of a sovereign. Theemperor neglected the practice, to instruct his son Ro­manus in the theory, of government; while he indulgedthe habits of intemperance and sloth, he dropped thereins of the administration into the hands of Helenahis wife; and, in the shifting scene of her favour andcaprice, each minister was regretted in the promotionof a more worthless successor. Yet the birth and mis­fortunes of Constantine had endeared him to the Greeks:they excused his failings; they respected his learning,his innocence, and charity, his love of justice; and theceremony of his funeral was mourned with the unfeign­ed tears of his subjects. The body, according to an­cient custom, lay in state in the vestibule of the palace;and the civil and military officers, the patricians, the







OCR Output








274 ROMAN EMPIRE.


eight parts, the zodiac 6f (he rrioon, and to Wess dieconstellations who refreshed, with salutary rains, thethirst of the desert. The reign of the heavenly orbscould not be extended beyond the visible sphere; andsome metaphysical powers were necessary to sustainthe transmigration of souls and the resurrection of bo­dies: a camel was left to perish on the grave, that he"might serve his master in another life; and'the invoca­tion of departed spirits implies that they were still en­dowed with consciousness and poWer. I am ignorant,and I am careless, of the blind mythology of the bar-'barians; of the local deities, of the stars, the air, andthe earth, of their sex or titles, their attributed or Isub-ordihation. Each tribe, each family, each indepen­dent warrior, created and changed the rites and theobject of his fantastic worship; but the nation, in everyage, has bowed to the religion, as well as to the'lan-guage, of Mecca. The genuine antiquity of theTheCaa- CAABA ascends beyond the Christian era: intem0ie of describing the coast of the Red sea, the GreekMecca, historian Diodorus7 has remarked, between itheThamudites and the Sabsans, a famous temple, whosesuperior sanctity was revered by all the Arabians: tirelinen or silken veil, which is annually renewed by&eTurkish emperor, was first offered by a pious king ofthe Homerites, who reigned seven hundred years beforethe time of Mahomet." A tent Or a cavern might suf­fice for the worship of the savages, but an edifice ofstone and clay has been erected in its place; and the


> Is(-.v ayvframti iifarai rifta/inn iim tarrm ApSi.v irtfirrvfifm. (Diod." Sir ul.torn. 1. fib. 3. p. 211.) The character and position are so correctly appofite, thatI am surprised how this curious passage should have been read without notice orapplication. Yet this famous temple had been overlooked by Agatharcide* (de, Mini liubro, ],. 58. in Hudson, torn. 1.) whom Diodorus copies in the rest of thedescription. Was the Sicilian more knowing than the Egyptian? Or was the(.'fuih;i built between the yean of Rome 650 and 746, the dates of their respec­tive histories? (Dodwell, in Dissert, ad torn. 1. Hudson, p. 72. Fabricius, Bib-liot. Griee, torn. 12. D. 770.)
* 1'urtick, Specimen, p. 60, 61. From the death of Mahomet we ascend to 68,from his birth to 129, years before the Christian era. The veil or curtain, whichis now, of silk and gold, was no more than a piece of Egyptian linen. (Abulfedaiin Vit. Mohammed, c. 6. p. 14.)







OCR Output








 


 


 







OCR Output








4 ROMAN EMPIRE.


thew,d which these sectaries long preserved in the ori­ginal Hebrew6 as the sole evidence of their faith. Thenatural suspicions of the husband, conscious of his ownchastity, were dispelled by the assurance (in a dream)that his wife was pregnant of the Holy Ghost: and asthis distant and domestic prodigy could not fall underthe personal observation of the historian, he must havelistened to the same voice which dictated to Isaiah thefuture conception of a virgin. The son of a virgin, ge­nerated by the ineffable operation of the Holy Spirit,was a creature without example or resemblance, supe­rior in every attribute of mind and body to the childrenof Adam. Since the introduction of the Greek or Chal­dean philosophy/ the Jews8 were persuaded of the pre-existence, transmigration, and immortality of souls; andProvidence was justified by a supposition, that they wereconfined in their earthly prisons to expiate the stains"which they had contracted in a former state.11 But thedegrees of purity and corruption are almost immeasur­


d The two first chapters of St. Matthew did not exist in the Ebionite copies;(F.liiphan. Haeres. 3O. 13.) and the miraculous conception is one of the last articleswhich Dr. Priestley has curtailed from his scanty creed.
'It is probable enough that the first of the gospels, for the use of the Jewish con­verts, was composed in the Hebrew or Syriac idiom; the fact is attested by a chainof fathers—Papias, Irenzeus, Origen, Jerome, &c. It is devoutly believed by theCatholics, and admitted by Casaubon, Grotius, and Isaac Vosshis, among the Pro­testant critics. But this Hebrew Gospel of St. Matthew is mostunaccountably lost;. and we may accuse the diligence or fidelity of the primitive churches, who have pre­ferred the unauthorized version of some nameless Greek. Erasmus and his follow­ers, who respect our Greek text as the original gospel, deprive themselves of theevidence which declares it to be the work of an apostle. See Simon, Hist. Critique,&c. torn. 3. c. 5—9. p. 47—101. and the Prolegomena of Mill and Wetstein to theNew Testament.
1 The metaphysics of the soul are disengaged by Cicero, (Tusculan, lib. 1.) andMaximus of Tyre, (Dissertat. 16.) from the intricacies of dialogue, which some­times amuse, and often perplex, the readers of the Phasdrus, the Phaedon, and theLaws of Plato.
* The disciples of Jesus were persuaded that a man might have sinned before hewas born, (John ix. 2.) and the Pharisees held the transmigration of virtuous souls,(Joseph, de Bell. Judaico, lib. 9. c. 7.) and a modern rabbi is modestly assuredthat Hermes, Pythagoras, Plato, &c. derived their metaphysics from his illustriouscountrymen.
i' Four different opinions have been entertained concerning the origin of humansouln.—l. That they are eternal and divine.—2. That they were created in a sepa­rate state of existence, before their union with the body.—3. That they have beenpropagated from the original stock of Adam, who contained in himself the mentalas well as the corporeal seed of his posterity.—4. That each soul is occasionallycreated and embodied in the moment of conception. The last of these sentimentsappears to have prevailed among the moderns; and our spiritual history is grownlesi sublime, without becoming more intelligible.







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 455


of their eastern progenitors. The victorious thoughmotley bands of Tarik and Musa asserted, by the nameof Spaniards, their original claim of conquest; yet theyallowed their brethren of Egypt to share their esta­blishments of Murcia and Lisbon. The royal legion ofDamascus was planted at Cordova; that of Emesa atSeville; that of Kinnisrin or Chalcis atJaen; that ofPalestine at Algezire and Medina Sidonia. The nativesof Yemen and Persia were scattered around Toledo andthe inland country; and the fertile seats of Grenadawere bestowed on ten thousand horsemen of Syria andIrak, the children of the purest and most noble of theArabian tribes/ A spirit of emulation, sometimes bene­ficial, more frequently dangerous, was nourished bythese hereditary factions. Ten years after the conquest,a map of the province was presented to the caliph: theseas, the rivers, and the harbours, the inhabitants andcities, the climate, the soil, and the mineral productionsof the earth." In the space of two centuries, the gifts ofnature were improved by the agriculture,'1 the manufac­tures, and the commerce of an industrious people; andthe effects of their diligence have been magnified by theidleness of their fancy. The first of the Ommiades whoreigned in Spain solicited the support of the Christians;and, in his edict of peace and protection, he contentshimself with a modest imposition of ten thousand ouncesof gold, ten thouand pounds of silver, ten thousand horses,as many mules, one thousand cuirasses, with an equal


'Bibliot. Arab. Hispana, torn. 2. p. 32. 352. The farmer of these quotations istaken from a Biographia Hufanica, by an Arabian of Valentia: (see the copious ex­tracts of Casiri, torn. t. p. 30—H1.) and the latter from a general chronology ofthe Caliphs, and of the African and Spanish Dynasties, with a particular Historyof the Kingdom of Grenada, of which Casiri has given almost an entire version.(Bibliot. Arabico-HUpana, torn. 2. p. 177—319.) The authorEbn Khateb, a na­tive of Grenada, and a contemporary of Nnvairi and Abulfeda, (born A. D. 1313,died A.D. 1374.) was an historian, geographer, physician, poet, Sec. (torn. 2. p.71, 72.)
* Cardonne, Hist . de I'Afrique et de 1'Espagne, torn. 4. p. 116,117.
* A copious treatise of Hushandry, by an Arabian of Seville, in the twelfth cen­tury, is in the Escurial library, and Casiri had some thoughts of translating it. Hegives a list of the authors quoted, Arabs, as well as Greeks, Latins, &c.; but it ifmuch if the Andalusian saw these strangers through the medium of his countrymanColumella. (Casiri, Bibliot . Arabico-Hiepana, torn. 1. p. 323—356.)







OCR Output








CHAP. Lit. 471


productive of the invention or familiar use of our presentnumerals, the Arabic or Indian ciphers, as they are com­monly styled, a regulation of office has promoted themost important discoveries of arithmetic, algebra, andthe mathematical sciences.k
Second Whilst the caliph Waled sat idle on the thronen- of Damascus, while his lieutenants achieved theconquest of Transoxiana and Spain, a third army71&—T1B. of Saracens overspread the provinces of AsiaMinor, and approached the borders of the Byzantinecapital. But the attempt and disgrace of the secondsiege was reserved for his brother Soliman, whose am­bition appears to have been quickened by a more activeand martial spirit. In the revolutions of the Greek em­pire, after the tyrant Justinian had been punished andavenged, a humble secretary, Anastasius or Artemius,was promoted by chance or merit to the vacant purple.He was alarmed by the sound of war; and his ambas­sador returned from Damascus with the tremendousnews, that the Saracens were preparing an armament bysea and land, such as would transcend the experienceof the past, or the belief of the present age. The pre­cautions of Anastasius were not unworthy of his stationor of the impending danger. He issued a peremptorymandate, that all persons who were not provided withthe means of subsistence for a three years' siege, shouldevacuate the city; the public granaries and arsenalswere abundantly replenished; the walls were restoredand strengthened; and the engines for Casting stones, ordarts, or fire, were stationed along the ramparts', or inthe brigantines of war, of which an additional numberwas hastily constructed. To prevent is safer, as well asmore honourable, than to repel an attack; and a design


k According to a new, though probable notion, maintained by M. de Villoison,(Aftecdota Grieca, torn. 2. p. 152—157.) our ciphers a/e not of Indian or Arabicinvention. They were used by the Greek and Latin arithmeticians long before theage of Boethins. After the extinction of science in the west, they were adoptedby the Arabic versions from the original MSS. and restored to the Latins about theeleventh century.







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 359


of the earth. When Abubeker assumed the office ofcaliph, he enjoined his daughter Ayesha to take a strictaccount of his private patrimony, that it might be evi­dent whether he were enriched or impoverished by theservice of the state. He thought himself entitled to astipend of three pieces of gold, with the sufficient main­tenance of a single camel and a black slave; but on theFriday of each week, he distributed the residue of hisown and the public money, first to the most worthy, andthen to the most indigent, of the Moslems. The remainsof his wealth, a coarse garment, and five pieces of gold,were delivered to his successor, who lamented with amodest sigh his own inability to equal such an admir­able model. Yet the abstinence and humanity of Omarwere not inferior to the virtues of Abubeker: his foodconsisted of barley-bread or dates; his drink was water:he preached in a gown that was torn or tattered in twelveplaces; and a Persian satrap who paid his homage tothe conqueror, found him asleep among the beggars onthe steps of the mosch of Medina. Economy is thesource of liberality, and the increase, of the revenue en­abled Omar to establish, a just and perpetual reward forthe past and present services of the faithful. Carelessof bis own emolument, he assigned to Abbas, the uncleof the prophet, the first and most ample allowance oftwenty-five thousand drachms or pieces of silver. Fivethousand were allotted to each of the aged warriors, therelics of the field of Beder, and the last and meanest ofthe companions of Mahomet was distinguished by theannual reward of three thousand pieces. One thousandwas the stipend of the veterans who had fought in thefirst battles against the Greeks and Persians, and the de­creasing pay, as low as fifty pieces of silver, was adaptedto the respective merit and seniority of the soldiers ofOmar. Under his reign, and that of his predecessor,the conquerors of the east were the trusty servants ofGod and the people: the mass of the public treasure







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI1I. 89


neither softened by the weakness of humanity, nor ani­mated by the vigour of memorable crimes. The free­men of antiquity might repeat with generous enthusiasmthe sentence of Homer, that on the first day of his ser­vitude, the captive is deprived of one half of his manlyvirtue. But the poet had only seen the effects of civilor domestic slavery, nor could he foretel that the secondmoiety of manhood must be annihilated by the spiritualdespotism, which shackles, not only the actions, buteven the thoughts, of the prostrate votary. By thisdouble yoke, the Greeks were oppressed under the suc­cessors of Heraclius, the tyrant; a law of eternal justicewas degraded by the vices of his subjects; and on thethrone, in the camp, in the schools, we search, perhapswith fruitless diligence, the names and characters thatmay deserve to be rescued from oblivion. Nor are thedefects of the subjects compensated by the skill and va­riety of the painters. Of a space of eight hundredyears, the four first centuries are overspread with acloud, interrupted by some faint and broken rays ofhistoric light: in the lives of the emperors, from Mau­rice to Alexius, Basil the Macedonian has alone beenthe theme of a separate work; and the absence, or loss,or imperfection, of contemporary evidence, must bepoorly supplied by the doubtful authority of more re­cent compilers. The four last centuries are exemptfrom the reproach of penury: and with the Comnenianfamily, the historic muse of Constantinople again re­vives, but her apparel is gaudy, her motions are with­out elegance or grace. A succession of priests, orcourtiers, treads in each other's footsteps in the samepath of servitude and superstition; their views are nar­row, their judgment is feeble, or corrupt; and we closethe volume of copious barrenness, still ignorant of thecauses of events, the characters of the actors, and themanners of the times, which they celebrate or deplore.The observation which has been applied to a man, may







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 331


wise man may deceive himself, how a good man maydeceive others, how the conscience may slumber in amixed and middle state between self-illusion and volun­tary fraud. Charity may believe that the originalmotives of Mahomet were those of pure and genuinebenevolence; but a human missionary is incapable ofcherishing the obstinate unbelievers who reject his claims,despise his arguments, and persecute his life; he mightforgive his personal adversaries, he may lawfully hatethe enemies of God; the stern passions of pride and re­venge were kindled in the bosom of Mahomet, and hesighed like the prophet of Nineveh, for the destructionof the rebels whom he had condemned. The injusticeof Mecca, and the choice of Medina, transformed thecitizen into a prince, the humble preacher into the leaderof armies; but his sword was consecrated by the ex­ample of the saints; and the same God who afflicts asinful world with pestilence and earthquakes, might in­spire for their conversion or chastisement the valour ofhis servants. In the exercise of political government,he was compelled to abate of the stern rigour of fana­ticism, to comply, in some measure, with the prejudicesand passions of his followers, and to employ even thevices of mankind as the instruments of their salvation.The use of fraud and perfidy, of cruelty and injustice,were often subservient to the propagation of the faith;and Mahomet commanded or approved the assassinationof the Jews and idolaters who had escaped from the fieldof battle. By the repetition of such acts, the characterof Mahomet must have been gradually stained; and theinfluence of such pernicious habits would be poorly com-.pensated by the practice of the personal and social vir­


pa mmu o at ftOAia wftma, irftrfWiu ti owrort, (Plato, in Apolog. Sociat, c. 19.p. 111. 122. edit. Fischer.) The familiar examples, which Socrates urges in MsDialogue with Theages, (Platon Opera, torn. l.p. 128, 129. edit. Hen. Stephan.)are beyond the reach of human foresight: and the divine inspiration (the A i;i ...o> /of the philosopher, in clearly taught in the Memorabilia of Xenophon. The ideasof the most rational Platonints are expressed by Cicero, (ds Divinat. 1.54.) and in&• fourteenth and fifteenth Dissertations of Maximus of Tyre, (p. 153—172. edit.Darin.)







OCR Output








252 ROMAN EMPIRE.


passed the Alps consisted of three hundred horse.
In the cathedral of St. Ambrose, Charles wascrowned with the iron crown, which tradition ascribedto the Lombard monarchy; but he was admitted onlywith a peaceful train; the gates of the city were shutupon him; and the king of Italy was held a captive bythe arms of the Visconti, whom he confirmed in thesovereignty of Milan. In the Vatican he was againcrowned with the golden crown of the empire; but, inobedience to a secret treaty, the Roman emperor imme­diately withdrew, without reposing a single night withinthe walls of Rome. The eloquent Petrarch," whosefancy revived the visionary glories of the Capitol, de­plores and upbraids the ignominious flight of the Bohe­mian; and even his contemporaries could observe, thatthe sole exercise of his authority was in the lucrativesale of privileges and titles. The gold of Italy securedthe election of his son; but such was the shameful po­verty of the Roman emperor, that his person was ar­rested by a butcher in the streets of Worms, and wasdetained in the public inn, as a pledge or hostage forthe payment of his expenses.
His osten From this humiliating scene, let us turn to thetation,^ apparent majesty of the same Charles in thediets of the empire. The golden bull, whichfixes the Germanic constitution, is promulgated in thestyle of a sovereign and legislator. A hundred princesbowed before his throne, and exalted their own dignityby the voluntary honours which they yielded to theirchief or minister. At the royal banquet, the hereditarygreat officers, the seven electors, who in rank and titlewere equal to kings, performed their solemn and domes­tic service of the palace. The seals of the triple king­dom were borne in state by the archbishops of Mentz,
"Besides the German and Italian historians, tho expedition of Charles IV. ispainted in lively and original colours in the curious Memoires sur la Vie de IV.trarque, torn. 3. p. 376—430. by the abbe de Sade, whose prolixity has m UT beenblamed by any reader of taste and curiosity.







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 257


•
or partial enjoyments. A shady grove, a green pasture,a stream of fresh water, are sufficient to attract a colonyof sedentary Arabs to the fortunate spots which can af­ford food and refreshment to themselves and their cattle,and which encourage their industry in the cultivationof the palm-tree and the vine. The high lands that'border on the Indian ocean are distinguished by theirsuperior plenty of wood and water; the air is more tem­perate, the fruits are more delicious, the animals andthe human race more numerous: the fertility of the soil,invites and rewards the toil of the husbandman; andthe peculiar gifts of frankincensef and coffee have at­tracted in different ages the merchants of the world.If it be compared with the rest of the peninsula, thissequestered region may truly deserve the appellation ofthe happy: and the splendid colouring of fancy andfiction has been suggested by contrast and counte­nanced by distance. It was for this earthly paradise thatnature had reserved her choicest favours and her mostcurious workmanship: the incompatible blessings ofluxury*and innocence were ascribed to the natives: thesoil was impregnated with goldg and gems, and boththe land and sea were taught to exhale the odours ofDivision of aromatic sweets. This division of the sandy,the stony,' the stony, and the happy, so familiar to theand the Greeks and Latins, is unknown to the ArabiansArabia, themselves: and it is singular enough, that acountry, whose language and inhabitants have ever beenthe same, should scarcely retain a vestige of its ancientgeography. The maritime districts of Bahrein andOman are opposite to the realm of Persia. The king-


'The aromatics, especially the thus, or frankincense, of Arabia, occupy the twelfthbook of Pliny. Our great poet (Paradise Lost, lib. 4.) introduces, in a simile, thespicy odours that are blown by the north-east wind from the Sabaean coast:—
. Many a league,
Pleas'd with the grateful scent, old Ocean smiles.(Plin. Hist , Natur. it. 42.)
f Agathaicides affirms, that lumps of pure gold were found, from the size of anolive to that of a nut; that iron was twice, and silver ten times, the value of gold,(de Mari Rnbro, p. 60.) These real or imaginary treasures are vanished; and nogold mines are at present known in Arabia. (Niobubr, Description, p. 124.)
VOL. VJ. S







OCR Output








422 ROMAN EMPIRE.


extant, had perused and compared the writings of their
predecessors;' nor can it fairly be presumed that any
important truth, any useful discovery in art or nature,
has been snatched away from the curiosity of modern
ages.
., . In the administration of Egypt,11 Amrou ba-
Admini- OJ r
stration of lanced the demands of justice and policy: thegypt' interest of the people of the law, who were de­fended by God; and of the people of the alliance, whowere protected by man. In the recent tumult of con­quest and deliverance, the tongue of the Copts and thesword of the Arabs were most adverse to the tranquillityof the province. To the former, Amrou declared, thatfaction and falsehood would be doubly chastised; by thepunishment of the accusers, whom he should detest ashis personal enemies, and by the promotion of their inno­cent brethren, whom their envy had laboured to injureand supplant. He excited the latter by the motives ofreligion and honour to sustain the dignity of their cha­racter, to endear themselves by a modest and temperateconduct to God and the caliph, to spare and protect apeople who had trusted to their faith, and to contentthemselves with the legitimate and splendid rewards oftheir victory. In the management of the revenue hedisapproved the simple but oppressive mode of a capi­tation, and preferred with reason a proportion of taxes,deducted on ev^ery branch from the clear profits of agri­culture and commerce. A third part of the tribute wasappropriated to the annual repairs of the dikes and canals,so essential to the public welfare. Under his admini­stration the fertility of Egypt supplied the dearth of


'Such as Galon, Pliny, Aristotle, &c. On this subject Wotton (Reflections onAncient and Modern Learning, p. 83—95.) argues with solid sense against thelively exotic fancies of sir William Temple. The contempt of the Greeks forbarbaric science, would scarcely admit the Indian or Ethiopia books into the libraryof Alexandria; nor is it proved that philosophy has sustained any real loss fromtheir exclusion.
k This curious and authentic intelligence of Murtadi (p. 284—289.) has not beendiscovered either by Ockley, or by the self-sufficient compilers of the Modern lini-yersal History.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 15


composition, might be compared with those of the Athe­nian orators. The death of Theophilus expanded andrealized the hopes of his nephew. The clergy of Alex­andria was divided; the soldiers and their general sup­ported the claims of the archdeacon; but a resistlessmultitude, with voices and with hands, asserted thecause of their favourite ; and, after a period of thirty-nineyears, Cyril was seated on the throne of Athanasius.*His ty- The prize was not unworthy of his am-J&af>'4\3 bition. At a distance from the court, and at—»i5,&c. (he head of an immense capital, the patriarch,as he was now styled, of Alexandria, had graduallyusurped the state and authority of a civil magis­trate. The public and private charities of the citywere managed by his discretion; his voice inflamedor appeased the passions of the multitude; his com­mands were blindly obeyed by his numerous and fana­tic parabolam? familiarized in their daily office withscenes of death; and the prefects of Egypt were awedor provoked by the temporal power of these Christianpontiffs. Ardent in the prosecution of heresy, Cyrilauspiciously opened his reign by oppressing the Nova-tians, the most innocent and harmless of the sectaries.The interdiction of their religious worship appeared inhis eyes a just and meritorious act; and he confiscatedtheir holy vessels, without apprehending the guilt ofsacrilege. The toleration, and even the privileges, ofthe Jews, who had multiplied to the number of fortythousand, were secured by the laws of the Caesars and


• See the youth and promotion of Cyril, in Socrates, (lib. 7. c. 7.) and Rcnau-dot. (111,1.' Patriarch. Alexandria, p. 106—108.) The abbfe Renaudot drew hismaterials from the Arabic history of Sererus, bishop of Hermopolis Magna, orAshmunein, in the tenth century, who can never be trusted, unless our assent isextorted by the internal evidence of facts.
a The parabolani of Alexandria were a charitable corporation, instituted duringthe plague of Gallienus, to visit the sick and to bury the dead. They graduallyenlarged, abused, and sold, the privileges of their order. Their outrageous conductduring the reign of Cyril provoked the emperor to deprive the patriarch of theirnomination, and restrained their number to five or fix hundred. But these re­straints were transient and ineffectual. See the Theodosian Code, lib. 16. tit. 2.andTillemont, Mern. Eccles.torn. 14. p. 376—278.







OCR Output








202 ROMAN EMPIRE.


try, and perhaps Europe, from the Mahometan yoke.The ambassadors of the pope were received by Charleswith decent reverence; but the greatness of his occu­pations, and the shortness of his life, prevented his in­terference in the affairs of Italy, except by a friendlyand ineffectual mediation. His son Pepin, the heir ofhis power and virtues, assumed the office of championof the Roman church; and the zeal of the French princeappears to have been prompted by the love of glory andreligion. But the danger was on the banks of the Ti­ber, the succour on those of the Seine; and our sym­pathy is cold to the relation of distant misery. Amidstthe tears of the city, Stephen III. embraced the gene­rous resolution of visiting in person the courts of Lom-bardy and France, to deprecate the injustice of hisenemy, or to excite the pity and indignation of hisfriend. After soothing the public despair by litaniesand orations, he undertook this laborious journey withthe ambassadors of the French monarch and the Greekemperor. The king of the Lombards was inexorable;but his threats could not silence the complaints, nor re­tard the speed, of the Roman pontiff, who traversed thePennine Alps, reposed in the abbey of St. Maurice,and hastened to grasp the right hand of his protector,a hand which was never lifted in vain, either in war orfriendship. Stephen was entertained as the visible suc­cessor of the apostle; at the next assembly, the field ofMarch or of May, his injuries were exposed to a devoutand warlike nation, and he repassed the Alps, not as asuppliant, but as a conqueror, at the head of a Frencharmy, which was led by the king in person. TheLombards, after a weak resistance, obtained an ignomi­nious peace, and swore to restore the possessions, andto respect the sanctity, of the Roman church. But nosooner was Astolphus delivered from the presence ofthe French arms, than he forgot his promise and re­sented his disgrace. Rome was again encompassed byhis arms; and Stephen, apprehensive of fatiguing the







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 277


and heroes; and the father of Mahomet himself wasdevoted by a rash vow, and hardly ransomed for theequivalent of a hundred camels. In the time of igno­rance, the Arabs, like the Jews and Egyptians, abstainedfrom the taste of swine's flesh;g they circumcised'1 theirchildren at the age of puberty: the same customs, with­out the censure or the precept of the Koran, have beensilently transmitted to their posterity and proselytes.It has been sagaciously conjectured, that the artful le­gislator indulged the stubborn prejudices of his coun­trymen. It is more simple to believe that he adheredto the habits and opinions of his youth, without fore­seeing that a practice congenial to the climate of Mecca,might become useless or inconvenient on the banks ofthe Danube or the Volga.
Arabia was free: the adjacent kingdoms
Introdnc- J °
tionof the were shaken by the storms of conquest and ty­ranny, and the persecuted sects fled to the hap­py land where they might profess what they thought,and practise what they professed. The religions of theSabians and Magians, of the Jews and Christians, weredisseminated from the Persian gulf to the Red sea. Ina remote period of antiquity, Sabianism was diffusedover Asia by the science of the Chaldeans' and thearms of the Assyrians. From the observations of twothousand years, the priests and astronomers of Baby­lon11 deduced the eternal laws of nature and Providence.


r Suillis caroibus abstinent, says Solinus, (Polyhistor, c. 33.) who copies Pliny,(lib. 8. c. 68.) in the strange supposition, that hogs cannot live in Arabia. TheEgyptians were actuated by a natural and superstitious horror for that uncleanbeast. (Marsham, Canon, p. 205.) The old Arabians likewise practised, post coi-tum, the right of ablution, (Herodot. lib. 1. c. 80.) which is sanctified by the Ma­hometan law, (Reland, p. 75, &c. Chardin, or rather the Moiiah of Shaw Ab­bas, torn. 4. p. 71, &c.)
'' The Mahometan doctors are not fond of the subject: yet they hold circumci­sion necessary to salvation, and even pretend that Mahomet was miraculouslyborn without a foreskin. (Pocock, Specimen, p. 319, 320. Sales' PreliminaryDiscourse, p. 106, 107.)
1 Diodorus Siculus (torn. 1. lib. 2. p. 149—145.) has cast on their religion thecarious but superficial glance of a Greek. Their astronomy would be far more va­luable: they had looked through the telescope of reason, since they could doubtwhether the sun were in the number of the planets or of the fixed stars.
k Simplicius (who quotes Porphyry) de Cielo, lib. 2. corn. 46. p. 123. lin. 18.apud Marsham, Canon. Chion. p. 474. who doubts the fact, because it is advem







OCR Output








412 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the reign of the Ptolemies and Caesars, the seat of govern­ment was removed to the sea-coast; the ancient capitalwas eclipsed by the arts and opulence of Alexandria;the palaces, and at length the temples, were reduced toa desolate and ruinous condition: yet in the age of Au­gustus, and even in that of Constantine, Memphis wasstill numbered among the greatest and most populous ofthe provincial cities.' The banks of the Nile, in thisplace of the breadth of three thousand feet, were unitedby two bridges of sixty and of thirty boats, connected inthe middle stream by the small island of Rouda, whichwas covered with gardens and habitations.1* The easternextremity of the bridge was terminated by the town ofBabylon and the camp of a Roman legion, which pro­tected the passage of the river and the second capital ofEgypt. This important fortress, which might fairly bedescribed as part of Memphis or Misrah, was investedby the arms of the lieutenant of Omar: a reinforcementof four thousand Saracens soon arrived in his camp; andthe military engines, which battered the walls, may beimputed to the art and labour of his Syrian allies. Yetthe siege was protracted to seven months; and the rashinvaders were encompassed and threatened by the inun­dation of the Nile.1 Their last assault was bold andsuccessful: they passed the ditch, which had been for­tified with iron spikes, applied their scaling-ladders, en­tered the fortress with the shout of God is victorious!


* 'Strabo, an accurate and attentive spectator, observes of Heliopolis ; nut fui tarurn irmptput n «Xif; (Geograph. lib. 17. p. 1158.) but of Memphis he declares,ureXi; !* fori /ufyaXn TI xai lvayogo;, JIUTIJH fttr AXlfarJptiar; (p. 1161.) he notices,however, the mixture of inhabitants and the ruins of the palaces. In the properEgypt, Ammianus enumerates Memphis among the foul cities, maximis urbibusquibus provincial nitet; (22. 16.) and the name of Memphis appears with distinc­tion in the Roman itinerary and episcopal lists.
k These rare and curious facts, (the breadth two thousand nine hundred andforty-six feet) and the bridge of the Nile, are only to be found in the Danish tra­veller and the Nubian geographer, (p. 98.)
1 From the month of April, the NUe begins imperceptibly to rise; the swell be­comes strong and visible m the moon after the summer solstice, (Plin. Hist. Nat.5.10.) and is ususlly proclaimed at Cairo on St. Peter's day. (Jane 29.) A registerof thirty successive years marks the greatest height of the waters between July *5and Augnst 18. (Maillet, Description de I' Egypte, lettre 11. p. 67, &c. Pocock'iDescription of the East, vol. 1. p. 200. Shaw s Travels, p. 383.)







OCR Output








190 ROMAN KM PI RE.


ample revenue; and the weakness or neglect of theemperors compelled them to consult, both in peaceand war, the temporal safety of the city. In theschool of adversity the priest insensibly imbibed thevirtues and the ambition of a prince; the same characterwas assumed, the same policy was adopted, by the Italian,the Greek, or the Syrian, who ascended the chair of St.Peter; and, after the loss of her legions and provinces,the genius and fortune of the popes again restored thesupremacy of Rome. It is agreed, that in the eighthcentury, their dominion was founded on rebellion, andthat the rebellion was produced, and justified, by the he­resy of the Iconoclasts; but the conduct of the second andthird Gregory, in this memorable contest, is variouslyinterpreted by the wishes of their friends and enemies.The Byzantine writers unanimously declare, that, after afruitless admonition, they pronounced the separation ofthe east and west, and deprived the sacrilegious tyrantof the re venue and sovereignty of Italy. Their excommu­nication is still more clearly expressed by the Greeks, whobeheld the accomplishment of the papal triumphs; andas they are more strongly attached to their religion thanto their country, they praise, instead of blaming, the zealand orthodoxy of these apostolical men.0 The modernchampions of Rome are eager to accept the praise andthe precedent: this great and glorious example of thedeposition of royal heretics is celebrated by the cardinalsBaronius and Bellarmine ;a and if they are asked, whythe same thunders were not hurled against the Neros andJulians of antiquity; they reply, that the weakness ofthe primitive church was the sole cause of her patient


» Ktu Tm Px/iun rut -xa-r, iraXia rut #acriXtia; alinu alrwruirf, says Theophanes.(Chronograph, p. 343.) For this Gregory is styled by Cedrenus avuj awwnXiUf.p. 450.) Zonaras specifies the thunder avuOn/cum 0-vwtiav. (torn. 2. lib. 15. p. 104,105.) It may be observed, that the Greeks are apt to 'confound the times andactions of the two Gregories.
d See Baronius, Annal. Eccles. A. D. 730, no. 4, 5. dignum exemplum! Bel-hiiinin, de Romano Pontifice. lib. 5. c. 8. muktavit cum parte imperil. Sigonius,de Regno Italiae, lib. 3. Opera, torn. •_'. p. id1.'. Yet such is th» change of Italy,that Sigonivw is corrected by the editor of Milan, Philippus Argelatus, a Bolognw.and subject of the pope.







OCR Output








CHAP. LI I. 493


made of the same precious metals, as well as the leaves ofthe tree. While the machinery effected spontaneous mo­tions, the several birds warbled their natural harmony.Through this scene of magnificence, the Greek ambassa­dor was led by the vizier to the foot of the caliph's throne*In the west, the Ommiades of Spain supported, withequal pomp, the title of commander of the faithful.Three miles from Cordova, in honour of his favourite sul­tana, the third and greatest of the Abdelrahmans con­structed the city, palace, and gardens, of Zehra. Twen­ty-five years, and above three millions sterling, were em­ployed by the founder: his liberal taste invited theartists of Constantinople, the most skilful sculptors andarchitects of the age; and the buildings were sustainedor adorned by twelve hundred columns of Spanish andAfrican, of Greek and Italian marble. The hall of au­dience was incrusted with gold and pearls, and a greatbasin in the centre was surrounded with the curious andcostly figures of birds and quadrupeds. In a lofty pavi­lion of the gardens, one of these basins and fountains, sodelightful in a sultry climate, was replenished, not withwater, but with the purest quicksilver. The seraglio ofAbdalrahman,his wives, concubines, and black eunuchs,amounted to six thousand three hundred persons; andhe was attended to the field by a guard of twelve thou­sand horse, whose belts and scimitars were studdedwith gold.0
its conse- In a private condition, our desires are perpe-tually repressed by poverty and subordination;


»ate and but ^ne lives an(J labours of millions are devoted
public
happiness, to the service of a despotic prince, whose lawsare blindly obeyed, and whose wishes are instantly gra­


b Abulfeda, p. 237. d'Herbelot, p. 509. This embassy was received at Bagdad,A. H. 305, A. D. 917. In the passage of Abulfeda, I bave used, with some varia­tions, the English translation of the tearned and amiable Mr. Harris of Salishury.(Philological Inquiries, p. 363, 364.)
a Cardonne, Histoire de 1'Afrique et de 1'Espagne, torn. 1. p. 330 — 336. A justidea of the taste and architecture of the Arabians of Spain, may be conceived fromthe description and plates of the Alhambra of Grenada. (Swinburne's Travels,p. 171—188.)







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 441


treachery, the Spaniards will repeat the popular story ofhis daughter Cava;g of a virgin who was seduced, orravished, by her sovereign; of a father who sacrificedhis religion and country, to the thirst of revenge. Thepassions of princes have often been licentious and de­structive; but this well-known tale, romantic in itself,is indifferently supported by external evidence; and thehistory of Spain will suggest some motives of interestand policy more congenial to the breast of a veteranstate of statesman.'1 After the decease or deposition ofthe Gothic Witiza, his two sons were supplanted by theambition of Roderic, a noble Goth, whose father,the duke or governor of a province, had fallen a victimto the preceding tyranny. The monarchy was still elec­tive; but the sons of Witiza, educated on the steps ofthe throne, were impatient of a private station. Theirresentment was the more dangerous, as it was varnishedwith the dissimulation of courts: their followers wereexcited by the remembrance of favours and the promiseof a revolution; and their uncle Oppas, archbishop ofToledo and Seville, was the first person in the church,and the second in the state. It is probable that Julianwas involved in the disgrace of the unsuccessful faction;that he had little to hope and much to fear from the newreign; and that the imprudent king could not forget orforgive the injuries which Roderic and his family hadsustained. The merit and influence of the count ren­dered him a useful or formidable subject: his estateswere ample, his followers bold and numerous, and it wastoo fatally shewn that, by his Andalusian and Maurita-nian commands, he held in his hand the keys of theSpanish monarchy. Too feeble, however, to meet his


» Le viol (says Voltaire) est aussi difficile a faire qu'a prouver. Des Evequesse seroient ils lifpea pour une li IK'.? (Hist. Generate, c. 26.) His argument is notlogically conclusive.
b In the story of Cava, Mariana (lib. 6. c. 2t. p. 241, 242.) seems to vie withthe Lucretia of Livy. Like the ancients, he seldom quotes; and the oldest tes­timony of Baronius, (Annal. Eccles. A. D. 713, no. 19.) that of Lucas Tudensif,& Galiician deacon of the thirteenth century, only says Cava quam pro concubiniiutebatur.







OCR Output








122 ROMAN EMPJRE.


year of his age. The restoration of images, and thefinal extirpation of the Iconoclasts, has endeared hername to the devotion of the Greeks; but in the fervourof religious zeal, Theodora entertained a grateful regardfor the memory and salvation of her husband. Afterthirteen years of a prudent and frugal administration,she perceived the decline of her influence; but the se­cond Irene imitated only the virtues of her predecessor.Instead of conspiring against the life or government ofher son, she retired, without a struggle, though not with­out a murmur, to the solitude of private life, deploringthe ingratitude, the vices, and the inevitable ruin, of theworthless youth.
Among the successors of Nero and Elagabalus, wehave not hitherto found the imitation of their vices, thecharacter of a Roman prince who considered pleasure asthe object of life, and virtue as the enemy of pleasure.Whatever might have been the maternal care of Theo­dora in the education of Michael III. her unfortunateson was a king before he was a man. If the ambitiousmother laboured to check the progress of reason, shecould not cool the ebullition of passion; and her selfishpolicy was justly repaid by the contempt and ingratitudeof the headstrong youth. At the age of eighteen, herejected her authority, without feeling his own incapa­city to govern the empire and himself. With Theodora,all gravity and wisdom retired from the court: theirplace was supplied by the alternate dominion of viceand folly; and it was impossible, without forfeiting thepublic esteem, to acquire or preserve the favour of theemperor. The millions of gold and silver which hadbeen accumulated for the service of the state, were la­vished on the vilest of men, who flattered his passionsand shared his pleasures; and in a reign of thirteenyears, the richest of sovereigns was compelled to stripthe palace and the churches of their precious furniture.Like Nero, he delighted in the amusements of thetheatre, and sighed to be surpassed in the accomplish1­







OCR Output








408 ROMAN EMPIRE.


founded; the walls of Edessa and Amida, of Dara andNisibis, which had resisted the arms and engines ofSapor or Nushirvan, were levelled in the dust: and theholy city of Abgarus might vainly produce the epistleof the image of Christ to an unbelieving conqueror. Tothe west the Syrian kingdom is bounded by the sea; andthe ruin of Aradus, a small island or peninsula on thecoast, was postponed during ten years. But the hills ofLibanus abounded in timber, the trade of Phoenicia waspopulous in mariners; and a fleet of seventeen hundredbarks was equipped and manned by the natives of thedesert. The imperial navy of the Romans fled beforethem from the Pamphylian rocks to the Hellespont; butthe spirit of the emperor, a grandson of Heraclius, hadbeen subdued before the combat by a dream and a pun.'The Saracens rode masters of the sea; and the islandsof Cyprus, Rhodes, and the Cyclades, were successivelyexposed to their rapacious visits. Three hundred yearsbefore the Christian era, the memorable, though fruit­less, siege of Rhodes,b by Demetrius, had furnished thatmaritime republic with the materials and the subject ofa trophy. A gigantic statue of Apollo, or the sun, seventycubits in height, was erected at the entrance of the har­bour, a monument of the freedom and the arts of Greece.After standing fifty-six years, the colossus of Rhodeswas overthrown by an earthquake; but the massy trunk,and huge fragments, lay scattered eight centuries on theground, and are often described as one of the wondersof the ancient world. They were collected by the'diligence of the Saracens, and sold to a Jewish


a He dreamt that he was at Thessalonica—a harmless and unmeaning vision;but his soothsayer or his cowardice understood the sure omen of a defeat concealedin that inauspicious word, e»o uXXv muir. Give to another the victory. (Theophan.p. 286. Zonaras, torn. 2. lib. 14. pi 88.)
h Every passage and every fact that relates to the isle, the city, and the colossusof Rhodes, are compiled in the laborious treatise of Meursius, who has bestowedthe same diligence on the two larger islands of Crete and Cyprus. See in the thirdVolume of his works, the Rhodia of Meursius. (lib. 1. c. 15. p. 715—719.) TheByzantine writers, Theophanes and Constantino, have ignorantly prolonged theterm to one thousand three hundred and sixty years, and ridiculously divide theweight among thirty thousand camels.







OCR Output








CHAP. LF. 355


which had been idly spent in domestic quarrels, was vi­gorously directed against a foreign enemy. Had theimpulse been less powerful, Arabia, free at home, andformidable abroad, might have flourished under a suc­cession of her native monarchs. Her sovereignty waslost by the extent and rapidity of conquest. The colo­nies of the nation were scattered over the east and west,and their blood was mingled with the blood of their con­verts and captives. After the reign of three caliphs, thethrone was transported from Medina to the valley ofDamascus and the banks of the Tigris; the holy citieswere violated by impious war: Arabia was ruled by therod of a subject, perhaps of a stranger; and the Bedo-weens of the desert, awakening from their dream of do­minion, resumed their old and solitary independence.*


CHAP. U.
The conquest of Persia, Syria, Egypt, Africa, and Spain, by theArabs or Saracens. — Empire of the caliphs, or successors of Ma­homet — State of the Christians, &c. under their government.


Union of revolution of Arabia had not changed the
the Arabs, character of the Arabs; the death of Mahomet''was the signal of independence; and the hastystructure of his power and religion tottered to its foun­dations. A small and faithful band of his primitivedisciples had listened to his eloquence, and shared hisdistress; had fled with the apostle from the persecution


'The writers of the Modem Universal History (vol. 1. and 2.) have compiled,in eight hundred and fifty folio pages, the life of Mahomet and the annals of the ca­liphs. They enjoyed the advantage of reading, and sometimes correcting theArabic text; yet, notwithstanding their high-sounding boasts, I cannot find, afterthe conclusion of my work, that they have afforded me much, if any, additional in­formation. The dull mass is not quickened by a spark of philosophy or taste ; andthe compilers indulge the criticism of acrimonious bigotry against Boulainvilliers,Sale, Cagnies, aid all who even treated Mahomet with favour, or c-v en justice.


2 A 2







OCR Output








410 ROMAN EMPIRE.


temper of a chief the valour of an adventurous soldier.In a visit to Medina, the caliph expressed a wish to sur­vey the sword which had cut down so many Christianwarriors; the son of Aasi unsheathed a short and ordi­nary scimitar; and as he perceived the surprise of Omar,Alas (said the modest Saracen), the sicord itself, withoutthe arm of its master, is neither sharper nor more weightythan the sword of Pharezdak the poet* After the con­quest of Egypt he was recalled by the jealousy of thecaliph Othman; but in the subsequent troubles, the am­bition of a soldier, a statesman, and an orator, emergedfrom a private station. His powerful support, both incouncil and in the field, established the throne of theOmmiades; the administration and revenue of Egyptwere restored by the gratitude of Moawiyah to a faithfulfriend who had raised himself above the rank of a sub­ject; and Amrou ended his days in the palace and citywhich he had founded on the banks of the Nile. Hisdying speech to his children is celebrated by the Ara­bians as a model of eloquence and wisdom: he deploredthe errors of his youth; but if the penitent was still in­fected by the vanity of a poet, he might exaggerate thevenom and mischief of his impious compositions.8invasion From his camp, in Palestine, Amrou had sur-A-ofsss. prised or anticipated the caliph's leave for theJune. invasion of Egypt.11 The magnanimous Omartrusted in his God and his sword, which had shaken thethrones of Chosroes and Caesar; but when he comparedthe slender force of the Moslems with the greatness of


r Tliis saying is preserved by Pocock, (Not. ad Carmen Tograi, p. 184.) andjustly applauded by Mr. Harris. (Philosophical Arrangements, p. 350.)
* For the life and character of Amrou, see Ockley, (Hist, of the Saracens, »ol. t.p. 28. 63. 94. 328. 349. 344. and to the end of the volume; vol. t. p. 51. 55. 57.74.110—112. 162.) and Otter, (Mern. de 1'Academic des Inscriptions, torn. II.p. 131,132.) The readers of Tacitus may aptly compare Vespasian and Mucianus,with Moawiyah and Amrou. Yet the resemblance is still more in the situation,than in the characters of the men.
h Al Wakidi had likewise composed a separate history of the conquest of Egypt,which Mr. Ockley could never procure; and his own inquiries (vol. 1. p. 344—368.)have added very little to the original text of Eutycbius (Annal. torn. 2. p. 296—323. vera. Pocock), the Melchite patriarch of Alexandria, who lived three hundredyears after the revolution.







OCR Output








CHAP. LII. 519


sidence and the camp of his barbarian favourites at Sa­mara on the Tigris, about twelve leagues above the cityof Peace/ His son Motawakkel was a jealous and crueltyrant: odious to his subjects, he cast himself on the fi­delity of the strangers, and these strangers, ambitious andapprehensive, were tempted by the rich promise of a re­volution. At the instigation, or at least in the cause ofhis son, they burst into his apartment at the hour of sup­per, and the caliph was cut into seven pieces by the sameswords which he had recently distributed among theguards of his life and throne. To this throne, yet stream­ing with a father's blood, Montasser was triumphantlyled; but in a reign of six months, he found only thepangs of a guilty conscience. If he wept at the sight ofan old tapestry which represented the crime and punish­ment of the sons of Chosroes; if his days were abridgedby grief and remorse, we may allow some pity to a par­ricide, who exclaimed in the bitterness of death, that hehad lost both this world and the world to come. Afterthis act of treason, the ensigns of royalty, the garmentand walking-staff of Mahomet, were given and tornaway by the foreign mercenaries, who in four years cre­ated, deposed, and murdered three commanders of thefaithful. As often as the Turks were inflamed by fear,or ravage, or avarice, these caliphs were dragged by thefeet, exposed naked to the scorching sun, beaten with ironclubs, and compelled to purchase, by the abdication oftheir dignity, a short reprieve of inevitable fate.8 Atlength, however, the fury of the tempest was spent or di­verted: the Abbassides returned to the less turbulent re­sidence of Bagdad; the insolence of the Turks was


1 He changed the old names of Sumere, or Samara, into the fanciful title ofSermen-Tdi, that which gives pleasure at first sight. (D'Herbelot, BibliothequeOrientale, p. 808. D'Anville, 1 Euphrate et le Tigre, p. 97, 98.)
8 Take a specimen, the death of the caliph Motaz: Correptum pedibus petra-hunt, etsudibus probe permulcant, et spoliatum lacoris vestibus in sole collocaot,prae cujus, acerrimo restd pedcs altemis attolebat et demittebat. Adstantium aliquismisero colaphos continuo ingerebat, quos ille objcctis manibus avertoro studebat
Quo facto traditus tortori fuit totoque triduo cibo potuque prohibitus. .. .
Sufibcatus, &c. (Abulfeda, p. iiOC.) Of the caliph Mohtadi, he says, cervices iflsiperpetuis ictibus coatundebant, testiculosque pedibus concu'cabant. (p. 208.)







OCR Output








50 ROMAN EMPIRE.


The three THREE CHAPTERS,b which has filled more vo-chaptcrs. lumes than it deserves lines, is deeply marked532—698. with this subtle and disingenuous spirit. Itwas now three hundred years since the body of Origen0had been eaten by the worms: his soul, of which he heldthe pre-existence, was in the hands of its Creator, but hiswritings were eagerly perused by the monks of Palestine.In these writings, the piercing eye of Justinian descriedmore than ten metaphysical errors; and the primitivedoctor, in the company of Pythagoras and Plato, wasdevoted by the clergy to the eternity of hell-fire, whichhe had presumed to deny. Under the cover of this pre­cedent, a treacherous blow was aimed at the council ofChalcedon. The fathers had listened without impa­tience to the praise of Theodore of Mopsuestia :d andtheir justice or indulgence had restored both Theodoretof Cyrrhus, and Ibas of Edessa, to the communion ofthe church. But the characters of these oriental bishopswere tainted with the reproach of heresy; the first hadbeen the master, the two others were the friends of Nes-torius: their most suspicious passages were accusedunder the tide of the three chapters; and the condem­nation of their memory must involve the honour of a


11 On the subject of the three chapters, the original acts of the fifth general coun­cil of Constantinople supply much useless though authentic knowledge. (Concil.torn. 6. p. 1—419.) The Greek Evagrius is less copious and correct (Jin. 4. c.38.) than the three zealous Africans, Facundus, (in his twelve books de tribuscapitules, which are most correctly published by Si runnil) Liberates, (in. his Bre-viarum, c. 22—24.) and Victor Tunnensis in his Chronicle, (in torn. 1. Antiq.Lect. Canisii, p. 330—334.) The Liber Pontificalia, or Anastaaius, (in Vigilio,Pelagio, &c.) is original, Italian evidence. The modem reader will derive someinformation from Dupin (Bibliot. Eccles. torn. 5. p. 189—207.) and Baanage,(Hist.de 1'Eglise, torn. 1. p. 519—541.) yet the latter is too firmly resolved todepreciate the authority and character of the popes.
c Origen had indeed too great a propensity to imitate the trXan and Juiririgsia ofthe old philosophers. (Justinian ad Mennam, in Concil. torn. 6. p. 356.) Hismoderate opinions were too repugnant to the zeal of the church, and he was foundguilty of the heresy of reason.
dBasnage(Prefat. p. 11—14. ad torn. 1. Antiq. Lect. Canis.) has fairly weighedthe guilt and innocence of Theodore of Mopsuestia. If he composed ten thousandvolumes, as many errors would be a charitable allowance. In all the subsequentcatalogues of heresiarchs, he alone, without Ins two brethren, is included: and itis the duty of Asseman (Bibliot. Orient, torn. 4. p. 203—207.) to justify the sen­tence.







OCR Output








430 ROMAN EMPIRE.


of the Romans.' After the fall of this opulent city, theprovincials and barbarians implored on all sides themercy of the conqueror. His vanity or his zeal might beflattered by offers of tribute, or professions of faith: buthis losses, his fatigues, and the progress of an epidemicaldisease, prevented a solid establishment; and the Sara­cens, after a campaign of fifteen months, retreated to theconfines of Egypt, with the captives and the wealth oftheir African expedition. The caliph's fifth was grantedto a favourite, on the nominal payment of five hundredthousand pieces of gold;' but the state was doubly in­jured by this fallacious transaction, if each foot-soldierhad shared one thousand, and each horseman three thou­sand, pieces, in the real division of the plunder. The au­thor of the death of Gregory was expected to have claim­ed the most precious reward of the victory: from hissilence it might be presumed that he had fallen in thebattle, till the tears and exclamations of the prefect'sdaughter at the sight of Zobeir revealed the valour andmodesty of that gallant soldier. The unfortunate virginwas offered, and almost rejected, as a slave, by her fa­ther's murderer, who coolly declared that his sword wasconsecrated to the service of religion; and that he la­boured for a recompense far above the charms of mortalbeauty, or the riches of this transitory life. A rewardcongenial to his temper, was the honourable commissionof announcing to the caliph Othman the success of hisarms. The companions, the chiefs, and the people, wereassembled in the mosch of Medina, to hear the interest­ing narrative of Zobeir; and, as the orator forgot no­thing except the merit of his own counsels and actions,


'Shaw's Travels, p. 118,119.
1 Mimica emptio (says Abulfeda),erathaec, etmiradouatio; quandoquidem Oth­man, ejus nomine minimus ex Eerario prills ablatos a-rario prastabat. (Annnl.Moslem, p. 78.) Elmacin (in his cloudy version, p. 39.) seems to report the samejob. When the Arabs besieged the palace of Othman, it stood high in their cata­logue of grievances.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. »y


title of Augustus; an empty title, for they continued tolanguish without trust or power in the solitude of thepalace. At their secret instigation, the troops of theAnatolian theme or province approached the city on theAsiatic side, demanded for the royal brothers, the parti­tion or exercise of sovereignty, and supported their se­ditious claim by a theological argument. They wereChristians (they cried), and orthodox Catholics; thesincere votaries of the holy and undivided Trinity. Sincethere are three equal persons in heaven, it is reasonablethere should be three equal persons upon earth. Theemperor invited these learned divines to a friendly con­ference; in which they might propose their argumentsto the senate; they obeyed the summons; but the pros­pect of their bodies hanging on a gibbet in the suburbof Galata, reconciled their companions to the unity of thereign of Constantine. He pardoned his brothers, andtheir names were still pronounced in the public acclama­tions; but on the repetition or suspicion of a similaroffence, the obnoxious princes were deprived of theirtitles and noses, in the presence of the Catholic bishopswho were assembled at Constantinople in the sixth ge­neral synod. In the close of his life, Pogonatus wasanxious only to establish the right of primogeniture : thehair of his two sons, Justinian and Heraclius, was of­fered on the shrine of St. Peter, as a symbol of theirspiritual adoption by the pope; but the elder was aloneexalted to the rank of Augustus and the assurance of theempire.
Justinian After the decease of his father, the inheritance^*D- of the Roman world devolved to Justinian II.September. and the name of a triumphant lawgiver was dis­honoured by the vices of a boy, who imitated his name­sake only in the expensive luxury of building. His pas­sions were strong; his understanding was feeble; andhe was intoxicated with a foolish pride, that liis birthhad given him the command of millions^ of whom the


H 2







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 49


has been computed that one hundred thousand Romansubjects were extirpated in the Samaritan war," whichconverted the once fruitful province into a desolate andsmoking wilderness. But in the creed of Justinian,the guilt of murder could not be applied to the slaugh­ter of unbelievers; and he piously laboured to establishwith fire and sword the unity of the Christian faith/Hi s ortho- With these sentiments, it was incumbent onito*?- him, at least, to be always in the right. In thefirst years of his administration, he signalized his zeal asthe disciple and patron of orthodoxy: the reconciliationof the Greeks and Latins established the tome of St. Leoas the creed of the emperor and the empire; the Nesto-rians and Eutychians were exposed, on either side, tothe double edge, of persecution; and the four synods ofNice, Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon, wereratified by the code of a Catholic lawgiver.2 But whileJustinian strove to maintain the uniformity of faith andworship, his wife Theodora, whose vices were not in­compatible with devotion, had listened to the Monophy-site teachers; and the open or clandestine enemies ofthe church revived and multiplied at the smile of theirgracious patroness. The capital, the palace, the nuptialbed, were torn by spiritual discord: yet so doubtfulwas the sincerity of the royal consorts, that their seem­ing disagreement was imputed by many to a secret andmischievous confederacy against the religion and hap­piness of their people." The famous dispute of the


* Procop. Anecdot. c. 11. Theophan. Chron. p. 152. John Malala, Chron. torn-2. p. 62. I remember an observation, half philosophical, half superstitious, thatthe province which had been ruined by the bigotry of Justinian, was the samethrough which the Mahometans penetrated into the empire.
1 The expression of Procopius is remarkable: ou yap ot I)OXII ifwo; adfinrotv itvaf,uf j* ftx Tuf OUTOU Jo£»; °l TiXit/r-wrfif Tvxptti WTi;. Anecdot. c. 13.
1 See the Chronicle of Victor, p. 328, and the original evidence of the laws ofJustinian. During the first years ofhis reign, Baronius himself is in extreme goodI.n int.in- with the emperor, who courted the popes, till he got them into' his power.
a Procopius, Anecdot. c. 13. Evagrius, lib. 4. c. 10. If the ecclesiastical neverread the sacred historian, their common suspicion proves at least the genera]hatred.
VOL. VI. E







OCR Output








286 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Eitent of some of the fairest kingdoms of Europe were thepatrimony or conquest of a prince, who reign-ed at the same time in France, Spain, Italy,Germany, and Hungary.0 I. The Roman province ofGaul had been transformed into the name and monar­chy of FRANCE; but, in the decay of the Merovingianline, its limits were contracted by the independence ofthe Britains and the revolt of Aquitain. Charlemagnepursued, and confined, the Britons on the shores of theocean; and that ferocious tribe, whose origin and lan­guage are so different from the French, was chastisedby the imposition of tribute, hostages, and peace. Af­ter a long and evasive conquest, the rebellion of thedukes of Aquitain was punished by the forfeiture oftheir province, their liberty, and their lives. Harshand rigorous would have been such treatment of ambi­tious governors, who had too faithfully copied themayors of the palace. But a recent discoveryp hasproved that these unhappy princes were the last andlawful heirs of the blood and sceptre of Clovis, ayounger branch, from the brother of Dagobert, of theMerovingian house. Their ancient kingdom was re­duced to the dutchy of Gascogne, to the counties ofFesenzac and Armagnac, at the foot of the Pyrenees:their race was propagated till the beginning of the six­teenth century; and, after surviving their Carlovingiantyrants, they were reserved to feel the injustice, or thefavours, of a third dynasty. By the reunion of Aqui­tain, France was enlarged to its present boundaries,


for Italy, de Marca (Marca Hfepanica) for Spain. For the middle geography ofGermany, I confess myself poor and destitute.
0 After a brief relation of his wars and conqueste, (Vit. Carol, c. 5—14.)Eginhard recapitulates, in a few words, (c. 15.) the countries subject to his em­pire. Strurius (Corpus Hist. German, p. 118—149.) has inserted in his Notesthe texts of the old Chronicles.
P Of a charter granted to the monastery of Alaon (A. D. 845.) by Chartesthe Bald, which deduces this royal pedigree. I doubt whether some subsequentlinks of the ninth and tenth centuries are equally firm; yet the whole is approvedand defended by M. Gaillard, (torn. t. p. tiO—1)1. 90S—206.) who affirms thatthe family of Montesquieu (not of the president de Montesquieu) is descended ini lir female line from Clotaire and Clovis—an innocent pretension!







OCR Output








108 ROMAN EMPIRE.


of a brute; his lust confounded the eternal distinctionsof sex and species; and he seemed to extract some un­natural delight from the objects most offensive to humansense. In his religion, the Iconoclast was a heretic, aJew, a Mahometan, a Pagan, and an atheist; and hisbelief of an invisible power could be discovered only inhis magic rites, human victims, and nocturnal sacrificesto Venus and the demons of antiquity. His life wasstained with the most opposite vices," and the ulcerswhich covered his body, anticipated before his deaththe sentiment of hell tortures. Of these accusations,which I have so patiently copied, a part is refuted by itsown absurdity; and in the private anecdotes of the lifeof princes, the lie is more easy as the detection is moredifficult. Without adopting the pernicious maxim, thatwhere much is alleged, something must be true, I canhowever discern, that Constantine V. was dissolute andcruel. Calumny is more prone to exaggerate than to in­vent; and her licentious tongue is checked in somemeasure by the experience of the age and country towhich she appeals. Of the bishops and monks, the ge­nerals and magistrates, who are said to have sufferedunder his reign, the numbers are recorded, the nameswere conspicuous, the execution was public, the mutila­tion visible and permanent. The Catholics hated theperson and government of Copronymus; but even theirhatred is a proof of their oppression. They dissemblethe provocations which might excuse or justify his ri­gour; but even these provocations must gradually in­flame his resentment, and harden his temper in the useor the abuse of despotism. Yet the character of the fifthConstantine was not devoid of merit, nor did his govern­ment always deserve the curses or the contempt of theGreeks. From the confession of his enemies, I am in­formed of the restoration of an ancient aqueduct, of theredemption of two thousand five hundred captives, of theuncommon plenty of the times, and of the new colonies







OCR Output








4.30 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Cabes and Tripoli. The arms of Hassan were bolderand more fortunate; he reduced and pillaged the metro­polis of Africa; and the mention of scaling-ladders mayjustify the suspicion that he anticipated, by a sudden as­sault, the more tedious operations of a regular siege.But the joy of the conquerors was soon disturbed by theappearance of the Christian succours. The prefect andpatrician John, a general of experience and renown, em­barked at Constantinople the forces of the eastern em­pire ;* they were joined by the ships and soldiers of Si­cily, and a powerful reinforcement of Goths" was ob­tained from the fears and religion of the Spanish mo­narch. The weight of the confederate navy broke thechain that guarded the entrance of the harbour; theArabs retired to Cairoan, or Tripoli; the Christianslanded; the citizens hailed the ensign of the cross, andthe winter was idly wasted in the dream of victory ordeliverance. But Africa was irrecoverably lost; the zealand resentment of the commander of the faithful1 pre­pared in the ensuing spring a more numerous armamentby sea and land; and the patrician in his turn was com­pelled to evacuate the post and fortifications of Carthage.A second battle was fought in the neighbourhood ofUtica: the Greeks and Goths were again defeated; andtheir timely embarkation saved them from the sword of


'AIWTIC; . .. ilrav-ra Ta "PaJ.ualXJ lJ»wMs-| irXoi/ua, fffarrrya -n Mr' atrrci; Iiaii-rrov narguun, iiumtgov, rav wcAIui&'V iFpxtiprafJttm; flfo; Kflpp^nJora Kara rttl Jspstcrt*Ti£in/u-4.<v. Nicephori Constantinopolitani Breviar. p. 28. The patriarch of Constan­tinople, with Theophanes, (Chronograph, p. 309.) hare slightly mentioned this lastattempt for the relief of Africa. Pagi (Critica, torn. 3. p. 129.141.) has nicely as­certained the chronology by a strict comparison of the Arabic and Byzantine his­torians, who often disagree both in time and fact. See likewise a note of Otter,(p. 121.)
0 Dove s'erano ridotti i nobili Romani e i Gotti; and afterward, i Romani sag-girono ei Gotti, lasciarono Carthagine. (Leo African, fol. 72. recto.) I know notfrom what Arabic writer the African derived his Goths: but the fact, though new,is so interesting and so probable, that I will accept it on the slightest authority.
1 This commander is styled by Nicephorus awiXeu; Zaptuuivor, a vague, though,not improper, definition, of the caliph. Theophanes introduces the strange appella­tion of irjoTM-i-yxScXe; which his interpreter lioar explains by Vizir Aztm. Theymay approach the truth, in assigning the active part to the minister, rather thanthe prince; bat they forget that the Ommiades had only a hittb, or secretary, andthat the office of vizier was not revived or instituted till the one hundred and thir­ty-second year of the Hegira. (D'Herbclot, p. 9,12 )







OCR Output








488 ROMAN EMPIRE.


a sixth part of that number; and the presence and meritof the caliph Mervan, the fourteenth and last of the houseof Ommiyah. Before his accession to the throne, hehad deserved, by his Georgian warfare, the honourableepithet of the ass of Mesopotamia;" and he might havebeen ranked among the greatest princes, had not, saysAbulfeda, the eternal order decreed that moment for theruin of his family; a decree against which all humanprudence and fortitude must struggle in vain. The or­ders of Mervan were mistaken or disobeyed: the returnof his horse, from which he had dismounted on a neces-cary occasion, impressed the belief of his death; and theenthusiasm of the black squadrons was ably conductedby Abdallah, the uncle of his competitor. After an ir­retrievable defeat, the caliph escaped to Mosul: but thecolours of the Abbassides were displayed from the ram­part: he suddenly repassed the Tigris, cast a melancholylook on his palace of Haran, crossed the Euphrates,abandoned the fortifications of Damascus, and, withouthalting in Palestine, pitched his last and fatal camp atBusir on the banks of the Nile.0 His speed was urgedFail of the by the incessant diligence of Abdallah, who inA jc£I75os'every step of the pursuit acquired strength andt'eb. 10. reputation: the remains of the white faction werefinally vanquished in Egypt; and the lance, which ter­minated the life and anxiety of Mervan, was not less


• Al Heman. He had been governor of Mesopotamia, and the Arabic proverbpraises the courage of that warlike breed of asses who never fly from an enemy.The surname of Mervan may justify the comparison of Homer, (Iliad, ?.. 557. &c.)and both will silence the moderns, who consider the ass as a stupid and ignobleemblern. (D'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orient, p.558.)
0 Four several places, all in Egypt, bore the name of Busir, or Busiria, so famousin Greek fable. The first, where Ain van was slain, was to the west of the Kile,in the province of Fium, or Arsinoe ; the second in the Delta, in the Sebennyticnome ; the third, near the pyramids; the fourth, which was destroyed by Uio-clesian, in the Thebais. I shall here transcribe a note of the learned and orthodoxMichaelis: Videntur in pluribus ^Egypti superioris urbibus Busiri Coptoque armasumpsisse Christiani, libertatemque de rehgione sentiendi defendisse, sed suc-cubuisse quo in bello Coptus et Busiris diruta, et circa Esnam masna strages edits.Bellum narrant aed causam belli ignorant scriptores Byzantini, alioqui Copt um etBusirim non rebellasse dicturi, sed caussam Christianorum suscepturi. (Not. 31 I.p. 100.) For the geography of the four Bosirs, see Abulfeda (Descript. .(Egypt,p. 9. vers. Michaelis, Gottingtc, 1776, in quarto), Michaelis, (Not. 188—1!7.p. 58—63.) and d'Anville. (Memoire sur 1'Egypte, p. 85. H7. 205.)







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 147


tide by conquest; but this sword would have beendrawn against the foreign and domestic enemies of thestate. The decline of his health and vigour suspendedthe operation of active virtue; and the prospect of ap­proaching death determined him to interpose some mo­ments betweentife and eternity. But instead of leavingthe empire as the marriage-portion of his daughter, hisreason and inclination concurred in the preference of hisbrother John, a soldier, a patriot, and the father of fivesons, the future pillars of an hereditary succession. Hisfirst modest reluctance might be the natural dictates ofdiscretion and tenderness, but his obstinate and success­ful perseverance, however it may dazzle with the showof virtue, must be censured as a criminal desertion of hisduty, and a rare offence against his family and country.The purple which he had refused was accepted by Con-stantine Ducas, a friend of the Comnenian house, andwhose noble birth was adorned with the experience andreputation of civil policy. In the monastic habit, Isaacrecovered his health, and survived two years his volun­tary abdication. At the command of his abbot, he ob­served the rule of St. Basil, and executed the most ser­vile offices of the convent: but his latent vanity wasgratified by the frequent and respectful visits of thereigning monarch, who revered in his person the cha­racter of a benefactor and a saint.^ If Constantino XI. were indeed the subject
tine XL most worthy of empire, we must pity the debase-A.Djiosg, ment of the age and nation in which he wasDec' 2'7. chosen. In the labour of puerile declamationshe sought, without obtaining, the crown of eloquence,more precious, in his opinion, than that of Rome: and,in the subordinate functions of a judge, he forgot theduties of a sovereign and a warrior. Far from imitatingthe patriotic indifference of the authors of his greatness,Ducas was anxious only to secure, at the expense ofthe republic, the power and prosperity of his children.


L2







OCR Output








168 ROMAN EMPIRE.


sunk before him; he reached the straits of the ThracianBosphorus; the Byzantine navy sailed from the har­bour to receive and transport the saviour of the empire;the torrent was loud and irresistible, and the insects,who had basked in the sunshine of royal favour, disap­peared at the blast of the storm. It was the first careof Andronicus to occupy the palace, to salute the em­peror, to confine his mother, to punish her minister, andto restore the public order and tranquillity. He thenvisited the sepulchre of Manuel: the spectators wereordered to stand aloof, but, as he bowed in the attitudeof prayer, they heard, or thought they heard, a murmurof triumph and revenge. I no longer fear thee, my oldenemy, who hast driven me a vagabond to every climateof the earth. Thou art safely deposited under a seven­fold dome, from whence thou canst never arise till thesignal of the last trumpet. It is now my turn, and speed­ily will I trample on thy ashes and thy posterity. Fromhis subsequent tyranny we may impute such feelingsto the man and the moment. But it is not extremelyprobable that he gave an articulate sound to his secretthoughts. In the first months of his administration,his designs were veiled by a fair semblance of hypo­crisy, which could delude only the eyes of the multi­tude: the coronation of Alexius was performed withdue solemnity, and his perfidious guardian, holding in,his hands the body and blood of Christ, most ferventlydeclared, that he lived, and was ready to die, for theservice of his beloved pupil. But his numerous adhe­rents were instructed to maintain, that the sinkingempire must perish in the hands of a child: that theRomans could only be saved by a veteran prince, boldin arms, skilful in policy, and taught to reign by thelong experience of fortune and mankind; and that itwas the duty of every citizen, to force the reluctantmodesty of Andronicus to undertake the burden of thepublic care. The young emperor was himself con­







OCR Output








CHAP. LII. 517


hoped to deprecate the fate of Araorium: the inexorablecaliph rejected with contempt his prayers and promises;and detained the Roman ambassadors to be the witnessesof his great revenge. They had nearly been the wit­nesses of his shame. The vigorous assaults of fifty-fivedays were encountered by a faithful governor, a veterangarrison, and a desperate people; and the Saracensmust have raised the siege if a domestic traitor had notpointed to the weakest part of the wall, a place whichwas decorated with the statues of a lion and a bull.The vow of Motassem was accomplished with unre­lenting rigour: tired, rather than satiated, with destruc­tion, he returned to his new palace of Samara, in theneighbourhood of Bagdad, while the unfortunate Theo-philus implored the tardy and doubtful aid of his westernrival the emperor of the Franks. Yet in the siege ofAmorium above seventy thousand Moslems had perished:their loss had been revenged by the slaughter of thirtythousand Christians, and the sufferings of an equal num­ber of captives, who were treated as the most atrociouscriminals. Mutual necessity could sometimes extort theexchange or ransom of prisoners ;b but in the nationaland religious conflict of the two empires, peace waswithout confidence, and war without mercy. Quarter wasseldom given in the field; those who escaped the edgeof the sword, were condemned to hopeless servitude, orexquisite torture; and a Catholic emperor relates, withvisible satisfaction, the execution of the Saracens ofCrete, who were flayed alive, or plunged into caldrons


* In the east he was styled Aurv^n;; (Continuator Theophan. lib. 3. p. 84.) butsuch was the ignorance of the west, that his ambassadors, in public discourse,might boldly narrate, de victoriis, quas adversns exteras bcllando gentes coelitusfuerat assecutus. (Annalist. Bertinian. apud Pagi, torn. 3. p. 720.)
lj Abu'pharagius (Dynast, p. 167,163.) relates one of these singular transactionson the bridge of the river Lamas in Cilicia, the limit of the two empires, and oneday's journey westward of Tarsus. ( D'Anville, Geographic Ancienne, torn. 2. p. 91.)Four thousand four hundred and sixty Moslems, eighthundred women and children,one hundred confederates, were exchanged for an equal number of Greeks. Theypassed each other in the middle of the bridge, and when they reached their respec­tive friends, they shouted Allah Ackar, and Kyrie Eltison. Many of the prisoners ofAmorium were probably among them, but in the same year (A. H. 231.) the mostllustrious of the-i, the forty-two martyrs, were beheaded by the caliph's order.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 5


able. It may be fairly presumed, that the most sublimeand virtuous of human spirits was infused into the off­spring of Mary and the Holy Ghost;' that his abasementwas the result of his voluntary choice; and that the objectof his mission was to purify, not his owq, but the sinsof the world. On his return to his native skies, he re­ceived the immense reward of his obedience; the ever­lasting kingdom of the Messiah, which had been dark­ly foretold by the prophets, under the carnal imagessf peace, of conquest, and of dominion. Omnipotencecould enlarge the human faculties of Christ to the extentof his celestial office. In the language of antiquity, thetitle of God has not been severely confined to the firstparent, and his incomparable minister, his only-begottenSon, might claim, without presumption, the religious,though secondary, worship of a subject world.ir. A pure II- The seeds of the faith, which had slowlyGod toUie arisen in the rocky and ungrateful soil of Judea,were transplanted, in full maturity, to the hap­pier climes of the Gentiles; and the strangers of Romeor Asia, who never beheld the manhood, were the morereadily disposed to embrace the divinity of Christ. ThePolytheistand the philosopher, the Greek and the bar­barian, were alike accustomed to conceive a long suc­cession, an infinite chain of angels or demons, or deities,or aeons, or emanations, issuing from the throne of light.Nor could it seem strange or incredible, that the firstof these aeons, the Logos, or Word of God, of the samesubstance with the Father, should descend upon earthto deliver the human race from vice and error, and toconduct them in the paths of life and immortality. Butthe prevailing doctrine of the eternity and inherent pravi-ty of matter infected the primitive churches of the east.Many among the Gentile proselytes refused to believe
•'On8 TOU Tttmfff -^uya, n -nu Aa-ift uv—was one of ihe fifteen heresies imputedto Origen, and denied by his apologist. (Photius, Bibliothec. Cod. 117. p. 296.)Some of the rabbies attribute ono and the same soul to the persons of Adam, David,and the Messiah.







OCR Output








CHAP. L.


in three divisions, marched into the city: eight andtwenty of the inhabitants were slain by the sword of Ca-led: eleven men and six women were proscribed by thesentence of Mahomet; but he blamed the cruelty of hislieutenant; and several of the most obnoxious victimswere indebted for their lives to his clemency or contempt.The chiefs of the Koreish were prostrate at his feet.What mercy can you expect from the man whom you havewronged?—We confide in the generosity of our kinsman.—And you shall not confide in vain; begone! you aresafe, you are free. The people of Mecca deserved theirpardon by the profession of Islam; and after an exile ofseven years, the fugitive missionary was enthroned asthe prince and prophet of his native country.b But thethree hundred and sixty idols of the Caaba were igno-miniously broken; the house of God was purified andadorned; as an example to future times, the apostleagain fulfilled the duties of a pilgrim: and a perpetuallaw was enacted, that no unbeliever should dare to sethis foot on the territory of the holy city.0Conquest The conquest of Mecca determined the faithA. J.tisst' ^d obedience of the Arabian tribes ;d who, ac-—632. cording to the vicissitudes of fortune, had obeyedor disregarded the eloquence or the arms of the prophet.Indifference for rites and opinions still marks the cha­racter of the Bedoweens; and they might accept, asloosely as they hold, the doctrine of the Koran. Yet anobstinate remnant still adhered to the religion and libertyof their ancestors; and the war of Honain derived a pro­per appellation from the idols, whom Mahomet had


'• The Mahometan doctors still dispute, whether Mecca was reduced by force orconsent (Abulfeda, p. 107. et Gagnier ad locum); and this verbal controversy is ofas much moment as our own about William the Conqueror.
* In excluding the Christians from the peninsula of Arabia, the province ofHejaz, or the navigation of the Red sea, Chardin (Voyages en Perses, torn. 4.p. 166.) and lleland (Dissert. Miscell. torn. 3. p. SI.) are more rigid than theMussulmans themselves. Tin- Christians are received without scruple into theports of Mocha, and even of Gedda, and it is only the city and precincts of Meccathat are inaccessible to the profane. (Niebuhr, Description de 1'Arabie, p. 308,309. Voyage en Arabie, torn. 1. p. 205. 248, &c.)
i• Abulfeda, p. 112—115. Gagnier, torn. 3. p. 67—88. D'Herbelot, MoHAMHF.D.
VOL. VI. Y







OCR Output








532 ROMAN EMPIRE.


his scaling-ladders, occupied two adjacent towers, stoodfirm against the pressure of multitudes, and bravelymaintained his post till he was relieved by the tardyRecovery though effectual support of his reluctant chief.ofAntioch-The first tumult of slaughter and rapine subsided;the reign of Caesar and of Christ was restored; and theefforts of a hundred thousand Saracens, of the armies ofSyria and the fleets of Africa, were consumed withouteffect before the walls of Antioch. The royal city ofAleppo was subject to^ Seifeddowlat, of the dynasty ofof Hamaden, who clouded his past glory by the preci­pitate retreat which abandoned his kingdom and capitalto the Roman invaders. In his stately palace, thatstood without the walls of Aleppo, they joyfully seizeda well-furnished magazine of arms, a stable of fourteenhundred mules, and three hundred bags of silver andgold. But the walls of the city withstood the strokes oftheir battering-rams; and the besiegers pitched theirtents on the neighbouring mountain of Jaushan. Theirretreat exasperated the quarrel of the townsmen andmercenaries; the guard of the gates and ramparts wasdeserted; and, while they furiously charged each otherin the market-place, they were surprised and destroyedby the sword of a common enemy. The male sex wasexterminated by the sword; ten thousand youths wereled into captivity: the weight of the precious spoil ex­ceeded the strength and number of the beasts of burden;the superfluous remainder was burnt; and, after a li­centious possession of ten days, the Romans marchedaway from the naked and bleeding city. In their Syrianinroads, they commanded the husbandmen to cultivatetheir lands, that they themselves, in the ensuing season,might reap the benefit: more than a hundred cities werereduced to obedience; and eighteen pulpits of the prin­cipal moschs were committed to the flames, to expiatethe sacrilege of the disciples of Mahomet. The classicnames of Hierapolis, Apamea, and Emesa, revive for a







OCR Output








322 ROMAN EMPIRE.


vowed to destroy, and whom the confederates of Tayefhad sworn to defend.0 Four thousand Pagans advancedwith secrecy and speed to surprise the conqueror; theypitied and despised the supine negligence of the Koreish,but they depended on the wishes, and perhaps the aid,of a people who had so lately renounced their gods, andbowed beneath the yoke of their enemy. The bannersof Medina and Mecca were displayed by the prophet; acrowd of Bedoweens increased the strength or numbersof the army, and twelve thousand Mussulmans enter­tained a rash and sinful presumption of their invinciblestrength. They descended without precaution into thevalley of Honain ; the heights had been occupied by thearchers and slingers of the confederates; their numberswere oppressed, their discipline was confounded, theircourage was appalled, and the Koreish smiled at theirimpending destruction. The prophet, on his white mule,was encompassed by the enemies; he attempted to rushagainst their spears in search of a glorious death: tenof his faithful companions interposed their weapons andtheir breasts; three of these fell dead at his feet. O mybrethren (he repeatedly cried with sorrow and indigna­tion), I am the son of Abdullah, T am the apostle oftruth! O man stand fast in the faith! O God, senddown thy succour! His uncle Abbas, who like the heroesof Homer, excelled in the loudness of his voice, made thevalley resound with the recital of the gifts and promisesof God: the flying Moslems returned from all sides tothe holy standard; and Mahomet observed with plea­sure that the furnace was again rekindled: his conductand example restored the battle; and he animated hisvictorious troops to inflict a merciless revenge on theauthors of their shame. From the field of Honain, hemarched without delay to the siege of Tayef, sixty miles
• The siege of Tayef, division of the spoil, &c. are related by Abulfeda, (p. 117-,-l33.) and Gagnier, (torn. 3. p. 88—111.) It is Al Jannabi who mentions theengines and engineers of the tribe of Daws. The fertile spot of Tayef was sup­posed to be a piece of the land of Syria detached and dropped in the preneral"•lug*.







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 429


(said he) is our general?—In his tent.—Is the tent astation for the general of the Moslems? Abdallah re­presented with a blush the importance of his own life,and the temptation that was held forth by the Romanprefect. Retort (said Zobeir) on the infidels their un­generous attempt. Proclaim through the ranks, thatthe head of Gregory shall be repaid with his captivedaughter, and the equal sum of one hundred thousandpieces of gold. To the courage and discretion of Zobeirthe lieutenant of the caliph intrusted the execution ofhis own stratagem, which inclined the long-disputedbalance in favour of the Saracens. Supplying by ac­tivity and artifice the deficiency of numbers, a part oftheir forces lay concealed in their tents, while the re­mainder prolonged an irregular skirmish with the enemy,till the sun was high in the heavens. On both sides theyretired with fainting steps: their horses were unbridled,their armour was laid aside, and the hostile nations pre­pared, or seemed to prepare, for the refreshment of theevening, and the encounter of the ensuing day. On asudden the charge was sounded; the Arabian camppoured forth a swarm of fresh and intrepid warriors;and the long line of the Greeks and Africans was sur­prised, assaulted, overturned, by new squadrons of thefaithful, who, to the eye of fanaticism, might appear asa band of angels descending from the sky. The prefecthimself was slain by the hand of Zobeir: his daughter,who sought revenge and death, was surrounded andmade prisoner; and the fugitives involved in theirdisaster the town of Sufetula, to which they escaped fromthe sabres and lances of the Arabs. Sufetula was builtone hundred and fifty miles to the south of Carthage;a gentle declivity is watered by a running stream, andshaded by a grove of juniper-trees; and in the ruins ofa triumphal arch, a portico, and three temples of the Co­rinthian order, curiosity may yet admire the magnificence







OCR Output








418 ROMAN EMPIRE.


men, the Saracens prevailed: the Greeks embarked theirdispirited and diminished numbers, and the standard ofMahomet was planted on the walls of the capital ofEgypt. / have taken (said Amrou to the caliph) thegreat city of the west. It is impossible for me to enu­merate the variety of its riches and beauty; and I shallcontent myself with observing, that it contains four thou­sand palaces, four thousand baths, four hundred theatresor places of amusement, twelve thousand shops for the saleof vegetable food, and forty thousand tributary Jews.The town has been subdued by force of arms, withouttreaty or capitulation, and the Moslems are impatient toseise the fruits of their victory.1 The commander of thefaithful rejected with firmness the idea of pillage, anddirected his lieutenant to reserve the wealth and revenueof Alexandria for the public service and the propagationof the faith: the inhabitants were numbered; a tributewas imposed; the zeal and resentment of the Jacobiteswere curbed, and the Melchites, who submitted to theArabian yoke, were indulged in the obscure but tranquilexercise of their worship. The intelligence of this dis­graceful and calamitous event afflicted the declininghealth of the emperor; and Heraclius died of a dropsyabout seven weeks after the loss of Alexandria/ Underthe minority of his grandson, the clamours of a people,deprived of their daily sustenance, compelled the By­zantine court to undertake the recovery of the capital ofEgypt. In the space of four years, the harbour andfortifications of Alexandria were twice occupied by afleet and army of Romans. They were twice expelledby the valour of Amrou, who was recalled by the do­mestic peril from the distant wars of Tripoli and Nubia.But the facility of the attempt, the repetition of the in-


1 Eutych. Anna1, torn. 2. p. 316. 319.
J Notwithstanding some inconsistencies of Theophanes and Cedrenus, the ac­curacy of Pagi (Critica, torn. 2. p. 824.) has extracted from Nicephorus and theChronicon Orientale the true date of the death of Heraclius, February 11, A. D.641; fifty Jays after the loss of Alexandria. A fourth of that time was sufficient toconvey the intelligence.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 3


beian garb, their grosser apprehensions were incapableof discerning their God, who had studiously disguisedhis celestial character under the name and person of amortal.1 The familiar companions of Jesus of Nazarethconversed with their friend and countryman, who, inall the actions of rational and animal life, appeared ofthe same species with themselves. His progress frominfancy to youth and manhood was marked by a regu­lar increase in stature and wisdom; and, after a pain­ful agony of mind and body, he expired on the cross.He lived and died for the service of mankind; but thelife and death of Socrates had likewise been devoted tothe cause of religion and justice; and although the Stoicor the hero may disdain the humble virtues of Jesus, thetears which he shed over his friend and country may beesteemed the purest evidence of his humanity. Themiracles of the gospel could not astonish a people whoheld, with intrepid faith, the more splendid prodigies ofthe Mosaic law. The prophets of ancient days had cureddiseases, raised the dead, divided the sea, stopped thesun, and ascended to heaven in a fiery chariot. Andthe metaphorical style of the Hebrews might ascribe toa saint and martyr, the adoptive title of SON OF GOD.Yet in the insufficient creed of the Nazarenes
His Lirth
and eieva- and the Ebionites, a distinction is faintly noticedbetween theheretics, who confounded thegenera-tion of Christ in the common order of nature, and theless guilty schismatics, who revered the virginity of hismother, and excluded the aid of an earthly father. Theincredulity of the former was countenanced by the visi­ble circumstances of his birth, the legal marriage of hisreputed parents, Joseph and Mary, and his lineal claimto the kingdom of David and the inheritance of Judah.But the secret and authentic history has been recordedin several copies of the Gospel according to St. Mat-


*Chry»08tom Damage, (Hist, des Juifs,torn. 5. c. 9. p. 183.) and Athanasius(Petav. Dogmat, Theotog. torn. 5. lib. 1 c. 2. p. 3.) are obliged to confess that thedivinity of Christ is rarely mentioned by himself or his apostles.


B 2







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 273


at the hour of prayer, was supporting his steps on theshoulders of two slaves. Alas! (he replied) my coffersare empty! but these you may sell: if you refuse, I re­nounce them. At these words, pushing away the youths,he groped along the wall with his 'staff. The charac­ter of Hatem is the perfect model of Arabian virtue:"he was brave and liberal, an eloquent poet and a suc­cessful robber: forty camels were roasted at his hospi­table feast; and at the prayer of a suppliant enemy,he restored both the captives and the spoil. The free­dom of his countrymen disdained the laws of justice:they proudly indulged the spontaneous impulse ofpity and benevolence.
The religion of the Arabs," as well as of the Indians,consisted in the worship of the sun, the moon, and thefixed stars, a primitive and specious mode of supersti­tion. The bright luminaries of the sky display the vi­sible image of a deity: their number and distance con­vey to a philosophic, or even a vulgar eye, the idea ofboundless space; the character of eternity is markedon these solid globes, that seem incapable of corrup­tion or decay; the regularity of their motions may beascribed to a principle of reason or instinct; and theirreal or imaginary influence encourages the vain beliefthat the earth and its inhabitants are the object of theirpeculiar care. The science of astronomy was culti­vated at Babylon; but the school of the Arabs was aclear firmament and a naked plain. In their .nocturnalmarches, they steered by the guidance of the stars:their names, and order, and daily station, were familiarto the curiosity and devption of the Bedoween; andhe was taught by experience to divide in twenty­


"D'Herbelot, Bibliot . Orient, p. 458. Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet, torn. 3. p.118. Caab and Hesnus (Pocock, Specimen, p. 43. 46. 48.) were likewise con­spicuous for i 1 ».•] r liberality; and the latter is elegantly praised by an Arabianpoet:—" Videbis earn cam accesseris ezultantem, ac si dares illi quod ab illopetis.''
* Whatever can be known of the idolatry of the ancient Arabians, may befound in Pocock. (Specimen, p. 89—136. 163,164.) His profound erudition ismore clearly and concisely interpreted by Sale; (Preliminary Discourse, p. 14—24.) and Assemanni (Bibliot. Orient, torn. 4. p. 580—590.) has added some ralu-»ble remarks.
VOL. VI. T







OCR Output








158 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the iron temper of a soldier, which cannot easily beparalleled, except in the lives of Richard I. of England,and of Charles XII. of Sweden. Such was his strengthand exercise in arms, that Raymond, surnamed theHercules of Antioch, was incapable of wielding thelance and buckler of the Greek emperor. In a famoustournament, he entered the lists on a fiery courser, andoverturned in his first career two of the stoutest of theItalian knights. The first in the charge, the last in theretreat, his friends and his enemies alike trembled, theformer for his safety, and the latter for their own. Af­ter posting an ambuscade in a wood, he rode forth inquest of some perilous adventure, accompanied only byhis brother and the faithful Axuch, who refused to de­sert their sovereign. Eighteen horsemen, after a shortcombat, fled before them: but the numbers of the ene­my increased; the march of the reinforcement wastardy and fearful, and Manuel, without receiving awound, cut his way through a squadron of the Turks.In a battle against the Hungarians, impatient of theslowness of his troops, he snatched a standard from thehead of the column, and was the first, almost alone, whopassed a bridge that separated him from the enemy. Inthe same country, after transporting his army beyondthe Save, he sent back the boats, with an order, underpain of death, to their commander, that he should leavehim to conquer or die on that hostile land. In thesiegeof Corfu, towing after him a captive galley, the emperorstood aloft on the poop, opposing against the volley ofdarts and stones, a large buckler and a flowing sail; norcould he have escaped inevitable death, had not the Si­cilian admiral enjoined his archers to respect the personof a hero. In one day, he is said to have slain aboveforty of the barbarians with his own hand; he returnedto the camp, dragging along four Turkish prisoners,whom he had tied to the rings of his saddle: he wasever the foremost to provoke or to accept a single com-







OCR Output








423 ROMAN EMPIRE.


The pre- standard was followed by one hundred and twentyfeoct ^ thousand men, the regular bands of the empire musthis daugh- have been lost in the naked and disorderly crowdof Africans and Moors, who formed the strength,or rather the numbers, of his host. He rejected with in­dignation the option of the Koran or the tribute; andduring several days, the two armies were fiercely engagedfrom the dawn of light to the hour of noon, when theirfatigue and the excessive heat compelled them to seekshelter and refreshment in their respective camps. Thedaughter of Gregory, a maid of incomparable beauty andspirit, is said to have fought by his side: from her earli­est youth she was trained to mount on horseback, to drawthe bow, and to wield the scimitar: and the richness ofher arms and apparel was conspicuous in the foremostranks of the battle. Her hand, with a hundred thousandpieces of gold, was offered for the head of the Arabiangeneral, and the youths of Africa were excited by theprospect of the glorious prize. At the pressing solicita­tion of his brethren, Abdallah withdrew his person fromthe field; but the Saracens were discouraged by the re­treat of their leader, and the repetition of these equal orunsuccessful conflicts.v. . A noble Arabian, who afterward became the
Victory
of the adversary of Ali and the father of a caliph, hadsignalized his valour in Egypt; and Zobeir4 wasthe first who planted a scaling-ladder against the walkof Babylon. In the African war he was detached fromthe standard of Abdallah. On the news of the battle,Zobeir, with twelve companions, cut his way through thecamp of the Greeks, and pressed forward, without tastingeither food or repose, to partake of the dangers of hisbrethren. He cast his eyes round the field. Where


* See in Ockley (Hist, of the Saracens, vol. 3. p. 45.) the death of Zobeir, whichwas honoured with the tears of Ali, against whom he had rebelled. Hit valour atthe siege of Babylon, if indeed it be the same person, is mentioned by Eutychius.( Annal.torn. 2. p. 308.)







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 265


tempted to forget his distant country and his unfortunatemaster. The historians of the age of Justinian representthe state of the independent Arabs, who were divided byinterest or aifection in the long quarrel of the east; thetribe of Gassan was allowed to encamp on the Syrian ter­ritory; the princes of Hira were permitted to form acity about forty miles to the southward of the ruins ofBabylon. Their service in the field was speedy and vi­gorous; but their friendship was venal, their faith in­constant, their enmity capricious; it was an easier taskto excite than to disarm these roving barbarians; and,in the familiar intercourse of war, they learned to see,and to despise, the splendid weakness both of Rome andof Persia. From Mecca to the Euphrates, the Arabiantribes' were confounded by the Greeks and Latins, underthe general appellation of SARACENS/ a name whichevery Christian mouth has been taught to pronouncewith terror and abhorrence.
Their do- The slaves of domestic tyranny may vainlydomaid*8" exult in their national independence; but thecharacter. j\rab is personally free; and he enjoys, in somedegree, the benefits of society, without forfeiting theprerogatives of nature. In every tribe, superstition, orgratitude, or fortune, has exalted a particular familyabove the heads of their equals. The dignities of sheichand emir invariably descend in this chosen race; butthe order of succession is loose and precarious; andthe most worthy or aged of the noble kinsmen are


'The Sajaxwix* ifvXs, ffjftzSt; riuna »ai TO orMwiov auran spniuwo^a, xai aare described by Menander, (Excerpt Legation, p. 149.) Procopius,(de Bell. Persic.lib. 1. c. 17. 19. lib. 2. c. 10.) and, in the most lively colours, by Ammianus Marcellinus, (lib. 14. c. 4.) who had spoken of them as early as the reign of Marcus.* The name which, used by Ptolemy and Pliny in a more confined, by Ammi­anus and Procopius in a larger, sense, has been derived, ridiculously, from Sarah,the wife of Abraham, obscurely from the village of Saraka(fura$afSariuwt; Stephan.de I ' r I ,il in s ) , more plausibly from the Arabic words, which signify a thieviih charac­ter, or arimtal situation. (Holtinger, Hist,|Oriental. lib. I.e. 1. p. 7, 8. Pocock, Spe­cimen, p. 33. 35. Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, torn. 4. p. 567.) Yet the last and mostpopular of these etymologies, is refuted by Ptolemy, (Arabia, p. 2. 18. in Hudson,torn. 4.) who expressly remarks the western and southern position of the Saracens,then an obscure tribe on the borders of Egypt. The appellation cannot thereforeallude to any national character; and, since it was imposed by strangers, it mustbe found, not in the Arabic, but in a foreign language.







OCR Output








280 ROMAN EMPIRE.


In the story of the Hebrew patriarchs, the Arabs werepleased to discover the fathers of their nation. Theyapplauded the birth and promises of Ismael; reveredthe faith and virtue of Abraham; traced his pedigreeand their own to the creation of the first man, and im­bibed, with equal credulity, the prodigies of the holytext, and the dreams and traditions of the Jewish rabbis.Birti a ' The base and plebeian origin of Mahomet iseducation an unskilful calumny of the Christians,' whomet, A.0D. exalt instead of degrading the merit of their569—609. a(iversary. JJis descent from Ismael was anational privilege or fable; but if the first steps of thepedigree8 are dark and doubtful, he could produce manygenerations of pure and genuine nobility: he sprung.from the tribe of Koreish and the family of Hashem,the most illustrious of the Arabs, the princes of Mecca,and the hereditary guardians of the Caaba. The grand­father of Mahomet was Abdol Motalleb, the son of Ha­shem, a weal thy and generous citizen, who relieved the dis­tress of famine with the supplies of commerce. Mecca,which had been fed by the liberality of the father, wassaved by the courage of the son. The kingdom of Ye­men was subject to the Christian princes of Abyssinia:their vassal Abrahah was provoked by an insult toavenge the honour of the cross; and the holy city wasinvested by a train of elephants and an army of Afri­cans. A treaty was proposed; and in the first audi­ence, the grandfather of Mahomet demanded the resti­


the Armenian, Persian, Ethiopia versions, expressly quoted by the fathers of thefifth century, who assert, that the Scriptures were translated into all the barbariclanguages. (Walton, Prolegomena ad Biblia Polyglot, p. 34. 93—97. Simeon,Hist. Critique du V. et du N. Testament, torn. 1. p. 180, 181.282—286. Z93. 305,306. torn. 4. p. 306.)
'In eo conveniunt omnes ut plebeio vilique genere ortum, &c. (Hottinger,Hist . Orient, p. 136.) Yet Theophanes, the most ancient of the Greeks, and thefather of many a lie, confesses that Mahomet was of the race of Ismael, u /uwcyiiaunn.nt uXw (Chronograph, p. 277.)
• Abulfeda, (in Vit. Mohammed, c. 1, 2.) and Gagnier (Vie de Mahomet, p.25—97.) describe the popular and approved genealogy of the prophet. At Mecca.I would not dispute its authenticity: at Lausanne, I will venture to observe, 1.That from Ismael to Mahomet, a period of two thousand five hundred years, theyreckon thirty, instead of seventy-five, generations. 2. That the modern Bedoweensare ignorant of their history and careless of their pedigree. (Voyage d'Arvieux,p. J30.133.)







OCR Output








THE
DECLINE AND FALL
or
THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


CHAP. XLVII.
Theological history of the doctrine of the incarnation.—The humanand divine natures of Christ.—Enmity of the patriarchs of Alex­andria and Constantinople.—St. Cyril and Nestorius.—Third ge­neral council of Ephesus.—Heresy of Eutyches.—Fourth generalcouncil of Chalcedon—Civil and ecclesiastical discord.—Intoler­ance of Justinian.—The three chapters.'—The Monothelite con­troversy.—State of the oriental sects.—I. The Nestorians.—II.The Jacobites.—III. TheiMaronites—IV. The Armenians.—V.The Copts and Abyssinians.
Theincar AFTER tne extinction of Paganism, the Chris-nation of tians in peace and piety might have enjoyed theirsolitary triumph: but the principle of discordwas alive in their bosom, and they were more solicitousto explore the nature, than to practise the laws of theirfounder. I have already observed, that the disputes ofthe TRINITY were succeeded by those of the INCAR­NATION; alike scandalous to the church, alike perni­cious to the state, still more minute in their origin, stillmore durable in their effects. It is my design to com­prise, in the present chapter, a religious war of twohundred and fifty years, to represent the ecclesiasticaland political schism of the oriental sects, and to intro­duce their clamorous or sanguinary contests, by a modestinquiry into the doctrines of the primitive church."
• By what means shall I authenticate this previous inquiry, which I have studiedto circumscribe and compress? If I persist in supporting each fact or reflection byits proper and special evidence, every line would require a string of testimonies, andevery note would swell to a critical dissertation. But the numberless passages of
VOL. VI. B







OCR Output








382 ROMAN EMPIRE.


and his grandfather; his uncles were strong and nume­rous; and in the division of the inheritance, the or­phan's. share was reduced to five camels and an Ethio­pian maid-servant. At home and abroad, in peace andwar, Abu Taleb, the most respectable of his uncles,was the guide and guardian of his youth; in his twea-ty-fifth year, he entered into the service of Cadijah,a rich and noble widow of Mecca, who soon rewardedhis fidelity with the gift of her hand and fortune. Themarriage-contract, in the simple style of antiquity. , re­cites the mutual loves of Mahomet and Cadija; de­scribes him as the most accomplished of the tribe ofKorr.ish; and stipulates a dowry of twelve ounces pfgold and twenty camels, which was supplied by the li­berality of his uncle." By this alliance the son of Ab-dallah was restored to the station of his ancestors; andthe judicious matron was content with his domesticvirtues, till, in the fortieth year of his age,y he assumedthe title of a prophet, and proclaimed the religion of theKoraq.
According to the tradition of his compa-
Qualifica- . mr i i . . • i i i' * i_
nions, Mahomet2 was distinguished by the


prophet. beauty of his person, an outward gift which isseldom despised, except by those to whom it has beeqrefused. Before he spoke, the orator engaged Ojn, hj$side the affections of a public or private audieuce.


* I copy the honourable testimony of Abu Taleb to his family and nephew.Laus Dei, qui nos a stirpe Abrahami et qemine ismaelis consatuit, et nobis regi-onem sacram dedit, et nos judices hominibus statuit. Poro Mohammed filius AD-dollahi nepotia mei (nepoi meat) quo cum ex aequo librabitur e Korashidis . juis-piam cui non prscponderaturus est bonitate et excellentia, et intellect^ et glona e.tacumiae etsi opum inops fuerit (et certe opes umbra transiens sunt etdepositum quodreddi debet), desiderio Chadijae filia e Chowailedi tenetur, et ilia vicissim ipsius,quicquid autem dotis vice petieritis, ego in me suscipiarn. (Pocock, Specimen, eseptima parte libri Ebn Uamduni.)
» The private life of Mahomet, from his birth to his mission, is preserved byAbulfeda, (in Vit. c. 3 — 7.) and the Arabian writers of genuine or apocryphalnote, who are alleged by Hottinger, (Hist. Orient , p. 204 — 211.) Maracci, (,1901.1. p. 10—14.) and Gagnier. (Vie de Mahomet, torn. 1. p. 97—134).
1 Abulfeda, in Vit , c. 65, 66. Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet, torn. 3. p. 37f — 289.the bes.t traditions of the person and conversation of the prophet are derived fromAyesha, Ali and Abu Horaira, (Gagnier, torn. 2. p. 267. Ockley's Hist, of theSaracens, voU 3. p. 149.) suniamed the father of a cat, who died in the year 59of i he Hegira.







OCR Output








434 ROMAN EMPIRE.


mand and failed in the attempt, was led about as ^prisonerin the camp of the Arabian general. The insurgents hadtrusted to his discontent and revenge; he disdained theiroffers and revealed their designs. In the hour of danger,the grateful Akbah unlocked his fetters, and advised himto retire; he chose to die under the banner of his rival.Embracing as friends and martyrs, they unsheathed theirscimitars, broke their scabbards, and maintained an ob­stinate combat till they fell by each other's side on thelast of their slaughtered countrymen. The third generalor governor of Africa, Zubeir, avenged and encounteredthe fate of his predecessor. He vanquished the nativesin many battles; he was overthrown by a powerful army,which Constantinople had sent to the relief of Carthage.Founda- fr ^ac^ keen the frequent practice of the Moor-tion of ish tribes to join the invaders, to share the plun-
Cairoan, PI/..I » i i .
A. D.ero der, to protess the faith, and to revolt to their sa-~ 67a' vage state of independence and idolatry, on thefirst retreat or misfortune of the Moslems. The prudenceof Akbah had proposed to found an Arabian colony inthe heart of Africa; a citadel that might curb the levityof the barbarians, a place of refuge to secure, against theaccidents of war, the wealth and the families of the Sa­racens. With this view, and under the modest title ofthe station of a caravan, he planted this colony in thefiftieth year of the Hegira. In its present decay, Cai-roanq still holds the second rank in the kingdom of Tunis,from which it is distant about fifty miles to the south;'its inland situation, twelve miles westward of the sea,has protected the city from the Greek and Sicilian fleets.When the wild beasts and serpents were extirpated, when


i The foundation of Cairoan is mentioned by Ockley; (Hist, of the Saracens,vol. 2. p. 189. 130.) and the situation, mosch, &c. of the city, are described by LeoAfricanns, (fol. 75.) Marmol,(torn. 2. p. flSS.) and Shaw. (p. 115.)
'A portentous, though frequent, mistake has been the confounding, from 3 slightsimilitude of name, the Cyrene of the Greeks, and the Cairoan of the Arabs, twocities which are separated by an interval of a thousand miles along the sea-coastThe great ThUanns has not escaped this fault, the less excusable, as it is connectedwith a formal and elaborate description of Africa. (Historiar. lib. 7. c. 9. in torn. 1.p. ?40. edit. Buckley.)







OCR Output








CHAP. ill. 467


of the Christians, and scattered among their enemies theseeds of division and decay.
First siege Forty-six years after the flight of Mahometsfantino ^rom Mecca, his disciples appeared in arms underpie by the the walls of Constantinople.1 They were ani-A.D. ees mated by a genuine or fictitious saying of the~67°- prophet, that, to the first army which besiegedthe city of the Caesars, their sins were forgiven: the longseries of Roman triumphs would be meritoriously trans­ferred to the conquerors of new Rome; and the wealthof nations was deposited in this well-chosen seat ofroyalty and commerce. No sooner had the caliphMoawiyah suppressed his rivals and established histhrone, than he aspired to expiate the guilt of civil blood,by the success and glory of his holy expedition ;b hispreparations by sea and land were adequate to the im­portance of the object: his standard was intrusted toSophian, a veteran warrior, but the troops were encou­raged by the example and presence of Yezid, the sonand presumptive heir of the commander of the faithful.The Greeks had little to hope, nor had their enemies anyreasons of fear, from the courage and vigilance of thereigning emperor, who disgraced the name of Constan-tine, and imitated only the inglorious years of his grand­father Heraclius. Without delay or opposition, thenaval forces of the Saracens passed through the un­guarded channel of the Hellespont, which even now,under the feeble and disorderly government of the Turks,is maintained as the natural bulwark of the capital.0 The
» ThroplmiKjs places the seten years of the siege of Constantinople in the year ofour Christian era 673, (of the Alexandrian 665, Sept. 1.) and the peace of the Sara­cens, four years afterward; a glaring inconsistency! which Petavius, Guar, andPagi, (Criticn, torn. 4. p. 63, 64.) have struggled to remove. Of the Arabians,the Hegira 52 (A. D. 672, January 8.) is assigned by Elmacin, the year 48, (A. D.668, Feb. 20.) by Abalfeda, whose testimony I esteem the most convenient andcreditable.
"Eor this first siege of Constantinople, see Nicephorus, (Breviar. p. 21, 22.)Theophancs, ( Chronograph, p. 294.) Cedrenus, (Compend. p. 437.) Zonaras, (Hist.torn, 2. Hb. 14. p. 89.) Elmacin, (Hist. Saracen, p. 56, 57.) Abulfeda, (Annal.Moslem, p. 127, 128. vers. Reiske) d'Herbelot, (Bibliot. Orient. Conetantinah)Ockiey'a History of the Saracens, vol. 2. p. 127,128.
• The state and defence of the Dardanelles is exposed in the Memoires of th«


2n 2







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 203


that can. neither be dissembled nor eluded, render thismode of reasoning as indiscreet as it is superfluous:the kingdom of Yemen has been successively subduedby the Abyssinians, the Persians, the sultans of Egypt,1and the Turks:" the holy cities of Mecca and Medinahave repeatedly bowed under a.Scythian tyrant; andthe Roman province of Arabia* embraced ,the peculiarwilderness in which Ismacl and his sons must havepitched their tents in the face of their brethren. Yetthese exceptions are temporary or local; the body ofthe nation has escaped the yoke of the most powerfulmonarchies: the arms of Sesostris and Cyrus, of Pom-pey and Trajan, could never achieve the conquest ofArabia; the present sovereign of the Turks'1 may exer­cise a shadow of jurisdiction, but his pride is reduced tosolicit the friendship of a people, whom it is dangerousto provoke and fruitless to attack. The obvious causesof their freedom are inscribed on the character and coun­try of the Arabs* Many ages before Mahomet,0 theirintrepid valour had been severely felt by their neighboursin offensive and defensive war. The patient and active


the exceptions of fact, might dispute the meaning of the text, (Genes, xvi. 12.)the extent of the application, and the foundation of the pedigree.
* It was subdued, A. D. 1173, by a brother of the great Saladin, who founded adynasty of Curds or Ayoubites. (Guignes, Hist, des Huns, torn. 1. p. 425. D'Her-belot, p. 477.)
* By the lieutenant of Soliman, (A. D. 1538.) and Selim II. (1568.) See Cante-mir's Hist, of the Otluunn empire, p. 201. 221. The pasha, who resided at Saana,commanded twenty-one beys, but no revenue was ever remitted to the Porte;(Marsigli, Stato Militare d«IT Imperio Ottomanno, p. 124.) and the Turks wereexpelled about the yeftr 163O. (Niebuhr, p. 167, 168.)
* Of the Roman province, under the name of Arabia and the third Palestine, theprincipal cities were Bostra and IVtr:x, which dated their era from the year 105,when they were subdued by Palma, a lieutenant of Trajan. (Dion. Cassius, lib. 68.)Petra was the capital of the Nabathsans, whose name is derived from the eldestofthesonsof Ismael. (tienes.xxv. 12, &c. with the commentaries of Jerome, LnClerc, and Calmet.) Justinian relinquished a palm country of ten days'Journeyto the south of .:i:i:i!i, (Procop. de Bell. Persic, lib. 1. c. 100 and the Romansmaintained a centurion and a custom-house, (Arrian in Periplo Mans Erythriei.p. 11. in Hudson, torn. 1.) at a place (Xiuxu xa/un, Pagus Albus Hawara) in theterritory of Medina. (D'Anville Memoire sur 1'Egypte, p. 243.) These real pos­sessions, and some naval inroads of Trajan, (Peripl. p. 14, 15.) are magnified byli i story and medals into the Roman conquest of Arabia.
'• Niebuhr (Description de 1'Arabic, p. 302,303. 329—331.) affords the mostrecent and authentic intelligence of the Turkish empire in Arabia.
c Diodonu Siculns (torn. 2. lib. 19. p. 390—393. edit. Wesseling) has clearlyexposed the freedom of the Nabathsan Arabs, who resisted the arms of Antigonusand his son.







OCR Output








CHAP. LIT. 515


enemy in his losses and defeat. In the last of these ex­peditions he penetrated into Syria, and besieged theobscure town of Sozopetra, the casual birth-placeof the caliph Motassem, whose father Harun was at­tended in peace or war by the most favourite of hiswives and concubines. The revolt of a Persian im­postor, employed at that moment the arms of the Sara­cen, and he could intercede in favour of a place for whichhe felt and acknowledged some degree of filial affection.These solicitations determined the emperor to wound hispride in so sensible a part. Sozopetra was levelled withthe ground, the Syrian prisoners were marked or muti­lated with ignominious cruelty, and a thousand femalecaptives were forced away from the adjacent territory.Among these a matron of the house of Abbas invoked,in an agony of despair, the name of Motassem; and theinsults of the Greeks engaged the honour of her kinsmanto avenge his indignity, and to answer her appeal.Under the reign of the two elder brothers, the inherit­ance of the youngest had been confined to Anatolia,Armenia, Georgia, and Circassia; this frontier stationhad exercised his military talents; and among his acci­dental claims to the name of Octonary* the most meri­torious are the eight battles which he gained or foughtagainst the enemies of the Koran. In this personalquarrel, the troops of Irak, Syria, and Egypt, were re­cruited from the tribes of Arabia, and the Turkish hordes:his cavalry might be numerous, though we should de­duct some myriads from the hundred and thirty thousandhorses of the royal stables; and the expense of thearmament was computed at four millions sterling, or onehundred thousand pounds of gold. From Tarsus, theplace of assembly, the Saracens advanced in three divi­sions along the high road of Constantinople: Motassem
> Tha same number was applied to the following circumstance in the life of Mo-tassem: he was (he eighth of the Abbassides; he reigned tight years, eight months,•and eight days; left eight sona, eiglu daughters, right thousand slaves, eight millionso gold.


2 L 2







OCR Output








400 ROMAN EMPIRE.


a loud voice,—God is victorious. O Lord, give us anan easy conquest! and pitching his tent of coarse hair,calmly seated himself on the ground. After signing thecapitulation, he entered the city without fear or precau­tion; and courteously discoursed with the patriarchconcerning its religious antiquities."1 Sophronius bowedbefore his new master, and secretly muttered, in thewords of Daniel,—The abomination of desolation is in theholy place." At the hour of prayer they stood togetherin the church of the resurrection; but the caliph refusedto perform his devotions, and contented himself withpraying on the steps of the church of Constantine. Tothe patriarch he disclosed his prudent and honourablemotive. Had I yielded (said Omar) to your request, theMoslems of a future age would have infringed the treaty,under colour of imitating my example. By his commandthe ground of the temple of Solornon was prepared forthe foundation of a mosch;0 and, during a residence often days, he regulated the present and future state ofhis Syrian conquests. Medina might be jealous, lestthe caliph should be detained by the sanctity of Jeru­salem or the beauty of Damascus; her apprehensionswere dispelled by his prompt and voluntary return to thetomb of the apostle ,p


'" The Arabs boast of an old prophecy preserved at Jerusalem, and describingthe name, the religion, and the person of Omar, the future conqueror. By sucharts the Jews are said to have soothed the pride of their foreign masters, Cyrusand Alexander. (Joseph. Ant. Jud. lib. 11. c. 1.8. p. 547. 679—58*.)
"To fSSitiUffta TH; tpifturtiac TO pn8iv Jin A««X TOU irlo^nrou IOTMC n tn» a.yt*.Theophan. Chronograph, p. 'Jill. This prediction, which had already served forAntiochus and the Romans, was again refitted for the present occasion, by theeconomy of Sophronius, one of the deepest theologians of the Monothelite con­troversy.
0 According to the accurate eurvey of d'Anville, (Dissertation tax 1'ancienneJerusalem, p. 42—54.) the mosch of Omar, enlarged and embellished by succeed­ing caliphs, covered tin' ground of the ancient temple (waXaioT •no fitya\w mmiWtJor, says Pbocas), a length of two hundred and fifteen, :i breadth of one hundredand seventy-two, toises. The Nubian geographer declares, that this magnifi­cent structure was second only in size and beauty to the great mosch of Cordova,(p. 113.) whose present state Mr. Swinburne has so elegantly represented. (Tra­vels into Spain, p. 396—302.)
i' Of the many Arabic tarikhs or chronicles of Jerusalem, (d'Herbelot, p. 867.)Qckley found one among the Pocock MSS.of Oxford,(vol, 1. p. 257.) which he huused to supply the defective narrative of Al Wakidi.







OCR Output








CHAP. LH. 476


which they had inflicted on the empire, by the defeatand slaughter of twenty-two thousand Asiatics. A reportwas dexterously scattered, that the Franks, the unknownnations of the Latin world, were arming by sea and land,in the defence of the Christian cause, and their formi­dable aid was expected with far different sensations inFailure the camp and city. At length, after a siege oftof the thirteen months,0 the hopeless Moslemah re-


trea


ceived from the caliph the welcome permissionof retreat. The march of the Arabian cavalry over theHellespont, and through the provinces of Asia, was exe­cuted without delay or molestation; but an army of theirbrethren had been cut in pieces on the side of Bithynia,and the remains of the fleet were so repeatedly damagedby tempest and fire, that only five galleys entered theport of Alexandria to relate the tale of their various andalmost incredible disasters.11
invention In the two sieges, the deliverance of Constan-thedGreekf tinople may be chiefly ascribed to the novelty, the*"• terrors, and the real efficacy, of the Greek fire?The important secret of compounding and directing thisartificial flame was imparted by Callinicus, a native ofHeliopolis in Syria, who deserted from the service of thecaliph to that of the emperor/ The skill of a chemistand engineer was equivalent to the succour of fleets and


0 Both Nicephorus and Theophanes agree, that the siege of Constantinople wasnow raised^ the fifteenth of August: (A. D. ?18.)butasthe former, our best witness,affirms that it continued thirteen months, the latter must be mistaken in supposingthat it began on the same day of the preceding year. I do not find that Pagi hasremarked this inconsistency.
P In the second siege of Constantinople, I have followed Nicephorus, (Brev.p. 33 — 36.) Theophanes, (Chronograph, p. 324 — 334.) Cedrenus, (Compend,p. 449 — 152.) Zonaras, (torn. 2. p. 98—102.) Elmacin, (Hist. Saracen, p. 88.)Abulfeda, ( Annal. Moslem, p. 126.) and Abulpharagius, (Dynast, p. 130.) the mostsatisfactory of the Arabs.
1 Our sure and indefatigable guide in the middle ages and Byzantine history,Charlcs du Fresno du Cange, has treated in several places of the Greek fire, and hiscollections leave few gleanings behind. See particularly Glossar. Med. et Inlim.Griecitat. p. 1275. sub voce Hvp Qakarriov, ifyfey. Glossar. Med. et Tnfim, LatinitaLignis Grtecta. Observations sur Villehardouin, p. 305, 306. Observations surJoinville, p. 71,73.
'Theophanes styles him af^iri^rm. (p. 395.) Cedrenus (p. 437.) brings thisartist (from the rums of) Heliopolis in Egypt; and chemistry was indeed the pecu­liar science of the Egyptians.







OCR Output








440 ROMAN EMPIRE.


V. In the progress of conquest from the northFirsttemp-and south, the Goths and the Saracens encoun-of tered each other on the confines of Europe and0bg' Africa. In the opinion of the latter, the differ­ence of religion is a reasonable ground of enmity,and warfare.0 As early as the time of Othman,d theirpiratical squadrons had ravaged the coasts of Andalusia;'nor had they forgotten the relief of Carthage by the Go­thic succours. In that age, as well as in the present,the kings of Spain were possessed of the fortress ofCeuta; one of the columns of Hercules, which is dividedby a narrow strait from the opposite pillar or point ofEurope. A small portion of Mauritania was still want­ing to the African conquest; but Musa, in the pride ofvictory, was repulsed from the walls of Ceuta, by thevigilance and courage of count Julian, the general ofthe Goths. From his disappointment and perplexity,Musa was relieved by an unexpected message of theChristian chief, who offered his place, his person, andhis sword, to the successors of Mahomet, and solicitedthe disgraceful honour of introducing their arms intothe heart of Spain/ If we inquire into the cause of his


he could acquire of Greek or Roman learning. Many of his gross mistakes mightbe detected in the first period of the Mahometan history.
c In a conference with a prince of the Greeks, Amrou observed that their reli­gion was different; upon which score it was lawful for brothers to quarrel. Ock-ley's History of the Saracens, vol. 1. p. 328.
'' Abulfeda, Annal. Moslern. j,. 71). VMS. Reiske.
'The name of Andalusia is applied by the Arabs not only to the modern pro­vince, but to the whole peninsula of Spain. (Geograph. Nub. p. 151. D'Herbelot,Bibliot. Orient, p. 114, 115.) The etymology has been most improbably deducedfrom Vandalusia, country of the Vandals. (D'Anville, Etats de 1'Europe, p. 1-ki,147, &c.) But the Handalusia of Casiri, which signifies in Arabic, the region ofthe evening, of the west, in a word, the Hesperia of the Greeks, is perfectly appo­site. (Bibliot. Arabico-Hispana, torn. 2. p. 327, &c.)
'1'he fall and resurrection of the Gothic monarchy are related by Mariana, (torn.1. p. 238—260. lib. 6. c. 19—26. lib. 7. c. 1, 2.) That historian has infoaed intohis noble work (Historia e de Rebus Hispanice, libri 30. Haga e Comitum 1733, infour volumes in folio, with the Continuation of Miniana) the style and spirit of aRoman classic; and after the twelfth century, his knowledge and judgment maybe safely trusted. But the Jesuit is not exempt from the prejudices of his order;he adopts and adorns, like his rival Buchanan, the most absurd of the nationallegends: he is too careless of criticism and chronology, and supplies, from a livelyfancy, thn chasms of historical evidence. These chasms are large and frequent;Roderic, archbishop of Toledo, the father of the Spanish history, lived five hundredyears after the conquest of the Arabs; and the more early accounts are comprisedin some meagre lines of the blind chronicles of Isidore of Badajoz (Pacensis), andof Alphonso III. king of Leon, which I have seen only in the Anna!.» of Pagi.







OCR Output








CHAP. XL VIII. 137


as he had secured the leaders and the troops, he boldlymarched to Constantinople, trampled on his enemies,avowed his correspondence with the empress, and,without degrading her sons, assumed, with the title ofAugustus, the pre-eminence of rank and the plenitudeof power. But his marriage with Theophano was re­fused by the same patriarch who had placed the crownon his head; by his second nuptials he incurred a yearof canonical penance; a bar of spiritual affinity wasopposed to their celebration; and some evasion andperjury were required to silence the scruples of theclergy and people. The popularity of the emperorwas lost in the purple: in a reign of six years he pro­voked the hatred of strangers and subjects; and thehypocrisy and avarice of the first Nicephorus were re­vived in his successor. Hypocrisy I shall never justifyor palliate; but I will dare to observe, that the odiousvice of avarice is of all others most hastily arraigned,and most unmercifully condemned. In a private citi­zen, our judgment seldom expects an accurate scrutinyinto his fortune and expense: and in a steward of thepublic treasure, frugality is always a virtue, and theincrease of taxes too often an indispensable duty. Inthe use of his patrimony, the generous temper of Ni­cephorus had been proved; and the revenue wasstrictly applied to the service of the state: each springthe emperor marched in person against the Saracens;and every Roman might compute the employment ofhis taxes in triumphs, conquests, and the security ofthe eastern barrier.
Among the warriors who promoted his ele-vat'on, an(l served under his standard, a noble


Constan- and valiant Armenian had deserved and obtained
tine IX. i_ - i rm f
A.D. 969, the most eminent rewards. The stature ofDec. 20. John Zimisces was below the ordinary standard;but this diminutive body was endowed with strength,beauty, and the soul of a hero. By the jealousy of the







OCR Output








CHAP. L. . 311


the Gospel. But the mild tenor of the evangelic stylemay explain an ambiguous text, that Jesus did not bringpeace on the earth, but a sword: his patient and humblevirtues should not be confounded with the intolerant,zeal of princes and bishops, who have disgraced thename of his disciples. In the prosecution of religiouswar, Mahomet might appeal with more propriety to theexample of Moses, of the judges and the kings of Israel.The military laws of the Hebrews are still more rigidthan those of the Arabian legislator.1 The Lord of hostsmarched in person before the Jews: if a city resistedtheir summons, the males, without distinction, were putto the sword : the seven nations of Canaan were devotedto destruction; and neither repentance nor conversioncould shield them from the inevitable doom, that nocreature within their precincts should be left alive. Thefair option of friendship, or submission, or battle, wasproposed to the enemies of Mahomet. If they professedthe creed of Islam, they were admitted to all the tempo­ral and spiritual benefits of his primitive disciples, andmarched under the same banner to extend the religionwhich they had embraced. The clemency of the pro­phet was decided by his interest; yet he seldom tram­pled on a prostrate enemy: and he seems to promise,that, on the payment of a tribute, the least guilty of hisunbelieving subjects might be indulged in their wor­ship, or at least in their imperfect faith. In the firstmonths of his reign, he practised the lessons of holywarfare, and diplayed his white banner before the gatesof Medina; the martial apostle fought in person at ninebattles or sieges ;k and fifty enterprises of war were


1 The tenth andtwentieth chapters of Deuteronomy ,with the practical commentsof Joshua, David, &e. are read with more awe than satisfaction by the pious Chris­tians of the present age. But the bishops, as well as the rabbles of former times,have beat the drum-ecclesiastic with pleasure and success. (Sale's PreliminaryDiscourse, p. 142,143.)
k Abulfeda, in ViJ. Moharn. p. 156. The private arsenal of the apostle consistedof nine swords, three lances, seven pikes or half-pikes, a quiver and three bow9,seven cuirasses, three shields, and two helmets, (Gagnier, torn. 3. p. 328—334.)







OCR Output













OCR Output








CHAP. LI.; 391


/ dare not go back; our foes are many, our danger isgreat, but our reward is splendid and secure, either inthis life or in the life to come. Let every man, accord­ing to his inclination, advance or retire. Not a Mussul­man deserted his standard. Lead the way (said Abdallahto his Christian guide), and you shall see what the com­panions of the prophet can perform. They charged infive squadrons; but after the first advantage of the sur­prise, they were encompassed and almost overwhelmedby the multitude of their enemies; and their valiant bandis fancifully compared to a white spot in the skin of ablack camel.' About the hour of sunset, when theirweapons dropped from their hands, when they pantedon the verge of eternity, they discovered an approachingcloud of dust; they heard the welcome sound of thetecbir," and they soon perceived the standard of Caled,who flew to their relief with the utmost speed of his ca­valry. The Christians were broken by his attack, andslaughtered in their flight, as far as the river of Tripoli.They left behind them the various riches of the fair; themerchandises that were exposed for sale, the money thatwas brought for purchase, the gay decorations of thenuptials, and the governor's daughter, with forty of herfemale attendants. The fruits, provisions, and furniture,the money, plate, and jewels, were diligently laden onthe backs of horses, asses, and mules; and the holy rob­bers returned in triumph to Damascus. The hermit,after a short and angry controversy with Caled, declinedthe crown of martyrdom, and was left alive in the soli­tary scene of blood and devastation.


'I am bolder than Mr. Ockley, (vol. 1. p. 194.) who dares not insert this figu­rative expression in the text, though he observes in a marginal note, that the Ara­bians often borrow their similies from that useful and familiar animal. The rein­deer may be equally famous in the songe of the Laplanders."We heard the tecbir; so the Arabs callTheir shout of onset, when with loud appealThey challenge heaven, as if demanding conquest.
- This word, so formidable in their holy wars, is a verb active (says Ockley in hisindex) of the second conjugation, from Kabbara, which signifies saying Alia Aciar!God is most mighty!







OCR Output








448 ROMAN EMPIRE.


that the governor of Cordova is recorded as the only chiefwho fell, without conditions, a prisoner into their hands.The cause of the Goths had been irrevocably judged inthe field of Xeres; and, in the national dismay, eachpart of the monarchy declined a contest with the anta­gonist who had vanquished the united strength of thewhole." That strength had been wasted by two succes­sive seasons of famine and pestilence; and the governors,who were impatient to surrender, might exaggerate thedifficulty of collecting the provisions of a siege. Todisarm the Christians, superstition likewise contributedher terrors; and the subtle Arab encouraged the reportof dreams, omens, and prophecies, and of the portraits ofthe destined conquerors of Spain, that were discoveredon breaking open an apartment of the royal palace. Yeta spark of the vital flame was still alive: some invinciblefugitives preferred a life of poverty and freedom in theAsturian valleys; the hardy mountaineer repulsed theslaves of the caliph; and the sword of Pelagius has beentransformed into the sceptre of the Catholic kings.*Conquest On ^e intelligence of his rapid success, the


applause of Musa degenerated into envy; andA. u. he began, not to complain but to fear, that Tarik
would leave him nothing to subdue. At thehead of ten thousand Arabs and eight thousand Africans,he passed over in person from Mauritania to Spain: thefirst of his companions were the noblest of the Koreish;his eldest son was left in the command of Africa; thethree younger brethren were of an age and spirit to se­cond the boldest enterprises of their father. At his land­ing in Algezire, he was respectfully entertained by countJulian, who stifled his inward remorse, and testified,


"Sucb was the argument of the traitor Oppae, and every chief to whom it wasaddressed did not answer with the spirit of Pelagius. — Omnis Hispania dudnmsub uno regimine Gothorum, omnis exercitus Hispaniae in uno congregatus Unru 1 -itarum mm valuit sustinere impel urn. Chron. Alphonsi Regis, apud Pagi, torn. :i.p. 177.
* The revival of the Gothic kingdom in the Asturias is distinctly, though, con­cisely, noticed by d'Anville. (Etats de 1'Europe, p. 159.)







OCR Output








CHAP. KLVIII, 105


successor. On the festival of his birth-day, Philippicusentertained the multitude with the games of the hippo­drome; from thence he paraded through the streetswith a thousand banners and a thousand trumpets; re­freshed himself in the baths of Zeuxippus, and, return­ing to the palace, entertained his nobles with a sump­tuous banquet. At the meridian hour he withdrew tohis chamber, intoxicated with flattery and wine, andforgetful that his example had made every subject am­bitious, and that every ambitious subject was his secretenemy. Some bold conspirators introduced themselvesin the disorder of the feast; and the slumbering monarchwas surprised, bound, blinded, and deposed, before heAnasta- was sensible of his danger. Yet the traitorsi'Vm were deprived of their reward; and the freeJune 4. 'voice of the senate and people promoted Arte-mius from the office of secretary to that of emperor: heassumed the title of Anastasius II. and displayed ina short and troubled reign the virtues both of peace andwar. But after the extinction of the imperial line, therule of obedience was violated, and every change dif­fused the seeds of new revolutions. In a mutiny of thefleet, an obscure and reluctant officer of the revenue•was forcibly invested with the purple: after somemonths of a naval war, Anastasius resigned the sceptre;and the conqueror, Theodosius III. submitted, *n his turn to the superior ascendant of Leo,January. fae general and emperor of the oriental troops.His two predecessors were permitted to embrace theecclesiastical profession: the restless impatience ofAnastasius tempted him to -risk and to lose his life in atreasonable enterprise; but the last days of Theodosiuswere honourable and secure. The single and sublimeword, "HEALTH," which he inscribed on his tomb, ex­presses the confidence of philosophy or religion; andthe fame of his miracles was long preserved among thepeople of Ephesus. This convenient shelter of the







OCR Output








ROMAN EMPIRE.


the commander of the faithful. His lieutenant, from amotive of fear or pity, apprised Abu Taher of his danger,and recommended a speedy escape. Your master (saidthe intrepid Carraathian to the messenger) is at the headof thirty thousand soldiers; three such men as these areivanting in his host: at the same instant, turning to threeof his companions, he commanded the first to plunge adagger into his breast, the second to leap into the Tigris,and the third to cast himself headlong down a precipice.They obeyed without a murmur. Relate (continuedthe imam) what you have seen: before the evening yourgeneral shall be chained among my dogs. Before theevening, the camp was surprised and the menace wasexecuted. The rapine of the Carmathians was sancti­fied by their aversion to the worship of Mecca: theyrobbed a caravan of pilgrims, and twenty thousand de­vout Moslems were abandoned on the burning sands toTheypii- a death of hunger and thirst. Another yearMecca, they suffered the pilgrims to proceed without in-A.D.929. terruptjon; but, in the festival of devotion, AbuTaher stormed the holy city, and trampled on the mostvenerable relics of the Mahometan faith. Thirty thou­sand citizens and strangers were put to the sword; thesacred precincts were polluted by the burial of threethousand dead bodies: the well of Zemzem overflowedwith blood; the golden spout was forced from its place;the veil of the Caaba was divided among these impioussectaries; and the black stone, the first monument ofthe nation, was borne away in triumph to their capital.After this deed of sacrilege and cruelty, they continuedto infest the confines of Irak, Syria, and Egypt; but thevital principle of enthusiasm had withered at the rootTheir scruples or their avarice again opened the pilgri­mage of Mecca, and restored the black stone of theCaaba; and it is needless to inquire into what factionsthey were broken, or by whose swords they were finallyextirpated. The sect of the Carmathians may be con-







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 383


of his troops. At length, when the spirits and quivers ofthe adverse line were almost exhausted, Caled gave tl*esignal of onset and victory. The remains of the imperialarmy fled to Antioch or Caesarea, or Damascus: and thedeath of four hundred and seventy Moslems was com­pensated by the opinion that they had sent to hell abovefifty thousand of the infidels. The spoil was inestimable;many banners and crosses of gold and silver, preciousstones, silver and gold chains, and innumerable suits ofthe richest armour and apparel. The general distributionwas postponed till Damascus should be taken: butthe seasonable supply of arms became the instru­ment of new victories. The glorious intelligence wastransmitted to the throne of the caliph, and the Arabiantribes, the coldest or most hostile to the prophet's mis­sion, were eager and importunate to share the harvest ofSyria.The Arabs ^e sac^ ^ings were carried to Damascus by


to the speed of grief and terror; and the inhabi­tants beheld from their walls the return of theheroes of Aiznadin. Amrou led the van at the head ofnine thousand horse: the bands of the Saracens suc­ceeded each other in formidable review; and the rear•was closed by Caled in person, with the standard of theblack eagle. To the activity of Derar he intrusted thecommission of patrolling round the city with two thou­sand horse, of scouring the plain, and of intercepting allsuccour or intelligence. The rest of the Arabian chiefswere fixed in their respective stations before the sevengates of Damascus; and the siege was renewed withfresh vigour and confidence. The art, the labour, themilitary engines of the Greeks and Romans, are seldomto be found in the simple, though successful, operationsof the Saracens: it was sufficient for them to invest acity with arms, rather than with trenches; to repel thesallies of the besieged; to attempt a stratagem or an as­sault; or to expect the progress of famine and discon­







OCR Output













OCR Output








40 ROMAN EMPIRE.


thority of the magistrate can only be maintained by theconcord of the people. It is in ecclesiastical story, thatZeno appears less contemptible; and I am not able todiscern any Manichaean or Eutychian guilt in the ge­nerous saying of Anastasius, that it was unworthy ofan emperor to persecute the worshippers of Christ andthe citizens of Rome. The Henoticon was most pleas­ing to the Egyptians; yet the smallest blemish has notbeen described by the jealous and even jaundiced eyesof our orthodox schoolmen; and it accurately representsthe Catholic faith of the incarnation, without adoptingor disclaiming the peculiar terms or tenets of the hostilesects. A solemn anathema is pronounced against Nes-toriusand Eutyches; againstall heretics by whom Christis divided, or confounded, or reduced to a phantom.Without defining the number or the article of the wordnature, the pure system of St. Cyril, the faith of Nice,Constantinople, and Ephesus, is respectfully confirmed;but, instead of bowing at the name of the fourth coun­cil, the subject is dismissed by the censure of all con­trary doctrines, if any such have been taught eitherelsewhere or at Chalcedon. Under this ambiguous ex­pression, the friends and the enemies of the last synodmight unite in a silent embrace. The most reasonableChristians acquiesced in this mode of toleration; buttheir reason wasfeeble and inconstant,and their obediencewas despised as timid and servile by the vehement spiritof their brethren. On a subject which engrossed thethoughts and discourses of men, it was difficult to pre­serve an exact neutrality; a book, a sermon, a prayer,rekindled the flame of controversy; and the bonds ofcommunion were alternately broken and renewed by theprivate animosity of the bishops. The space betweenNestorius and Eutyches was filled by a thousand shadesof language and opinion; the acephali4 of Egypt, and
"See lUnaudot. (Hist . Patriarch. Alex. p. 123. 131. 145. 195—347.) Theyware recontiled by the care of Mark I. (A. D. 799—819.) he promoted their chiefo







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 87


CHAP. XLVIII.
I
Plan of the remainder of the work.—Succession and characters ofthe Greek emperors of Constantinople, from the time of Hera-clius to the Latin conquest.
Defects of I HAVE now deduced from Trajan to Constan-»nSfe tme, ^rom Constantine to Heraclius, the regularkiatory. series of the Roman emperors; and faithfullyexposed the prosperous and adverse fortunes of theirreigns. Five centuries of the decline and fall of the em­pire have already elapsed; but a period of more thaneight hundred years still separates me from the term ofmy labours, the taking of Constantinople by the Turks.Should I persevere in the same course, should I ob­serve the same measure, a prolix and slender threadwould be spun through many a volume, nor would thepatient reader find an adequate reward of instructionor amusement. At every step as we sink deeper in thedecline and fall of the eastern empire, the annals ofeach succeeding reign would impose a more ungratefuland melancholy task. These annals must continue torepeat a tedious and uniform tale of weakness and mi­sery; the natural connexion of causes and events wouldbe brpken by frequent and hasty transitions, and a mi­nute accumulation of circumstances must destroy thelight and effect of those general pictures which com­pose the use and ornament of a remote history. Fromthe time of Heraclius, the Byzantine theatre is con­tracted and darkened: the line of empire, which hadbeen defined by the laws of Justinian and the arms of


anisme d'/Ethiopie et d'Armenie, La Haye, 1759, in duodecimo), have drawnthrit principal materials from the Jesuits, especially from the General History ofTellez, published in Portuguese at Conimbra, 1660. We might be surprised attheir frankness; bat their most flagitious vice, the spirit of persecution, was, intheir eyes, the most meritorious virtue. Ludolphus possessed some, though aslight, advantage from the ^Ethiopia language, and the personal conversation ofGregory, a free-spirited Abyssinian priest, whom he invited from Rome to thecourt of Saxe-Gotha. See the Theologia jEthiopica of Gregory, in Fabricius, LuxSvsngelii, p. 716—734.







OCR Output








308 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Mahomet, his kinsmen, and his disciples; and pledgedthemselves to each other by a mutual oath of fidelity.They promised in the name of the city, that if he shouldbe banished, they would receive him as a confederate,obey him as a leader, and defend him to the last extre­mity, like their wives and children. But if you are re­called by your country (they asked with a flattering an­xiety), will you not abandon your new allies?—.All things(replied Mahomet with a smile) are now common betweenus; .your blood is as my blood, your ruin as my ruin. Weare bound to each other by the ties of honour and interest.I am your friend, and the enemy of your foes.—But ifwe are killed in your service, what (exclaimed the depu­ties of Medina) will be our reward?—Paradise, repliedthe prophet. Stretch forth thy hand. He stretched itforth, and they reiterated the oath of allegiance andfidelity. Their treaty was ratified by the people, whounanimously embraced the profession of Islam; they re­joiced in the exile of the apostle, but they trembledfor his safety, and impatiently expected his arrival.After a perilous and rapid journey along the sea-coast,he halted at Koba, two miles from the city, and madehis public entry into Medina, sixteen days after hisflight from Mecca. Five hundred of the citizens ad­vanced to meet him: he was hailed with acclamationsof loyalty and devotion; Mahomet was mounted on ashe-camel, an umbrella shaded his head, and a turbanwas unfurled before him to supply the deficiency of astandard. His bravest disciples, who had been scatteredby the storm, assembled round his person; and the equal,though various, merit of the Moslems was distinguishedby the names of Mohagerians and Ansars, the fugitivesof Mecca, and the auxiliaries of Medina. To eradi­cate the sfeeds of jealousy, Mahomet judiciously coupledhis principal followers with the rights and obligationsof brethren; and when Al i found himself without apeer, the prophet tenderly declared, that he would be







OCR Output








484 ROMAN EMPIRE.


and religious freedom of their posterity. The epithet ofMartel, the Hammer, which has been added to the nameof Charles, is expressive of his weighty and irresistiblestrokes: the valour of Eudes was excited by resentmentand emulation; and their companions, in the eye of his­tory, are the true peers and paladins of French chivalry.After a bloody field, in which Abderame was slain, theSaracens, in the close of the evening, retired to theircamp. In the disorder and despair of the night, the va­rious tribes of Yemen and Damascus, of Africa andSpain, were provoked to turn their arms against eachother: the remains of their host were suddenly dis­solved, and each emir consulted his safety by a hastyand separate retreat. At the dawn of day, the stillnessof a hostile camp was suspected by the victorious Chris­tians: on the report of their spies, they ventured to ex­plore the riches of the vacant tents; but, if we exceptsome celebrated relics, a small portion of the spoil wasrestored to the innocent and lawful owners. The joyfultidings were soon diffused over the Catholic world, andthe monks of Italy could affirm and believe that threehundred and fifty, or three hundred and seventy-fivethousand of the Mahometans had been crushed by thehammer of Charles;' while no more than fifteen hun­dred Christians were slain in the field of Tours. Butthis incredible tale is sufficiently disproved by the cau­tion of the French general, who apprehended the snaresand accidents of a pursuit, and dismissed his Germanallies to their native forests. The inactivity of a con­queror betrays the loss of strength and blood, and themost cruel execution is inflicted, not in the ranks ofbattle, but on the backs of a flying enemy. Yet the vic­


* These numbers are stated by Paul Wamefirid, the deacon of Aquileia (de GectisLangobard. lib. 6. p. 921. edit , Grot.) and Anastasius, the librarian of the Romanchurch, (in Vit. Gregorii II.) who tells a miraculous story of three consecratedsponges, which rendered invulnerable the French soldiers among whom they hadbeen shared. It should seem, that in his letters to the pope, Eudes usurped the ho­nour of the victory, for which he was chastised by the French annalists, who. withequal falsehood, accuse him of inviting the Saracens.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIL 55


rors of Manes, Apoilinaris, Eutyches, &c.; they signedthe sentence of excommunication on the tomb of St.Peter; the ink was mingled with the sacramental wine,the blood of Christ; and no ceremony was omitted thatcould fill the superstitious mind with horror and affright.As the representative of the western church, pope Mar­tin and his Lateran synod anathematized the perfidiousand guilty silence of the Greeks; one hundred and fivebishops of Italy, for the most part the subjects of Con-stans, presumed to reprobate his wicked type and theimpious ecthesis of his grandfather, and to confound theauthors, and their adherents, with the twenty-one noto­rious heretics, the apostates from the church, and the or­gans of the devil. Such an insult under the tamest reigncould not pass with impunity. Pope Martin ended hisdays on the inhospitable shore of the Tauric Chersone-sus, and his oracle, the abbot Maximus, was inhuman­ly chastised by the amputation of his tongue and hisright hand.™ But the same invincible spirit survived intheir successors, and the triumph of the Latins avengedsixfn their recent defeat, and obliterated the disgracecouncil -, of the three chapters. The synods of Rome wereConstan- confirmed by the sixth general council of Con-J^e'go stantinople, in the palace and the presence of aHOT.?, 'jiew Constantine, a descendant of Heraclius.Sep. 16. 'The royal convert converted the Byzantine pon­tiff and a majority of the bishops;" the dissenters, withtheir chief, Macarius of Antioch, were condemned tothe spiritual and temporal pains of heresy; the east con­descended to accept the lessons of the west; and thecreed was finally settled, which teaches the Catholics of
"The sufferings of Martin and Maximus are described with pathetic simplicityin the original letters and acts. (Concil. torn. t. p. fiS—78. Baron. Annal. Eccles.A. D. 636. no. 2. et annos subsequent.) Yet the chastisement of their disobedience,»?»j"» and fiifturx naf/not, had been previously announced in the type of Constans.(Concil. torn. 7. p. 240.)
• Entychius (Annal. torn. 2. p. 368.) most erroneously supposes that the one hun­dred and twenty-fooi bishops of the Roman synod transported themselves to Con­stantinople; and, by adding them to the one hundred and sixty-eight Greeks, thuscomposes the ninth council of two hundred and ninety-two fathers.







OCR Output








528 ROMAN EMPIRE.


mercenaries themselves? The African and the Turkishguards drew their swords against each other, and thechief commanders, the emirs al Omra,' imprisoned ordeposed their sovereigns, and violated the sanctuary ofthe mosch and haram. If the caliphs escaped to thecamp or court of any neighbouring prince, their deliver­ance was a change of servitude, till they were promptedby despair to invite the Bowides, the sultans of Persia,who silenced the factions of Bagdad by their irresistiblearms. The civil and military powers were assumed byMoezaldowlat, the second of the three brothers, and astipend of sixty thousand pounds sterling was assignedby his generosity for the private expense of the com­mander of the faithful. But on the fortieth day, at theaudience of the ambassadors of Chorasan, and in thepresence of a trembling multitude, the caliph was drag­ged from his throne to a dungeon, by the command ofthe stranger, and the rude hands of his Dilemites. Hispalace was pillaged, his eyes were put out, and the meanambition of the Abbassides aspired to the vacant stationof danger and disgrace. In the school of adversity, theluxurious caliphs resumed the grave and abstemious vir­tues of the primitive times. Despoiled of their armourand silken robes, they fasted, they prayed, they studiedthe Koran and the tradition of the Sonnites; they per­formed with zeal and knowledge the functions of theirecclesiastical character. The respect of nations stillwaited on the successors of the apostle, the oracles ofthe law and conscience of the faithful; and the weak­ness or division of their tyrants sometimes restored theAbbassides to the sovereignty of Bagdad. But theirmisfortunes had been embittered by the triumph of theFatimites, the real or spurious progeny of Ali. Arising
• The office of vizier was superseded by the emir a 1 Omra Imperator Imperatorum,a title first instituted by Radhi, and which merged at length in the Bowides andSeljukides: vectigalibus, ettributis, et cnriis peromnes regionesprsfecit.jussitquein omnibus suggestis nominis PJUS in concionibus mentionem fieri. (Abulpharagius,Dynast, p. 190.) It is likewise mentioned by Elmacin. (p. 254,







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 291


to himself or his disciples, is uncreated and eternal;subsisting in the essence of the Deity, and inscribedwith a pen of light on the table of his everlasting de­crees. A paper copy, in a volume of silk and gems, wasbrought down to the lowest heaven by the angel Gabriel,who, under the Jewish economy, had indeed been dis­patched on the most important errands; and this trustymessenger successively revealed the chapters and versesto the Arabian prophet. Instead of a perpetual andperfect measure of the divine will, the fragments of theKoran were produced at the discretion of Mahomet:each revelation is suited to the emergencies of his policyor passion; and all contradiction is removed by the sav­ing maxim, that any text of Scripture is abrogated ormodified by any subsequent passage. The word ofGod, and of the apostle, was diligently recorded by hisdisciples on palm-leaves and the shoulder-bones of mut­ton; and the pages, without order or connexion, werecast into a domestic chest in the custody of one of hiswives. Two years after the death of Mahomet, the sa­cred volume was collected and published by his friendand successor Abubeker: the work was revised by thecaliph Othman, in the thirtieth year of the Hegira; andthe various editions of the Koran assert the same mi­raculous privilege of a uniform and incorruptible text.In the spirit of enthusiasm or vanity, the prophet reststhe truth of his mission on the merit of his book, auda­ciously challenges both men and angels to imitate thebeauties of a single page, and presumes to assert thatGod alone could dictate this incomparable performance."This argument is most powerfully addressed to a devoutArabian, whose mind is attuned to faith and rapture,whose ear is delighted by the music of sounds, and whoseignorance is incapable of comparing the productions ofhuman genius." The harmony and copiousness of style


'Koran, c. 17. 5. 89. In Sale, p. 255, 236. In Maracci, p. 410.* Vet a sect of Arabians was persuaded, that it might be equalled or surpassed,by a human pen; (Pocock, Specimen, p. 221. &c.) and Maracci (th$ polemic ii


U 2







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 375


and the camp of Medina was successively filled with theintrepid bands of the Saracens, who panted for action,complained of the heat of the season, and the scarcity ofprovisions; and accused with impatient murmurs thedelays of the caliph. As soon as their numbers werecomplete, Abubeker ascended the hiH, reviewed the men,the horses, and the arms, and poured forth a ferventprayer for the success of their undertaking. In personand on foot, he accompanied the first day's march; andwhen the blushing leaders attempted to dismount, thecaliph removed their scruples by a declaration, that thosewho rode, and those who walked, in the service of reli­gion, were equally meritorious. His instructions7 to thechiefs of the Syrian army, were inspired by the warlikefanaticism which advances to seize, and affects to despise,the objects of worldly ambition. Remember (said thesuccessor of the prophet) that you are always in the pre­sence of God, on the verge of death, in the assurance ofjudgment, and the hope of paradise. Avoid injustice andoppression; consult with your brethren, and study to pre­serve the love and confidence of your troops. When youfight the battles of the Lord, acquit yourselves like men,without turning your back; but let not your victory bestained with the blood of women or children. Destroy nopalm-trees, nor burn any fields of corn. Cut down nofruit-trees, nor do any mischief to cattle, only such asyou kill to eat. When you make any covenant or article,stand to it, and be as good as your word. As you go on,you will find some religious persons who live retired in mo­nasteries, and propose to themselves to serve God thatway: let them alone, and neither kill them nor destroytheir monasteries ? and you will find another sort of people
J The instructions, &c. of the Syrian war, are described by Al Wakidi and Ock-ley, torn. 1. p. 22—27, &c. In the sequel it is necessary to contract, and needlessto quote, their circumstantial narrativi-:. My obligations to others shall be noticed.'Notwithstanding this precept, M.Pauw (Kecherch.es $ur les Egyptiens, torn. 2.p. 192. edit. Lausanne) represents the Bedoweens sis the implacable enemies ofthe Christian monks. For my own part I am more inclined to suspect.the avariceof the Arabian robbe», and the .prejudices of i he German philosopher.







OCR Output








402 ROMAN EMPIRE.


dels to fall upon you on all sides. Remain before Alepp otill God shall determine the event, and forage with yourhorse round the adjacent country. The exhortation ofthe commander of the faithful was fortified by a supplyof volunteers from all the tribes of Arabia, who arrivedin the camp on horses or camels. Among these wasDames, of a servile birth, but of gigantic size and in­trepid resolution. The forty-seventh day of his servicehe proposed, with only thirty men, to make an attempton the castle. The experience and testimony of Caledrecommended his offer; and Abu Obeidah admonishedhis brethren not to despise the baser origin of Dames,since he himself, could he relinquish the public care,would cheerfully serve under the banner of the slave.His design was covered by the appearance of a retreat;and the camp of the Saracens was pitched about a leaguefrom Aleppo. The thirty adventurers lay in ambush atthe foot of the hill; and Dames at length succeeded inhis inquiries, though he was provoked by the ignoranceof his Greek captives. God curse these dogs (said theilliterate Arab), what a strange barbarous language theyspeak. At the darkest hour of the night he scaled themost accessible height, which he had diligently surveyed,a place where the stones were less entire, or the slopeless perpendicular, or the guard less vigilant. Seven ofthe stoutest Saracens mounted on each other's shoulders,and the weight of the column was sustained on the broadand sinewy back of the gigantic slave. The foremostin this painful ascent could grasp and climb the lowestpart of the battlements; they silently stabbed and castdown the sentinels; and the thirty brethren, repeatinga pious ejaculation, O apostle of God, help and deliver us!were successively drawn up by the long folds of theirturbans. With bold and cautious footsteps, Dames ex­plored the palace of the governor, who celebrated, inriotous merriment, the festival of his deliverance. Fromthence returning to his companions, he assaulted on the







OCR Output








160 ROMAN EMPIRE.


among the Turks of Asia Minor, the hereditary ene­mies of his country. The sultan of Colonia afforded ahospitable retreat to Andronicus, his mistress, and hisband of outlaws; the debt of gratitude was paid byfrequent inroads in the Roman province of Trebizond;and he seldom returned without an ample harvest ofspoil and of Christian captives. In the story of hisadventures, he was fond of comparing himself to Da­vid, who escaped, by a long exile, the snares of thewicked. But the royal prophet (he presumed to add)was content to lurk on the borders of Judaea, to slay anAmalekite, and to threaten, in his miserable state, thelife of the avaricious Nabal. The excursions of theComnenian prince had a wider range; and he hadspread over the eastern world the glory of his nameand religion. By a sentence of the Greek church thelicentious rover had been separated from the faithful;but even this excommunication may prove, that henever abjured the profession of Christianity.
His vigilance had eluded or repelled the open andsecret persecution of the emperor; but he was at lengthensnared by the captivity of his female companion.The governor of Trebizond succeeded in his attempt tosurprise the person of Theodora: the queen of Jerusa­lem and her two children were sent to Constantinople,and their loss imbittered the tedious solitude of banish­ment. The fugitive implored and obtained a final par-doii, with leave to throw himself at the feet of his sove­reign, who was satisfied with the submission of thishaughty spirit. Prostrate on the ground, he deploredWith tears and groans the guilt of his past rebellion;nor would he presume to arise unless some faithful sub­ject would drag him to the foot of the throne, by aniron chain with which he had secretly encircled hisheck. This extraordinary penance excited the wonderand pity of the assembly; his sins were forgiven bythe church and state; but the just suspicion of Manuel







OCR Output








CHAP. XL1X.


in their opinion, the Lord of Hosts pronounced a deci­sive judgment between the adoration and contempt ofthese mute and inanimate idols. For awhile Edessa hadbraved the Persian assaults: but the chosen city, thespouse of Christ, was involved in the common ruin;and his divine resemblance became the slave and trophyof the infidels. After a servitude of three hundred years,the Palladium was yielded to the devotion of Constan­tinople, for a ransom of twelve thousand pounds of silver,the redemption of two hundred Mussulmans, and a per-petual truce for the territory of Edessa.'1 In this seasonof distress and dismay, the eloquence of the monks wasexercised in the defence of images; and they attemptedto prove, that the sin and schism of the greatest part ofthe Orientals had forfeited the favour, and annihilatedthe virtue, of these precious symbols. But they werenow opposed by the murmurs of many simple or rationalChristians, who appealed to the evidence of texts, of facts,and of the primitive times, and secretly desired the re­formation of the church. As the worship of images hadnever been established by any general or positive law, itsprogress in the eastern empire had been retarded, or ac­celerated, by the differences of men and manners, thelocal degrees of refinement, and the personal charactersof the bishops. The splendid devotion was fondly che­rished by the levity of the capital, and the inventive ge­nius of the Byzantine clergy, while the rude and remotedistricts of Asia were strangers to this innovation of sa­cred luxury. Many large congregations of Gnostics andArians maintained, after their conversion, the simpleworship which had preceded their separation; and theArmenians, the most warlike subjects of Rome, were notreconciled, in the twelfth century, to the sight of images/


i See EJmacin, (Hist. Saracen, p. 267.) Abulpharagius, (Dynast, p. 201.) andAbulfeda. (Annul. Moslem, p. 264.) and the Criticisms of Pagi. (torn 3. A. IX 944.)The prudent Franciscan refuses to determine whether the image of Edessa now re­poses at Rome or Genoa; but its repose is inglorious, and this ancient object ofworship is no longer famous or fashionable.
'Af/*fn»i; xat AX0/4ayMf tvurnt; v iyian uxovwv TtfWHumfis (urnyo^uTBi. (Nicetas,







OCR Output








534 ROMAN KM PI RE.


consumed in private luxury. But the apprehensions ofBagdad were relieved by the retreat of the Greeks:thirst and hunger guarded the desert of Mesopotamia:and the emperor, satiated with glory, and laden with ori­ental spoils, returned to Constantinople, and displayed,in his triumph, the silk, the aromatics, and three hun­dred myriads of gold and silver. Yet the powers ofthe east had been bent, not broken, by this transienthurricane. After the departure of the Greeks, the fu­gitive princes returned to their capitals; the subjectsdisclaimed their involuntary oaths of allegiance; theMoslems again purified their temples, and overturnedthe idols of the saints and martyrs; the Nestorians andJacobites preferred a Saracen to an orthodox master;and the numbers and spirit of the Melchites were in­adequate to the support of the church and state. Ofthese extensive conquests, Antioch, with the cities ofCilicia and the isle of Cyprus, was alone restored, apermanent and useful accession to the Roman empire."


e See the Annals of Elmacin, Abulpharagius, and Abulfeda, from A. It 351. toA. H. 361 ; and the reigns of Nicephorus Phocas and John Zimisces, in the Chro­nicles of Zonaras (torn. t. lib. 16. p. 199. lib. 17. 315.) and Odrcnns. (Compend.p. 649—684.) Their manifold defects are partly supplied, by the MS. history ofLeo the Deacon, which Pagi obtained from the Benedictines, and has insertedalmoatentire in the Latin version. (Critica, torn. 3. p. 873. torn. 4. p. 37.)
END OF VOL. VI.
£,r* . •$'/,
Printed by J. F. DovE. St. John's Square.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. Jli)


tent with the title of mother of Theophilus, his son andsuccessor.
The character of Theophilus is a rare exam-.Di P^ in which religious zeal has allowed, and
-, '-':„•,. * ™
perhaps magnified, the virtues of a heretic, anda persecutor. His valour was.often felt by the ene­mies, and his justice by the Subjects, of the monarchy;but the valour of Theophilus was rash and fruitless,and his justice arbitrary and cruel. He displayed thebanner of the cross against the Saracens; but his fiveexpeditions were concluded by a signal overthrow;Amorium, the native city of his ancestors, was levelledwith the ground, and from his military toils, he derivedonly the surname of the Unfortunate. The wisdom ofa sovereign is comprised in the institution of laws andthe choice of magistrates, and while he seems withoutaction, his civil government revolves round his centrewith the silence and order of the planetary system. Butthe justice of Theophilus was fashioned on the modelof the oriental despots, who, in personal and irregularacts of authority, consult the reason or passion of themoment, without measuring the sentence by the law, orthe penalty by the offence. A poor woman threw her­self at the emperor's feet to complain of a powerfulneighbour, the brother of the empress, who had raisedhis palace-wall to such an inconvenient height, that herhumble dwelling was excluded from light and air! Onthe proof of the fact, instead of granting, like an ordi­nary judge, sufficient or ample damages to the plaintiff,the sovereign adjudged to her use and benefit the pa­lace and the ground. Nor was Theophilus content withthis extravagant satisfaction; his zeal converted a civiltrespass into a criminal act; and the unfortunate patri­cian was stripped and scourged in the public place ofConstantinople. For some venial offences, some defectof equity or vigilance, the principal ministers, a prefect,a quaestor, a captain of the guards, were banished, ormutilated, or scalded with boiling pitch, or burnt alive







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 37


had been respectfully, perhaps sincerely, subscribed:but they protested, in two successive debates, that it wasneither expedient nor lawful to transgress the sacredlandmarks which had been fixed at Nice, Constanti­nople, and Ephesus, according to the rule of Scriptureand tradition. At length they yielded to the impor­tunities of their masters; but their infallible decree, afterit had been ratified with deliberate votes and vehementacclamations, was overturned in the next session by theopposition of the legates and their oriental friends. Itwas in vain that a multitude of episcopal voices repeatedin chorus, The definition of the fathers is orthodox andimmutable! The heretics are now discovered! Anathemato the Nestorians! Let them depart from the synod! Letthem repair to Rome /" The legates threatened, theemperor was absolute, and a committee of eighteen bi­shops prepared a new decree, which was imposed onthe reluctant assembly. In the name of the fourth ge­neral council, the Christ in one person, but in two na­tures, was announced to the Catholic world: an invi­sible line was drawn between the heresy of Apollinarisand the faith of St. Cyril; and the road to paradise,a bridge as sharp as a razor, was suspended over theabyss by the master-hand of the theological artist.During ten centuries of blindness and servitude, Europereceived her religious opinions from the oracle of theVatican; and the same doctrine, already varnished withthe rust of antiquity, was admitted without dispute intothe creed of the reformers, who disclaimed the supremacyof the Roman pontiff. The synod of Chalcedon still tri­umphs in the Protestant churches; but the ferment ofcontroversy.has subsided, and the most pious Christiansof the present day are ignorant or careless of their ownbelief concerning the mystery of the incarnation.


* E0»mr i i ift nfvniru * amfxffuS* , . . u arnXiyorric if.anpoi yntmai, o'xmXiycmc Nitrrtfiaw ura, 01 airiMywrtj lit Po|unr iuriXfW». (Concil. torn. 4. p.1449.) Evagrius and Liberatus present only the placid face of the synod, anddiscreetly sink- over those embers suppoeitos cinere dole-so.







OCR Output








298 ROMAN EMPIRE.


cuses him of fraud or extortion, the tenth, under the ideaof restitution, is enlarged to ajifth* Benevolence is thefoundation, of justice, since we are forbid to injure thosewhom we are bound to assist. A prophet may revealthe secrets of heaven and of futurity;. but in his moralprecepts he can only repeat the lessons of our ownhearts.
Remittee- The two articles of belief, and the four prac-^™. tical duties of Islam, are guarded by rewards andpunishments; and the faith of the Mussulman is devoutlyfixed on the event of the judgment and the last day.The prophet has not presumed to determine the momentof that awful catastrophe, though he darkly announcesthe signs, both in heaven and earth, which will precedethe universal dissolution, when life shall be destroyed,and the order of creation shall be confounded in the pri­mitive chaos. At the blast of the trumpet, new worldswill start into being; angels, genii, and men, will arisefrom the dead, and the human soul will again be unitedto the body. The doctrine of the resurrection was firstentertained by the Egyptians;0 and their mummies wereembalmed, their pyramids were constructed, to preservethe ancient mansion of the soul, during a period of threethousand years. But the attempt is partial and unavail­ing; and it is with a more philosophic spirit that Maho­met relies on the omnipotence of the Creator, whoseword can reanimate the breathless clay, and collect theinnumerable atoms, that no longer retain their form orsubstance.11 The intermediate state of the soul it is hard


i The jealousy of Maracci (Prodromus, part 4. p. 33.) prompts him to enumeratethe more liberal alma of the Catholics of Rome. Fifteen great hospitals are opento many thousand patients and pilgrims, fifteen hundred maidens are annually por­tioned, fifty-six charity-schools are founded' for both sexes, one hundred and twentyconfraternities relieve the wants of their brethren, &c. The benevolence of Londonis still more extensive; but I am afraid that much more is to be ascribed to thehumanity, than to the religion of the people.
0 See Herodotus, (lib. 2.c.l23.)and our learned countryman, sir John Marsham.(Canon. Chronicus, p. 46.) The AJnf of the same writer (p. 244—274.) is an ela­borate sketch of the infernal regions, as they were painted by the fancy of theEgyptians and Greeks, of the poets and philosophers of antiquity.
PThe Koran(c. 2. p. 259, &C. of Sale,p. 32. of Maracci, p. 97.)relates an inge­nious miracle, which satisfied the curiosity, and confirmed the faith, of Abraharn.







OCR Output








268 ROMAN EMPIRE.


a maxim of jurisprudence, which they believe and prac­tise to the present hour. They pretend, that, in thedivision of the earth, the rich and fertile climates wereassigned to the other branches of the human family; andthat the posterity of the outlaw Ismael might recover,by fraud or force, the portion of inheritance, of whichhe had been unjustly deprived. According to the re­mark of Pliny, the Arabian tribes are equally addictedto theft and merchandise; the caravans that traverse thedesert are ransomed or pillaged; and their neighbours,since the remote times of Job and Sesostris,m have beenthe victims of their rapacious spirit. If a Bedoweendiscovers from afar a solitary traveller, he rides furi­ously against him, crying, with a loud voice, Undressthyself, thy aunt (my wife) is without a garment. Aready submission entitles him to mercy; resistance willprovoke the aggressor, and his own blood must expiatethe blood which he presumes to shed in legitimate de­fence. A single robber, or a-few associates, are brandedwith their genuine name; but the exploits of a numer­ous band assume the character of a lawful and honour­able war. The temper of a people thus armed againstmankind, was doubly inflamed by the domestic licenceof rapine, murder, and revenge. In the constitution ofEurope, the right of peace and war is now confined toa small, and the actual exercise to a much smaller, listof respectable potentates; but each Arab, with impunityand renown, might point his javelin against the life ofhis countryman. The union of the nation consistedonly in a vague resemblance of language and manners;and in each community, the jurisdiction of the magi­strate was mute and impotent. Of the time of ignorancewhich preceded Mahomet, seventeen hundred battles"


i" Observe the first chapter of Job, and the long wall of one thousand five hundredstadia which Sesostris built from Pelusium to Heliopolis. (Diodor. Sicul. torn. 1.lib. 1. p. 67.) Under the name of Hycsot, the shepherd kings, they had formerlysubdued Egypt, (Marsham, Canon. Chron. p. 98—163, &c.)
"Or, according to another account, one thousand two hundred: (d'Herbelot,Bibliotheque Orientale, p. 75.) the two historians, who wrote of the Ayamal Arab,







OCR Output








Id ROMAN EMPIRE,


Ptolemies, and a long proscription of seven hundredyears since the foundation of Alexandria. Withoutany legal sentence, without any royal mandate, the pa­triarch, at the dawn of day, led a seditious multitude tothe attack of the synagogues. Unarmed and unprepar­ed, the Jews were incapable of resistance; their housesof prayer were levelled with the ground, and the epis­copal warrior, after rewarding his troops with the plun­der of their goods, expelled from the city the remnantof the unbelieving nation. Perhaps he might plead theinsolence of their prosperity, and their deadly hatredof the Christians, whose blood they had recently shed ina malicious or accidental tumult. Such crimes wouldhave deserved the animadversion of the magistrate;but in this promiscuous outrage the innocent were con­founded with the guilty, and Alexandria was impover­ished by the loss of a wealthy and industrious colony.The zeal of Cyril exposed him to the penalties of theJulian law; but in a feeble government, and a super­stitious age, he was secure of impunity, and even ofpraise. Orestes complained; but his just complaintswere too quickly forgotten by the ministers of Theodo-sius, and too deeply remembered by a priest who af­fected to pardon, and continued to hate, the prefect ofEgypt. As he passed through the streets, his chariotwas assaulted by a band of five hundred of the Nitrianmonks: his guards fled from the wild beasts of thedesert; his protestations, that he was a Christian and aCatholic, were answered by a volley of stones, and theface of Orestes was covered with blood. The loyalcitizens of Alexandria hastened to his rescue; he in­stantly satisfied his justice and revenge against themonk, by whose hand he had been wounded, and Am-monius expired under the rod of the lictor. At the com­mand of Cyril, his body was raised from the ground,and transported, in solemn procession, to the cathe­dral ; the name of Ammonius was changed to that of







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 335


bed, in the embraces of his Egyptian captive: she pro­mised secrecy and forgiveness: he swore that he wouldrenounce the possession of Mary. Both parties forgottheir engagements, and Gabriel again descended with achapter of the Koran, to absolve him from his oath, andto exhort him freely to enjoy his captives and concu­bines, without listening to the clamours of his wives.In a solitary retreat of thirty days, he laboured, alonewith Mary, to fulfil the commands of the angel. Whenhis love and revenge were satiated, he summoned to hispresence his eleven wives, reproached their disobedienceand indiscretion, and threatened them with a sentenceof divorce, both in this world and the next: a dreadfulsentence, since those who had ascended the bed of theprophet were for ever excluded from the hope of a secondmarriage. Perhaps the incontinence of Mahomet maybe palliated by the tradition of his natural or preterna­tural gift;" he united the manly virtue of thirty of thechildren of Adam; and the apostle might rival the thir­teenth labour'1 of the Grecian Hercules.0 A more seriousand decent excuse may be drawn from his fidelity toCadijah. During the twenty-four years of their mar­riage, her youthful husband abstained from the right ofpolygamy, and the pride or tenderness of the venerablematron was never insulted by the society of a rival. Af­ter her death he placed her in the rank of the four per­fect women, with the sister of Moses, the mother of


i Sibi robur ad generationem, quantum triginta virihavent, iness* jactaret: itaut unitfi hoift posset nmlivi in fceminis tatisfacerc, nt ex Arabura libris refert SinsPetrus Paschasius, c.'.?. (Maracci, Prodromus Alcoran, p. 4. p. 55.) See likewiseobservations de Belon, lib. 3. c. 10. fol. 179. recto.) Al Jannabi (Gagnier, torn. 3.p. 487.) records Ms own testimony, that he surpassed all men in conjugal vigour;and Abulfeda mentions the exclamation of Ali, who washed his body after hisdeath,—" O propheta, certe penis suns ccelum versus ereetus est." (in Yit. Mo­hammed, p. 140.)
li I borrow the style of a father of the church, Ka9Xeuay 'HpaxXou; TfMrxaiJixarW•dXcv. (Greg. Nazianzen, orat . 3. p. 108.)
• The common and most glorious legend includes, in a single night, the fiftyvictories of Hercules over the virgin daughters ofThestius. (Diodor.Sicul. torn. 1.Kb. 4. p, 474. Pausauias, lib. 9. p. 763. Statius Sylv. lib. 1. elcg. 3. v. 42.) ButAthensuo allows seven nights, (Diepuosophist. lib. 13. p. 556.) and Apollodorusfifty, for this arduous achievement of Hercules, who was then no more than eigh­teen years of age. (Bibliot. lib. 2. c.4. p. 111. cum notis Hevne, part 1. p. 3S2.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 127


elation till his influence was fortified by popular esteem.His life was endangered by the caprice of the emperor;and his dignity was profaned by a second colleague, whohad rowed in the galleys. Yet the murder of his benefac­tor must be condemned as an act of ingratitude and trea­son; and the churches which he dedicated to the name ofSt. Michael, were a poor and puerile expiation of his guilt.The different ages of Basil I. may be compared withthose of Augustus. The situation of the Greek did notallow him in his earliest youth to lead an army againsthis country, or to proscribe the noblest of her sons; buthis aspiring genius stooped to the arts of a slave; hedissembled his ambition and even his virtues,and grasped,with the bloody hand of an assassin, the empire whichhe ruled with the wisdom and tenderness of a parent.A private citizen may feel his interest repugnant to hisduty; but it must be from a deficiency of sense or cou­rage, that an absolute monarch can separate his happi­ness from his glory, or his glory from the public welfare.The life or panegyric of Basil has indeed been composedand published under the long reign of his descendants;but even their stability on the throne may be justly as­cribed to the superior merit of their ancestor. In hischaracter, his grandson Constantine has attempted todelineate a perfect image of royalty; but that feebleprince, unless he had copied a real model could noteasily have soared so high above the level of his ownconduct or conceptions. But the most solid praise ofBasil is drawn from the comparison of a ruined and aflourishing, monarchy, that which he wrested from thedissolute Michael, and that which he bequeathed to theMacedonian dynasty. The evils which had been sanc­tified by time and example, were corrected by his master-hand; and he revived, if not the national spirit, at leastthe order and majesty of the Roman empire. His appli­cation was indefatigable, his temper cool, his understand­ing vigorous and decisive; and in his practice he ob­







OCR Output








250 ROMAN EMPIRE.


southern basis presents a front of a thousand miles tothe Indian ocean. The entire surface of the peninsulaexceeds in a fourfold proportion that of Germany orFrance; but the far greater part has been justly stigma-^ .f tized with the epithets of the stony and the sandy.andcii- Even the wilds of Tartary are decked by thehand of nature with lofty trees and luxuriantherbage; and the lonesome traveller derives a sort ofcomfort and society from the presence of a vegetablelife. But in the dreary waste of Arabia, a boundlesslevel of sand is intersected by sharp and naked moun­tains, and the face of the desert, without shade or shelter,is scorched by the direct and intense rays of a tropicalsun. Instead of refreshing breezes, the winds, particu­larly from the south-west, diffuse a noxious and evendeadly vapour; the hillocks of sand, which they alter­nately raise and scatter, are compared to the billows ofthe ocean, and whole caravans, whole armies, have beenlost and buried in the whirlwind. The common bene­fits of water are an object of desire and contest; andsuch is the scarcity of wood, that some art is requisiteto preserve and propagate the element of fire. Arabiais destitute of navigable rivers, which fertilize the soil,and convey its produce to the adjacent regions: thetorrents that fall from the hills are imbibed by the thirstyearth: the rare and hardy plants, the tamarind or theacacia, that strike their roots into the clefts of the rocks,are nourished by the dews of the night; a scanty supplyof rain is collected in cisterns and aqueducts; the wellsand springs are the secret treasure of the desert; andthe pilgrim of Mecca," after many a dry and sultryinarch, is disgusted by the taste of the waters, whichhave rolled over a bed of sulphur or salt. Such is thegeneral and genuine picture of the climate of Arabia.The experience of evil enhances the value of any local


a In the thirty days or stations, between Cairo and Mecca, there are fifteen de-etitute of good water. See the route of the Hadjees, in Shaw's Travels, p. 477.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 209


tomb of St. Peter. The ample measure of the exarchate'might comprise all the provinces of Italy which hadobeyed the emperor and his vicegerent; but its strictand proper limits were included in the territories ofRavenna, Bologna, and Ferrara; its inseparable de­pendency was the Pentapolis, which stretched along theHadriatic from Rimini to Ancona,and advanced into themidland country as far as the ridges of the Appennine.In this transaction, the ambition and avarice of the popeshad been severely condemned. Perhaps the humilityof a Christian priest should have rejected an earthlykingdom, which it was not easy for him to govern with­out renouncing the virtues of his profession. Perhapsa faithful subject, or a generous enemy, would havebeen less impatient to divide the spoils of the barbarian;and if the emperor had intrusted Stephen to solicit inhis name the restitution of the exarchate, I will notabsolve the pope from the reproach of treachery andfalsehood. But in the rigid interpretation of the laws,every one may accept, without injury, whatever hisbenefactor can bestow without injustice. The Greekemperor had abdicated or forfeited his right to the ex­archate; and the sword of Astolphus was broken by thestronger sword of the Carlovingian. It was not in thecause of the Iconoclast that Pepin had exposed his per­son and army in a double expedition beyond the Alps;he possessed, and might lawfully alienate, his conquests;and to the importunities of the Greeks, he piously re­plied, that no human consideration should tempt him toresume the gift which he had conferred on the Romanpontiff for the remission of his sins, and the salvation ofhis soul. The splendid donation was granted in supremeand absolute dominion, and the world beheld for thefirst time a Christian bishop invested with the preroga­


'Between the exorbitant claims, and narrow concessions, of interest and preju­dice, from which even Muratori (Antiquitat. torn. 1. p. 63—68.) is not exempt, Ihave been guided, in the limits of the exarchate and Pentapolis, by the DissertatioChorographica Italia Medii JEvi, torn. 10. p. 160—180.
VOL. VI. P







OCR Output








368 ROMAN EMPIRE.


suers; the gorgeous trophy was presented to the com­mander of the faithful, and the gravest of the com­panions condescended to smile when they beheld thewhite beard, hairy arms, and uncouth figure, of theveteran, who was invested with the spoils of the greatking.0 The sack of Ctesiphon was followed by its de­sertion and gradual decay. The Saracens dis-tion of liked the air and situation of the place, and Omarwas advised by his general to remove the seat ofgovernment to the western side of the Euphrates. Inevery age the foundation and ruin of the Assyrian citieshas been easy and rapid; the country is destitute ofstone and timber, and the most solid structures'1 are com­posed of bricks baked in the sun, and joined by a cementof the native bitumen. The name of Cufa" describes ahabitation of reeds and earth; but the importance of thenew capital was supported by the numbers, wealth, andspirit, of a colony of veterans; and their licentiousnesswas indulged by the wisest caliphs, who were appre­hensive of provoking the revolt of a hundred thousandswords. Ye men of Cufa (said Ali, who solicited theiraid), you have been always conspicuous by your valour.You conquered the Persian king, and scattered his forces,till you had taken possession of his inheritance. Thismighty conquest was achieved by the battles of Jalulaand Nehavend. After the loss of the former, Yezdegerdfled from Holwan, and concealed his shame and despairin the mountains of Farsistan, from whence Cyrus haddescended with his equal and valiant companions. Thecourage of the nation survived that of the monarch;among the hills to the south of Ecbatana or Hamadan,one hundred and fifty thousand Persians made a third


1 See Gagnier. Vie de Mahomet, torn. 1. p. 376, 377. I may credit the fact,without believing the prophecy.
* The most considerable ruins of Assyria are the tower of Belus at Babylon, andthe hall of Chosroes at Ctesiphon: they have been visited by that vain and curioustraveller Pietro della Valle. (torn. 1. p. 713—718. 731—735.)
<• Consult the article of Coufah in the Bibliotheque of d'Herbelot, (p. 277, ¥16.)and the second volume of Ocklry's History, particularly p. 40. and 153.







OCR Output








12 ROMAN EMPIRE.


revered Mary as the spiritual, rather than as the carnal,mother of Christ, whose body either came from heaven,impassible and incorruptible, or was absorbed, and, asit were, transformed, into the essence of the Deity.The system of Apollinaris was strenuously encounteredby the Asiatics and Syrian divines, whose schools arehonoured by the names of Basil, Gregory, and Chrysos-tom, and tainted by those of Diodorus, Theodoric, andNestorius. But the person of the aged bishop of Lao-dicea, his character, and dignity, remained inviolate,and his rivals, since we may not suspect them of theweakness of toleration, were astonished, perhaps, bythe novelty of the argument, and diffident of the finalsentence of the Catholic church. Her judgment atlength inclined in their favour; the heresy of Apolli­naris was condemned, and the separate congregationsof his disciples were proscribed by the imperial laws.But his principles were secretly entertained in the mo­nasteries of Egypt, and his enemies felt the hatred ofTheophilus and Cyril, the successive patriarchs ofAlexandria.
v. Ortho- ^' ^e groveNing Ebionite, and the fantas-doxcou- tic Docetes, were rejected, and forgotten; theverbal recent zeal against the errors of Apollinaris,disputes. reduced the Catholics to a seeming agreementwith the double nature of Cerinthus. But, instead of atemporary and occasional alliance, they established, andwe still embrace, the substantial, indissoluble, and ever­lasting union of a perfect God with a perfect man, or thesecond person of the trinity with a reasonable soul and hu­man flesh. In the beginning of the fifth century, the unityof the two natures was the prevailing doctrine of thechurch. On all sides, it was confessed, that the mode oftheir co-existence could neither be represented by ourideas, nor expressed by our language. Yet a secret andincurable discord was cherished between those who weremost apprehensive of confounding, and those who were







OCR Output








230 ROMAN EMPIRE.


If we retrace the outlines of thb geographical
His neigh- . . .111 i i • e i
bourn and picture, it will be seen that the empire ot theenemies. extended between east and west, from


the Ebro to the Elbe or Vistula; between the north and
south, from the dutchy of Beneventum to the river Eyder,
the perpetual boundary of Germany and Denmark. The
personal and political importance of Charlemagne was
magnified by the distress and division of the rest of
Europe. The islands of Great Britain and Ireland
.were disputed by a crowd of princes of Saxon or Scot­
tish origin; and after the loss of Spain, the Christian
and Gothic kingdom of Alphonso the Chaste, was con­
fined to the narrow range of the Asturian mountains.
These petty sovereigns revered the power or virtue of
the Carlovingian monarch, implored the honour and
support of his alliance, and styled him their common
parent, the sole and supreme emperor of the west.1
He maintained a more equal intercourse with the
caliph Harun al Rashid/ whose dominion stretched
from Africa to India, and accepted from his ambas­
sadors a tent, a water-clock, an elephant, and the keys
of the holy sepulchre. It is not easy to conceive the
private friendship of a Frank and an Arab, who were
strangers to each other's person, and language, and
religion: but their public correspondence was founded
on vanity, and their remote situation left no room for
a competition of interest. Two-thirds of the western
empire of Rome were subject to Charlemagne, and the
deficiency was amply supplied by his command of the
inaccessible or invincible nations of Germany. But in
the choice of his enemies, we may be reasonably sur­
prised that he so often preferred the poverty of the north


* See Eginhard, c. 16. and Gaillard, torn. 2. p. 361 — 385. who mentions, withaloose reference, the intercourse of Charlemagne and Egbert, the emperor's gift ofhis own sword, and the modest answer of his Saxon disciple. The anecdote, ifgenuine, would have adorned oar English histories.
J The correspondence is mentioned only in the French annals, and the orientalsare ignorant of the caliph's friendship for the Christian dag — a polite appellation,which Harun bestows on the emperor of the Greeks.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 161


of royal birth, it is incumbent on me to observe, thattheir fortunate lover was cast in the best proportions ofstrength and beauty; and that the want of the softergraces was supplied by a manly countenance, a loftystature, athletic muscles, and the air and deportment ofa soldier. The preservation, in his old age, of healthand vigour, was the reward of temperance and exercise.A piece of bread and a draught of water were often hissole and evening repast; and if he tasted of a wild boar,or a stag, which he had roasted with his own hands, itwas the well-earned fruit of a laborious chase. Dexterousin arms,he was ignorantof fear: his persuasive eloquencecould bend to every situation and character of life: hisstyle, though not his practice, was fashioned by the ex­ample of St. Paul; and, in every deed of mischief, hehad a heart to resolve, a head to contrive, and a hand toexecute. In his youth, after the death of the emperorJohn, he followed the retreat of the Roman army; but,in the march through Asia Minor, design or accidenttempted him to wander in the mountains; the hunterwas encompassed by the Turkish huntsmen, and he re­mained some time a reluctant or willing captive in thepower of the sultan. His virtues and vices recommendedhim to the favour of his cousin; he shared the perilsand the pleasures of Manuel; and while the emperorlived in public incest with his niece Theodora, the af­fections of her sister Eudocia were seduced and enjoyedby Andronicus. Above the decencies of her sex andrank, she gloried in the name of his concubine; andboth the palace and the camp could witness that sheslept or watched in the arms of her lover. She accom­panied him to his military command of Cilicia, the firstscene of his valour and imprudence. He pressed, withactive ardour, the siege of Mopsuestia: the day was em­ployed in the boldest attacks; but the night was wastedin song and dance; and |a band of Greek comediansformed the choicest part of his retinue. Andronicus was
VOL. VI. M







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 43


Catholic cry; and the galleys of Anastasius lay upontheir oars before the palace, till the patriarch had par­doned his penitent, and hushed the waves of the troubledmultitude. The triumph of Macedonius was checkedby a speedy exile; but the zeal of his flock was againexasperated by the same question,—Whether one of theTrinity had been crucified? On this momentous occa­sion, the blue and green factions of Constantinople sus­pended their discord, and the civil and military powerswere annihilated in their presence. The keys of the city,and the standards of their guards, were deposited inthe Forum of Constantine, the principal station andcamp of the faithful. Day and night they were inces­santly busied either in singing hymns to the honour oftheir god, or in pillaging and murdering the servantsof their prince. The head of his favourite monk, thefriend, as they styled him, of the enemy of the holyTrinity, was borne aloft on a spear; and the firebrands,which had been darted against heretical structures, dif­fused the undistinguishing flames against the most or­thodox buildings. The statues of the emperor werebroken, and his person was concealed in a suburb, till,at the end of three days, he dared to implore the mercyof his subjects. Without his diadem, and in the pos­ture of a suppliant, Anastasius appeared on the throneof the circus. The Catholics, before his face, rehearsedtheir genuine Trisagion; they exulted in the offer whichhe proclaimed by the voice of a herald, of abdicatingthe purple; they listened to the admonition, that sinceall could not reign, they should previously agree in thechoice of a sovereign; and they accepted the blood oftwo unpopular ministers, whom their master withouthesitation, condemned to the lions. These furiousbut transient seditions were encouraged by the suc­cess of Vitalian, who, with an army of Huns and Bul­garians, for the most part idolaters, declared himselfthe champion of the Catholic faith. In this pious







OCR Output








38 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Discord of Far different was the temper of the Greekstheeast, anc[ Egyptians under the orthodox reigns of451—482. Leo and Marcian. Those pious emperors en­forced with arms and edicts the symbol of their faith ;raod it was declared by the conscience or honour offive hundred bishops, that the decrees of the synod ofChalcedon might be lawfully supported, even withblood. The Catholics observed with satisfaction, thatthe same synod was odious both to the Nestorians andthe Monophysites ;y but the Nestorians were less angry, orless powerful, and the east was distracted by the obsti­nate and sanguinary zeal of the Monophysites. Jerusa­lem was occupied by an army of monks; in the nameof the one incarnate nature, they pillaged, they burnt,they murdered; the sepulchre of Christ was defiledwith blood; and the gates of the city were guarded intumultuous rebellion against the troops of the emperor.After the disgrace and exile of Dioscorus, the Egyp­tians still regretted their spiritual father; and detestedthe usurpation of his successor, who was introducedby the fathers of Chalcedon. The throne of Proteriuswas supported by a guard of two thousand soldiers; hewaged a five years' war against the people of Alexan­dria; and, on the first intelligence of the death of Mar­cian, he became the victim of their zeal. On the thirdday before the festival of Easter, the patriarch was be­sieged in the cathedral, and murdered in the baptis­tery. The remains of his mangled corpse were deliver­


x See in the Appendix to the Acts of Cbalcedon, the confirmation of the synod byMarcian, (Concil. torn. 4. p. 1781.1783.) his letters to the monks of Alexandria,(p. 1791.) of Mount Sinai, (p. 1793.) of Jerusalem and Palestine, (p. 1798.) hislaws against the Eutychians, (p. 1809. 1811. 1831.) the correspondence of Leowith the provincial synods on the revolution of Alexandria, (p. 1835.1930.)
JPhotius(or rather the Eulogiusof Alexandria) confesses, in afine passage, thespecious colourof this double charge against Pope Leo and his synod of Chalcedon.(Bibliot. cod. 225. p. 768.) He waged a double war against the enemies of thechurch, and wounded eitherfoe with the darts of his adversary—xaraXXuXoif B'MnTHUS amvaXcu; ttnyarM. Against Nestorius he seemed to introduce the ?vyxy?itof the Monophysites: against Eutyches he appeared to countenance the vgwranm)iafega of the Nestorians. The apologist claims a charitable interpretation for thesaints: if the same had been extended to the heretics, the sound of the contro­versy would have been lost in the air.







OCR Output








324 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Not a month, not an hour.—Excuse us at least from theobligation of prayer.— Without prayer religion is of noavail. They submitted in silence; their temples^ weredemolished, and the same sentence of destruction wasexecuted on all the idols of Arabia. His lieutenants, onthe shores of the Red sea, the ocean, and the gulf ofPersia, were saluted by the acclamations of a faithfulpeople; and the ambassadors who knelt before the throneof Medina, were as numerous (says the Arabian proverb)as the dates that fall from the maturity of a palm-tree.The nation submitted to the God and the sceptre of Ma­homet: the opprobrious name of tribute was abolished,the spontaneous or reluctant oblations of alms and titheswere applied to the service of religion; and one hundredand fourteen thousand Moslems accompanied the lastpilgrimage of the apostle/
When Heraclius returned in triumph from the
Firstwar —. . . _ r
of the Ma-Persian war, he entertained, at Emesa, one ofe ambassadors of Mahomet, who invited theprinces and nations of the earth to the professionA. D. 6«9, of Islam. On this foundation the zeal of the
630
Arabians has supposed the secret conversion ofthe Christian emperor: the vanity of the Greeks hasfeigned a personal visit to the prince of Medina, who ac­cepted from the royal bounty a rich domain, and a secureretreat in the province of Syria.*5 But the friendship ofHeraclius and Mahomet was of short continuance: thenew religion had inflamed rather than assuaged the ra­pacious spirit of the Saracens; and the murder of anenvoy afforded a decent pretence for invading, withthree thousand soldiers, the territory of Palestine, thatextends to the eastward of the Jordan. The holy bannerwas intrusted to Zeid; and such was the discipline or


'The last conquest and pilgrimage of Mahomet are contained in Abulfeda,(p. 121—133.; Gagnier, (torn. 3. p. 1j9—219.) Elmacin, (p. 10.11.) Abulphara-gius. (p. 103.) The ninth of the Hegira was styled the Year of Embassies. (Ga­gnier, Not. ad Abulfed. (p. 121.)
* Compare the bigotted Al Jannabi (apud Gagnier, torn. 1. p. 232—255.) withthe no less bigoted Greeks, Theophanes, (p. 276—278.) Zonarac, (torn. t. lib. 14.p. 86.) and Cedrenus. (p. 421.)







OCR Output








148 ROMAN EMPIRE.


His three sons, Michael VII. Andronicus I. and Con-stantine XII. were invested, in a tender age, with theequal title of Augustus; and the succession was speed­ily opened by their father's death. His widow,A.D. io67, Eudocia, was intrusted with the administration;*7' but experience had taught the jealousy of thedying monarch to protect his sons from the danger ofher second nuptials; and her solemn engagement, at­tested by the principal senators, was deposited in thehands of the patriarch. Before the end of sevenmonths the wants of Eudocia, or those of the state,called aloud for the male virtues of a soldier; and herheart had already chosen Romanus Diogenes, whomshe raised from the scaffold to the throne. The dis­covery of a treasonable attempt had exposed him to theseverity of the laws: his beauty and valour absolvedhim in the eyes of the empress; and Romanus, from amild exile, was recalled on the second day to the com­mand of the oriental armies. Her royal choice was yetunknown to the public, and the promise which wouldhave betrayed her falsehood and levity, was stolen bya dexterous emissary from the ambition of the patriarch.Xiphilin at first alleged the sanctity of oaths and thesacred nature of a trust; but a whisper that his brotherwas the future emperor, relaxed his scruples, and forcedhim to confess that the public safety was the supremelaw. He resigned the important paper; and when hishopes were confounded by the nomination of Romanus,he could no longer regain his security, retract his de­clarations, nor oppose the second nuptials of the em­press. Yet a murmur was heard in the palace; andRoma- the barbarian guards had raised their battle-


nus in. axes in the cause Of the house of Ducas, till
Diogenes,
A. D. 1067, the young princes were soothed by the tears of
their mother and the solemn assurances of the
fidelity of their guardian, who filled the imperial sta­
tion with dignity and honour. Hereafter I shall relate







OCR Output








46 ROMAN EMPIRE.


expressed by silence and submission; that man ignorantof his own nature, should not presume to scrutinize thenature of his God; and that it is sufficient for us to know,that power and benevolence are the perfect attributes ofthe Deity."
His per- Toleration was not the virtue of the times,secution an(J indulgence to rebels has seldom been thevirtue of princes. But when the prince descends tothe narrow and peevish character of a disputant, he iseasily provoked to supply the defect of argument bythe plenitude of power, and to chastise without mercythe perverse blindness of those who wilfully shut theireyes against the light of demonstration. The reign ofJustinian was a uniform yet various scene of persecu­tion; and he appears to have surpassed his indolentpredecessors, both in the contrivance of his laws andthe rigour of their execution. The insufficient term ofof here- three months was assigned for the conversiontics. or exile of all heretics ;p and if he still connivedat their precarious stay, they were deprived, under hisiron yoke, not only of the benefits of society, but ofthe common birth-right of men and Christians. Atthe end of four hundred years, the Montanists of Phry-giaq still breathed the wild enthusiasm of perfectionand prophecy, which they had imbibed from their maleand female apostles, the special organs of the Paraclete.On the approach of the Catholic priests and soldiers,they grasped with alacrity the crown of martyrdom;the conventicle and the congregation perished in theflames; but these primitive fanatics were not extin­


"For these wi>e and moderate sentiments, Procopius (de Bell. Goth. lib. 1.e. 3.)is scourged in the preface of Alemannus, who ranks him among the political Chris­tians—sed longe verius hieresium omnium sentinas, prorsusque A theos—abominableAtheists, who preached the imitation of God's mercy to man. (ad Hist. Arcan.c. 13.)
P This alternative, a precious circumstance, is preserved by John Malala, (torn.2. p. 63. edit. Venet. 1733.) who deserves more credit as he draws towards hisend. After numbering the heretics, Nestorians, Eutychians, &c. ne expectent,says Justinian, ut digni venia judicentur: jubemus,enimut. . .. convicti et apertihieretici justs et idons animadversion! subjiciantur. Baronius copies and ap­plauds this edict of the Code. (A. D. 527. no. 39—40.)
i See the character and principles of the Montanists, in Mosheim, de RebnsChrist, ante Constantinum, p. 410—424.







OCR Output








10 ROMAN EMPIRE.


fer; that human nature is never absolutely perfect; andthat the cross and passion might serve to expiate thevenial transgressions of the son of Joseph, before hismysterious union with the Son of God.qiv.Divine IV. All those who believe the immaterialitytke soul, a specious and noble tenet, mustconfess, from their present experience, the in­comprehensible union of mind and matter. A similarunion is not inconsistent with a much higher, or evenwith the highest, degree of mental faculties; and theincarnation of an aeon or archangel, the most perfectof created spirits, does not involve any positive contra­diction or absurdity. In the age of religious freedom,which was determined by the council of Nice, the dig­nity of Christ was measured by private judgment, ac­cording to the indefinite rule of Scripture, or reason, ortradition. But when his pure and proper divinity hadbeen established on the ruins of Arianism, the faith ofthe Catholics trembled on the edge of a precipice,where it was impossible to recede, dangerous to stand,dreadful to fall; and the manifold inconveniences oftheir creed were aggravated by the sublime characterof their theology. They hesitated to pronounce, thatGod himself, the second person of an equal and con-substantial trinity, was manifested in the flesh ;r that abeing who pervades the universe, had been confined inthe womb of Mary; that his eternal duration had beenmarked by the days, and months, and years, of human


i The heretics abused the passionate exclamation of " My God, my God, whyhast Hum forsaken me!" Rousseau, who has drawn an eloquent, but indecent pa­rallel between Christ and Socrates, forgets that not a word of impatience or de­spair escaped from the mouth of the dying philosopher. In the Messiah, suchsentiments could be only apparent; and such Ul-sounding words are properly ex­plained as the application of a psalm and prophecy.
'This strong expression might be justified by the language of St. Paul; (1 Tirn.iii. 16.) but we are deceived by our modem Bibles. The word 8 (which) was al­tered to flu* (God) at Constantinople in the beginning of the sixth century: thetrue reading, which is visible in the Latin and Syriac versions, still exists in thereasoning of the Greek, as well as of the Latin fathers; and this fraud, with thatof the three witnesses of St. John, is admirably detected by sir Isaac Newton.(See his two letters translated by M. de Missy, in the Journal Britannique, torn.15. p. 148—190. 351—390.) I have weighed the arguments, and may yield tothe authority, of the first of philosophers, who was deeply skilled in critical andtheological studies.'







OCR Output








476 ROMAN EMPIRE.


armies; and this discovery or improvement of the mili­tary art was fortunately reserved for the distressful period,when the degenerate Romans of the east were incapableof contending with the warlike enthusiasm and youthfulvigour of the Saracens. The historian who presumes toanalyze this extraordinary composition, should suspecthis own ignorance, and that of his Byzantine guides, soprone to the marvellous, so careless, and, in this instance,so jealous of the truth. From their obscure, and perhapsfallacious hints, it should seem that the principal ingre­dient of the Greek fire was the naptha,* or liquid bitu­men, a light, tenacious, and inflammable oil,* whichsprings from the earth, and catches fire as soon as it comesin contact with the air. The naptha was mingled, Iknow not by what methods or in what proportions, withsulphur and with the pitch that is extracted from ever­green firs." From this mixture, which produced a thicksmoke and a loud explosion, proceeded a fierce and ob­stinate flame,which not only rose in perpendicular ascent,but likewise burnt with equal vehemence in descent orlateral progress; instead of being extinguished, it wasnourished and quickened, by the element of water; andsand, urine, or vinegar, were the only remedies thatcould damp the fury of this powerful agent, which was


• The naptha, the oleum iucendiarium of, the history of Jerusalem, (Gest. Dei perFrancos, p. 1167.) the oriental fountain of James de Vitry, (lib. 3. c. 84.) is intro­duced on slight evidence and strong probability. Cinnamus (lib. 6. p. Iti5.) callsthe Greek fire m( MnJiaov; and the naptha is known to abound between the Tigrisand the Caspian sea. According to Pliny, (Hist. Natur. 2.109.) it was subservientto the revenge of Medea, and in either etymology the iXaiov Mn.Vt;, or Mr?;.- -,(Procop. de Bell. Gothic lib. 4. c. 11.) may fairly signify this liquid bitumen.
1 On the different sorts of oils and bitumens. See Dr. Watson's (the present bishopof Llandaff's) Chemical Essays, vol. 3. essay 1. a classic book, the best adaptedto infuse the taste and knowledge of chemistry. Tin' less perfect ideas of the an­cients may be found in Strabo (Geograph. lib. 16. p. 1078.) and Pliny. (Hist. Natur.2.108,109-) Huic (Nopt/iff) magna cognatio est ignium, transiliuntque protinus inearn vradecunque visarn. Of our travellers lam best pleased with Otter, (torn. l.p.153—158.)
"Anna Cotnnena has partly drawn aside the curtain. Ar= rut vtiant, «' >XX*rTivafl TOIOUTW )ivfyw( afitflnXwy rovayITai ^axfuov aKauarov. Tflirro JUITA flfwu TfiQsfAersrfliU{3aXXiTai ft; auXiraouf xaXaituov icai tyt^vraTai ttttga TOU vai^orro; Xa0p« Mai ovn%timtvfMTi. (Alexiad. lib. 13. p. 383.) Elsewhere (lib. 11. p. 336.) she mentions theproperty of burning, HUTU TB frpan; ui iif' 'aumyi. Leo, in the nineteenth chapterof his Tactics, (Opera Meursu, torn. 6. p. 813. edit. Lami, Florent. 174A.) speaksof the new invention of vuf pint @pom; «u xumw. These are genuine and Imperialtestimonies.







OCR Output








316 ROMAN EMPIRE.


javelin; two of his teeth were shattered with a stone;yet, in the midst of tumult and dismay, he reproachedthe infidels with the murder of a prophet; and blessedthe friendly hand that stanched his blood, and conveyedhim to a place of safety. Seventy martyrs died for thesins of the people; they fell, said the apostle, in pairs,each brother embracing his lifeless companion:" theirbodies were mangled by the inhuman females of Mecca;and the wife of Abu Sophian tasted the entrails ofHamza, the uncle of Mahomet. They might applaudtheir superstition and satiate their fury; but the Mus­sulmans soon rallied in the field, and the Koreish wantedstrength or courage to undertake the siege of Medina.The na- It was attacked the ensuing year by an army ofthTditch, ten thousand enemies; and this third expeditionA.D. 625. is variously named from the nations, whichmarched under the banner of Abu Sophian, from theditch which was drawn before the city, and a camp ofthree thousand Mussulmans. The prudence of Maho­met declined a general engagement; the valour of Aliwas signalized in single combat; and the war was pro­tracted twenty days, till the final separation of the con­federates. A tempest of wind, rain, and hail, overturnedtheir tents; the private quarrels were fomented by aninsidious adversary; and the Koreish, deserted by theirallies, no longer hoped to subvert the throne, or to checkthe conquests, of their invincible exile.'Mahomet The choice of Jerusalem for the first kebla ofthe"jUews prayer discovers the early propensity of Mahometof Arabia, m favour of the Jews; and happy would it have623-^-627. been for their temporal interest, had they recog­nised, in the Arabian prophet, the hope of Israel and thepromised Messiah. Their obstinacy converted his friend-


• In the third chapter of the Koran (p. 50—53. with Sale's notes), the prophetalleges some poor excuses for the defeat of Ohud.
1 For the detail of the three Koreish wars, of Beder, of Ohud, and of the ditch,peruse Abulfeda, (p. 56—61. 64—69. 73—77.) Gagnier, (torn. 3. p. 23—45. 7O-96.120—139.) with the proper articles of D'Herbelot, and the abridgments ofElmaciu, (Hist. Saracen, p. 6,7.) and Abulpharagius. (Dynast, p. 102.)







OCR Output








04 ROMAN EMPIRE.


4 colleague and a guardian, and he yielded with secretA.D. ess, reluctance to the partition of the empire. Thef senate was summoned to the palace to ratify orattest the association of Heracleonas, the son of Martina:the imposition of the diadem was consecrated by theprayer and blessing of the patriarch; the senators andpatricians adored the majesty of the great emperor' andthe partners of his reign; and, as soon as the doors werethrown open, they were hailed by the tumultuary butA.D. 639, important voice of the soldiers. After an inter-January. yal of £ve months, the pompous ceremonies,which formed the essence of the Byzantine state, werecelebrated in the cathedral and the hippodrome: theconcord of the royal brothers was affectedly displayedby the younger leaning on the arm of the elder; andthe name of Martina was mingled in the reluctant orA.D.641. venal acclamations of the people. HeracliusFeb.ii. survive(J this association about two years; hislast testimony declared his two sons the equal heirs ofthe eastern empire, and commanded them to honourhis widow Martina as their mother and their sove­reign.
Constan- When Martina first appealed on the throngjLplftii, with the name and attributed of royalty, she wasF*i*us*y. checked by a firm, though respectful, opposition;and the dying embers of freedonl Were kindled by thebreath of superstitious prejudice.— We reverence (ex­claimed the voice of a citizen), we reverence the motherof our princes; but to those princes alone our obedience isdue, and Constantine, the elder emperor, is of an age tosustain, in his own hands, the weight of the sceptr'e'. Yoursex is excluded by nature from the toils of government.Row could you combat, how could you answer, the bar-Adrians, who, with hostile or friendly intentions, mayapproach the royal city? May heaven avert from theRoman republic this national disgrace, which would pro­voke the patience of tne slaves of Persia. Martina de­







OCR Output








72 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the orthodox line between the sects of Nestorius andEutyehes; but the unfortunate question of one will oroperation in the two natures of Christ was generatedby their curious leisure. Their proselyte, the emperorHeraclius, was rejected as a Maronite from the wallsof Emesa; he found a refuge in the monastery of hisbrethren; and their theological lessons were repaidwith the gift of a spacious and wealthy domain. Thename and doctrine of this venerable school were pro­pagated among the Greeks and Syrians, and their zealis expressed by Macarius patriarch of Antioch, who de­clared before the synod of Constantinople, that soonerthan subscribe the two wills of Christ, he would submitto be hewn piecemeal, and cast into the sea.' A simi­lar or a less cruel mode of persecution soon convertedthe unresisting subjects of the plain, while the glorioustitle of Mardaites," or rebel, was bravely maintained bythe hardy natives of mount Libanus. John Maron,one of the most learned and popular of the monks, as­sumed the character of patriarch of Antioch; his ne­phew Abraham, at the head of the Maronites, defendedtheir civil and religious freedom against the tyrants ofthe east. The son of the orthodox Constantine pursued,with pio\ls hatred, a people'of soldiers, who mighthave stood the bulwark of his empire against the com­mon foes of Christ and of Rome. An army of Greeksinvaded Syria; the monastery of St. Maron was de­stroyed with fire; the bravest chieftains were betrayedand murdered, and twelve thousand of their followerswere transplanted to the distant frontiers of Armeniaand Thrace. Yet the humble nation of the Maroniteshas survived the empire of Constantinople, and they


 


'(Vmi.il. torn. 7. p. 780. Tin' Wonoihrliti.- cause was supported with firmnesiand subtlety by Coostantiae, a Syrian priest of Apamea. (p. 1040, .v .)
a Theophanes (Chron. p. 29J, 296. 300. 302. 3QC.) and Cedrenus, (p, 437.4W-) rebates the exploits of the Mardaites: tbe nape (t$w4. in Syriac lebellaiit)
trates, from the year 686 to 707, the troubles of, mourn Lib.mus.







OCR Output








222 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the imperial title was the object of his ambition, and aRoman senate had pronounced, that it was the onlyadequate reward of his merit and services.11
The appellation of great has often been be-character stowed and sometimes deserved, but CHARLE-is the only prince in whose favour thenas been indissolubly blended with thename. That name, with the addition of saint,is inserted in the Roman calendar; and the saint, by arare felicity, is crowned with the praises of the histo­rians and philosophers of an enlightened age.0 His realmerit is doubtless enhanced by the barbarism of the na­tion and the times from which he emerged; but the ap­parent magnitude of an object is likewise enlarged by anunequal comparison; and the ruins of Palmyra derive acasual splendour from the nakedness of the surroundingdesert. Without injustice to his fame, I may discern someblemishes in the sanctity and greatness of the restorer ofthe western empire. Of his moral virtues, chastity is notthe most conspicuous ;d but the public happiness couldnot be materially injured'by his nine wives orconcubines,the various indulgence of meaner or more transientamours, the multitude of his bastards whom he bestowedon the church, and the long celibacy and licentious man­ners of his daughters,6 whom the father was suspected


b This great event of the translation or restoration of the empire, is related anddiscussed by Natalis Alexander, (secul. 9. dissert. 1. p 390—397.) Pagi, (torn. 3.p. 418.) Muratori, (Annali d'ltalia, torn. 6. p. 339—352.) Sigonius, (de RcgnoItalia, lib. 4. Opp. torn. '_'. p. 247—351.) Spanheim (de ficta Translatione Imperil),Giannone, (torn. 1. p. 395—405.) St. Marc, (Abr£ge Chonologique.torn. 1. p. 438—450.) Gaillard. (Hist, de Charlemagne, torn. 2. p. 386—446.) Almost all thesemoderns have some religious or national bias.
c By Mably (Observations surl'Histoire de France),Voltaire (Histoire Generale),Robertson, (History of Charles V.) and Montesquieu. (Esprit des Loix,lib. 31.c. 18.) In the year 1785, M. Gaillard published his Histoire de Charlemagne (in fourvols. duodecimo), which I have freely and profitably used. The author is a man ofsense and humanity: and his work is laboured with industry and eloquence. But Ihave likewise examined the original monuments of the reigns of Pepin and Charle­magne, in the fifth volume of the historians of France.
'' The vision of Weltin, composed by a monk, eleven years after the death ofCharlemagne, shews him in purgatory, with a vulture who is perpetually gnawingthe guilty member, while the rest of his body, the emblem of his virtues, is soundand perfect. (See Gaillard, torn. 2. p. 317—360.)
'The marriage of Eginhard with Imma, daughter of Charlemagne, is, in myopinion, sufficiently refuted by the probum and fuipicio that sullied these fair dam­







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 211)


queror himself conformed, with the temper of a states­man, to the various practice of France and Italy. In hisfour pilgrimages or visits to the Vatican, he embracedthe popes in the communion of friendship and piety;knelt before the tomb, and consequently before theimage of the apostle; and joined, without scruple, in allthe prayers and processions of the Roman liturgy.Would prudence or gratitude allow the pontiffs to re­nounce their benefactor? Had they a right to alienatehis gift of the exarchate? Had they power to abolishhis government of Rome? The title of patrician wasbelow the merit and greatness of Charlemagne; and itwas only by reviving the western empire that they couldpay their obligations or secure their establishment. Bythis decisive measure they would finally eradicate theclaims of the Greeks from the debasement of a provin­cial town: the majesty of Rome would be restored: theLatin Christians would be united under a supreme head,in their ancient metropolis; and the conquerors of thewest would receive their crown from the successors ofSt. Peter. The Roman church would acquire a zealousand respectable advocate; and, under the shadow of theCarlovingian power, the bishop might exercise, withhonour and safety, the government of the city.*Coronation Before the ruin of Paganism in Rome, theof Charie- competition for a wealthy bishopric had often
matin'.' as
emperor of been productive of tumult and bloodshed. The


omo 'mi 11 ii*
of the west, people was less numerous, but the times wereA.D. BOO. more savage, the prize more important, and thechair of St. Peter was fiercely disputed by theleading ecclesiastics who aspired to the rank of sovereign.The reign of Hadrian I." surpasses the measure of past


1 Fontanini considers the emperors as no more than the advocates of the church.(advocatus et defcnsor S. R. £. See Ducange, Gloss, l.ai . torn. 1. p. £97.) His an­tagonist Muratori reduces the popes to be no more than the exarchs of the emperor.In the more equitable view of Mosheim, (Institut. Hist. Eccles. p. 264, 265.) theyheld Rome under the empire as the most honourable species of fief or benefice —premantur nocte caliginosa!
• His merits and hopes are summed up in an epitaph of thirty.eight verses, ofwhich Charlemagne declares himself the author. (Concil. torn. 8. p. 520.)







OCR Output








74 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the religion and empire of the Christians. The dis­orders of their country, and their ignorance of theGreek tongue, prevented their clergy from assisting atthe synod of Chalcedon, and they floated eighty-fouryears,b in a state of indifference or suspense, till theirvacant faith was finally occupied by the missionariesof Julian of Halicarnassus,0 who, in Egypt, their com­mon exile, had been vanquished by the arguments orthe influence of his rival Severus, the Monophysite pa­triarch of Antioch. The Armenians alone are thepure disciples of Eutyches, an unfortunate parent, whohas been renounced by the greater part of his spiritualprogeny. They alone persevere in the opinion, thatthe manhood of Christ was created, or existed withoutcreation, of a divine and incorruptible substance. Theiradversaries reproach them with the adoration of a phan­tom; and they retort the accusation, by deriding orexecrating the blasphemy of the Jacobites, who imputeto the Godhead the vile infirmities of the flesh, eventhe natural effects of nutrition and digestion. The re­ligion of Armenia could not derive much glory fromthe learning or the power of its inhabitants. The roy­alty expired with the origin of their schism; and theirChristian kings, who arose and fell in the thirteenthcentury on the confines of Cilicia, were the clients ofthe Latins and the vassals of the Turkish sultan of Ico-nium. The helpless nation has seldom been permittedto enjoy the tranquillity of servitude. From the ear­liest period to the present hour, Armenia has been thetheatre of perpetual war; the lands between Tauris and


Christ, de 1'Ethiope ct de 1'Armenie, p. 269—402.) He refers to the great Arme­nian History of Galanus, (3 vols. in folio, Rome, 1650—1661.) and commends thestate of Armenia in the third volume of the Nouveaux Memoires des Missions duLevant. The work of a Jesuit must have sterling merit when it is praised by LaCroze.
b The schism of the Armenians is placed eighty-four years after the council ofChalcedon. (Pagi, Critica, ad A. D. 535.) It was consummated at the end ofseventeen years; and it is from the year of Christ 552 that we date the era of theArmenians. (1'Art de verifier les Dates, p. 35.)
•' The sentiments and success of Julian of Halicarnassus may be seen in Libe-ratus, (Brev. c. 19.) Benaudot, (Hist. Patriarch, Alei. p. 132—303.) and Asse-mannus. ( Bibliot. Orient, torn. 2. Dissertat. de Monophysitis, c. 8. p. 286.)







OCR Output








246 ROMAN EMPIRE.


and as often as the bell was rung, or the standard8erected, the gates of the city poured forth a numerousand intrepid band, whose zeal in their own cause wassoon guided by the use and discipline of arms. Atthe foot of these popular ramparts, the pride of theCaesars was overthrown; and the invincible genius ofliberty prevailed over the two Frederics, the greatestprinces of the middle age: the first, superior perhapsin military prowess; the second, who undoubtedly ex­celled in the softer accomplishments of peace andlearning.
Ambitious of restoring the honours of the pur-


A.D. 1152 pie, Frederic I. invaded the republic of Lorn--bardy, with the arts of a statesman, the valourof a soldier, and the cruelty of a tyrant. The recentdiscovery of the Pandects had renewed a science mostfavourable to despotism; and his venal advocates pro­claimed the emperor the absolute master of the lives andproperties of his subjects. His royal prerogatives, in aless odious sense, were acknowledged in the diet ofRoncaglia; and the revenue of Italy was fixed at thirtythousand pounds of silver,11 which were multiplied toan indefinite demand, by the rapine of the fiscal officers.The obstinate cities were reduced by the terror or forceof his arms; his captives were delivered to the execu­tioner, or shot from his military engines; and, after thesiege and surrender of Milan, the buildings of thatstately capital were rased to the ground; three hundredhostages were sent into Germany, and the inhabitantswere dispersed in four villages, under the yoke of theinflexible conqueror.' But Milan soon rose from herashes; and the league of Lombardy was cemented by


c The Lombards invented and used the cuneinm, a standard planted on a car orwaggon, drawn by a team of oxen. (Ducange, torn. 2. p. 194, 195. Muratori,Antiquitat. torn. X. dis. 36. p. 489 — 493.)
•• Gunther Ligurinus, lib. 8. 584, et seq. apud Schmidt, torn. S. p. 399.
1 Solus imperator faciem suam firmavit ut petrarn. (Bucard. de Excidio Mcdio-lani, Script , Ital. torn. 6. p. 917.) This volume of Muratori contains tbe originalsof the history of Frederic I. which must be compared with due regard to the cir­cumstances and prejudices of each German or Lombard writer.







OCR Output








524 ROMAN EMPIRE.


vernment were reserved for local services or privatemagnificence. Instead of a regular supply of men andmoney, the successors of the prophet were flattered withthe ostentatious gift of an elephant, or a cast of hawks,a suit of silk hangings, or some pounds of musk andamber.1
( After the revolt of Spain, from the temporalpendent and spiritual supremacy of the Abbassides, theynasues' first symptons of disobedience broke forth in theprovince of Africa. Ibrahim, the son of Aglab, the lieu­tenant of the vigilant and rigid Harun, bequeathed toThe A la- ^e dynasty of the Aglabites the inheritance ofbites, A.D. his name and power. The indolence or policyof the caliphs dissembled the injury and loss,nd pursued only with poison the founder of the829^907 Edrisites,™ who erected the kingdom and city ofThe Tahe- Fez on the shores of the western ocean." In theA. D, east, the first dynasty was that of the Taherites,0813-872. ^ p0sterity Of the valiant Taher, who, in the
civil wars of the sons of Harun, had served with toomuch zeal and success the cause of Almamon, theyounger brother. He was sent into honourable exile,to command on the banks of the Oxus; and the inde­pendence of his successors, who reigned in Chorasan tilltill the fourth generation, was palliated by their modest


1 The dynasties of the Arabian empire may be studied in the Annals of Elmacin •Abulpharagius, and Abulfeda, under the proper yeats; in the dictionary of d'Her-belot, under the proper names. The tables of M. de Guignes (Hist, des Huns, torn.1.) exhibit a general chronology of the east, interspersed with some historicalanecdotes; but his attachment to national blood has sometimes confounded lheorder of time and plaoe.
'" The Algabites and Edrisites are the professed subjects of M. de CaiJonne.(Hist. d'Afrique et de 1' Espagne sous la Domination des Aiabes, torn. 2. p. 1—63.
° To escape the reproach of error, I must criticise the inaccuracies of M. deGuignes (torn. 1. p. 359.) concerning the Edriaites. 1. The dynasty and city of Fezcould not be founded in the year of the Hegira 173, since the founder was a potf-humous child of a descendant of Ali, who fled from Mecca in the year 168. 9. Thisfounder, Edris, the son of Edris, instead of living to the improbable age of one hun­dred and twenty years, A. 11. 313, died A. H. 214, in the prime of manhood. 3.Th»dynasty ended A. H. 307, twenty-three years sooner than it is fixed by the historianof the Huns. See the accurate Annals of Abulfeda. p. 158,159. 185. 258.
0 The dynasties of the Taherites and Soffarides, with the rise of that of the Sa-manides, are described in the original history and Latin version of Mirchond ; yetthe most interesting facts had already been drained by the diligence of M.d'Her-belot.







OCR Output








82 ROMAN EMPIRE.


was received and dismissed with honour; but when h«accused the heresy and treason of the Egyptians, thenegro convert was instructed to reply that he wouldnever abandon his brethren, the true believers, to the per­secuting ministers of the synod of Chalcedon.p Duringseveral ages, the bishops of Nubia were named andconsecrated by the Jacobite patriarch of Alexandria: aslate as the twelfth century, Christianity prevailed; andsome rites, some ruins, are still visible in the savagetowns of Sennaar and Dongola.q But the Nubians atlength executed their threats of returning to the worshipof idols; the climate required the indulgence of poly­gamy, and they have finally preferred the triumph ofthe Koran to the abasement of the cross. A metaphy­sical religion may appear too refined for the capacityof the negro race: yet a black or a parrot might betaught to repeat the wards of the Chalcedon or Mono-physite creed.
Church of Christianity was more deeply rooted in thejftTsso'Abyssinian empire; and, although the corre-**• spondence has been sometimes interrupted aboveseventy or a hundred years, the mother-church of Alex­andria retains her colony in a state of perpetual pupil­age. Seven bishops once composed the./Ethiopic synod:had their number amounted to ten, they might haveelected an independent primate; and one of their kingswas ambitious of promoting his brother to the eeclest-astical throne. But the event was foreseen, the increasewas denied; the episcopal office has been graduallyconfined to the abuna' the head and author of the Abys-


P Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, torn. 1. p. 329.
i The Christianity of the Nubians, A. D. 1153, it attested by the slicrif at K.drisi,falsely described under the name of the Nubian geographer, (p. 18.) who repre­sents them as a nation of Jacobites. The rays of historical light that twinkle inthe history of Renaudot, (p. 178. 220. 224. 281. 286. 405. 434.451. 464.) are allprevious to this era. See the modern state in the Lettres Edificantes, (Recueil 4.)and Busching. (torn. 9. p. 152—159. par Berenger.)
'The abuna is improperly dignified by the Latins with the title of patriarch.The Abyssinians acknowledge only the four patriarchs, and their chief is no morethan a metropolitan, or national primate. (Ludolph. Hint. tEthiopic. et Comment,lib. 3. c. 7.) The seven bishops of Renaudot, (p. 511.) who existed A. D. 118!,are unknown to the historian.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 17


Thaumasius the wonderful; his tomb was decoratedwith the trophies of martyrdom, and the patriarch as­cended the pulpit, to celebrate the magnanimity of anassassin and a rebel. Such honours might incite thefaithful to combat and die under the banners of the saint;and he soon prompted, or accepted, the sacrifice of avirgin, who professed the religion of the Greeks, andcultiviated the friendship of Orestes. Hypatia, thedaughter of Theon the mathematician,11 was initiatedin her father's studies: her learned comments haveelucidated the geometry of Apollonius and Diophantus,and she publicly taught, both at Athens and Alexan­dria, the philosophy of Plato and Aristotle. In thebloom of beauty, and in the maturity of wisdom, themodest maid refused her lovers and instructed her dis­ciples; the persons most illustrious for their rank ormerit were impatient to visit the female philosopher;and Cyril beheld, with jealous eye, the gorgeous trainof horses and slaves who crowded the door of her aca­demy. A rumour was spread among the Christians, thatthe daughter of Theon was the only obstacle to the re­conciliation of the prefect and the archbishop; and thatobstacle was speedily removed. On a fatal day, in theholy season of Lent, Hypatia was torn from her chariot,stripped naked, dragged to the church, and inhumanlybutchered by the hands of Peter the reader, and atroop of savage and merciless fanatics: her flesh wasscraped from her bones with sharp oyster-shells,0 andher quivering limbs were delivered to the flames. Thejust progress of inquiry and punishment was stopped


'• For Theon, and his daughter Hypatia, see Fabricius, Bibliothec. torn. 8. p.910,311. Her article in the Lexicon of Suidas is curious and original. Itesvchins(Meursii Opera, torn. 7. p. 295, 296.) observes, that she was prosecuted em ruywnpg»xx»w« 9-iKfiay; and an epigram in the Greek Anthology (lib. 1. c. 76. p. 159.edit. Mni.la.ii celebrates her knowledge and eloquence. She is honourably men­tioned (Epist. 10.15,16. 33—80. 124. 135. 153.) by her friend and disciple thephilosophic bishop Synesius.
c Oc-rfcLnut aniXn, tuu /ulXnJov }UKTwoo-am;, &c. Oyster-shells were plentifullystrewed on the sea-beach before the Casareurn. I may therefore prefer the lite­ral sense, without rejecting the metaphorical version of tegulae, tiles, which is usedby M. de Valois. I am ignorant, and the assassins were probably regardless,whether their victim waft yet alive.
VOL. VI. C







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 437


Hassan, who had invested the slight and insufficient ram­part of their camp. Whatever yet remained of Carthage,was delivered to the flames, and the colony of Didoy andCaesar lay desolate above two hundred years, till a part,perhaps a twentieth, of the old circumference was repeo-pled by the first of the Fatimite caliphs. In the begin-ing of the sixteenth century, the second capital of thewest was represented by a mosch, a college without stu­dents, twenty-five or thirty shops, and the huts of fivehundred peasants, who, in their abject poverty, displayedthe arrogance of the Punic senators. Even that paltryvillage was swept away by the Spaniards whomCharles V. had stationed in the fortress of the Goletta.The ruins of Carthage have perished; and the place mightbe unknown if some broken arches of an aqueduct didnot guide the footsteps of the inquisitive traveller.2Final con- The Greeks were expelled, but the ArabiansAfrica* were not yet masters of the country. In theA. D. 698 interior provinces the Moors or Berbers,* sofeeble under the first Caesars, so formidable tothe Byzantine princes, maintained a disorderly resistanceto the religion and power of the successors of Mahomet.


J According to Solinus, (lib. 27. p. 36. edit , Salmas.) the Carthage of Dido stoodeither six hundred and seventy-seven or seven hundred and thirty-seven years; avarious reading, which proceeds from the difference of AlSS.or editions. (Sahnas.Plinian. Exercit. torn. 1. p. 228.) The former of these accounts, which gives eighthundred and twenty-three years before Christ, is more consistent with the well-weighed testimony of Velleius Paterculus; but the latter is preferred by our chro-nologists (Marsham, Canon. Chron. p. 398.) as more agreeable to the Hebrew andTynan annals.
* Leo African, fol. 71. verso, 72. recto. Mannol, torn. 2. p. 445—447. Shaw, p. 80.
• The history of the word Barbur may be classed under four periods.—1. Inthe time of Homer, when the Greeks and Asiatics might probably use a commonidiom, the imitative sound of Barbar was applied to the ruder tribes, whose pro­nunciation was most harsh, whose grammar was most defective. Kapi; utc&ifi$xm.(Iliad 2. 867. with the Oxford scholiast, Clarke's Annotation, and HenryStephens' Greek Thesaurus, torn. 1. p. 720.) 2. From the time, at least, of He-Todotus, it was extended to all the nations who were strangers to the language andmanners of the Greeks, 3. In the age of Plautus, the Romans submitted to theinsult (Pompeius Festus, lib. 2. p. 48. edit. Dacier), and freely gave themselvesthe name of barbarians. They insensibly claimed an exemption for Italy, and hersubject provinces; and at length removed the disgraceful appellation to the savageor hostile nations beyond the pale of the empire. 4. In every sense it was due tothe Moors; the familiar word was borrowed from_ the Latin provincials by theArabian conquerors, and ha* j'tK''y rettlrd as n local denomination (Barbaty) alongthe northern coast of Africa.







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 445


but Alaric would have blushed at the sight of his un­worthy successor, sustaining on his head a diadem ofpearls, encumbered with a flowing robe of gold and silkenembroidery, and reclining on a litter, or car of ivory,drawn by two white mules. Notwithstanding the va­lour of the Saracens, they fainted under the weight ofmultitudes, and the plain of Xeres was overspread withsixteen thousand of their dead bodies. "My brethren(said Tarik to his surviving companions), the enemy isbefore you, the sea is behind; whither would ye fly?Follow your general; I am resolved either to lose mylife, or to trample on the prostrate king of the Romans."Besides the resource of despair, he confided in thesecret correspondence and nocturnal interviews of countJulian, with the sons and the brother of Witiza. The twoprinces and the archbishop of Toledo occupied the mostimportant post: their well-timed defection broke theranks of the Christians; each warrior was prompted byfear or suspicion to consult his personal safety; and theremains of the Gothic army were scattered or destroyedin the flight and pursuit of the three following days.Amidst the general disorder, Roderic started from hiscar, and mounted Orelia, the fleetest of his horses;but he escaped from a soldier's death to perish moreignobly in the waters of the Boetis or Guadalquivir. Hisdiadem, his robes, and his courser, were found on thebank; but as the body of the Gothic prince was lost inthe waves, the pride and ignorance of the caliph musthave been gratified with some meaner head, which wasexposed in triumph before the palace of Damascus."And such (continues a valiant historian of the Arabs) isthe fate of those kings who withdraw themselves from afield of battle."11
P Id sane infortunii icgibus pedem ex acie referentibus sape contingit. Ben Hazilof Grenada, in Bibliot. Arabico-Hispana, torn. 2. p. 327. Some credulous Spa­niards believe that king Roderic, or Koderigo, escaped to a hermit's cell; andothers that he was cast alive into a tub full of serpents, from whence he ex­claimed with a lamentable voice, "They devour the part with which I have sogrievously sinned." (Don Quixote, pan 2. lib. y. c. If)







OCR Output








22 ROMAN EMPIRE.


errors and passions of a mortal; and his twelve11 anathe­mas still torture the orthodox slaves, who adore the me­mory of a saint, without forfeiting their allegiance tothe synod of Chalcedon. These bold assertions are in­delibly tinged with the colours of the Apollinarianheresy; but the serious, and perhaps the sincere, pro­fessions of Nestorius, have satisfied the wiser and lesspartial theologians of the present times/
Yet neither the emperor nor the primate ofthe east were disposed to obey the mandate ofa" Italian priest; and a synod of the Catholic,June— or rather of the Greek church, was unanimous-
October*
ly demanded, as the sole remedy that couldappease or decide this ecclesiastical quarrel.' Ephesus,on all sides accessible by sea and land, was chosen forthe place, the festival of Pentecost for the day, of themeeting; a writ of summons was dispatched to eachmetropolitan, and a guard was stationed to protect andconfine the fathers till they should settle the mysteriesof Heaven, and the faith of the earth. Nestoriusappeared, not as a criminal, but as a judge; he depend­ed rather on the weight than the number of his pre­lates, and his sturdy slaves from the baths of Zeuxippuswere armed for every service of injury or defence. Buthis adversary Cyril was more powerful in the weaponsboth of the flesh and of the spirit. Disobedient to theletter, or at least to the meaning, of the royal summons,


1 Concil. torn. 3. p. 943. They have never been directly approved by the church.(Tillemont, Mern. Eccles. torn. 14. p. 368—372.) I almost pity the agony of rageand sophistry. with which Pctavius seems to be agitated in the sixth book of hisDogmata Theologies.
'Such as the rational Basnage, (ad torn. 1. Variar. Lection. Canisii in Pnrfat.c. t. p. 11—23.) and La Croze, the universal scholar. (Christianisme dee Indes,torn. 1. p. 16—20. "De 1'Ethiope, p. 26, 27. Thesaur. Epist. p. 176, &c. 283. 285.)His free sentence is confirmed by that of his friends Jablonski (Thesaur. Epist.torn. 1. p. 193—201.) and Mosheim, (idem, p. 304. Nestorium crimine caruisseest et mea sententia); and three more respectable judges will not easily be found.Asseman, a learned and modest slave, can hardly discern (Bibliothec. Orient,torn. 4. p. 190—224.) the guilt and error of the Nestorians.
•The origin and progress of the Nestorian controversy till the synod of Ephesus,may be found in Socrates, (lib. 7. c. 32.) Evagrius, (lib. 1.e. 1,2.) Liberatus,(Brev. c. 1—4.) the original Acts, (Condi, torn. 3. p. 551—991, edit. Veniac,1728.) the Annuls of Baronius and Pagi, and the faithful collections of Tillemont.(Mern. Eccles. torn. 14. p. 283—377.)







OCR Output








200 ROMAN EMPIRE.


guarded the patrimony of St. Peter from the calamitiesof war; if the Christians, who visited the holy thresh­old, would have sheathed their swords in the presenceof the apostle and his successor. But this mystic circlecould have been traced only by the wand of a legislatorand a sage; this pacific system was incompatible withthe zeal and ambition of the popes; the Romans werenot addicted, like the inhabitants of Elis, to the inno­cent and placid labours of agriculture; and the barbari­ans of Italy, though softened by the climate, were farbelow the Grecian states in the institutions of publicand private life. A memorable example of repentanceand piety was exhibited by Liutprand, king of theLombards. In arms, at the gate of the Vatican, the con­queror listened to the voice of Gregory II.b withdrewhis troops, resigned his conquests, respectfully visitedthe church of St. Peter, and after performing his devo­tions, offered his sword and dagger, his cuirass andmantle, his silver cross and bis crown of gold, on thetomb of the apostle. But this religious fervour was theillusion, perhaps the artifice, of the moment; the senseof interest is strong and lasting; the love of arms andrapine was congenial to the Lombards; and both theprince and people were irresistibly tempted by the dis­orders of Italy, the nakedness of Rome, and the unwar-like profession of her new chief. On the first edicts ofthe emperor, they declared themselves the champions ofthe holy images; Liutprand invaded the province ofRomagna, which had already assumed that distinctiveappellation; the Catholics of the exarchate yielded with­out reluctance to his civil and military power; and aforeign enemy was introduced for the first time into theimpregnable fortress of Ravenna. That city and fortresswere speedily recovered by the active diligence and ma­ritime forces of the Venetians; and those faithful sub-edition in duodecimo), and the judicious reflections of Polybius. (torn. 1. lib. 4.p. 466. edit. Gionov.)


b The speech of Gregory to the Lombard is finely composed by Sigonius, (deRpgno lialnr, lib. 3. Opera, torn. '-'. p. 173.) who imitates the licence and the•pint of Sallust or Liw.







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 307


and promises from their hands. In this eventful momentthe lance of an Arab might have changed the history ofthe wor.ld. The flight of the prophet from Mecca toMedina has fixed the memorable era of the Hegira,cwhich, at the end of twelve centuries, still discriminatesthe lunar years of the Mahometan nations.dReceived The religion of the Koran might have perish-rfMediaa e(^ in *ts cradle, nad not Medina embraced withA.D. eza. faith and reverence the holy outcasts of Mecca.Medina, or the city, known under the name of Yathreb,before it was sanctified by the throne of the prophet, wasdivided between the tribes of the Charegites and theAwsites, whose hereditary feud was rekindled by theslightest provocations: two colonies of Jews, who boasteda sacerdotal race, were their humble allies, and withoutconverting the Arabs, they introduced the taste of scienceand religion, which distinguished Medina as the cityof the book. Some of her noblest citizens, in a pil­grimage to the Caaba, were converted by the preachingof Mahomet; on their return they diffused the belief ofGod and his prophet, and the new alliance was ratifiedby their deputies in two secret and nocturnal interviewson a hill in the suburbs of Mecca. In the first, ten Cha­regites and two Awsites united in faith and love, pro­tested in the name of their wives, their children, andtheir absent brethren, that they would for ever professthe-creed, and observe the precepts, of the Koran. Thesecond was a political association, the first vital spark ofthe empire of the Saracens.0 Seventy-three men andtwo women of Medina held a solemn conference with


c The Hegira was instituted by Omar, the second caliph, in imitation of the earof the martyrs of the Christians; (d'Herbelot, p. 444.) and properly commencedfdzty-eight days before the flight of Mahomet, with the first of Moharren, or firstday of that Arabian year, which coincides with Friday, July 16, A. D. 629. (Abul­feda, Vit. Moharn. c. 22, 23. p. 45—50. and Greave's edition of tiling BeigV.Epocha e Arabum, &c. c. 1. p. 8. 10, &c.)
1 Mahomet's life, from his mission to the Hegira, may be found in Abulfeda(p. 14—45.) and Gagnier. (torn. 1. 134—251. 342—383.) The legend fromp. 187—264. is vouched by Al Jannabi, and disdained by Abulfeda.
'The triple inauguration of Mahomet is described by Abulfeda (p. 3O. 33.80. i and Gagnier. (torn. 1. p. 349, &c. torn. 1. p. 223, 4c.)


x 2







OCR Output








70 ROMAN EMPIRE.


asserted, as they now assert, their indefeasible right tothe title, the rank, and the prerogatives, of the patriarchof Antioch: under the milder yoke of the infidels, theyreside about a league from Merdin, in the pleasant mo­nastery of Zapharan, which they have embellished withcells, aqueducts, and plantations. The secondary, thoughhonourable, place is filled by the maphrian, who, in hisstation at Mosul itself, defies the Nestorian Catholic,with whom he contests the supremacy of the east. Un­der the patriarch and the maphrian, one hundred andfifty archbishops and bishops have been counted in thedifferent ages of the Jacobite church; but the order ofthe hierarchy is relaxed or dissolved, and the greaterpart of their diocesses is confined to the neighbourhoodof the Euphrates and the Tigris. The cities of Aleppoand Amida, which are often visited by the patriarch,contain some wealthy merchants and industrious me­chanics, but the multitude derive their scanty sustenancefrom their daily labour: and poverty, as well as super­stition, may impose their excessive fasts,—five annuallents, during which both the clergy and laity abstainnot only from flesh or eggs, but even from the taste ofwine, of oil, and of fish. Their present numbers are es­teemed from fifty to fourscore thousand souls, the rem-nantofa populous church, which has gradually decreasedundertheoppression of twelve centuries. Yetin that longperiod, some strangers of merit have been convertedto the Monophysite faith, and a Jew was the fatherof Abulpharagius,p primate of the east, so truly eminentboth in his life and death. In his life, he was an elegantwriter of the Syriac and Arabic tongues, a poet, physi­cian, and historian, a subtle philosopher, and a mode­rate divine. In his death, his funeral was attended byhis rival the Nestorian patriarch, with a train of Greeks
P The account of his person and writings is perhaps the most curious article inthe Bibliotheca of Assemannus. (torn. 2. p. 244—321, under the name of Grego-rius Bar-Hebraus.) La Crote (Christianiime d'Ethiope, p. 53—63.) ridicules theprejudice of the Spaniards against the Jewish blood, which secretly defiles theirchurch and state.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 215


rasius, and ratified by the acclamations and subscriptionsof three hundred and fifty bishops. They unanimouslypronounced, that the worship of images is agreeable toScripture and reason, to the fathers and councils of thechurch: but they hesitate whether that worship be rela­tive or direct; whether the godhead, and the figure ofChrist, be entitled to the same mode of adoration. Ofthis second Nicene council, the acts are still extant; acuriousmonumentof superstition and ignorance; of false­hood and folly. I shall only notice the judgment of thebishops, on the comparative merit of image-worship andmorality. A monk had concluded a truce with the de­mon of fornication, on condition of interrupting his dailyprayers to a picture that hung in his cell. His scruplesprompted him to consult the abbot. Rather than ab­stain from adoring Christ and his mother in their holyimages, it would be better (replied the casuist) to enterevery brothel, and visit every prostitute, in the city.1Final esta- For the honour of orthodoxy, at least the or-ofUrT""* thodoxy of the Roman church, it is somewhat>7 **«I unfortunate, that the two princes who convenedTheodora, the two councils of Nice, are both stained with'D'842'the blood of their sons. The second of theseassemblies was approved and rigorously executed bythe despotism of Irene; and she refused her adver­saries the toleration which at first she had granted toher friends. During the five succeeding reigns, a pe­riod of thirty-eight years, the contest was maintained,with unabated rage and various success, between theworshippers and the breakers of the images; but I amnot inclined to pursue with minute diligence the repe­tition of the same events. Nicephorus allowed a ge-


were persuaded by the Catholics to represent the oriental patriarchs. This cu­rious anecdote is revealed by Theodore Studitei, (epist. 1. 38. in Sirmond. Opp.torn. 5. p. 1519.) one of the warmest Iconoclasts of the nge.
1 Zu/tKpif ii Ji ffoi ff' xaraXifl-liv iv TTI TroXu Tai/rjl Trofttiov ii; o fjtn n '' • ,, *t !w aymffn
TO VftffKVnn TOT *'-;..: I fi i; Hal dlflV !,:.-:. XplCTOV {.'.;'• THf tljaf aUTOU fbUlTpo? IV IIXoW.
These visits could not be innocent, since the Aai^uw Trogviiac (the demon of forni­cation) roXf/ufi >i avroi . . . tv [JUf wi if ITTWIITO aua-rtf a-^atfa, &c. Actio 1. p.901. Actio5.p. 1031.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVJI. 39


ed to the flames, and his ashes to the wind: and thedeed was inspired by the vision of a pretended angel:an ambitious monk, who, under the name of Timothythe Cat,* succeeded to the place and opinions of Dios-corus. This deadly superstition was inflamed, on eitherside, by the principle and the practice of retaliation:in the pursuit of a metaphysical quarrel, many thou­sands* were slain, and the Christians of every degree•were deprived of the substantial enjoyments of sociallife, and of the invisible gifts of baptism and the holycommunion. Perhaps an extravagant fable of the timesmay conceal an allegorical picture of these fanatics,who tortured each other, and themselves. Under theconsulship of Venantius and Celer (says a grave bishop),the people of Alexandria, and all Egypt, were seized witha strange and diabolical frenzy: great and small, slavesand freemen, monks and clergy, the natives of the land,who opposed the synod of Chalcedon, lost their speechand reason, barked like dogs, and tore with their ownteeth, the Jlesh from their hands and arms.bThe Heno- The disorders of thirty years at length pro-Zcno °f duced the famous HENOTICON" of the emperorA.D. 482. Zeno, which in his reign, and in that of Anastasius,was signed byall the bishopsof the east,under the penaltyof degradation and exile, if they rejected or infringed thissalutary and fundamental law. The clergy may smile orgroan at the presumption of alayman who defines the arti­cles of faith: yet if he stoops to the humiliating task, hismind is less infected by prejudice or interest, and the au-


, from Ins nocturnal expeditions. In darkness and disguise he creptroond the cells of the monastery, and whispered the revelation to his slumberingbrethren. (Theodcr. Lector, lib. 1.)
* C-JVCK; ft T:?./xnflrvo( iuv£fou( al/uarw tfXufllf jUOXlff&HTdl fJtr, fiuvtH ruv yn aXXa JUJaurov Tar acp». Such is the hyperbolic language of the Henoticon. •
b See the Chronicle of Victor Tunnensis, in the Lectiones Antiquae of Canisius,repnblished by Basnage, torn. 1. p. 326.
c The Henoticon is transcribed by Evagrius, (lib. 3. c. 13.) and translated byLiberatus. (Brev. c. 18.) Pagi (Critica, torn. 2. p. 414.) and Asseman (Bibliot.Orient, torn. 1. p. 343.) are satisfied that it is free from heresy; but Petaviua( Uopnat. Theolog. torn. 5. lib. 1. c. 13. p. 40.) most unaccountably affirms Chal-cedonensem ascivit. An adversary would prove that he had never read theHenoticou.







OCR Output








250 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Such anarchy was the inevitable consequence of thelaws and manners of Europe; and the kingdoms ofFrance and Italy were shivered into fragments by theviolence of the same tempest. But the Italian citiesand the French vassals were divided and destroyed,while the union of the Germans has produced, underthe name of an empire, a great system of a federativerepublic. In the frequent, and at last the perpetual,institution of diets, a national spirit was kept alive, andthe powers of a common legislature are still exercisedby the three branches or .colleges of the electors, theprinces, and the free and imperial cities of Germany.I. Seven of the most powerful feudatories were per­mitted to assume, with a distinguished name and rank,the exclusive privilege of choosing the Roman emperor;and these electors were the king of Bohemia, the dukeof Saxony, the margrave of Brandenburgh, the countpalatine of the Rhine, and the three archbishops ofMentz, of Treves, and of Cologne. II. The college ofprinces and prelates purged themselves of a promiscuousmultitude: they reduced to four representative votes,the long series of independent counts, and excludedthe nobles or equestrian order, sixty thousand of whom,as in the Polish diets, had appeared on horseback, inthe field of election. III. The pride of birth and do­minion, of the sword and the mitre, wisely adopted thecommons as the third branch of the legislature, and, inthe progress of society, they were introduced about thesame era into the national assemblies of France, Eng­land, and Germany. The Hanseatic league command­ed the trade and navigation of the north: the confede­rates of the Rhine secured the peace and intercourse ofthe inland country; the influence of the cities has beenadequate to their wealth and policy, and their negativestill invalidates the acts of the two superior colleges ofelectors and princes.'


1 In the immense labyrinth of the juspublicam of Germany, I most either quoteone writer or a thousand. and I had rather trust to one faithful guide, than tran­scribe, on credit, a multitude of aamcs and passages. That guide ia M. Pfeffol, the







OCR Output








443 ROMAN EMPIRE.


sovereign in arms, he sought the aid of a foreign power;and his rash invitation of the Moors and Arabs producedthe calamities of eight hundred years. In his epistles,or in a personal interview, he revealed the wealth andnakedness of his country; the weakness of an unpopularprince; the degeneracy of an effeminate people. TheGoths were no longer the victorious barbarians who hadhumbled the pride of Rome, despoiled the queen ofnations, and penetrated from the Danube to the Atlanticocean. Secluded from the world by the Pyrenneanmountains, the successors of Alaric had slumbered in along peace; the walls of the cities were mouldered intodust: the youth had abandoned the exercise of arms;and the presumption of their ancient renown would ex­pose them in a field of battle to the first assault of theinvaders. The ambitious Saracen was fired by the easeand importance of the attempt; but the execution wasdelayed till he had consulted the commander of thefaithful; and his messenger returned with the permis­sion of Walid to annex the unknown kingdoms of thewest to the religion and throne of the caliphs. In hisresidence of Tangier, Musa, with secrecy and caution,continued his correspondence and hastened his prepa­rations. But the remorse of the conspirators was sooth­ed by the fallacious assurance, that he should contenthimself with the glory and spoil, without aspiring toestablish the Moslems beyond the sea that separatesAfrica from Europe.'


1 The orientals, Elmacin, Abulpharagius, Abulfeda, pass over the conquest ofSpain in silence, or with a single word. The text of Novairi, and the other Ara­bian writers, is represented, though with some foreign alloy, by M. de Cardooue.(Hist, de 1'Afrique et de 1'Espagne sous la Domination des Arabee, Paris, 1765,three vols. in duodecimo, torn. 1.p. 55—114.) and more concisely by M. deGuignes. (Hist, des Huns, torn. 1. p. 34?—350.) The librarian of the Escurialhas not satisfied my hopes: yet he appears to have searched with diligence hisbroken materials; and the history of the conquest is illustrated by some valuablefragments of the genuine Raiis,(who wrote at Corduba, A.H. 300.) of Ben Hazil,&c. See Bibliot. Arabico-Hispana, torn. ?. p. 32. 105, 106. 182. 352. 319—•333.On this occasion, the industry of Pagi has been aided by the Arabic learningof his friend the abb£ de Longuerue, and to their joint labours I am deeplyindebted.







OCR Output








112 ROMAN EMPIRE.


racter he ascended his hereditary throne, and dis­missed Irene to a life of solitude and repose. Buther haughty spirit condescended to the arts of dis­simulation: she flattered the bishops and eunuchs, re­vived the filial tenderness of the prince, regained hisconfidence, and betrayed his cre'dulity. The characterof Constantine was not destitute of sense or spirit; buthis education had been studiously neglected; and hisambitious mother exposed to the public censure thevices which she had nourished, and the actions which shehad secretly advised: his divorce and second marriageoffended the prejudices'of the clergy, and by his impru­dent rigour he forfeited the attachment of the Armenianguards. A powerful conspiracy was formed for therestoration of Irene; and the secret, though widelydiffused, was faithfully kept above eight months, tillthe emperor, suspicious of his danger, escaped fromConstantinople, with the design of appealing to theprovinces and armies. By this hasty flight, the em­press was left on the brink of the precipice; yet beforeshe implored the mercy of her son, Irene addressed aprivate epistle to the friends whom she had placedabout his person, with a menace, that unless they ac­complished, she would reveal their treason. Theirfear rendered them intrepid; they seized the emperoron the Asiatic shore, and he was transported to thePorphyry apartment of the palace where he had firstseen the light. In the mind of Irene, ambition hadstifled every sentiment of humanity and nature; and itwas decreed in her bloody council that Constantineshould be rendered incapable of the throne: her emis­saries assaulted the sleeping prince, and stabbed theirdaggers with such violence and precipitation into hiseyes, as if they meant to execute a mortal sentence. Anambiguous passage of Theophanes persuaded the an­nalist of the church that death was the immediate con­sequence of this barbarous execution. The Catholics







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 231


to the riches of the south. The three and thirty cam­paigns laboriously consumed in the woods and morassesof Germany, would have sufficed to assert the amplitudeof his title by the expulsion of the Greeks from Italyand the Saracens from Spain. The weakness of theGreeks would have ensured an easy victory: and theholy crusade against the Saracens would have beenprompted by glory and revenge, and loudly justified byreligion and policy. Perhaps, in his expeditions beyondthe Rhine and the Elbe, he aspired to save his monarchyfrom the fate of the Roman empire, to disarm the ene­mies of civilized society, and to eradicate the seed offuture emigrations. But it has been wisely observed,that in a light of precaution, all conquest must be in­effectual, unless it could be universal; since the increas­ing circle must be involved in a larger sphere of hosti­lity.2 The subjugation of Germany withdrew the veilwhich had so long concealed the continent or island ofScandinavia from the knowledge of Europe, and awaken­ed the torpid courage of their barbarous natives. Thefiercest of the Saxon idolaters escaped from the Christiantyrant to their brethren of the north; the ocean andMediterranean were covered with their piratical fleets;and Charlemagne beheld with a sigh the destructiveprogress of the Normans, who, in less than seventyyears, precipitated the fall of his race and monarchy.His sue- Had the pope and the Romans revived thecessom, primitive constitution, the titles of emperor and814—887, Augustus were conferred on Charlemagne for
the term of his life; and his successors, on each; vacancy, must have ascended the throne by a
formal or tacit election. But the association ofhis son Lewis the Pious asserts the independent rightof monarchy and conquest, and the emperor seems on


1 Gaillard, torn. 2. p. 361—365. 471—476. 494. I have borrowed his judiciousremarks on Charlemagne's plan of conquest, and the judicious distinction of hisenemies of Che first and the second enceinte, (torn. 2. p. 184.509, &c.)







OCR Output








238 ROMAN EMPIRE.


rejected by the applause or clamour of the Romanpeople. But the election was imperfect; nor couldthe pontiff be legally consecrated till the emperor, theadvocate of the church, had graciously signified hisapprobation and consent The royal commissionerexamined, on the spot, the form and freedom of theproceedings: nor was it, till after a previous scrutinyinto the qualifications of the candidates that he acceptedan oath of fidelity, and confirmed the donations whichhad successively enriched the patrimony of St. Peter.In the frequent schisms, the rival claims were submit­ted to the sentence of the emperor, and in a synod ofbishops he presumed to judge, to condemn, and topunish, the crimes of a guilty pontiff. Otho I. imposeda treaty on the senate and people, who engaged to pre­fer the candidate most acceptable to his majesty;ra hissuccessors anticipated or prevented their choice: theybestowed the Roman benefice, like the bishoprics ofCologne or Bamberg, on their chancellors or precep­tors: and whatever might be the merit of a Frank orSaxon, his name sufficiently attests the interposition offoreign power. These acts of prerogative were mostspeciously excused by the vices of a popular election.The competitor who had been excluded by the cardi­nals, appealed to the passions or avarice of the multi­tude: the Vatican and the Lateran were stained withblood; and the most powerful senators, the marquisesof Tuscany and the counts of Tusculum, held the apos-
tolic see in a long and disgraceful servitude.
The Roman pontiffs, of the ninth and tenthcenturies, were insulted, imprisoned, and murdered, by


The cardinal-bishops, so highly exalted by Peter Damianus, are sunk to a levelwith the rest of the sacred college.
'" Firmiter jurantes,nunquam se papam electuros ant ordinaturos, prater censen-simi et electionem Othonis et filii sin. (Liutprand, lib. 6. c. 6. p. 472.) This import­ant concession may either supply or confirm the decree of the clergy and people ofRome, sO fiercely rejected by Baronius, Fagi, and Muratori, (A. J). 964.) a»d sowell defended and explained by St. Marc. (Abreg£, torn. 2. p. 80S—816. torn. 4.p. 1167—1185.) Consult that historical critic, and the annals of Muratori, forthe election and confirmation of each pope.







OCR Output








CHAP. LI I. 485


They re- tory of the Franks was complete and final; Aqui-fore'thT tam was recovered by the arms of Eudes; the ArabsFranks. never resumed the conquest of Gaul, and theywere soon driven beyond the Pyrennees by Charles Marteland his valiant race.k It might have been expected thatthe saviour of Christendom would have been canonized,or at least applauded, by the gratitude of the clergy, whoare indebted to his sword for their present existence.But in the public distress the mayor of the palace hadbeen compelled to apply the riches, or at least the re­venues, of the bishops and abbots, to the relief of thestate and the reward of the soldiers. His merits wereforgotten, his sacrilege alone was remembered, and, inan epistle to a Carlovingian prince, a Gallic synod pre­sumes to declare that his ancestor was damned; that onthe opening of his tomb, the spectators were affrightedby a smell of fire and the aspect of a horrid dragon; andthat a saint of the times was indulged with a pleasantvision of the soul and body of Charles Martel, burning,to all eternity, in the abyss of hell.1Elevation The loss of an army, or a province, in the west-of the Ah- em W0rld, was less painful to the court of Da-
bas3ides, t i • i
A.D. 746 mascus, than the rise and progress of a domesticcompetitor. Except among the Syrians, thecaliphs of the house of Ommiyah had never been theobjects of the public favour. The life of Mahomet re­corded their perseverance in idolatry and rebellion; theirconversion had been reluctant, their elevation irregularand factious, and their throne was cemented with themost holy and noble blood of Arabia. The best of their


k Narbonne, and the rest of Septimania, was recovered by Pepin, the son ofCharles Martel, A. D. 755. (Pagi, Critica, torn. 3. p. 300.) Thirty-seven years af­terward it was pillaged by a audden inroad of the Arabs, who employed the captivesin the construction of the mosch of Cordova. (De Guignes, Hist, des Huns, torn. 1.p. 354.)
1 This pastoral letter, addressed to Lewis the Germanic, the grandson of Charle­magne, and most probably composed by the pen of the artful Hincmar, is dated inthe year 858, and signed by the bishops of the provinces of Rheims and Rouen.(Baronius, Annul. Eccles. A.D. 741. Fleury, Hist. Eccles.torn. 10. p. 514—516.)Yet Baronius himself, and the French critics, reject with contempt this episcopalfiction.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 179


peopled the temples of antiquity, were offensive to thefancy or conscience of the Christian Greeks; and asmooth surface of colours has ever been esteemed amore decent and harmless mode of imitation/The image The merit and effect of a copy depend on itsof Edema, resemblance with the original: but the primi­tive Christians were ignorant of the genuine features ofthe son of God, his mother, and his apostles: the sta­tue of Christ at Paneas in Palestine8 was, more proba­bly, that of some temporal saviour; the Gnostics andtheir profane monuments were reprobated; and thefancy of the Christian artists could only be guided bythe clandestine imitation of some heathen model. Inthis distress, a bold and dexterous invention assured atonce the likeness of the image and the innocence ofthe worship. A new superstructure of fable wasraised on the popular basis of a Syrian legend, on thecorrespondence of Christ and Abgarus, so famous inthe days of Eusebius, so reluctantly deserted by ourmodern advocates. The bishop of Caesareah recordsthe epistle,' but he most strangely forgets the picture


'This general history of images is drawn from the twenty-second book of theHist, des Eglises Reformees of Basnage, torn. 2. p. 1310—1337. He was a Pro­testant, but of a manly spirit; and on this head the Protestants are so notoriouslyin the right, that they can venture to be impartial. See the perplexity of poorfriar Pagi, Critica, torn. 1. p. 42.
* After removing tome rubbish of miracle and inconsistency, it may be allowed,that as late as the year 300, Paneas in Palestine was decorated with a bronze sta-tne, representing a grave personage wrapt in a cloak, with a grateful or suppliantfemale kneeling before him: and that ati inscription—ra.Zvnpi, -T..J tvtfyrn—w.isperhaps inscribed on the pedestal. By the Christians, this groupe was •foolishlyexplained of their founder and the four woman whom he had cured of the bloody-Sax. (Euseb. 7.18. Philostorg. 7. 3, &c.) M. de Beausobre more reasonably con­jectures the philosopher Apollonius, or the emperor Vespasian: in tha latter sup­position, the femal» is a city, a province, or perhaps the queen Berenice. (Bib-Kotheque Germaniuue, torn. I3. p. 1—92.)
'Eoseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. 1. c. IS- The learned Assemanus has brought upthe collateral aid of the three Syrians, St. Ephrem, Josua Stylites, and James bi­shop of Sarug; but I do not find any notice of the Syriac original, or the archivesof Edessa; (Bibliot Orient, torn. 1. p. 318. 420. .v,'t. i their vague belief is pro­bably derived from the Greeks.
1 The evidence for these epistles in stated and rejected by the candid l ,;inlm r.( Heathen Testimonies, vol. 1. p. '279—309.) Among the herd of bigots who areforcibly driven from this convenient bat untenable poM, I am ashamed, with, theGrabes, Caves, Tillemonts, .v. to discover Mr. Addison, an English gentleman(ton Works, vol. t. p. 528. Baskerville's edition); but his superficial tract on tin'Christian religion owei it- credit to bin namp, its style, and the interested applauwof our clergy.


x 2







OCR Output








35O ROMAN EMPIRE.


of a popular and hostile race, whom he had injured be­yond the hope of reconciliation. But Yezid preferredthe councils of mercy: and the mourning family was ho­nourably dismissed to mingle their tears with their kin­dred at Medina. The glory of martyrdom supersededthe right of primogeniture; and the twelve IMAMS," orpontiffs, of the Persian creed, are Ali, Hassan, Hosein,and the lineal descendants of Hosein to the ninthgeneration. Without arms, or treasures, or subjects,they successively enjoyed the veneration of the peo­ple, and provoked the jealousy of the reigning ca­liphs; their tombs at Mecca or Medina, on the banksof the Euphrates, or in the province of Chorasan, arestill visited by the devotion of their sect. Their nameswere often the pretence of sedition and civil war; butthese royal saints despised the pomp of the world, sub­mitted to the will of God and the injustice of man,and devoted their innocent lives to the study and prac­tice of religion. The twelfth and last of the Imams,conspicuous by the title of Mahadi, or the Guide, sur­passed the solitude and sanctity of his predecessors. Heconcealed himself in a cavern near Bagdad: the time andplace of his death are unknown; and his votaries pre­tend that he still lives, and will appear before the day ofjudgment to overthrow the tyranny of Dejal, or the an­tichrist/ In the lapse of two or three centuries theposterity of Abbas, the uncle of Mahomet, had multi­plied to the number of thirty-three thousand :y the raceof Ali might be equally prolific: the meanest individualwas above the first and greatest of princes; and themost eminent were supposed to excel the perfection ofangels. But their adverse fortune, and the wide extent


• The general article of Imam, in d'Herbelot's Bibliotheque, will indicate thesuccession; and the lives of the twelve are given under their respective names.
x The name of Antichrist may seem ridiculous, but the Mahometans have libe­rally borrowed the fables of every religion. (Sale's Preliminary Discourse, p. 80.88.) In the royal stable of Ispahan, two horses were always kept saddled, tatfor the Mahadi himself, the other for his lieutenant, Jesus the son of Mary,i In the year of the Hegira 200. (A.D. 815.) See d'Herbelot, p. 546.







OCR Output








32 ROMAN EMPIRE.


of debate: the same spiritual and carnal weapons wereagain drawn from the arsenals of Egypt; the Asiatic ve­terans, a band of archers, served under the orders of Dios-corus; and the more formidable monks, whose mindswere inaccessible to reason or mercy, besieged the doorsof the cathedral. The general, and, as it should seem,the unconstrained voice of the fathers, accepted the faithand even the anathemas of Cyril; and the heresy of thetwo natures was formally condemned in the persons andwritings of the most learned orientals. May those whodivide Christ be divided with the sword; may they behewn in pieces, may they be burnt alive.' were the cha­ritable wishes of a Christian synod.0 The innocence andsanctity of Eutyches were acknowledged without hesita­tion: but the prelates, more especially those of Thraceand Asia, were unwilling to depose their patriarch forthe use or even the abuse of this lawful jurisdiction.They embraced the knees of Dioscorus, as he stood witha threatening aspect on the footstool of his throne, andconjured him to forgive the offences, and to respectthe dignity, of his brother. Do you mean to raise asedition? exclaimed the relentless tyrant. Where aretheofficers? At these words a furious multitude of monksand soldiers, with staves, and swords, and chains, burstinto the church; the trembling bishops hid themselvesbehind the altar, or under the benches, and as they werenot inspired with the zeal of martyrdom, they succes­sively subscribed a blank paper, which was afterwardfilled with the condemnation of the Byzantine pontiff.Flavian was instantly delivered to the wild beasts of thisspiritual amphitheatre: the monks were stimulated by.the voice and example of Barsumas to avenge the injuriesof Christ: it is said that the patriarch of Alexandria re­viled, and buffeted, and kicked, and trampled his brother


0 H ay.!'- fan^at unr a;:;, xaiwov EwriSiw, tires fw xaq ouro; lit tia ytnttu, »;tptpn /uipwd* ... it TI; > tj'fi tuo eaaSn/Mt. At the request of Dioscorus, thosewho were not able to roar (Cono-ai), stretched out their hands. At Chalcedon, theorientals disclaimed these acclamations; but the Egyptians more consistently de­clared Tuura *!,,, TOTE fiTtiiiv »ii n/i Xf>o,ui». (('until, torn, 4. p. 101?.)







OCR Output








388 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Pursuit of The passion of a Syrian youth completed thethe Dama- ruin of the exiles of Damascus. A nobleman ofthe city, of the name of Jonas,q was betrothed toa wealthy maiden; but her parents delayed the con­summation of his nuptials, and their daughter was per­suaded to escape with the man whom she had chosen.They corrupted the nightly watchmen of the gate Keisan:the lover, who led the way, was encompassed by a squa­dron of Arabs: but his exclamation in the Greek tongue,—The bird is taken, admonished his mistress to hastenher return. In the presence of Caled, and of death, theunfortunate Jonas professed his belief in one God, and hisapostle Mahomet; and continued, till the season of hismartyrdom, to discharge the duties of a brave and sin­cere Mussulman. When the city was taken, he flew tothe monastery where Eudocia had taken refuge; butthe lover was forgotten; the apostate was scorned; shepreferred her religion to her country; and the justice ofCaled, though deaf to mercy, refused to detain by forcea male or female inhabitant of Damascus. Four dayswas the general confined to the city by the obligationof the treaty, and the urgent cares of his new conquest.His appetite for blood and rapine would have been ex­tinguished by the hopeless computation of time and dis­tance; but he listened to the importunities of Jonas,who assured him that the weary fugitives might yet beovertaken. At the head of four thousand horse, in thedisguise of Christian Arabs, Caled undertook the pursuit.They halted only for the moments of prayer; and theguide had a perfect knowledge of the country. For along way the footsteps of the Damascenes were plain


i On the fate of these lovers, whom he names Phocyas and Eudocia,' Mr. Hugheshas built the siege of Damascus, one of our most popular tragedies, and whichpossesses the rare merit of blending nature and history, the manners of the timesand the feelings of the heart. The foolish delicacy of the players compelled himto soften the guilt of the hero and the despair of the heroine. Instead of & baserenegade, Phocyas serves the Arabs as an honourable ally; instead of promptingtheir pursuit, he flies to the succour of his countrymen, and, after killing Caled andDerar, is himself mortally wounded, and expires in the presence of Eudocia, whoprofesses her resolution to take the veil at Constantinople. A frigid catastrophe!







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 285


Persian, and the Syrian monk, whom they accuse oflending their secret aid to the composition of theKoran.0 Conversation enriches the understanding, butsolitude is the school of genius; and the uniformity ofa work denotes the hand of a single artist. From hisearliest youth, Mahomet was addicted to religious con­templation: each year, during the month of Ramadan,he withdrew from the world and from the arms of Ca-dijah: in the cave of Hera, three miles from Mecca,*1he consulted the spirit of fraud or enthusiasm, whoseabode is not in the heavens, but in the mind of theprophet. The faith which, under the name of Islam,he preached to his family and nation, is compoundedof an eternal truth, and a necessary fiction, THAT THERE
IS ONLY ONE GOD, AND THAT MAHOMET IS THEAPOSTLE OF GOD.
It is the boast of the Jewish apologists, that'while the learned nations of antiquity were de­luded by the fables of Polytheism, their simple ancestorsof Palestine preserved the knowledge and worship of thetrue God. The moral attributes of Jehovah may noteasily be reconciled with the standard of human virtue:his metaphysical qualities are darkly expressed; but eachpage of the Pentateuch and the Prophets is an evidenceof his power: the unity of his name is inscribed on thefirst table of the law; and his sanctuary was never de­filed by any visible image of the invisible essence.After the ruin of the temple, the faith of the Hebrewexiles was purified, fixed, and enlightened, by the spi­ritual devotion of the synagogue; and the authority ofMahomet will not justify his perpetual reproach, that


a I am not at leisure to pursue the fables or conjectures which name the stran­gers accused or suspected by the infidels of Mecca. (Koran, c. 16. p. 223. e. 35.p. 297. with Sale's Remarks. Prideaux's Life of Mahomet, p. 21—27. Gag-•nier. Not. ad Abulfed. p. 11. 74. Maracci, torn. 2. p. 400.) Even Prideanx hasobserved that the transaction must have been secret, and that the scene lay in theheart of Arabia.
d Abulfeda, in Vit. c. 7. p. 15. Gagnier, torn. 1. p. 133. 135. The situationof mount Hera is remarked by Abulfeda. (Geograph. Arab. p. 4.) Yet Maho--met had never read of the cave of Egeria, ubi noctums Numa constituebat arnica),•of the Idiean mount, where Minos conversed with Jove, &c.







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 381


Battle of About four years after the triumphs of the Per-
1*15*633 s^an war' tne repose of Heraclius and the empireJuly is. was again disturbed by a new enemy, the powerof whose religion was more strongly felt than it wasclearly understood by the Christians of the east. In hispalace of Constantinople or Antioch, he was awakenedby the invasion of Syria, the loss of Bosra, and the dan­ger of Damascus. An army of seventy thousand vete­rans, or new levies, was assembled at Hems or Emesa,under the command of his general Werdan;' and thesetroops, consisting chiefly of cavalry, might be indiffer­ently styled either Syrians, or Greeks, or Romans: Syrians,from the place of their birth or warfare; Greeks, fromthe religion and language of their sovereign; and Ro­mans, from the proud appellation which was still pro­faned by the successors of Constantine. On the plainof Aiznadin as Werdan rode on a white mule decoratedwith gold chains, and surrounded with ensigns and stan­dards he was surprised by the near approach of a fierceand naked warrior, who had undertaken to view the stateof the enemy. The adventurous valour of Derar was in­spired, and has perhaps been adorned, by the enthusiasmof his age and country. The hatred of the Christians,the love of spoil, and the contempt of danger, were theruling passion of the audacious Saracen; and the pros­pect of instant death could never shake his religious con­fidence, or ruffle the calmness of his resolution, or evensuspend the frank and martial pleasantry of his humour.In the most hopeless enterprises, he was bold, and pru­dent, and fortunate: after innumerable hazards, afterbeing thrice a prisoner in the hands of the infidels, hestill survived to relate the achievements, and to enjoythe rewards, of the Syrian conquest. On this occasion,


'The name of Werdan is unknown to Theophanes, and, though it might belongto an Armenian chief, has very little of a Greek aspect or sound. If the Byzantinehistorians have mangled the oriental names, the Arabs, in this instance, likewisehave taken ample revenge on their enemies. In transposing the Greek characterfrom right to left, might they not produce, from the familiar appellation of Andrew,•omething like the anagram Wtrdan 1







OCR Output








520 ROMAN EMPIRE.


curbed with a firmer and more skilful hand, and theirnumbers were divided and destroyed in foreign warfare.But the nations of the east had been taught to trampleon the successors of the prophet; and the blessings ofdomestic peace were obtained by the relaxation of strengthand discipline. So uniform are the mischiefs of militarydespotism, that I seem to repeat the story of the praeto­rians of Rome.h
Rise and While the flame of enthusiasm was damped-° by the business, the pleasure, and the knowledgeftne a£e, *t burnt with concentrated heat in the—951 breasts of the chosen few, the congenial spirits,who were ambitious of reigning either in this world orin the next. How carefully soever the book of prophecyhad been sealed by the apostle of Mecca, the wishes, and(if we may profane the word) even the reason, of fana­ticism, might believe that, after the successive missions ofAdam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Mahomet,the same God, in the fulness of time, would reveal a stillmore perfect and permanent law. In the two hundredand seventy-seventh year of the Hegira, and in theneighbourhood of Cufa, an Arabian preacher, of thename of Carmath, assumed the lofty and incompre­hensible style of the guide, the director, the demon­stration, the word, the Holy Ghost, the camel, the heraldof the Messiah, who had conversed with him in a humanshape, and the representative of Mohammed the son ofAli, of St. John the Baptist, and of the angel Gabriel.In his mystic volume, the precepts of the Koran were re­fined to a more spiritual sense : he relaxed the duties o*ablution, fasting, and pilgrimage; allowed the indiscri­minate use of wine and forbidden fruit; and nourishedthe fervour of his disciples by the daily repetition of fiftyprayers. The idleness and ferment of the rustic crowdawakened the attention of the magistrates of Cufa; a


* See under the reigne of Motassem, Motawakkel, Mostanser, Mostain, Motaz,Mohtadi, and Motamed, in the Bibliotheque of d'Herbelot, and the now familiarVnnnls of Elmacin, Abulpharagius, and Abulfeda.







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 275


art and power of the monarchs of the east have beenconfined to the simplicity of the original model.3 Aspacious portico encloses the quadrangle of the Caaba;a square chapel, twenty-four cubits long, twenty-threebroad, and twenty-seven high; a door and a windowadmit the light; the double roof is supported by threepillars of wood; a spout (now of gold) discharges therain-water, and the well Zanzem is protected by a domefrom accidental pollution. The tribe of Koreish, byfraud or force, had acquired the custody of the Caaba;the sacerdotal office devolved through four lineal de­scents to the grandfather of Mahomet; and the familyof the Hashemites, from whence he sprung, was themost respectable and sacred in the eyes of their coun­try.1* The precincts of Mecca enjoyed the rights ofsanctuary; and, in the last month of each year, the cityand the temple were crowded with a long train of pil­grims, who presented their vows and offerings in thehouse of God. The same rites, which are now accom­plished by the faithful Mussulman, were invented andpractised by the superstition of the idolaters. At anawful distance they cast away their garments: seventimes, with hasty steps, they encircled the Caaba, andkissed the black stone: seven times they visited andadored the adjacent mountains; seven times they threwstones into the valley of Mina; and the pilgrimage wasachieved, as at the present hour, by a sacrifice of sheepand camels, and the burial of their hair and nails in theconsecrated ground. Each tribe either found or intro­duced in the Caaba their domestic worship: the templewas adorned, or defiled, with three hundred and sixty


* The original plan of the Caaba (which is servilely copied in Sale, the Univer­sal History, &c.) was a Turkish draught, which Beland (de Religions Moham-nn ilic.'L, p. 113—123.) has corrected and explained from the best authorities. Forthe description and legend of the Caaba, consult Pocock, (Specimen, p. 115—122.)'the Bibliotheque Orientale of d'Herbelot, (Cooto, Ilagir, Zansem, &C.) and Sale.(Preliminary Discourse, p. 114—122.)
• '• Cosa, the fifth ancestor of Mahomet, must have usurped the Caaba A. D. 440.but the story is differently told by Jannebi, (Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet, torn. 1.p. 65-—69.) and by Abulfeda. (in Vit , Moharn. c. 6. p. 13.)


T2







OCR Output








7(5 ROMAN EMPIRE.


V.TH» V." In the rest of the Roman empire, the des-E°"s_'°Bpotism of the prince might eradicate or silence


the sectaries of an obnoxious creed. But thestubborn temper of the Egyptians maintained their op>position to the synod of Chalcedon, and the policy ofJustinian condescended to expect and to seize the op­portunity of discord. The Monophysite church of Alex-andriaf was torn by the disputes of the corruptibles andincorruptibles; and on the death of the patriarch, theThe atri . two ^actions upheld their respective candidates.'aiehTheo- Gaian was the disciple of Julian, TheodosiusA. D.' had been the pupil of Severus: the claims of thessr— see. former were supported by the consent of themonks and senators of the city and the province; thelatter depended on the priority of his ordination, thefavour of the empress Theodora, and the arms of theeunuch Narses, which might have been used in morehonourable warfare. The exile of the popular candi­date to Carthage and Sardinia inflamed the ferment ofAlexandria; and, after a schism of one hundred andseventy years, the Gaianites still revered the memoryand doctrine of their founder. The strength of numbersand of discipline was tried in a desperate and bloodyconflict; the streets were filled with the dead bodies ofcitizens and soldiers; the pious women ascending theroofs of the houses, showered down every sharp or pon­derous utensil on the heads of the enemy; and the finalvictory of Narses was owing to the flames with whichhe wasted the third capital of the Roman world. Butthe lieutenant of Justinian had not conquered in thecause of a heretic; Theodosius himself was speedily,though gently removed; and Paul of Tanis, an or­thodox monk, was raised to the throne of Athanasius.


nicr, (torn. 1. p. 28 — 37.510 — 518.) that rambling jewellar, tpho bad read nothing.but had seen so much and so well.
'The history of the Alexandrian patriarchs, from Dioscorus to Benjamin, is takenfrom Renaudot, (p. Ill — 164.) and the second tome of the Annals of Kutyrhins.
* Liberal. Brev. c. 20—23. Victor. Cbron. p. 329, 330. Procop. Anecdot , c.26, 27.







OCR Output








248 ROMAN EMPIRE.


on the powerful, who aspired to command. The empireof Charlemagne and Otho was distributed among thedukes of the nations or provinces, the counts of thesmaller districts, and the margraves of the marches orfrontiers, who all united the civil and military authorityas it had been delegated to the lieutenants of the firstCaesars. The Roman governors, who, for the most part,were soldiers of fortune, seduced their mercenary legions,assumed the imperial purple, and either failed or suc­ceeded in their revolt, without wounding the power andunity of government. If the dukes, margraves, andcounts, of Germany, were less audacious in their claims,the consequences of their success were more lasting andpernicious to the state. Instead of aiming at the su­preme rank, they silently laboured to establish and ap­propriate their provincial independence. Their ambitionwas seconded by the weight of their estates and vassals,their mutual example and support, the common interestof the subordinate nobility, the change of princes andfamilies, the minorities of Otho III. and Henry IV., theambition of the popes, and the vain pursuits of the fugi­tive crowns of Italy and Rome. All the attributes ofregal and territorial jurisdiction were gradually usurpedby the commanders of the provinces; the right of peaceand war, of life and death, of coinage and taxation, offoreign alliance and domestic economy. Whatever hadbeen seized by violence, was ratified by favour or dis­tress, was granted as the price of a doubtful vote or avoluntary service; whatever had been granted to one,could not, without injury, be denied to his successor orequal; and every act of local or temporary possession wasinsensibly moulded into the constitution of the Germanickingdom. In every province, the visible presence of theduke or count was interposed between the throne andthe nobles; the subjects of the law became the vassalsof a private chief; and the standard, which he receivedfrom his sovereign, was often raised against him in the







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIi: 63


self that they would gradually perceive the temporalbenefits of union with the empire and the church ofRome; and if he failed in exciting their gratitude, hemight hope to provoke the jealousy of their sovereign.In a later age, the Lutherans have been burnt at Paris,and protected in Germany, by the superstition and po­licy of the most Christian king.
Their mis- ^he desire of gaining souls for God, and sub-sjons in jects for the church, has excited in every age theIndia,' diligence of the Christian priests. From theA^'SOO conquest of Persia they carried their spiritual—1200. arms to the north, the east, and the south; andthe simplicity of the gospel was fashioned and paintedwith the colours of the Syriac theology. In the sixthcentury, according to the report of a Nestorian travel­ler,* Christianity was successfully preached to the Bac-trians, the Huns,'the Persians, the Indians, the Parsar-menians, the Medes, and the Ekmites: the barbaricchurches, from the gulf of Persia to the Caspian sea,were almost infinite; and their recent faith was con­spicuous in the number and sanctity of their monks andmartyrs. The pepper coast of Malabar, and the islesof the ocean, Socotora and Ceylon, were peopled withan increasing multitude of Christians, and the bishopsand clergy of those sequestered regions derived theirordination from the Catholic of Babylon. In a subse­quent age, the zeal of the Nestorians overleaped thelimits, which had confined the ambition and curosity


* See the Topographia Christiana of Cosmas, sumamed Indico-pleustes, or theradian navigator, lib. 3. p. 178, 179. lib. 11. f. 337.—The entire work, of whichsome curious extracts may be found in Photius, (cod. 36. p. 9,10. edit. HoescheL)Thevenot, (in the first part of bis Relation des Voyages, £c.) and Fabricius, (Bib-fiot. Graec. lib. 3. c. 25. torn. 2. p. 603—617.) has been published by father Mont-feucon at Paris, 1707, in the Nova Collectio Patrurn. (torn. 2. p. 113—346.) Itwas the design of the author to confute the impious heresy of those who maintainthat the earth is a globe, and not a flat oblong table, as it is represented in the Scrip­tures. (Kb. 2. p. 138.) But the nonsense of the monk is mingled with the practicalknowledge of the traveller, who performed his voyage, A. D.522. and published hisbook at Alexandria, A. D. 547. (lib. 2. p. 140, 141. Montfaucon, Prafat. c. 2.)The Nestorianism of Cosmas, unknown to his learned editor, was detected by LaCroze, (Christiauisme deslndes, torn. 1. p. 40—55.) and is confirmed by Aesemanai.(Bibliot. Orient, torn. 4. p. 605, 606.)







OCR Output








48 ROMAN EMPIRE.


cence of Justinian/ The Jews, who had been gradu­ally stripped of their immunities, were oppress­ed by a vexatious law, which compelled themto observe the festival of Easter the same day on whichit was celebrated by the Christians/ And they mightcomplain with the more reason, since the Catholicsthemselves did not agree with the astronomical calcu­lations of their sovereign: the people of Constantino­ple delayed the beginning of their Lent a whole weekafter it had been ordained by authority; and they hadthe pleasure of fasting seven days, while meat was ex­posed for sale by command of the emperor. The Sa-a- maritans of Palestine' were a motley race, anambiguous sect, rejected as Jews by the Pa­gans, by the Jews as schismatics, and by the Christiansas idolaters. The abomination of the cross had alreadybeen planted on their holy mount of Gerizim," but vthepersecution of Justinian offered only the alternative ofbaptism or rebellion. They chose the latter: underthe standard of a desperate leader, they rose in arms,and retaliated their wrongs on the lives, the property,and the temples, of a defenceless people. The Sama­ritans were finally subdued by the regular forces of theeast; twenty thousand were slain, twenty thousandwere sold by the Arabs to the infidels of Persia andIndia, and the remains of that unhappy nation atonedfor the crime of treason by the sin of hypocrisy. It


r Theophan. Chrnn. p. 153. John de Monophyeite bishop of Asia, Is a moreauthentic witness of this transaction, in which he was himself employed by theemperor. (Asseman. Bib. Orient, torn. 1. p. 85.)
• Compare Procopius (Hist. Arcan. c. SB. and Aleman's Notes) with Theo-phanes. (Chron. p. 190.) The council of Nice has intrusted the patriarch, orrather the astronomers of Alexandria, with the usual proclamation of Easter; andwe still read, or rather we do not read, many of the Paschal epistles of St. Cyril.Since the reign of Monophytism in Egypt, the Catholics were perplexed by asfoolish a prejudice as that which so long opposed, among the Protestants, the re­ception of the Gregorian style.
1 For the religion and history of the Samaritans, consult Basnage, Histoires desJuifs, a learned and impartial work.
"Sichem, Neapolis, Naplous, the ancient and modern seat of the Samaritans, issituate in a valley between the barren Ebal, the mountain of cursing to the north,the fruitful Gtrizim, or mountain of blessing to the south, ten or eleven hours' tra­vel from Jerusalern. See Maundrel, Journey from Aleppo, &c. p. 59—63.







OCR Output








CHAP. LII. 490


Latin schools."1 The physics, both of the Academy andthe Lycaeum, as they are built, not on observation, but onargument, have retarded the progress of real knowledge.The metaphysics of infinite, or finite spirit, have too oftenbeen enlisted in the service of superstition. But the hu­man faculties are fortified by the art and practice ofdialectics; the ten predicaments of Aristotle collect andmethodize our ideas," and his syllogism is the keenestweapon of dispute. It was dexterously wielded in theschools of the Saracens, but as it is more effectual for thedetection of error than for the investigation of truth, it isnot surprising that new generations of masters and dis­ciples should still revolve in the same circle of logicalargument. The mathematics are distinguished by apeculiar privilege, that, in the course ages, they mayalways advance, and can never recede. But the ancientgeometry, if I and not misinformed, was resumed in thesame state by the Italians of the fifteenth century; andwhatever may be the origin of the name, the science ofalgebra is ascribed to the Grecian Diophantus by themodest testimony of the Arabs themselves.0 They cul­tivated with more success the sublime science of astro­nomy, which elevates the mind of man to disdain hisdiminutive planet and momentary existence. The costlyinstruments of observation were supplied by the caliphAlmamon, and the land of the Chaldeans still affordedthe same spacious level, the same unclouded horizon. Inthe plains of Sinaar, and a second time in those of Cufa,his mathematicians accurately measured a degree of the


'" See Mosheim, Institut. Hist. Eccles. p. 181. 214. «36. 3o7. 315. 338. 396.438, &c.
n The most elegant commentary on the Categories or Predicaments of Aru-totle may be found in the Philosophical Arrangements of Mr. James Harris(London, 1775, in octavo), who laboured to revive the studies of Grecian litera­ture and philosophy.
"Abulpharagius, Dynast, p. 81. f22. Bibliot . Arab. Hist. turn. 1. p. 370, 371.In quern (says the primate of the Jacobites) si immiserit se lector, oceanum hocin genere (algebra) inveniet . The time of Diophantus of Alexandria is unknown,but hiu six books are still extant, and have been illustrated by the Creek Planudesand the Frenchman Meziriac. (Fabric. Bibliot. Grac. torn. 4. p. 12—15.)


2 K 2







OCR Output








<58 ROMAN EMPIRE.


gifts and Syriac missionaries could be obtained frontthe patriarch of Babylon. Since the expulsion of thePortuguese, the Nestorian creed is freely professed onthe coast of Malabar. The trading companies of Hol­land and England are the friends of toleration; but ifoppression be less mortifying than contempt, the Chris­tians of St. Thomas hare reason to complain of the coldand silent indifference of their brethren of Europe.1n.TuE II. The history of the Monophysites is lessJACoBITES. copioas and interesting than that of the Nesto^rians. Under the reigns of Zeno and Anastasius, theirartful leaders surprised the ear of the prince, usurpedthe tbtones of the east, and crushed on its native soilthe school of the Syrians. The rule of the Monophysitefaith was defined with exquisite discretion by Severus,patriarch of Antioch: he condemned, in the style of theHenoticon, the adverse heresies of Nestorius and Eu-tyehes, maintained against the latter the reality of thebody of Christ, and constrained the Greeks to allow thathe was a liar who spoke truth.1* But the approximationof ideas could rwxt abate the vehemence of passion; eachparty was the more astonished that their blind antago­nist could dispute on so trifling a difference; the tyrantof Syria enforced the belief of his creed, and his reign*was polluted with the blood of three hundred and fiftymonks, who were slain, not perhaps without provocationA. 0. MB. or resistance, under the walls of Apamea.1 The


• * Concerning theChristians of St. Thomas, see Assenmnnus, Bibtioth. Orient, torn.4. p. 391—407. 435—4M. Geddes's Church History of Malabar, and, above all,ta Croze, Histoire du Christianisme des Indes, in two vols. 1 2mo. La Hnyp, 1758,.a learned and agreeable work. They have drawn from the same source, the Por­tuguese and Italian narratives; and the prejudices of the Jesuits are sufficientlycorrected by those of the Protestants.
k Our uffifv 4'tv&t XnSnf is the expression of Theodore in his treatise on the incar­nation, p. 245. a-17. as he is quoted by La Croze, (Hist, du Christianisme d'Ethiopeet d'Armenie, p. 35.) who exclaims perhaps too hastily, " Quel pitoyable raissone-meat!" Renatidothaa touched' (Hisf. Patriarch. Alex. p. 127—l38.)the orientalaccount of Several: and h is authentic creed in ay be found in the epistle of John the1Jacobite, patriarch of Antioch, in the tenth century, to his brother Alcanas of Alex­andria. (Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, torn. 2. p. 132—141.)
'Epist- Archimandritarum et Monachorum Syria Secundze ad Papam Hormis-tlmn, Coneil. torn. 5, p. 598—603. The courage of St. Si'iius, ut leo animuMis,
defensive. Qi3aronius, A. D. 513. no. 7^ occ.)







OCR Output








54 ROMAN EMPIRE.


effect, and the timid or vehement Catholics condemnedeven the semblance of a retreat in the presence of a subtleand audacious enemy. The orthodox (the prevailing)party devised new modes of speech, and argument, andinterpretation: to either nature of Christ, they speciousrly applied a proper and distinct energy; but the diffe­rence was no longer visible when they allowed that thehuman and the divine will were invariably the same.kThe disease was attended with the customary symptoms >but the Greek clergy, as if satiated with the endless con­troversy of the incarnation, instilled a healing counsel in-tq the ear of the prince and people. They declared them­selves MONOTHELITES (assertors of the unity of will), butthey treated the words as new, the questions as superflu­ous; and recommended a religious silence as the mostagreeable to the prudence and charity of the gospel.of silence was successively imposed byraciu Qr exposition of Heraclius, the type
A.D.639; or model of his grandson Constans;' and the im-Constanfc perfect edicts were subscribed with alacrity orA. b. 648. reluctance by the four patriarchs of Rome, Con-stantinpple, Alexandria, and Antipch. JJut the bishopand monks of Jerusalem sounded the alarm: in the lan­guage, or even in the silence, of the Greeks, the Latinchurches detected a latent heresy; and the obedience ofpope Honorius to, the commands of his sovereign wasretracted afl$ censured by the bolder ignorance of hissuccessors. They condemned the execrable and abo^mjn,able h,e.re£y of the Monqthelites, who revived the er­


ignorant that they might allege the positive authority of the eothesis. 'O fua{itNaimi{iif xaiwl{ tuufm tvi diutt nu Kufieu aa&fvf*ru, KOI Suo tiaa-ym vuyt, (the com­mon reproach of the A^onophisites,) Jut OtXn/uara TWT« uma nu fnX/wtirfj •naiamn>( TauTo BouVav TOT . . . . tin irpwawm ilefcan. (Concil. torn. 7. p. 205.)
k See the orthodox faith in Fetavios: (Dogmata Theolog. torn. 5. lib. 9. c. 6—10.p. 433—447.) all the depths of this controversy. are founded in the Creek dialoguebetween Marimus and Pyrrhus, (ad calcem, torn, 8. Annal. Baron, p. 7o$—794.)which relates a real conference, and produced as short-lived a conversion.
1 Impiissimam ecthesim .... ecelerosum typum (Concil. torn. 7. p.366.)diabo-licsa operationis genimina, (sora, germina, or eke the Greek ymftpTo. in the origi­nal. Concil. p. 363, 364.) are the expressions of the eighteenth anathema. Theepistle of pope Martin to Amandus, a Gallican bishop, stigmatizes^ the Monpthe-lites and their heresy with equal virulence, (p. 392.)







OCR Output








304 ROMAN EMPIltE.


era, which coincides with an astronomical period," has re­corded the fall of the Sassanian dynasty and the religionof Zoroaster.' The youth and inexperience of the prince,he was only fifteen years of age, declined a perilous en­counter; the royal standard was delivered into thehands of his general Rustam; and a remnant of thirtythousand regular troops was swelled in truth, or in opi­nion, to one hundred and twenty thousand subjects, orallies, of the great king. The Moslems, whose numberswere reinforced from twelve to thirty thousand, hadpitched their camp in the plains of Cadesia :u and theirline, though it consisted of fewer men, could producemore soldiers than the unwieldy host of the infidels. Ishall here observe, what I must often repeat, that thecharge of the Arabs was not like that of the Greeks andRomans, the effort of a firm and compact infantry: theirmilitary force was chiefly formed of cavalry and archers;and the engagement, which was often interrupted andoften renewed by single combats and flying skirmishes,might be protracted without any decisive event to thecontinuance of several days. The periods of the battleof Cadesia were distinguished by their peculiar appella­tions. The first, from the well-timed appearance of sixthousand of the Syrian brethren, was denominated the


• A cycle of one hundred and twenty years, the end of which an intercalarymonth of thirty days, supplied the use of our bissextile, and restored the integrityof the solar year. In a great revolution of one thousand four hundred and fortyyears, this intercalation was successively removed from the first to the twelftnmonth ; but Hyde and Freret are involved in a profound controversy, whether thetwelve, or only eight of these changes, were accomplished before the era of V.. -degerd, which is unanimously fixed to the 16th of June, A. D. 632. How labori­ously does the curious spirit of Europe explore the darkest and most distant anti­quities! (Hyde and Religione Persarum, c. 14—18. p. 181—211. Freret in theMern. de 1'Academic des Inscriptions, torn. 16. p. 233—267.)
1 Nine days after the death of Mahomet, (7th June, A. D. 632.) we find the eraof Yezdegerd; (16th June, A. D. 632.) and his accession cannot be postponedbeyond the end of the first year. His predecessors could not therefore resist thearms of the caliph Omar, and these unquestionable dates overthrow the thought­less chronology of Abulpharagius. See Ockley's Hist, of the Saracens, vol. 1.p. 130.
"Cadesia.says the Nubian geographer,(p. 121.) is in marginesolitudinis, sixty-one leagues from Bagdad, and two stations from Cufa. Otter (Voyage, torn. 1.p. 163.) reckons fifteen leagues, and observes, that the place is supplied with datesand water.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 189


their real and pretended sufferings, nor how many losttheir lives or limbs, their eyes or their beards, by the cru­elty of the emperor. From the chastisement of indivi­duals, he proceeded to the abolition of the order; and,as it was wealthy and useless, his resentment might bestimulated by avarice and justified by patriotism. Theformidable name and mission of the Dragon," his visitor-general, excited the terror and abhorrence of the blacknation: the religious communities were dissolved, thebuildings were converted into magazines, or barracks;the lands, moveables, and cattle, were confiscated; andour modern precedents will support the charge, thatmuch wanton or malicious havoc was exercised againstthe relics, and even the books, of the monasteries. Withthe habit and profession of monks, the public and privateworship of images was rigorously proscribed; and itshould seem, that a solemn abjuration of idolatry wasexacted from the subjects, or at least from the clergy, ofthe eastern empire.'1
state of The patient east abjured, with reluctance, her3' sacred images: they were fondly cherished, andvigorously defended, by the independent zeal of theItalians. In ecclesiastical rank and jurisdiction; thepatriarch of Constantinople and the pope of Rome werenearly equal. But the Greek prelate was a domesticslave under the eye of his master, at whose nod healternately passed from the convent to the throne, andfrom the throne to the convent. A distant and dan­gerous station amidst the barbarians of the west, ex­cited the spirit and freedom of the Latin bishops.Their popular election endeared them to the Romans;the public and private indigence was relieved by their


* In the narrative of this persecution from Theophanes and Cedrenns, Spanheim(p. J35—238.) is happy to compare the Draco of Leo with the dragoons ( Dracouei)of Louis XIV. and highly solaces himself with this controversial pun.
6 nfcypaftftct ya.f l^iorf/tx^fi Kara, irarav f£tpxiav T11V ^fl<° TTIf Jt"f0? *mev, irarracirojfa^ai lui a/auia nu aBi-nta-ai rm it^'.a-iunirn TaV mitral luuim. (Damascen. Op.torn. 1. p. 615.) This oath and subscription I do not remember to have seen in anymodern compilation.







OCR Output








J52 ROMAN EMPIRE.


rants: the men, mounted on horseback, sallied fromthe city, and erected the standard of civil war. Thesoldiers, who had been gradually assembled in the ca­pital and the neighbourhood, were devoted to the causeof a victorious and injured leader: the ties of commoninterest and domestic alliance secured the attachment ofthe house of Ducas: and the generous dispute of theComneni was terminated by the decisive resolution ofIsaac, who was the first to invest his younger brotherwith the name and ensigns of royalty. They returnedto Constantinople, to threaten rather than besiege thatimpregnable fortress; but the fidelity of the guards wascorrupted: a gate was surprised; and the fleet was oc­cupied by the active courage of George Palaeologus, whofought against his father, without foreseeing that he la­boured for his posterity. Alexius ascended the throne;and his aged competitor disappeared in a monastery. Anarmy of various nations was gratified with the pillage ofthe city; but the public disorders were expiated by thetears and fasts of the Comneni, who submitted to everypenance compatible with the possession of the empire.The life of the emperor Alexius has beenComoenus, delineated by a favourite daughter, who was°81' inspired by a tender regard for his person, and


a laudable zeal to perpetuate his virtues. Con­scious of the just suspicion of her readers, the prin­cess Anna Comnena repeatedly protests, that, besidesher personal knowledge, she had searched the dis­course and writings of the most respectable veterans;that after an interval of thirty years, forgotten by, andforgetful of, the world, her mournful solitude was inac­cessible to hope and fear; and that truth, the naked per­fect truth, was more dear and sacred than the memoryof her parent. Yet, instead of the simplicity of style andnarrative which wins our belief, an elaborate affectationof rhetoric and science betrays in every page the vanityof a female author. The genuine character of Alexius







OCR Output








CIIAP. L. 27$


in the wars of Titus; and Hadrian,. Tfye industriousexiles aspired to liberty and power; they erected syna­gogues in the, castles and qties in the wilderness, andtheir gentile converts were confounded with the chil­dren ojT Israel, whom they resembled in the outward.•The Chru- mai,k pf circumcision. The Christian mjs-ti^s. sionaries were still more active and successful:the Catholics asserted their universal reign; the sectswhom they oppressed successively seared beyond theliin^s pf the Roman empire; the JVlarc^nites and thetylaflichaeans dispersed their fantastic opinions andapocryphal gospejs; thp churches of Ye.rn.en, and the.princes of Hira and Gassan, were instructed in a purercreed by the Jacobite and I^estorian bishops.0 The li­berty of phoice was presented to th$ tribes; each Arabwas free to elect or to compose his private religion; andthe rude superstition of his house was mingled withthe subjjme theology of s.aints and philosophers. Afundamental article, p,f faith was jnculcated by the con-sen.t of the Iearne4 strangers; the existence of one su­preme proxj, wjio is exalted above the powers of heavenand earth, but who has often revealed himself tq man-kinfj. by the ministry pf his angels and prophets, andwhose grace or justice has interrupted, by seasonablemiracles, the order of nature. The most rational ofd»e Arabs acknowledged his power, though they neg-lected his worship;11 and it was habit rather than con-victipn that still attached them to the relics of idolatry.The Jews and Christians were the people of the book:the Bible was already translated into the Arabic lan­guage;'1 and the volume of the Old Testament was ac­cepted by the concord of these implacable enemies.


0 The state of the Jews and Christians in Arabia is described by Pocock fromSharestanl,'&c. (Specimen, p. 60.134, &c.) Hottinger, (Hist. Orient, p. 212—238.) d'Herbelot, (Bibliot . Orient, p. 474—476.) Basnage, (Hist, des Juifs, torn.7. p. 185. torn. 8. p. 280.) and Sale. (Preliminary Discourse, p.22,&c.33,&c.)
P In their offerings, it was a maxim to defraud God for the profit of the idol,not a more potent, hut a more irritable, patron. (Pocock, Specimen, p. 108, 109.)
1 Our versions now extant, whether Jewish or Christian, appear more receritthan the Koran; but the existence of a prior translation may be fairly inferred,^—1. From the perpetual practice of the synagogue, of expounding the Hebrew lessonby a paraphrase in the vulgar tongue of tin. country. 2. From the Analogy of







OCR Output








471 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the siege was continued through the winter by the neg­lect rather than by the resolution of the caliph Omar."The winter proved uncommonly rigorous: above a hun­dred days the ground was covered with deep snow, andthe natives of the sultry climes of Egypt and Arabia laytorpid and almost lifeless in their frozen camp. Theyrevived on the return of spring; a second effort had beenmade in their favour; and their distress was relieved bythe arrival of two numerous fleets, laden with com, andarms, and soldiers; the first from Alexandria, of fourhundred transports and galleys; the second of threehundred and sixty vessels from the ports of Africa. Butthe Greek fires were again kindled, and if the destruc­tion was less complete, it was owing to the experiencewhich had taught the Moslems to remain at a safe dis­tance, or to the perfidy of the Egyptian mariners, whodeserted with their ships to the emperor of the Chris­tians. The trade and navigation of the capital were re­stored; and the produce of the fisheries supplied thewants, and even the luxury, of the inhabitants. But thecalamities of famine and disease were soon felt by thetroops of Moslemah, and as the former was miserablyassuaged, so the latter was dreadfully propagated, by thepernicious nutriment which hunger compelled them toextract from the most unclean or unnatural food. Thespirit of conquest, and even of enthusiasm, was extinct:the Saracens could no longer straggle beyond their lines,either single or in small parties, without exposing them­selves to the merciless retaliation of the Thracian pea­sants. An army of Bulgarians was attracted from theDanube by the gifts and promises of Leo; and thesesavage auxiliaries made some atonement for the evils


 


„„ being with God, that he would not have anointed his ear (his
own saying) to obtain a perfect cure of his last malady. The caliph had only oneshirt, and in an age of luxury his annual expense was no more than two drachms.(Abulpharagius, p. 131.) Haud din gavisus eo principe fait orbix Moslemas.(Abulfeda, p. 127.)







OCR Output








376 ROMAN EMPIRE.


that belong to the synagogue of Satan, who have shavencrowns ;a be sure you cleave their skulls, and give themno quarter till they either turn Mahometans, or pay tri­bute. All profane or frivolous conversation; all dan­gerous recollection of ancient quarrels, was severely pro­hibited among the Arabs: in the tumult of a camp, theexercises of religion were assiduously practised; and theintervals of action were employed in prayer, meditation,and the study of the Koran. The abuse, or even the useof wine was chastised by fourscore strokes on the soles ofthe feet, and in the fervour of their primitive zeal, manysecret sinners revealed their fault, and solicited theirpunishment. After some hesitation the command of thearmy was delegated to Abu Obeidah, one of the fugitivesof Mecca and companions of Mahomet; whose zeal anddevotion were assuaged, without being abated, by thesingular mildness and benevolence of his temper. Butin all the emergencies of war, the soldiers demanded thesuperior genius of Caled; and whoever might be thechoice of the prince, the sword of God was both in factand fame the foremost leader of the Saracens. Heobeyed without reluctance; he was consulted withoutjealousy; and such was the spirit of the man, or ratherof the times, that Caled professed his readiness to serveunder the banner of the faith, though it were in the handsof a child or an enemy. Glory, and riches, and domi­nion, were indeed promised to the victorious Mussulman;but he was carefully instructed, that if the goods of thislife were his only incitement, they likewise would be hisonly reward.
siege of One of the fifteen provinces of Syria, the cul-Bosra. tivated lands to the eastward of the Jordan, hadbeen decorated by Roman vanity with the name of Ara-


* Even in the seventh century, the monks were generally laymen. they woretheir hair long and dishevelled, and shaved their heads when they were ordainedpriests. The circular tonsure was sacred and mysterious: it was the crown ofthorns, but it was likewise a royal diadem, and every priest was a king, &c. (Tbo-massin, Discipline de 1'Eglise, torn. 1. p. 721—758.especially p. 737,738.)







OCR Output








ROMAN EMPIRE.


Ruin of the Count Julian had plunged so deep into guiltnwch'0."10 an^ infamy, that his only hope was in the ruinA. D. 71L Of his country. 'After the battle of Xeres he re­commended the most effectual measures to the victoriousSaracen. "The king of the Goths is slain; their princesare fled before you, the army is routed, the nation is as­tonished. Secure with sufficient detachments the citiesof Boetica; but in person, and without delay, march tothe royal city of Toledo, and allow not the distractedChristians either time or tranquillity for the election ofa new monarch." Tarik listened to his advice. A Ro­man. captive and proselyte, who had been enfranchisedby the caliph himself, assaulted Cordova with sevenhundred horse; he swam' the river, surprised the townjand drove the Christians into the great church, wherethey defended themselves above three months. Ano­ther detachment reduced the sea-coast of Bcetica, whichin the last period of the Moorish power, has comprisedin a narrow space the populous kingdom of Grenada.The march of Tarik from the Ba.tis to theTagus,q was di­rected through the Sierra Morena, that separates Anda­lusia and Castile, till he appeared in arms under the wallsof Toledo/ The most zealous of the Catholics had es­caped with the relics of their saints; and if the gateswere shut it was only till the victor had subscribed afair and reasonable capitulation. The voluntary exileswere allowed to depart with their effects; seven churcheswere appropriated to the Christian worship; the arch­bishop and his clergy were at liberty to exercise theirfunctions, the monks to practise or neglect their penance:and the Goths and Romans were left in. all civil and


11liB direct road from Cordiiba to Toledo was measured by Mr. Swinburne'smulee in seventy-two hours and a half; but a larger computation must be adoptedfor the slow and devious march of an army. The Arabs traversed the province ofLa Mancha, which the pen of Cervantes has transformed into classic ground to thereader of every nation.
'The antiquities of Toledo, Urbi Parta in the Punic wan, Urbt Rtgia in the Birticentury.are briefly described by Nonins. (Hispanla.c. 59. p. 181—186.) He bor­rows from Roderic the fatalt palatiirm of Moorish portraits; bat modestly iosintuite*that it was no more than a Roman amphitheatre.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 7


a rebellious, or at least an ignorant spirit. The Son ofGod descended upon earth to abolish his temple andhis law; and, for the accomplishment of this salutaryend, he dexterously transferred to his own person thehope and prediction of a temporal Messiah.His incor- ^ne of tue most subtle disputants of the Ma-mptibie nichaean school, has pressed the danger and in­decency of supposing, that the God of the Chris­tians, in the state of a human foetus, emerged at the endof nine months from a female womb. The pious hor­ror of his antagonists provoked them to disclaim all sen­sual circumstances of conception and delivery; to main­tain, that the divinity passed through Mary like a sun­beam through a plate of glass, and to assert, that theseal of her virginity remained unbroken even at the mo­ment when she became the mother of Christ. But therashness of these concessions has encouraged a mildersentiment of those of the Docetes, who taught, not thatChrist was a phantom, but that he was clothed with animpassible and incorruptible body. Such, indeed, inthe more orthodox system he has acquired since his re­surrection, and such he must have always possessed, ifit were capable of pervading, without resistance orinjury,the density of intermediate matter. Devoid of its mostessential properties, it might be exempt from the attri­butes and infirmities of the flesh. A foetus, that couldincrease from an invisible point to its full maturity; achild, that could attain the stature of perfect manhood,without deriving any nourishment from the ordinarysources, might continue to exist without repairing a dailywaste by a daily supply of external matter. Jesus mightshare the repasts of his disciples without being subjectto the calls of thirst or hunger; and his virgin puritywas never sullied by the involuntary stains of sensualconcupiscence. Of a body thus singularly constituted,a question would arise, by what means, and of what ma­terials, it was originally framed; and our sounder theo­logy is started by an answer which was not peculiar to







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 115


trolling the ambition of his equals, or of resisting thearms of the victorious Bulgarians. While his want ofability and success exposed him to the contempt of thesoldiers, the masculine spirit of his wife Procopiaawakened their indignation. Even the Greeks of theninth century were provoked by-the insolence of a fe­male, who, in the front of the standards, presumed todirect their discipline and animate their valour; andtheir licentious clamours advised the new Semiramis toreverence the majesty of a Roman camp. After anunsuccessful campaign, the emperor left, in their winterquarters of Thrace, a disaffected army under the com­mand of his enemies; and their artful eloquence per­suaded the soldiers to break the dominion of the eu­nuchs, to degrade the husband of Procopia, and toassert the right of a military election. They marchedtowards the capital; yet the clergy, the senate, and thepeople of Constantinople, adhered to the cause of Mi­chael; and the troops and treasures of Asia might haveprotracted the mischiefs of civil war. But his huma­nity (by the ambitious it will be termed his weakness)protested, that not a drop of Christian blood should beshed in his quarrel, and his messengers presented theconquerors with the keys of the city and the palace.They were disarmed by his innocence and submission;his life and his eyes were spared; and the imperialmonk enjoyed the comforts of solitude and religionabove thirty-two years after he had been stripped ofthe purple and separated from his wife.Leo v. the A rebel in the time of Nicephorus, the fa-A™!^,' mous and unfortunate Bardanes, had once theJoiyii. curiosity to consult an Asiatic prophet, who,after prognosticating his fall, announced the fortunesof his three principal officers, Leo the Armenian, Mi­chael the Phrygian, and Thomas the Cappadocian, thesuccessive reigns of the two former, the fruitless andfatal enterprise of the third. This prediction was veri­


i 2







OCR Output








494 ROMAN EMPIRE.


tified. Our imagination is dazzled by the splendid pic­ture; and whatever may be the cool dictates of reason,there are few among us who would obstinately refuse atrial of the comforts and the cares of royalty. It maytherefore be of some use to borrow the experience of thesame Abdalrahman, whose magnificence has perhaps ex­cited our admiration and envy, and to transcribe an au­thentic memorial which was found in the closet of thedeceased caliph. I have now reigned above fifty years invictory or peace; beloved by my subjects, dreaded by myenemies, and respected by my allies. Riches and honours,power and pleasure, have waited on my call, nor does anyearthly blessing appear to have been wanting to my feli­city. In this situation I have diligently numbered thedays of pure and genuine happiness which have fallen tomy lot: they amount to fourteen :—O man! place not thyconfidence in this present world /d The luxury of the ca­liphs, so useless to their private happiness, relaxed thenerves, and terminated the progress, of the Arabian em­pire. Temporal and spiritual conquest had been thesole occupation of the first successors of Mahomet; andafter supplying themselves with the necessaries of life,the whole revenue was scrupulously devoted to that sa­lutary work. The Abbassides were impoverished by themultitude of their wants, and their contempt of economy.Instead of pursuing the great object of ambition, theirleisure, their affections, the powers of their mind, werediverted by pomp and pleasure; the rewards of valourwere embezzled by women and eunuchs, and the royalcamp was encumbered by the luxury of the palace. Asimilar temper was diffused among the subjects of thecaliph. Their stern enthusiasm was softened by time
•' Cardonne, torn. 1. p. 329, 330. This confession, the complaints of Solomon ofthe vanity of this world (read Prior's verbose but eloquent poem), and the happyten days of the emperor Seghed, (Rambler, no. 204, 205.) will be triumphantlyquoted by the detractors of human life. Their expectations are commonly immo­derate ; their estimates are seldom impartial. If I may speak of myself (the onlyperson of whom I can speak with certainty), my happy hours have far exceeded,and far exceed, the scanty numbers of the caliph of Spam; and I shall not scrupleto add, that many of them are due to the pleasing labour of the present composition.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 207


the decrees of the senate and people successively in­vested Charles Martel and his posterity with the honoursof patrician of Rome. The leaders of a powerful nationwould have disdained a servile title and subordinateoffice; but the reign of the Greek emperors was sus­pended; and, in the vacancy of the empire, they deriveda more glorious commission from the pope and therepublic. The Roman ambassadors presented thesepatricians with the keys of the shrine of St. Peter, as apledge and symbol of sovereignty; with a holy banner,which it was their right and duty to unfurl in the de­fence of the church and city.* In the time of CharlesMartel and of Pepin, the interposition of the Lombardkingdom covered the freedom, while it threatened thesafety, of Rome; and the patriciate represented onlythe title, the service, the alliance, of these distant pro­tectors. The power and policy of Charlemagne anni­hilated an enemy, and imposed a master. In his firstvisit to the capital, he was received with all the honourswhich had formerly been paid to the exarch, the repre­sentative of the emperor: and these honours obtainedsome new decorations from the joy and gratitude ofPope Hadrian I." No sooner was he informed of thesudden approach of the monarch, than he dispatchedthe magistrates and nobles of Rome to meet him, withthe banner, about thirty miles from the city. At thedistance of one mile, the Flaminian way was lined withthe schools or national communities, of Greeks, Lom­bards, Saxons, &c.: the Roman youth were under arms;and the children of a more tender age, with palms andolive branches in their hands, chanted the praises of


'The papal advocates can soften the symbolic meaning of the banner and thekeys; bat the style of ad rtgnum dimisimus,oidirezimus, (Codex. Carolin, epist. 1.torn. 3. pars 2. p. 76.) seems to allow of no palliation or escape. In the MS.of the Vienna library, they read, instead of regnwn, rogum, prayer or request (seeDucange); and the royalty of Charles Martel is subverted by this important cor­rection. (Catalini, in his Critical Prefaces, Annali d'ltalia, torn. 17. p. 95—99.)
0 In the authentic narrative of this reception, the Liber Pontificals observes—obviam illi > jus sanctitas dirigens venerabiles cruces, id est signa; sicut, mos est adexarcham.autpatriciumsuscipiendum, eum cum ingentihonoresuscipi fecit, (torn.3.para 1. p. 185.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 241


the ecclesiastical order, whose liberty was connectedwith that of their chief. But the second attempt,though it was crowned with some partial and apparentsuccess, has been vigorously resisted by the secularpower, and finally extinguished by the improvement ofhuman reason.
In the revival of the empire of Rome, neither the
Authority i . •• . , *• , _.
of the em- bishop nor the people could bestow on Charle-SSnre.111 magne or Otho, the provinces which were lost,
as they had been won, by the chance of arms.But the Romans were free to choose a master for them­selves: and the powers which had been delegated tothe patrician, were irrevocably granted to the Frenchand Saxon emperors of the west. The broken recordsof the times," preserve some remembrance of their pa­lace, their mint, their tribunal, their edicts, and thesword of justice, which, as late as the thirteenth century,was derived from Caesar to the prefect of the city.xBetween the arts of the popes and the violence of thepeople, this supremacy was crushed and annihilated.Content with the titles of emperor and Augustus, thesuccessors of Charlemagne neglected to assert this lo­cal jurisdiction. In the hour of prosperity, their ambi­tion was diverted by more alluring objects; and in thedecay and division of the empire, they were oppressedby the defence of their hereditary provinces. Amidst
the ruins of Italy, the famous Marozia invited
Revolt of •"
one oi the usurpers to assume the character of


''938' her third husband; and Hugh, king of Bur­gundy, was introduced by her faction into the mole ofHadrian or castle of St. Angelo, which commands theprincipal bridge and entrance of Rome. Her son bythe first marriage, Alberic, was compelled to attend atthe nuptial banquet; but his reluctant and ungraceful


• For the history of the emperors in Rome and Italy, see Sigonius de Regnoit.ili.i-, Opp- torn. 2. with the notes of Saxius, and the Annals of Muratori, whomight refer more distinctly to the authors of his great collection.
1 See the Dissertation of Le Blanc at the end of his Treatise des Monnoyes deFrance, in which he produces some Roman coins of the French emperort.
VOL. VI. R







OCR Output








302 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Mahomet The first and most arduous conquests of Ma-Kehccsa, hornet' were those of his wife, his servant, hisA.D. cos. pupil, and his friend;" since he presented him­self as a prophet to those who were most conversantwith his infirmities as a man. Yet Cadijah believed thewords, and cherished the glory of her husband; the ob­sequious and affectionate Zeid was tempted by the pros­pect of freedom: the illustrious Ali, the son of AbuTaleb, embraced the sentiments of his cousin with thespirit of a youthful hero; and the wealth, the moderation,the veracity of Abubeker, confirmed the religion of theprophet whom he was destined to succeed. By hispersuasion, ten of the most respectable citizens of Meccawere introduced to the private lessons of Islam; theyyielded to the voice of reason and enthusiasm; they re­peated the fundamental creed,—There is but one God,and Mahomet is the apostle of God; and their faith, evenin this life, was rewarded with riches and honours, with


ideas of the Magi are darkly and doubtfully explored by their apologist. Dr.Hyde. (Hist. Religionis Persarum, c. 32. p. 402— 412. Oion. 1760.) la thearticle of Mahomet, Bayle has shewn how indifferently wit and philosophy supply<he absence of general information.
1 Before I enter into the history of the prophet, it is incumbent on me to producemy evidence. The Latin, French, and English versions of the Koran, are pre­ceded by historical discourses, and the three translators, Maracci (torn. 1. p. 10—32.) Savary, (torn. 1. p. 1—248.) and Sale, (Preliminary Discourse, p. 33—56.)Jbad accurately studied the language and character of their author. Two ptofessedlives of Mahomet have been composed by Dr. Prideaux ( Life of Mahomet, seventhedition, London, 1718, in octavo) and the oonnt de BoulainvilKere (Vie da Ma­homed. Londres, 1730, in octavo); Imt the adverse wish of 6nding an impostor,or a hero, has too often corrupted the learning of the doctor and the ingenuity ofthe count. The article in d'Herbelot (Bibliot. Orient, p.598—603.) is chieflydrawn from Novairi and Mircond; but the best and most authentic of our guidesis M. Gagnier, a Frenchman by birth, and professor at Oxford of the orientaltongues. In two elaborate works, (Ismael Abulfeda de Vita et Rebus gestisMohammedis, &c. Latine vertit, 1'r.i fationc et Notis illustravit Johannes Gagnier,Oxon. 1723, in folio; La Vie de Mahomet traduite et compile de 1'Alcoran, iesTraditions authentiques de la Sonna et des meilleurs Auteurs Arabes; Amsterdam,1748,3 vols. in duodecimo,) he has interpreted, illustrated, and supplied the Arabictext of Abulfeda and Al Jannabi; the first, an enlightened prince, who reigned atHamah, in Syria, A.D. 1310—1332; (see Gagnier Prafat. ad Abnlfed.) thesecond, a credulous doctor, who visited Mecca, A. D. 1556. (D'Herbelot, p. 397.Gagnier, torn. 3. p. 209, 210.) Thesearemy general vouchers, and the inquisitivereader may follow the order of time, and the division of chapters. Yet I mustobserve, that both Abulfeda and Al Jannabi are modern historians, and that theycannot appeal to any writers of the first century of the Hegira.
"After the Greeks, Prideaux (p. 8.) discloses the secret doubts of the wife ofMahomet. As if he had been a privy-counsellor of the prophet, Bonlanvillien(li.v'T'j. &c.) unfolds the sublime and patriotic views of Cadijah and the fretdisciples.







OCR Output








,'J20 ROMAN EMPIRE.


sulmans, and their disappointment might justly accusethe failure of a prophet who had so often appealed tothe evidence of success. The faith and hope of thepilgrims were rekindled by the prospect of Mecca: then-swords were sheathed; seven times in the footsteps ofthe apostle they encompassed the Caaba: the Koreishhad retired to the hills, and Mahomet, after the custo­mary sacrifice, evacuated the city on the fourth day.The people were edified by his devotion; the hostilechiefs were awed, or divided, or seduced; and both Ca-led and Amrou, the future conquerors of Syria andEgypt, most seasonably deserted the sinking cause ofidolatry. The power of Mahomet was increased by thesubmission of the Arabian tribes: ten thousand soldierswere assembled for the conquest of Mecca; and theidolaters, the weaker party, were easily convicted of vio­lating the truce. Enthusiasm and discipline impelledthe march, and preserved the secret, till the blaze of tenthousand fires proclaimed to the astonished Koreish, thedesign, the approach, and the irresistible force of theenemy. The haughty Abu Sophian presented the keysof the city, admired the variety of arms and ensigns thatpassed before him in review; observed that the son ofAbdallah had acquired a mighty kingdom, and con­fessed, under the scimitar of Omar, that he was theapostle of the true God. The return of Marius andSylla was stained with the blood of the Romans: therevenge of Mahomet was stimulated by religious zeal,and his injured followers were eager to execute or toprevent the order of a massacre. Instead of indulgingtheir passions and his own," the victorious exile forgavethe guilt, and united the factions of Mecca. His troops,


* After the conquest of Mecca, the Mahomet of Voltaire imagines and perpe­trates the most horrid crimes. The poet confesses, that he w not supported by thetruth of history, and can only allege, que celui qui fait la guerre a sa patrie au nomdo Diem, est capable de tout. (Oeuvres de Voltaire, torn. 15. p. 282.) The maximis neither charitable nor philosophic; and some reverence is surely due to the fameof heroes and the religion of nations. I am informed that a Turkish ambassadorat Paris was much scandalized at the representation of this tragedy.







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 201


knowledge. Among the forty-two cities of Arabia,0enumerated by Abulfeda, the most ancient and popu­lous were situate in the happy Yemen: the towers ofSaana,p and the marvellous reservoir of Merabq Wereconstructed by the kings of the Homerites; but theirprofane lustre was eclipsed by the propheticglories of MEDINA' and MECCA,*near the Redsea, and at the distance from each other of two hundredand seventy miles. The last of these holy places wasknown to the Greeks under the name of Macoraba; andthe termination of the word is expressive of its greatness,which has not indeed, in the most flourishing period, ex­ceeded the size and populousness of Marseilles. Some la­tent motive, perhaps of superstition, must have impelledthe founders, in the choice of amostunpromisingsituation.They erected their habitations of mud or stone, in a plainabout two miles long and one mile broad, at the foot ofthree barren mountains: the soil is a rock, the water, evenof the holy well of Zemzem, is bitter or brackish; thepastures are remote from the city; and grapes are trans-


- Yet Marcian of Heraclea (in Periplo, p. 16. in torn. 1. Hudson, Minor. Geo-graph.) reckons one hundred and sixty-four towns in Arabia Felix. The size of the.towns might be small—the faith of the writer might be large.
i' It is compared by Abulfeda (in Hudson, torn. 3. p. 54.) to Damascus, and isstill the residence of the Iman of Yemen. (Voyages de Niebuhr, torn. 1. p. 331—342.) Saana is twenty-four parasangs from Dasar, (Abulfeda, p. 51.) and sixty-eight from Aden. (p. 53.)
1 Pocock, Specimen, p. 57. Geograph. Nubiensis, p. 52. Moriaba, or Merab,six miles in circumference, was destroyed by the legions of Augustus, (Plin. Hist.Nat. 6 32.) and had not revived in the fourteenth century. (Abulfed. Descript.Arab. p. 58.)
r The name of city, Medina, was appropriated xar' tf t,xn, to Yatreb (the Latrippaof the Greeks), the seat of the prophet. The distances of Medina are reckoned byAbulfeda in stations, or days'journey of a caravan: (p. 15.) to Bahrein, fifteen; toBassora, eighteen; to Cusah, twenty; to Damascus or Palestine, twenty; to Cairo,'twenty-five; to Mecca, ten; from Mecca to Saana, (p. 52.) or Aden, thirty; toCairo, thirty-one days, or four hundred and twelve hours; (Shaw's Travels, p. 477.)which, according to the estimate of d'Anville, (Mesures Itineraires, p. 99.) allowsabout twenty-five English miles for a day's journey. From the land of frankincense(Hadramant, in Yemen, between Aden and Cape Fartasch) to Gaza, in Syria, Pliny(Hist. Nat. 12. 32.) computes sixty-five mansions of camels. These measures mayassist fancy and elucidate facts.
• Our notions of Mecca must be drawn from the Arabians, (d'Herbelot, Biblio-theque Orientate, p. 368—371. Pocock,Specimen, p. 125—128. Abulfeda, p. 11—40) As no unbeliever is permitted to enter the city, our travellers are silent; andthe short hints of Thevenot (Voyages du Levant, part 1. p. 490.) are taken fromthe suspicious mouth of an African renegado. Some Persians counted six thousandhouses. (Chardiu, torn. 4. p. 167.)







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 317


ship into implacable hatred, with which he pursued thatunfortunate people to the last moment of his life; andin the double character of an apostle and a conqueror,his persecution was extended to both worlds.11 TheKainoka dwelt at Medina under the protection of thecity: he seized the occasion of an accidental tumult, andsummoned them to embrace his religion, or contend withhim in battle. Alas (replied the trembling Jews), weare ignorant of the use of arms, but we persevere in thefaith and worship of our fathers; why wilt thou reduceus to the necessity of a just defence? The unequal conflictwas terminated in fifteen days; and it was with extremereluctance that Mahomet yielded to the importunity ofhis allies, and consented to spare the lives of the cap­tives. But their riches were confiscated, their armsbecame more effectual in the hands of the Mussulmans;and a wretched colony of seven hundred exiles wasdriven with their wives and children to implore a refugeon the confines of Syria. The Nadharites were moreguilty, since they conspired in a friendly interview toassassinate the prophet. He besieged their castle threemiles from Medina, but their resolute defence obtainedan honourable capitulation; and the garrison, soundingtheir trumpets and beating their drums, was permittedto depart with the honours of war. The Jews had ex­cited and joined the war of the Koreish: no sooner hadthe nations retired from the ditch, than Mahomet, with­out laying aside his armour, marched on the same dayto extirpate the hostile race of the children of Koraidha.After a resistance of twenty-five days, they surrenderedat discretion. They trusted to the intercessipn of theirold allies of Medina: they could not be ignorant thatfanaticism obliterates the feelings of humanity. A ve­nerable elder, to whose judgment they. appealed, pro­nounced the sentence of their death: seven hundred
"The ware of Mahomet against the Jewish tribes, of Kainoka, the Nadhirites,Koraidha, and Chaibar, are related by Abolfeda(p. 61. 71. 77. 87, &c.) and Gag.nier. (torn. 9. 61—65.107—114. 139—148. 268—294.)







OCR Output








30 ROMAN EMPIRE.


voutly tortured the enemy of Christ and St. Cyril; and,as far as the confines of ^Ethiopia, the heretic was al­ternately dragged and recalled, till his aged body wasbroken by the hardships and accidents of these reite­rated journeys. Yet his mind was still independent anderect; the president of Thebais was awed by his pasto­ral letters; he survived the Catholic tyrant of Alexan­dria, and, after sixteen years' banishment, the synod ofChalcedon would perhaps have restored him to the ho­nours, or at least to the communion of the church. Thedeath of Nestorius prevented his obedience to their wel­come summons;' and his disease might afford somecolour to the scandalous report, that his tongue, the or­gan of blasphemy, had been eaten by the worms. Hewas buried in a city of Upper Egypt, known by thenames of Chemnis, or Panopolis, or Akmin ;k but theimmortal malice of the Jacobites has persevered for agesto cast stones against his sepulchre, and to propagate thefoolish tradition, that it was never watered by the rainof heaven, which equally descends on the righteous andthe ungodly.1 Humanity may drop a tear on the fate ofNestorius; yet justice must observe,that he suffered thepersecution which he had approved and inflicted.™
The death of the Alexandrian primate, after aEutychM, reign of thirty-two years, abandoned the Catho-A. D.448. tne intemperance of zeal, and the abuse of


1 The invitation of Nestorius to the synod of Chalcedon, is related by Zachariusbishop of Melitene, (Evagrius, lib. 2. c. 2. Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, torn. 2. p. 55.)and the famous Xenaias or Philoxenus, bishop of Hierapolis, (Asseman. Bibliot.Orient, torn. 2. p. 40, &c.) denied by Evagrius and Asseman, and stoutlymaintained by La Croze. (Thesaur. Epistol. torn. 3. p. 181, &c.) The fact is notimprobable ; yet it was the interest of the Monophysites to spread the invidiousreport; and Eutychius (torn. 2. p. 12.) affirms, that Nestorius died after an exile ofseven years, and consequently ten years before the synod of Chalcedon.
k Consult d'Anville. (Memoire sur 1'Egypte, p. 191.) Pocock, Description of theEast, vol. 1, p. 76.) Abulfeda, (Descript. Egypt, p. 14.) and his commentator Mi-chaelis, (Not. p. 78 — 83.) and the Nubian Geographer, (p. 42.) who mentions, in thetwelfth century, the ruins and the sugar-canes of Akmirn.
Eutychius, (Annal. torn. 2. p. 1 2. ) and Gregory Bar-Hebraus, of Abulpharagins,(Asseman. torn. 2. p. 316.) represent the credulity of the tenth and thirteenth cen­turies.
01 We are obliged to Evagrius (lib. 1 . c. 7 ) for some extracts from the letters ofNestorius ; but the lively picture of his sufferings is treated with insult by the hardand stupid fanatic.







OCR Output








340 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the third caliph, twenty-four years after the death ofthe prophet, that All was invested, by the popularchoice, with the regal and sacerdotal office. The man­ners of the Arabians retained their primitive simplicity,and the son of Abu Taleb despised the pomp and vanityof this world. At the hour of prayer, he repaired tothe mosch of Medina, clothed in a thin cotton gown, acoarse turban on his head, his slippers in one hand, andhis bow in the other, instead of a walking staff. Thecompanions of the prophet and the chiefs of the tribessaluted their new sovereign, and gave him their righthands as a sign of fealty and allegiance.Discord of The mischiefs that flow from the contests ofIndpJr-8 ambition are usually confined to the times andBums. countries in which they had been agitated. Butthe religious discord of the friends and enemies of Allhas been renewed in every age of the Hegira, and is stillmaintained in the immortal hatred of the Persians andTurks.k The former, who are branded with the appella­tion of Shiites or sectaries, have enriched the Mahometancreed with a new article of faith; and if Mahomet bethe apostle, his companion Ali is the vicar, of God. Intheir private converse, in their public worship, they bit­terly execrate the three usurpers who intercepted his in­defeasible right to the dignity of imam and caliph; andthe name of Omar expresses in their tongue the perfectaccomplishment of wickedness and impiety.1 The Son-nites, who are supported by the general consent and or­thodox tradition of the Mussulmans, entertain a moreimpartial, or at least a more decent, opinion. They re­spect the memory of Abubeker, Omar, Othman, and Ali,the holy and legitimate successors of the prophet. But


k The schism of the Persians is explained by all oar travellers of the last century,especially in the second and fourth volumes of their master, Chardin. Niebuhr,though of infinite merit, has the advantage of writing so late as the year 1764,(Voyages en Arabic, &c. torn. 2. p. 208—233.) since the ineffectual attempt ofNadir Shah to change the religion of the nation. (See his Persian History trans­lated into French by sir William Jones, torn. 2. p. 5, 6. 47, 48. 144—155.)
1 Omar is the name of the devil: his murderer is a saint. When the Persians?hoot with the bow, they frequently cry—" May this arrow go to the heart ofOmar!" (Voyages de Chardin, torn. 2. p. 239, 240. 259, &c.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 85


patience and dexterity of forty years at length obtaineda more favourable audience, and two emperors of Abys­sinia were persuaded that Rome could ensure the tem­poral and everlasting happiness of her votaries. Thefirst of these royal converts lost his crown and his life;and the rebel army was sanctified by the abuna, whohurled an anathema at the apostate, and absolved hissubjects from their oath of fidelity. The fate of Za-denghel was revenged by the courage and fortune ofSusneus, who ascended the throne under the name ofSegued, and more vigorously prosecuted the pious en­terprise of his kinsman. After the amusement of someunequal combats between the Jesuits and his illiteratepriests, the emperor declared himself a proselyte to thesynod of Chalcedon, presuming that his clergy andpeople would embrace without delay the religion oftheir prince. The liberty of choice was succeeded bya law, which imposed, under pain of death, the beliefof the two natures of Christ: the Abyssinians were en­joined to work and to play on the sabbath; and Se­gued, in the face of Europe and Africa, renounced hisconnexion with the Alexandrian church. A Jesuit,._ Alphonso Mendez, the Catholic patriarch of
•ion of ./Ethiopia, accepted in the name of Urban VIII.IOT.TJD. the homage and abjuration of his penitent. /16t6' confess (said the emperor on his kness), / con­fess that the pope is the vicar of Christ, the successor ofSt. Peter, and the sovereign of the world. To him Iswear true obedience, and at his feet I offer my personand kingdom. A similar oath was repeated by his son,his brother, the clergy, the nobles, and even the ladiesof the court: the Latin patriarch was invested with ho­nours and wealth; and his missionaries erected theirchurches or citadels in the most convenient stations ofthe empire. The Jesuits themselves declare the fatalindiscretion of their chief, who forgot the mildness oithe gospel and the policy of his order, to introduce







OCR Output








CHAP. X-LVII. 21


of the monks; and the people were interested in the gloryof their virgin patroness.1" The sermons of the archbi­shop, and the service of the altar, were disturbed by se­ditious clamour; his authority and doctrine were re­nounced by separate congregations; every wind scatter­ed round lie empire the leaves of controversy; and thevoice of the combatants on a sonorous theatre re-echoedin the cells of Palestine and Egypt. It was the duty of Cy­ril to enlighten the zeal and ignorance of his innumerablemonks; in the school of Alexandria, he had imbibed andprofessed the incarnation of one nature: and the suc­cessor of Athanasius consulted his pride and ambition,when he rose in arms against another Arius, more for­midable and more guilty, on the second throne of thehierarchy. After a short correspondence, in which therival prelates disguised their hatred in the hollow lan­guage of respect and charity, the patriarch of Alexan­dria denounced to the prince and people, to the eastand to the west, the damnable errors of the Byzantinepontiff. From the east, more especially from Antioch,he obtained the ambiguous counsels of toleration andsilence, which were addressed to both parties whilethey favoured the cause of Nestorius. But the Vaticanreceived with open arms the messengers of Egypt.The vanity of Celestine was flattered by the appeal;and the partial version of a monk decided the faith ofthe pope, who, with his Latin clergy, was ignorant ofthe language, the arts, and the theology of the Greeks.At the head of an Italian synod, Celestine weighed themerits of the cause, approved the creed of Cyril, con­demned the sentiments and person of Nestorius, de­graded the heretic from his episcopal dignity, alloweda respite of ten days for recantation and penance, anddelegated to his enemy the execution of this rash andillegal sentence. But the patriarch of Alexandria,whilst he darted the thunders of a god, exposed the
P See Ducangc, C. P. Christiana, lib, 1. p. SO, &c.







OCR Output








130 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the last moments of despair, when he no longer wantedor valued the opinion of mankind.
Of the four sons of the emperor, Constantine diedbefore his father, whose grief and credulity were amused
by a flattering impostor and a vain apparition.
Stephen, the youngest, was content with the, honours of a patriarch and a saint; both LeoMarch i. and Alexander were alike invested with the pur­ple, but the powers of government were solely exercisedby the elder brother. The name of Leo VI. has beendignified with the title of philosopher; and the unionof the prince and the sage, of the active and speculativevirtues, would indeed constitute the perfection of humannature. But the claims of Leo are far short of this idealexcellence. Did he reduce his passions and appetitesunder the dominion of reason? His life was spent inthe pomp of the palace, in the society of his wives andconcubines; and even the clemency which he shewed,and the peace which he strove to preserve, must be im­puted to the softness and indolence of his character.Did he subdue his prejudices, and those of his subjects?His mind was tinged with the most puerile superstition;the influence of the clergy, and the errors of the people,were consecrated by his laws; and the oracles of Leo,which reveal, in prophetic style, the fates of the empire,are founded on the arts of astrology and divination.If we still inquire the reason of his sage appellation, itcan only be replied, that the son of Basil was less igno­rant than the greater part of his contemporaries in churchand state; that his education had been directed by thelearned Photius; and that several books of profane andecclesiastical science were composed by the pen, or inthe name, of the imperial philosopher. But the reputa­tion of his philosophy and religion was overthrown bya domestic vice, the repetition of his nuptials. Theprimitive ideas of the merit and holiness of celibacy







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 41


the Roman pontiffs, of equal valour, though of unequalstrength, may be found at the two extremities of thetheological scale. The acephali, without a king or abishop, were separated above three hundred years fromthe patriarchs of Alexandria, who had accepted thecommunion of Constantinople, without exacting a for­mal condemnation of the synod of Chalcedon. Foraccepting the communion of Alexandria, without aformal approbation of the same synod, the patriarchsof Constantinople were anathematized by the popes.Their inflexible despotism involved the most orthodoxof the Greek churches in this spiritual contagion, de­nied or doubted the validity of their sacraments,' andfomented, thirty-five years, the schism of the east andwest, till they finally abolished the memory of fourByzantine pontiffs, who had dared to oppose the su­premacy of St. Peter/ Before that period, the preca­rious truce of Constantinople and Egypt had been vio­lated by the zeal of the rival prelates. Macedonius,who was suspected of the Nestorian heresy, asserted,in disgrace and exile, the synod of Chalcedon, whilethe successor of Cyril would have purchased its over­throw with a bribe of two thousand pounds of gold.The TrU- In the fever of the times, the sense, or ratherthe sound of a syllable, was sufficient to disturbthe peace of an empire. TheTaiSAGioNg(thrice


to the bishoprics of Athribis and Talba, (perhaps Tava: see d'Anville, p. 82.)and supplied the sacraments, which had failed for want of an episcopal ordination.
'De his quos baptizavit, quos ordinavit Acacius, majorum traditione confectamet MT.an, priecipue religiose solicitudini congruam prabemus sine difficultate me-dicinarn. (Galasius, in epist. 1. ad Euphemium, Condi, torn. .'• 286.) The offerof a medicine proves the disease, and numbers must have perished before the ar-•''. il of the Roman physician. Tillemont himself (Mern. Eccles. torn. 16. p. Sit,642, Sec.) is shocked at the proud uncharitable temper of the popes; they arc nowglad, says he, to invoke St. Flavian of Antioch, St. Elias of Jerusalem, &c. towhom they refused communion whilst upon earth. But cardinal Baronius it firmand hard as the rock of St. Peter.
•'Their names were erased from the diptych of the church: ex venerabili dip-tycho, in quo pia memoriie transitum ad ccdum habentium episcoporum vocabulacondnentur. (Concil. torn. i. p. 1846.) This ecclesiastical record was thereforeequivalent to the book of life.
t Petavios (Dogmat. Theolog. torn. 5. lib. 5. c. I—4. p. 217—3«5.) and TUle-mont (Mern. Eccles. torn. 14. p. 713, &c. 799.) represent the history and doctrineof the Trisagion. In the twelve centuries between Isaiah and St. Proclus'a boy,







OCR Output








176 ROMAN EMPIRE.


to the substance of Christ's body," I have purposelyabandoned to the curiosity of speculative divines.But I have reviewed, with diligence and pleasure,the objects of ecclesiastical history, by which the de­cline and fall of the Roman empire were materiallyaffected, the propagation of Christianity, the constitu­tion of the Catholic church, the ruin of Paganism,and the sects that arose from the mysterious contro­versies concerning the Trinity and incarnation. Atthe head of this class, we may justly rank the wor­ship of images, so fiercely disputed in the eighth andninth centuries; since a question of popular supersti­tion produced the revolt of Italy, the temporal powerof the popes, and the restoration of the Roman empirein the west.
The primitive Christians were possessed with an un­conquerable repugnance to the use and abuse of images,and this aversion may be ascribed to their descent fromthe Jews, and their enmity to the Greeks. The Mosaiclaw had severely proscribed all representations of theDeity; and that precept was firmly established, in theprinciples and practice of the chosen people. The witof the Christian apologists was pointed against the foolishidolaters, who bowed before the workmanship of theirown hands; the images of brass and marble, which hadthey been endowed with sense and motion, should havestarted rather from the pedestal to adore the creativepowers of the artist.b Perhaps some recent and imper­fect converts of the Gnostic tribe, might crown thestatues of Christ and St. Paul with the profane honourswhich they paid to those of Aristotle and Pythagoras ;c


» The learned Sold™ has given the history of transubstantiation in a compre­hensive and pithy sentence.—" This opinion is only rhetoric turned into logic."(His Works, vol. 3. p. S073. in his Table talk.)
b Nee intelligunt homines ineptissimi, qudd si sentire simulacra et moveri po»-sent, adoraturahominemfmssent a quo sunt expolita. (Divin. Institut. lib. t. c. -'.)Lactantius is the last, as well as the most eloquent, of the Latin apologists. Theirraillery of idols attacks not only the object, but the form and matter.
c See Irenaeus, Epiphanius, and Augustin. (Basnage, Hist , des F.glisrs Refor-mees, torn. 2. p. 1313.) This Gnostic practice has a singular affinity with the







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 319


and the caliph alleged the injunction of his dying mas­ter, that one and the true religion should be professed inhis native land of Arabia/
Submission ^'ve ^mes eacn day tne e7es o^ Mahometof Mecca, were turned towards Mecca,2 and he was urged'by the most sacred and powerful motives, to re­visit, as a conqueror, the city and temple from whencehe had been driven as an exile. The Caaba was presentto his waking and sleeping fancy: an idle dream wastranslated into vision and prophecy; he unfurled theholy banner; and a rash promise of success too hastilydropped from the lips of the apostle. His march fromMedina to Mecca displayed the peaceful and solemnpomp of a pilgrimage; seventy camels, chosen and be­decked for sacrifice, preceded the van; the sacred ter­ritory was respected, and the captives were dismissedwithout ransom to proclaim his clemency and devotion.But no sooner did Mahomet descend into the plain,within a day's journey of the city, than he exclaimed,they have clothed themselves with the skins of tigers; thenumbers and resolution of the Koreish opposed his pro­gress; and the roving Arabs of the desert might desertor betray a leader whom they had followed for the hopesof spoil. The intrepid fanatic sunk into a cool and cau­tious politician: he waved in the treaty his title ofapostle of God, concluded with the Koreish and theirallies a truce of ten years, engaged to restore the fugitivesof Mecca who should embrace his religion, and stipu­lated only, for the ensuing year, the humble privilege ofentering the city as a friend, and of remaining threedays to accomplish the rites of the pilgrimage. A cloudof shame and sorrow hung on the retreat of the Mus-


> The banishment of the Jews is attested by Klmacin (Hist. Saracen, p. 9.) andthe great Al Zabari. (Gagnier, torn. 2. p. 285.) Yet Niebohr (Description de1'Arabic, p. 324.) believes that the Jewish religion, and Kareite sect, are still pro­fessed by the tribe of Chaibar; and that in the plunder of the caravans, the disci­ples of Moses are the confederates of those of Mahomet.
* The successive steps of the reduction of Mecca are related by Abulfeda, (p.84—87. 97—100. 104—111.) and Gagnier, (torn. 2. p. 209—245, 309—382. torn. 3.p. 1—58.) Klmacin, (Hilt. Saracen, p. 8—10.) Abulpharagius, (Dynast, p. 103.)







OCR Output








CHAP. LII. 529


from the extremity of Africa, these successful rivals ex­tinguished in Egypt and Syria, both the spiritual andtemporal authority of the Abbassides; and the monarchof the Nile insulted the humble pontiff on the banks ofthe Tigris.
Enterprises In the declining age of the caliphs, in theGreeL, century which elapsed after the war of Theophi-A.D.960. \us an(j Motassem, the hostile transactions of thetwo nations were confined to some inroads by sea andland, the fruits of their close vicinity and indelible ha­tred. But when the eastern world was convulsed andbroken, the Greeks were roused from their lethargy bythe hopes of conquest and revenge. The Byzantine em­pire, since the accession of the Basilian race, had reposedin peace and dignity; and they'might encounter withtheir entire strength the front of some petty emir, whoserear was assaulted and threatened by his national foesof the Mahometan faith. The lofty titles of the morningstar, and the death of the Saracens,' were applied in thepublic acclamations to Nicephorus Phocas, a prince asrenowned in the camp as he was unpopular in the city.Reduction In the subordinate station of great domestic, orof Creus. general of the east, he reduced the island of Crete,and extirpated the nest of pirates who had so long defied,with impunity, the majesty of the empire." His militarygenius was displayed in the conduct and success of theenterprise, which had so often failed with loss and dis­honour. The Saracens were confounded by the landingof his troops on safe and level bridges, which he castfrom the vessels to the shore. Seven months were con­sumed in the siege of CJandia; the despair of the native


'Liutprand, whose choleric temper was imbittcred by his uneasy situation, sug­gests the names of reproach and contempt more applicable to Nicephorus than thevain titles of the Greeks, Ecce venit stella matutina, surgit Eous, reverberat obtutdsolis radios, pallida Saracenorum mors, Nicephorus /uilov.
11 Notwithstanding tho insinuations of Zonaras, x4i n /un, &c, (torn. 2. lib. 16.
& 197.) it is an undoubted fact, that Crete was completely and finally subdued byicephorus Phocas. (Pagi, Critica, torn. 3. p. 873—875. Meursius, Creta, lib. 3.c. 7.torn.3. p. 464,465.)
VOL. VI. 2 M







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 399


the natives and strangers might feel some sparks of theenthusiasm which so fiercely glowed in the bosoms ofthe Saracens. The siege of Jerusalem lasted fourmonths; not a day was lost without some action ofsally or assault; the military engines incessantly playedfrom the ramparts; and the inclemency of the winterwas still more painful and destructive to the Arabs. TheChristians yielded at length to the perseverance of thebesiegers. The patriarch Sophronius appeared on thewalls, and by the voice of an interpreter demanded aconference. After a vain attempt to dissuade the lieu­tenant of the caliph from his impious enterprise, he pro­posed, in the name of the people, a fair capitulation,with this extraordinary clause, that the articles of secu­rity should be ratified by the authority and presence ofOmar himself. The question was debated in the councilof Medina; the sanctity of the place, and the advice ofAli, persuaded the caliph to gratify the wishes of his sol­diers and enemies, and the simplicity of his journey ismore illustrious than the royal pageants of vanity andoppression. The conqueror of Persia and Syria wasmounted on a red camel, which carried, besides his per­son, a bag of corn, a bag of dates, a wooden dish, anda leather bottle of water. Wherever he halted, the com­pany, without distinction, was invited to partake of hishomely fare, and repast was consecrated by the prayerand exhortation of the commander of the faithful.1 Butin this expedition of pilgriniage, his power was exer­cised in the administration of justice; he reformed thelicentious polygamy of the Arabs, relieved the tributa­ries from extortion and cruelty, and chastised the luxuryof the Saracens, by despoiling them of their rich silks,and dragging them on their faces in the dirt. Whenhe came within sight of Jerusalem, the caliph cried with


1 The singular journey and equipage of Omar are described (besides Ockley,»ol. 1. p. 250.) by Murtadi. (Merveillos de 1'Egypte, p. 200—202.)







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 347


with vigour and address; and his son Yezid, a feebleand dissolute youth, was proclaimed as the commanderof the faithful and the successor of the apostle of God.Death of A familiar story is related of the benevolenceA^ixeao of one of the sons of Ali. In serving at table, aOct. 10. slave had inadvertently dropped a dish of scald­ing broth on his master: the heedless wretch fell pros­trate, to deprecate his punishment, and repeated a verseof the Koran. Paradise is far those who command theiranger.—I am not angry.—And for those who pardon of­fences.—I pardon your offence.—And for those who re­turn good for evil.—I give you your liberty, and fourhundred pieces of silver. With an equal measure ofpiety, Hosein, the younger brother of Hassan, inheriteda remnant of his father's spirit, and served with honouragainst the Christians in the siege of Constantinople.The primogeniture of the line of Hashem, and the holycharacter of grandson of the apostle, had centred in hisperson, and he was at liberty to prosecute his claimagainst Yezid, the tyrant of Damascus, whose vices hedespised, and whose title he had never deigned to ac­knowledge. A list was secretly transmitted from Cufato Medina, of one hundred and forty thousand Moslems,who professed their attachment to his cause, and whowere eager to draw their swords as soon as he shouldappear on the banks of the Euphrates. Against theadvice of his wisest friends, he resolved to trust hi$ personand family in the hands of a perfidious people. He tra­versed the desert of Arabia with a timorous retinue ofwomen and children; but as he approached the confinesof Irak, he was alarmed by the solitary or hostile face ofthe country, and suspected either the defection or ruinof his party. His fears were just: Obeidollah, the go­vernor of Cufa, had extinguished the first sparks of aninsurrection; and Hosein, in the plain of Kerbela, wasencompassed by a body of five thousand horse, who in<-tercepted his communication with the city and the river.







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 369


and final stand for their religion and country; and thedecisive battle of Nehavend was styled by the Arabs thevictory of victories. If it be true that the flying generalof the Persians was stopped and overtaken in a crowd ofmules and camels laden with honey, the incident, how­ever slight or singular, will denote the luxurious impe­diments of an oriental army/
Conquest The geography of Persia is darkly delineatedA.D?6S7 by the Greeks and Latins; but the most illus-~651- trious of her cities appear to be more ancientthan the invasion of the Arabs. By the reduction ofRamadan and Ispahan, of Caswin, Tauris, and Rei, theygradually approached the shores of the Caspian sea;and the orators of Mecca might applaud the success andspirit of the faithful, who had already lost sight of thenorthern bear, and had almost transcended the boundsof the habitable world.g Again turning towards thewest and the Roman empire, they repassed the Tigrisover the bridge of Mosul, and, in the captive provincesof Armenia and Mesopotamia, embraced their victoriousbrethren of the Syrian army. From the palace of Madayntheir eastern progress was not less rapid or extensive.They advanced along the Tigris and the Gulf; pene­trated through the passes of the mountains into thevalley of Estachar or Persepolis; and profaned the lastsanctuary of the Magian empire. The grandson ofChosroes was nearly surprised among the falling columnsand mutilated figures; a sad emblem of the past andpresent fortune of Persia;11 he fled with accelerated haste


'See the article of Nehavend, in d'Herbelot, p. 667, 668. and .Voyages en Tur-quie et en Perse, par Otter, torn. 1. p. 191.
f It is in such a style of ignorance and wonder that the Athenian orator describesthe Arctic conquestsof Alexander, who never advances beyond the shores of the Cas­pian, AXifrwJpot •£» -Pi! »fxrcu xai -rnt iHuuftmt, oAiyouJtif, xamt fMtSuinwa. Eschinescontra Ctesiphontem, torn. 3. p. 554. edit. Graec. Orator. Reiske. This memorablecause was pleaded at Athens, Olymp. 112. 3. (before Christ 300) in the autumn,(Taylor, prafat. p. 370, &c.) about a year after the battle of Arbela; and Alex­ander, in the pursuit of Darius, was marching towards Hyrcania and Bactriana.
11 We are indebted for this curious particular to the Dynasties of Abulpharagius,p. 116. but it is needless to prove the identity of Estachar and Persepolis; (d'Her­belot, p. 327.) and still more needless to copy the drawings and descriptions ofair John Chardin, or Corneille le Brnyn.
VOL. VI. 2 B







OCR Output








306 ROMAN EMPIRE.


of the branch of Oramiyah, succeeded to tne principalityof the republic of Mecca. A zealous votary of the idols,a mortal foe of the line of Hashem, he convened an as­sembly of the Koreishites and their allies, to decide thefate of the apostle. His imprisonment might provoke thedespair of his enthusiasm; and the exile of an eloquentand popular fanatic would diffuse the mischief throughthe provinces of Arabia. His death was resolved; andthey agreed that a sword from each tribe should beburied in his heart, to divide the guilt of his blood, andand driven baffle the vengeance of the Hashemites. An an-Mecca. S^ or a SPY revealed their conspiracy; and flightA.D. ees. was the only resource of Mahomet.b At the deadof night, accompanied by his friend Abubeker, he silentlyescaped from his house: the assassins watched at thedoor; but they were deceived by the figure of Ali, whoreposed on the bed, and was covered with the green vest­ment of the apostle. The Koreish respected the pietyof the heroic youth; but some verses of Ali, which arestill extant, exhibit an interesting picture of his anxiety,his tenderness, and his religious confidence. Three daysMahomet and his companion were concealed in the caveof Thor, at the distance of a league from Mecca; and inthe close of each evening, they received from the sonand daughter of Abubeker, a secret supply of intelligenceand food. The diligence of the Koreish explored everyhaunt in the neighbourhood of the city; they arrived atthe entrance of the cavern; but the providential deceitof a spider's web and a pigeon's nest, is supposed to con­vince them that the place was solitary and inviolate. Weare only two, said the trembling Abubeker. There is athird (replied the prophet); it is God himself. Nosoofter was the pursuit abated, than the two fugitives is­sued from the rock, and mounted their camels; on theroad to Medina, they were overtaken by the emissariesof the Koreish; they redeemed themselves with prayers
» plfcrbelot, Bibliot. Orient, p. 445. He quotes a particular history of th«flight of Mahomet.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 53


Justinian, remember your baptism and your creed! Letnot your gray hairs be defiled with heresy. Recallyour fathers from exile, and your followers from perdi­tion. You cannot be ignorant, that Italy and Gaul,Spain and Africa, already deplore your fall, and ana­thematize your name. Unless, without delay, you destroywhat you have taught; unless you exclaim, with a loudvoice, I have erred, I have sinned, anathema to Nestorius,anathema to Eutyches, you will deliver your soul to thesame flames in which they will eternally burn. He diedand made no sign.g His death restored in some de­gree the peace of the church, and the reigns of his foursuccessors, Justin, Tiberius, Maurice, and Phocas, aredistinguished by a rare, though fortunate, vacancy, inthe ecclesiastical history of the east.11The Mono- The faculties of sense and reason are least. ca-t^era0011 pable of acting on themselves; the eye is mostA. D. 629: inaccessible to the sight, the soul to the thought;yet we think, and even feel, that one will, a sole principleof action, is essential to a rational and conscious being.When Heraclius returned from the Persian war, the or­thodox hero consulted his bishops, whether the Christwhom he adored, of one person, but of two natures, wasactuated by a single or a double will. They replied in thesingular, and the emperor was encouraged to hope thatthe Jacobites of Egypt and Syria might be reconciled bythe profession of a doctrine, most certainly harmless, andmost probably true, since it was taught even by the Nes-torians themselves.' The experiment was tried without


*Nicetius, bishop of Treves: (Concil. torn. 6. p. 511—513.) he himself, likemost of the Galilean prelates, (Grcgor. Epist. lib. 7. ep. 5. in Concil- torn. 6. p.1007.)was separated from the communion of the four patriarchs by his refusal to condemnthe three chapters. Baronius almost pronounces the damnation of Justinian.(A. D. 565. no. 6.)
k After relating the last heresy of Justinian, (lib. 4. c. 39—41.) and the edict ofhis successor, (lib. 5. c. 3.) the remainder of the history of Evagrius is filled withi i \ i I, instead of ecclesiastical events.
1 This extraordinary, and perhaps inconsistent, doctrine of the Nestorians, hadbeen observed by La Croze, (Christianisme des Indcs, torn. 1. p. 19, 20.) and ismore fully exposed by Abulpharagius (Bibliot. Orient, torn. 2. p. 292.) Hist. Dy­nast, p. 21. vers. Latin Pocock), and Asscman himself, (torn. 4. p. 218.) They seem







OCR Output








116 ROMAN EMPIRE.


fied, or rather was produced by the event. Ten yearsafterward, when the Thracian camp rejected the hus­band of Procopia, the crown was presented to the sameLeo, the first in military rank and the secret author ofthe mutiny. As he affected to hesitate,—with thissword (said his companion Michael) / will open thegates of Constantinople to your imperial sway; or in­stantly plunge it into your bosom, if you obstinately resistthe just desires of your fellow-soldiers. The complianceof the Armenian was rewarded with the empire, and hereigned seven years and a half under the name of LeoV. Educated in a camp, and ignorant both of laws andletters, he introduced into his civil government the ri­gour and even cruelty of military discipline; but if hisseverity was sometimes dangerous to the innocent, itwas always formidable to the guilty. His religiousinconstancy was taxed by the epithet of chameleon, butthe Catholics have acknowledged by the voice of a saintand confessors, that the life of the Iconoclast was use­ful to the republic. The zeal of his companion Mi­chael was repaid with riches, honours, and militarycommand; and his subordinate talents were beneficiallyemployed in the public service. Yet the Phrygianwas dissatisfied at receiving as a favour a scanty portionof the imperial prize, which he had bestowed on hisequal; and his discontent, which sometimes evaporatedin a hasty discourse, at length assumed a more threat­ening and hostile aspect against a prince whom herepresented as a cruel tyrant. That tyrant, however,repeatedly detected, warned, and dismissed the oldcompanion of his arms, till fear and resentment pre­vailed over gratitude; and Michael, after a scrutinyinto his actions, was convicted of treason, and sen­tenced to be burnt alive in the furnace of the privatebaths. The devout humanity of the empress Theo-phano was fatal to her husband and family. A solemnday, the twenty-fifth of December, had been fixed for







OCR Output













OCR Output








240 ROMAN EMPIRE.


sence of Otho the great. As John XII. had renouncedthe dress and decencies of his profession, the soldiermay not perhaps be dishonoured by the wine which hedrank, the blood that he spilt, the flames that he kin­dled, or the licentious pursuits of gaming and hunting.His open simony might be the consequence of distress:and his blasphemous invocation of Jupiter and Venus,if it be true, could not possibly be serious. But weread with some surprise, that the worthy grandson ofMarozia lived in public adultery with the matrons ofRome; that the Lateran palace was turned into aschool for prostitution, and that his rapes of virginsand widows had deterred the female pilgrims from vi­siting the tomb of St. Peter, lest, in the devout act theyshould be violated by his successor." The Protestantshave dwelt with malicious pleasure on these charactersof antichrist; but to a philosophic eye, the vices ofthe clergy are far less dangerous than their virtues.After a long series of scandal, the apostolic see
Reforms- . - , i i i i •'
tion and was reformed and exalted by the austerity andihe'church, zeal of Gregory VII. That ambitious monkA.D.1073. devoted his life to the execution of two pro­jects. I. To fix in the college of cardinals thefreedom and independence of election, and for ever toabolish the right or usurpation of the emperors and theRoman people. II. To bestow and resume the wes­tern empire as a fief or benefice' of the church, and toextend his temporal dominion over kings and kingdomsof the earth. After a contest of fifty years, the first ofthese designs was accomplished by the firm support of


'Lateranense palatium .... proatibulum meretricum Testis omnium
gentium, praterquam Romanorum, absentia mulierum, qua sanctorum apostolo •nun limina orandi gratia timent visere, cum nonnullas ante dies paucos, hunc au-dierint conjugatas viduas, virgines vi oppressisse. (Lautprand, Hist. lib. 6. c. 6.p. 471. See the whole affair of John XII. p. 471—i76.)
'A new example of the mischief of equivocation is the beneficium (Ducange.torn. 1. p. 617, &c.) which the pope conferred on the emperor Frederic I. sincethe Latin word may signify either a legal fief, or a simple favour, an obligation,(we want the word bivnfait.) See Schmid, Hist, des Allemands, torn. 3. p. 398—408. Pfeflel, Abrege Chronologique, torn. 1. p. 329. 296. 317. 324. 420. 43O,500. 505. 509, &c.







OCR Output













OCR Output








CHAP. LII. 521


timid persecution assisted the progress of the new sect,and the name of the prophet became more revered afterhis person had been withdrawn from the world. Histwelve apostles dispersed themselves among the Be-doweens, a race of men (says Abulfeda) equally devoidof reason and religion; and the success of their preach­ing seemed to threaten Arabia with a new revolution.The Carmathians were ripe for rebellion, since theydisclaimed the title of the house of Abbas, and ab­horred the worldly pomp of the caliphs of Bagdad.They were susceptible of discipline, since they vowed ablind and absolute submission to their imam, who wascalled to the prophetic office by the voice of God andthe people. Instead of the legal tithes, he claimed thefifth of their substance and spoil: the most flagitious sins
Theirmiu-were no more tnan tne type o^ disobedience;tary ex- and the brethren were united and concealed byA.D.'goo.an oath of secresy. After a bloody conflict, theyprevailed in the province of Bahrein, along thePersian gulf: far and wide, the tribes of the desert weresubject to the sceptre, or rather to the sword, of AbuSaid and his son Abu Taher; and these rebellious imamscould muster in the field a hundred and seven thousandfanatics. The mercenaries of the caliph were dismayedat the approach of an enemy who neither asked nor ac­cepted quarter; and the difference between them, in for­titude and patience, is expressive of the change whichthree centuries of prosperity had effected in the charac­ter of the Arabians. Such troops were discomfited inevery action; the cities of Racca and Baalbec, of Cufa,and Bassora, were taken and pillaged; Bagdad was filledwith consternation; and the caliph trembled behind theveils of his palace. In a daring inroad beyond the Tigris,Abu Taher advanced to the gates of the capital with nomore than five hundred horse. By the special order ofMoctader, the bridges had been broken down, and theperson or head of the rebel was expected every hour by







OCR Output








-" CHAP. L. .139


venting their common enemies, and wisely rejected hiscourteous offer df abdicating the government of the Ara­bians. After a reign of two years, the aged caliph wassummoned by the angel of death. In his testament, withthe tacit approbation of the companions, he bequeathedthe sceptre to the firm and intrepid virtue of Omar. /have no occasion (said the modest candidate) for theplace.—But the place has occasion for you, replied Abu-beker; who expired with a fervent prayer thatA. D. 634, the god of Mahomet would ratify his choice, andy ' direct the Mussulmans in the way of concord andobedience. The prayer was not ineffectual, since Alihimself, in a life of privacy and prayer, professed to re­vere the superior worth and dignity of his rival; whocomforted him for the loss of empire, by the most flat­tering marks of confidence and esteem. In the twelfthyear of his reign, Omar received a mortal wound fromthe hand of an assassin; he rejected with equal impar­tiality the names of his son and of Ali, refused to loadhis conscience with the sins of his successor, and devolvedon six of the most respectable companions, the arduoustask of electing a commander of the faithful. On thisoccasion, Ali was again blamed by his friends11 for sub­mitting his right to the judgment of men, for recognizingtheir jurisdiction by accepting a place among the sixelectors. He might have obtained their suffrage, had hedeigned to promise a strict and servile conformity, notonly to the Koran and tradition, but likewise to the de-...., terminations of two seniors.' With these li-
ofOthman,
A. D. 644, nutations, Othman, the secretary of Mahomet,accepted the government; nor was it till after


"Particularly by bis friend and cousin Abdallah, tbe son of Abbas, who diedA. D. 687, with the title of grand doctor of the Moslems. In Abulfeda be recapi­tulated tbe important occasions in which Ali had neglected bin salutary advice;(p. 76. vers. Reiske) and concludes, (p. 85.) 0 princeps fidelium, absque contro-versia tu quidem vere fortis es, at inops boni consilii, et rerun gerendarum paruntcallens.
11 suspect that the two seniors (Abulpharagius, p. 115. Ockley, torn. 1. p. 371.)may signify not two actual counsellors, but hit two predecessors, Abubeker andOmar.


z2







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 213


and poets,0 and the tacit or modest censure of theadvocates of the Roman church/ The popes them­selves have indulged a smile at the credulity of thevulgar/ but a false and obsolete title still sanctifies theirreign; and, by the same fortune which has attended thedecretals and the Sibylline oracles, the edifice has sub­sisted after the foundations have been undermined.
While the popes established in Italy their free-dom and dominion, the images, the first causeof tne*r revolt, were restored in the eastern em-p*re-h Under the reign of Constantino V. theA.D.780,'union of civil and ecclesiastical power hadoverthrown the tree, without extirpating theroot, of superstition. The idols, for such they werenow held, were secretly cherished by the order and thesex most prone to devotion; and the fond alliance ofthe monks and females, obtained a final victory over thereason and authority of man. Leo IV. maintained withless rigour the religion of his father and grandfather;but his wife, the fair and ambitious Irene, had imbibedthe zeal of the Athenians, the heirs of the idolatry,rather than the philosophy, of their ancestors. Duringthe life of her husband, these sentiments were inflamed


f The Paladin Astolpho found it in the moon, among the things that were lostupon earth. (Orlando Furioso, 34. 80.)
Di van fiore ad un grand monte passa,
Ch'ebbe gia buono odore, or puzza forte
Questo era il dono (se pero dir lece)
Che Constantino al buon Silvestro fece.Yet this incomparable poem has been approved by a bull of Leo X.
f See Baronius, A. D. 324. no. 117—123. A. D. 1191, no. 51, tic. The cardinalwishes to suppose that Rome was offered by Constantine, and refused by Silvester.The act of donation he considers, strangely enough, as a forgery of the Greeks.
S Baronius n'en dit guerres contre; encore en a-t'il trop dit, et Ton vouloit sansmoi (Cardinal du Perron), qui 1'empechai, censurer eette partie de son histoire.J'en devisai un jonr avec le Pape, et il ne me repondit antre chose " che volete! ICanonici la lengono," il le desoit en riant. (Perroniana, p. 77.)
h The remaining history of images, from Irene to Theodora, is collected, for theCatholics, by Baronius and Pagi, (A. D. 780—840.) Natalis Alexander, (Hist.N. T. seculumS. Panoplia adversus Hareticos, p. 118—178. and Dupin: (Bibliot.Eccles. torn. 6. p. 136—154.) for the Protestants, by Spanheim, (Hist. limit;, p. 305—639.) Basnage, (Hist. del'Eglise.torn. 1. p. 556—572. torn. 2. p. 1362—1385.)and Hosheirn. (Institut. Hist. Eccles. secul. 8. et 9.) The Protestants, exceptMosheim, are soured with controversy; but the Catholics, except Dupin, are in­flamed by the fury and superstition of the monks; and even Le Beau (Hist. du.Bas Empire), a gentleman and a scholar, is infected by the odious contagion.







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 367*


clearest evidence of public freedom.11 But their simplefreedom was of a very different cast from the nice andartificial machinery of the Greek and Roman republics,in which each member possessed an undivided share ofthe civil and political rights of the community. In themore simple state of the Arabs, the nation is free,becauseeach of her sons disdains a base submission to the willof a master. His breast is fortified with the austere vir­tues of courage, patience, and sobriety; the love of in­dependence prompts him to exercise the habits of self-command; and the fear of dishonour guards him fromthemeaner apprehension of pain, of danger,and of death.The gravity and firmness of the mind are conspicuous inhis outward demeanour: his speech is slow, weighty, andconcise, he is seldom provoked to laughter, his only ges­ture is that of stroking his beard, the venerable symbolof manhood; and the sense of his own importance teacheshim to accost his equals without levity, and his superiorswithout awe.1 The liberty of the Saracens survived theirconquests: the first caliphs indulged the bold and fami­liar language of their subjects: they ascended the pulpitto persuade and edify the congregation: nor was it be­fore the seat of empire was rembved to the Tigris, thatthe Abbassides adopted the proud and pompous cere­monial of the Persian and Byzantine courts.
In the study of nations and men we may ob-
Cmlwais * iii-i
and private serve the causes that render them hostile or.' venge. friendiy to each other, that tend to narrow orenlarge, to mollify or exasperate, the social character.The separation of the Arabs from the rest of mankind,has accustomed them to confound the ideas of strangerand enemy: and the poverty of the land has introduced


k Nou gloriabantni antiquitus Arabes, nisi gladio, hospite, et elaqtuntiA. (Sepha-dius, apud Pocock, Specimen, p. 161, 162.) This gift of speech they shared onlywith the Persians; and the sententious Arabs would probably have disdained thesimple and sublime logic of Demosthenes.
1 I must remind the reader, that d'Arvieux, d'Herbelot, and Niebuhr, represent,in the most lively colours, the manners and government of the Arabs, which areillustrated by many incidental passages in the life of Mahomet.







OCR Output








96 ROMAN EMPIRE.


dignation, the church was pillaged, the sanctuary waspolluted by a promiscuous crowd of Jews and barba­rians; and the Monothelite Pyrrhus, a creature of theempress, after dropping a protestation on the altar,escaped by a prudent flight from the zeal of the Ca­tholics. A more serious and bloody task was reservedfort he senate, who derived a temporary strength fromthe consent of the soldiers and people. The spirit ofRoman freedom revived the ancient and awful exam­ples of the judgment of tyrants, and the imperial cul­prits were deposed and condemned as the authors of thePnnish- death of Constantine. But the severity of themem of COnscript fathers was stained by the indiscrimi-
Martma r J
and Hera- nate punishment of the innocent and the guilty:A?!?. 6*1, Martina and Heracleonas were sentenced to theSeptember'amputation, the former of her tongue,,the latterof his nose; and after this cruel execution they con­sumed the remainder of their days in exile and oblivion.The Greeks who were capable of reflection might findsome consolation for their servitude, by observing theabuse of power when it was lodged for a moment inthe hands of an aristocracy.
Constans We shall imagine ourselves transported fiveI^A.D. hunclrecl years backwards to the age of the An-SePtember-tonines, if we listen to the oration which Con­stans II. pronounced in the twelfth year of his agebefore the Byzantine senate. After returning his thanksfor the just punishment of the assassins who had inter­cepted the fairest hopes of his father's reign,—By theDivine Providence (said the young emperor), and byyour righteous decree, Martina and her incestuous pro­geny have been cast headlong from the throne. Yourmajesty and wisdom have prevented the Roman state fromdegenerating into lawless tyranny. I therefore exhortand beseech you to stand forth as the counsellors andjudges of the common safety. The senators were grati­fied by the respectful address and liberal donative of







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 27


pus, where he was resisted, threatened, and confined, bythe magistrates in the interest of Nestorius and the ori­entals; who assembled the troops of Lydia and Ionia tosuppress the fanatic and disorderly train of the patriarch.Without expecting the royal licence, he escaped fromhis guards, precipitately embarked, deserted the im­perfect synod, and retired to his episcopal fortress ofsafety and independence. But his artful emissaries,both in the court and city, successfully laboured to ap­pease the resentment, and to conciliate the favour, ofthe emperor. The feeble son of Arcadius was alter­nately swayed by his wife and sister, by the eunuchs andwomen of the palace; superstition and avarice weretheir ruling passions; and the orthodox chiefs wereassiduous in their endeavours to alarm the former, andto gratify the latter. Constantinople and the suburbswere sanctified with frequent monasteries, and the holyabbots, Dalmatius and Eutyches,0 had devoted theirzeal and fidelity to the cause of Cyril, the worship ofMary, and the unity of Christ. From the first momentt»f their monastic life, they had never mingled with theworld, or trode the profane ground of the city. But inthis awful moment of the danger of the church, theirvow was superseded by a more sublime and indispens­able duty. At the head of a long^order of monks andhermits, who carried burning tapers in their hands,and chanted litanies to the mother of God, they pro­ceeded from their monasteries to the palace. The peo­ple was edified and inflamed by this extraordinary spec­tacle, and the trembling monarch listened to the prayersand adjurations of the saints, who boldly pronounced,that none could hope for salvation, unless they embracedthe person and the creed of the orthodox successorof Athanasius. At the same time every avenue of thethrone was assaulted with gold. Under the decent names


e Eutychee, the heresiarcb. Eutyches, is honourably named by Cyril as a friend, asaint, and the strenuous defender of the faith. His brother, the abbot Dalmatius,j» likewise employed to bind the emperor and all his chamberlains terribili conju-ratione. Syuodicon, c. 203. in Concil. torn. 4. p. 467.







OCR Output








362 ROMAN EMPIRE.


Arabic and Persian literature,™ our interpreters have se­lected the imperfect sketches of a more recent age." Theart and genius of history have ever been unknown tothe Asiatics;" they are ignorant of the laws of criticism;and our monkish chronicles of the same period may becompared to their most popular works, which are neververified by the spirit of philosophy and freedom. Theoriental library of a Frenchman11 would instruct themost learned mufti of the east; and perhaps the Arabsmight not find in a single historian, so clear and com­prehensive a narrative of their own exploits, as that whichwill be deduced in the ensuing sheets.
I. In the first year of the first caliph, his lieu-
Invasion of
Penis, tenant Caled, the sword of God, and the scourge
'of the infidels, advanced to the banks of the
Euphrates, and reduced the cities of Anbar and Him.
Westward of the ruins of Babylon a tribe of sedentary


• Besides the lists of authors framed by Prideaux, (Life of Mahomet, p. 179—189.) Ockley (at the end of his second volume), and Petit de la Croix, (Hist, deGengiscan, p. 525—550.) we find in the Bibliotheque Orientale Tarikh, a cata­logue of two 0r three hundred histories or chronicles of the east, of which not morethan three or four are older than Tabari. A lively sketch of oriental literature isgiren by Reiske; (in his Prodidagmata ad Hagji Chalifs librum memorialem adcalcem Abulfeda: Tabulie Syria, Ljpsis, 1766.) but his project and the Frenchversion of Petit de la Croix (Hist, de Timur Bee, torn. 1. preface, p. 45.) havefallen to the ground.
n The particular historians and geographers will be occasionally introduced.The four following titles representthe annals, which have guided me in this generalnarrative.—1. AnnaUs Eutychii, Patriarchs Alexandrine, ab Edwardo Pocockio, Oxtm.1656, tiro vols. in quarto; a pompous edition of an indifferent author, translatedby Pocock, to gratify the prcshyterian prejudice of his friend Selden. 2. HifloriaSaracenica Oecn-fii Elmacini, opera ft audio Thonuc Erpenii, in quarto, Jjugd. Bata-vorum, 1625. He is said to have hastily translated a corrupt MS. and bis versionis often deficient in style and sense. 3. Hittaria compendiata Dynaittarum a Gre-gario Abulpharagio, interprtte Edwardo Poaocldo, in quarto, Oxen. 1663 ; more usefulfor the literary than the civil history of the east. 4. Abulfedf Annates Idotlemid adAnn. ltf.;i:.'i .toil, a Jo. Joe. Eeiskc, in quarto, Lipsitf, 1754; the best of our Chroni­cles, both for the original and version; yet how far below the name of Abnlfeda!We know that he wrote at Hamah, in the fourteenth century. The three formerwere Christians of the tenth, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries; the two first, na­tives of Egypt ; a Melchite patriarch, and a Jacobite scribe.
"M. de Guignes (Hist, des Huns, torn. 1. pref. zix. xx.) has characterized,with truth and knowledge, the two sorts of Arabian historians, the dry annalist,and the tumid and flowery orator.
p Bibliotheque Orientale, par M. d'Herbelot, in folio, Paris, 1697. For thecharacter of the respectable author, consult his friend Thevenot. (Voyages daLevant, part 1. chap, 50.) His work is an agreeable miscellany, which mustgratify every taste ; but I never can digest the alphabetical order, and I find himmore satisfactory in the Persian than the Arabic history. The recent supplementfrom the papers of MM. Visdelou and Gallond (in folio, La Hayc, 1779) is of adifferent case, a medley of tales, proverbs, and Chinese antiquities.







OCR Output








426 ROMAN EMPIRE.


sand seven hundred villages and towns.1 After a longresidence at Cairo, a French consul has ventured to as­sign about four millions of Mahometans, Christians, andJews, for the ample, though not incredible, scope of thepopulation of Egypt/
Africa. IV. The conquest of Africa, from the Nile toFirst inva- the Atlantic ocean,* was first attempted by theAbdaiiah, arms of the caliph Othman. The pious design'''was approved by the companions of Mahometand the chiefs of the tribes; and twenty thousand Arabsmarched from Medina, with the gifts and the blessingsof the commander of the faithful. They were joined inthe camp of Memphis by twenty thousand of their coun­trymen: and the conduct of the war was intrusted toAbdallah,* the son of Said, and the foster-brother of thecaliph, who had lately supplanted the conqueror and thelieutenant of Egypt. Yet the favour of the prince, and themerit of his favourite, could not obliterate the guilt of hisapostacy. The early conversion of Abdallah, and hisskilful pen, had recommended him to the important officeof transcribing the sheets of the Koran; he betrayed histrust, corrupted the text, derided the errors which he had


* The list of Schultens(Index Geograph. ad Calcem Vn. Saladin. p. 5.) contain!two thousand three hundred and ninety-six places; that of d'Anville, (Mern. sar1'Egypte, p. -'.'. i from the divan of Cairo, enumerates two thousand six hundred andninety-six.
> See Maillet, (Description de 1'Egypte, p. 28.) who seems to argue with can­dour and judgment. I am much better satisfied with the observations than withthe reading of the French consul. He was ignorant of Greek and Latin literature,and his fancy is too much delighted with the fictions of the Arabs. Their bestknowledge is collected by Abulfeda; (Descript. Egypt. Arab, et Lat. a Job. DavidMichaelis, Gottingre, in quarto, 1776.) and in two recent voyages into Egypt, weare amused by Savary, and instructed by Volney. I wish the latter could travelover the globe.
1 My conquest of Africa is drriwn from two French interpreters of Arabic litera­ture, Cardonne (Hist, de 1'Afrique et de 1'Espagne sous la Domination des Arabes,torn. 1. p. 8—55.) and Otter. (Hist . de 1'Academie des Inscriptions, torn. 21. p.1ll—125. and 136.) They derive their principal information from Nov.iiri.whocomposed, A. D. 1331, an Encyclopedia in more than twenty volumes. The firegeneral parts successively treat of, 1. Physics, 2. Man, 3. Animals, 4. Plants, and,5. History; and the African affairs are discussed in the sixth chapter of the fifthsection of this last part. ( Reiske, Prodidagmata ad Hagji Chalifs Tabulas, p. S32—334.) Among the older historians who are quoted by Novairi, we may distin­guish the original narrative of a soldier who led the van of the Moslems.
i See the history of Abdaiiah, iu Abulfeda (Viu Mohammed, p. 103.) and Ga-srnicr. (Vie dp Mahomet, torn. .'5. p. 15—48.)







OCR Output








278 ROMAN EMPIRE.


They adored the seven gods or angels who directedthe course of the seven planets, and shed their irresis­tible influence on the earth. The attributes of theseven planets, with the twelve signs of the zodiac, andthe twenty-four constellations of the northern andsouthern hemisphere, were represented by images andtalismans; the seven days of the week were dedicatedto their respective deities: the Sabians prayed thriceeach day; and the temple of the moon at Haran wasthe term of their pilgrimage.1 But the flexible geniusof their faith was always ready either to teach or tolearn; in the tradition of the creation, the deluge, andthe patriarchs, they held a singular agreement withtheir Jewish captives; they appealed to the secretbooks of Adam, Seth, and Enoch: and a slight infusionof the gospel has transformed the last remnant of thePolytheists into the Christians of St. John, in the terri-The Ma- tory of Bassora.™ The altars of Babylon weregians. overturned by the Magians; but the injuries ofthe Sabians were revenged by the sword of Alexander;Persia groaned above five hundred years under aforeign yoke; and the purest disciples of Zoroasterescaped from the contagion of idolatry, and breathedwith their adversaries the freedom of the desert."Seven hundred years before the death of Ma-TheJews. Jews were settled in Arabia: and


a far greater multitude was expelled from the holy land


to his systems. The earliest date of the Chaldean observations is the year 23S4before Christ. After the conquest of Babylon by Alexander, they were commn-nicated at the request of Aristotle, to the astronomer Hipparchus. What a mo­ment in the annals of science!
'Pocock, (Specimen, p. 138—146.) Hottinger, (Hist. Oriental, p. 16*— 203.)Hyde, (de Religione Vet. Persarum, p. 124. 128, &c.) d'Herbelot, (Soti, p. 735,726.) and Sale, (Preliminary Discourse, p. 14, 15.) rather excite than gratify ourcariosity; and the last of these writers confounds Sabianism with the primitivereligion of the Arabs.
« D'Anville (('Euphrates et le Tigre, p. 130—147.) will fix the position ofthese ambiguous Christians: Assemannus (Bibliot. Oriental, torn. 4. p. 607—614.)may explain their tenets. But it is a slippery task to ascertain the creed of anignorant people, afraid and ashamed to disclose their secret traditions.
• The Magi were fixed in the province of Bahrein, (Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet,lorn. 3. p. 114.) and mingled with the old Arabians. (Pocock, Specimen, p. 146—1SO.







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 351


from a distance with a cloud of arrows, and the horsesand men were successively slain: a truce was allowedon both sides for the hour of prayer; and the battle atlength expired by the death of the last of the companionsof Hosein. Alone, weary, and wounded, he seated him­self at the door of his tent. As he tasted a drop of water,he was pierced in the mouth with a dart; and his sonand nephew, two beautiful youths, were killed in hisarms. He lifted his hands to heaven; they were full ofblood, and he uttered a funeral prayer for the living andthe dead. In a transport of despair his sister issued fromthe tent, and adjured the general of the Cufians, that hewould not suffer Hosein to be murdered before his eyes;a tear trickled down his venerable beard; and the bold­est of his soldiers fell back on every side as the dyinghero threw himself among them. The remorselessShamer, a name detested by the faithful, reproachedtheir cowardice; and the grandson of Mahomet wasslain with three-and-thirty strokes of lances and swords.After they had trampled on his body, they carried hishead to the castle of Cufa, and the inhuman Obeidollahstruck him on the mouth with a cane. Alas! (exclaimedan aged Mussulman) on these lips have I seen the lips ofthe apostle of God! In a distant age and climate thetragic scene of the death of Hosein will awaken thesympathy of the coldest reader.' On the annual festivalof his martyrdom, in the devout pilgrimage to his se­pulchre, his Persian votaries abandon their souls to thereligious frenzy of sorrow and indignation.'
, When the sisters and children of Ali were
rostenty of
Mahomet brought in chains to the throne of Damascus,the caliph was advised to extirpate the enmity


• I have abridged the interesting narrative of Ockley. (torn. 2. p. 170—231It is long and minute; but the pathetic, almost always, consists in the detail oflittle circumstances.
'Niebuhr the Dane (Voyages en Arabic, &c. torn. 2. p. 208, &c.) is perhaps theonly European traveller who has dared to visit Meshed Ali and Meshed Hosein.The two sepulchres are in the hands of the Turks, who tolerate and tax the de­votion of the Persian heretics. The festival of the death of Hosein is amply de­scribed by sir John Chardin, a traveller whom I have often praised.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 93


noticed the first appearance of the TURKS, and thenames of the fathers, of Seljuk and Othman, discrimi­nate the two successive dynasties of the nations, whichemerged in the eleventh century from the Scythian wil­derness. The former established a potent and splendidkingdom from the banks of the Oxusto Antioch and Nice;and the first crusade was provoked by the violation ofJerusalem and the danger of Constantinople. Froman humble origin, the Ottomans arose, the scourge andterror of Christendom. Constantinople was besiegedand taken by Mahomet II. and his triumph annihilatesthe remnant, the image, the title, of the Roman empirein the east. The schism of the Greeks will be con­nected with their last calamities, and the restoration oflearning in the western world. I shall return from thecaptivity of the new, to the ruins of ancient ROME;and the venerable name, the interesting theme, willshed a ray of glory on the conclusion of my labours.


Second The emperor Heraclius had punished a ty-rcarnage rant and ascended his throne; and the memory
and death . . . *
of Hera- of his reign is perpetuated by the transient con­quest, and irreparable loss, of the eastern pro­vinces. After the death of Eudocia, his first wife, hedisobeyed the patriarch, and violated the laws, by hissecond marriage with his niece Martina; and the super­stition of the Greeks beheld the judgment of heavenin the diseases of the father and the deformity of hisoffspring. But the opinion of an illegitimate birth issufficient to distract the choice, and loosen the obedi­ence, of the people: the ambition of Martina was quick­ened by maternal love, and perhaps by the envy of astep-mother; and the aged husband was too feeble towithstand the arts of conjugal allurements. Constan-tine, his eldest son, enjoyed in a mature age the title ofAugustus; but the weakness of his constitution required







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV1I. 23


he was attended by fifty Egyptian bishops, who expect­ed from their patriarch's nod the inspiration of the HolyGhost. He had contracted an intimate alliance withMemnon bishop of Ephesus. The despotic primate ofAsia disposed of the ready succours of thirty or fortyepiscopal votes: a crowd of peasants, the slaves of thechurch, was poured into the city, to support with blowsand clamours a metaphysical argument; and the peoplezealously asserted the honour of the Virgin, whose bodyreposed within the walls of Ephesus.' The fleet, whichhad transported Cyril from Alexandria, was laden withthe riches of Egypt: and he disembarked a numerousbody of mariners, slaves, and fanatics, enlisted with blindobedience under the banner of St. Mark and the motherof God. The fathers, and even the guards, of the coun­cil, were awed by this martial array; the adversaries ofCyril and Mary were insulted in the streets, or threat­ened in their houses; his eloquence and liberality madea daily increase in the number of his adherents; andthe Egyptian soon computed, that he might commandthe attendance and the voices of two hundred bishops."But the author of the twelve anathemas foresaw anddreaded the opposition of John of Antioch, who with asmall, though respectable, train of metropolitans anddivines, was advancing by slow journeys from the dis­tant capital of the east. Impatient of a delay, whichhe stigmatized as voluntary and culpable," Cyril an-


* The Christians of the four first centuries were ignorant of the death and burialof Mary. The tradition of Ephesus is affirmed by the synod, (i»9a o StcXoyt; loiam;,1a1 .-, :-i;-W;- «»ftow; ,i ayia Mafia. Concil. torn. 3. p. 1102.) yet it has been super­seded by the claim of Jerusalem; and her empty sepulchre, as it was shewn to thepilgrims, produced the fable of her resurrection and assumption, in which theGreek and I .-.u m churches have piously acquiesced. See Baronius (Annal. Eccles.A. D. 48. no. 6, &c.) and Tillemont. (Mern. Eccles. torn. 1. p.467—477.)
* The Acts of Chalcedon (Concil. torn. 4. p. 1405.1408.) exhibit a lively pictureof the blind, obstinate servitude of the bishops of Egypt to their patriarch.
* Civil or ecclesiastical business detained the bishops at Antioch, till the eigh­teenth of May. Ephesus was at the distance of thirty days' journey; and ten daysmore may be fairly allowed for accidents and repose. The march of Xenophonover the same ground enumerates about two hundred and sixty parasangs orleagues; and this measure might be illustrated from ancient and modern itineraries,if I knew how to compare the speed of an army, a synod, and a caravan. Johnof Antioch is reluctantly acquitted by Tillemont himself. (Mern. Eccles. torn. 14.p. 286—289.)







OCR Output








18 ROMAN EMPIRE.


by seasonable gifts; but the murder of Hypatia has im­printed an indelible stain on the character and religionof Cyril of Alexandria.11
Nestorius, Superstition, perhaps, would more gently ex-ofConstan- piate the blood of a virgin, than the banish-Anrj!428, ment of a samt , and Cyril had accompanied hisApril 10. uncle to the iniquitous synod of the oak. Whenthe memory of Chrysostom was restored and conse­crated, the nephew of Theophilus, at the head of a dyingfaction, still maintained the justice of his sentence; norwas it till after a tedious delay, and an obstinate resist­ance, that he yielded to the consentof the Catholic world.*His enmity to the Byzantine pontiffsf was a sense of in­terest, not a sally of passion: he envied their fortunatestation in the sunshine of the imperial court; and hedreaded their upstart ambition, which oppressed themetropolitans of Europe and Asia, invaded the provincesof Antioch and Alexandria, and measured their diocessby the limits of the empire. The long moderation ofAtticus, the mild usurper of the throne of Chrysostom,suspended the animosities of the eastern patriarchs; butCyril was at length awakened by the exaltation of a ri­val more worthy of his esteem and hatred. After theshort and troubled reign of Sisinnius bishop of Constan­tinople, the factions of the clergy and people were ap­peased by the choice of the emperor, who, on this occa­sion, consulted the voice of fame, and invited the meritof a stranger. Nestorius,g a native of Germanicia, anda monk of Antioch, was recommended by the austerity


* These exploits of St. Cyril are recorded by Socrates; (lib. 7. c. 13—15.) andthe most reluctant bigotry ia compelled to copy an historian who coolly styles themurderers of Hypatia avfyi; TO tycmpa tvS>tf/t.a. At the mention of that injured name,I am pleased to observe a blush even on the cheek of Baronius. (A. D.415, no. 48.)
1 He was deaf to the entreaties of Atticus of Constantinople, and of Isidore ofPelusium, and yielded only (if we may believe Nicephoms, lib. 14. c. 18.) to thepersonal intercession of the Virgin. Yet in his last years he still muttered, thatJohn Chrysostom had been justly condemned. (Tillemont, Mern. Eccles. torn. 14.p. 278—282. Baronius, Annal. Eccles. A. D. -11','. no. 46—64.)
'See their characters in the History of Socrates, (lib. 7. c. 25—28.) their powerand pretensions, in the huge compilation of Thomassin. (Discipline de 1'Eglise,torn. 1. p. 80—91.)
* His elevation and conduct are described by Socrates; (lib. 7. c. 29—3I.) andMarcellinus seems to have applied the loquentiae satis, sapientiae parum, of Sallust.







OCR Output








60 ROMAN EMPIRE.


were crushed by the penal laws: and as early as thereign of Justinian, it became difficult to find a churchof Nestorians within the limits of the Roman empire.Beyond those limits they had discovered a new world,in which they might hope for liberty, and aspire toconquest. In Persia, notwithstanding the resistanceof the Magi, Christianity had struck a deep root, andthe nations of the east reposed under its salutary shade.The Catholic, or primate, resided in the capital: inhis synods, and in their diocesses, his metropolitans,bishops, and clergy, represented the pomp and honourof a regular hierarchy: they rejoiced in the increase ofproselytes, who were converted from the Zendavestato the gospel, from the secular to the monastic life;and their zeal was stimulated by the presence of anartful and formidable enemy. The Persian churchhad been founded by the missionaries of Syria; andtheir language, discipline, and doctrine, were closelyinterwoven with its original frame. The Catholicswere elected and ordained by their own suffragans;but their filial dependance on the patriarchs of Antiochis attested by the canons of the oriental church." Inthe Persian school of Edessa/ the rising generationsof the faithful imbibed their theological idiom; theystudied in the Syriac version the ten thousand volumesof Theodore of Mopsuestia, and they revered the apo­stolic faith and holy martyrdom of his disciple Nesto-rius, whose person and language were equally unknown


1 See the Arabic canons of Nice in the translation of Abraham Eccheleneis,Do. 37—40. Concil. torn. 2. p. 336, 336. edit. Venet. These vulgar titles, Ni-cene and Arabic, are both apocryphal. The council of Nice enacted no morethan twenty canons; (Theodoret, Hist. Eccles. lib. 1. c. 8.) and the remainder,seventy or eighty, were collected from the synods of the Greek church. The Sy­riac edition of Maruthas is no longer extant, (Asseman. Bibliot Oriental, torn. 1.p. 195. torn. 3. p. 74.) and the Arabic version, is marked with many recent inter­polations. Yet this code contains many curioua relics of ecclesiastical discipline;and since it is equally revered by all the eastern communions, it was pcobablyfinished before the schism of the Nestorians and Jacobites. (Fabric. Bibliot. Graec.torn. 11. p. 363—367.)
y Theodore the reader (lib. 2. c. 5. 49. ad calcem Hist. Eccles.) has noticedthis Persian" school of Edessa. Its ancient splendour, and the two eras of itsdownfal (A.D. 431 and 489.) are clearly discussed by Asscmanni. (Bibliotb.Orient, torn. 2. p. 402. 3. p. 376. 378. 4. p. 70. 924.)







OCR Output








98 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the corpse of their lifeless emperor. The troops ofSicily invested with the purple an obscure youth,whose inimitable beauty eluded, and it might easilyelude, the declining art of the painters and sculptors ofthe age.
Constan- Constans had left in the Byzantipe palacetine iv. three sons, the eldest of whom had been clothed
Pogonatus,
A. i). 668, in his infancy with the purple. When the fa-1 r'ther summoned them to attend his person inSicily, these precious hostages were detained by theGreeks, and a firm refusal informed him that they werethe children of the state. The news of his murder wasconveyed with almost supernatural speed from Syracuseto Constantinople; and Constantine, the eldest of hissons, inherited his throne without being the heir of thepublic hatred. His subjects contributed, with zeal andalacrity, to chastise the guilt and presumption of a pro­vince which had usurped the rights of the senate andpeople: the young emperor sailed from the Hellespontwith a powerful fleet; and the legions of Rome andCarthage were assembled under his standard in the har­bour of Syracuse. The defeat of the Sicilian tyrant waseasy, his punishment just, and his beauteous head wasexposed in the hippodrome: but I cannot applaud theclemency of a prince, who, among a crowd of victims,condemned the son of a patrician, for deploring withsome bitterness the execution of a virtuous father. Theyouth was castrated; he survived the operation, andthe memory of this indecent cruelty is preserved by theelevation of Germanus to the rank of a patriarch andsaint. After pouring this bloody libation on his father'stomb, Constantine returned to his capital, and the growthof his young beard during the Sicilian voyage, was an­nounced by the familiar surname of Pogonatus, to theGrecian world. But his reign, like that of his prede­cessor, was stained with fraternal discord. On his twobrothers, Heraclius and Tiberius, he had bestowed the







OCR Output








454 ROMAN EMPIRE.


/ know his features (he exclaimed with indignation);I assert his innocence; and I imprecate the same, ajuster,fate against the authors of his death. The age anddespair of Musa raised him above the power of kings;and he expired at Mecca of the anguish of a brokenheart. His rival was more favourably treated: his ser­vices were forgiven; and Tarik was permitted to minglewith the crowd of slaves.0 I am ignorant whethercount Julian was rewarded with the death which hedeserved indeed, though not from the hands of the Sa­racens; but the tale of their ingratitude to the sons ofWitizais disproved by the most unquestionable evidence.The two royal youths were reinstated in the private pa­trimony of their father; but on the decease of Elba theelder, his daughter was unjustly despoiled of her portionby the violence of her uncle Sigebut. The Gothic maidpleaded her cause before the caliph Hasheim, andobtained the restitution of her inheritance; but she wasgiven in marriage to a noble Arabian, and their twosons, Isaac and Ibrahim, were received in Spain withthe consideration that was due to their origin and riches.Prosperity ^- prov™ce is assimilated to the victoriousof Spain state by the introduction of strangers and the
under the . . .' ~~! , .
Arabs, imitative spirit of the natives; and Spain, whichhad been successively tinctured with Punic, and Roman,and Gothic, blood, imbibed, in a few generations, thename and manners of the Arabs. The first conquerors,and the twenty successive lieutenants of the caliphs,were attended by a numerous train of civil and militaryfollowers, who preferred a distant fortune to a narrowhome: the private and public interest was promoted bythe establishment of faithful colonies; and the cities ofSpain were proud to commemorate the tribe or country


e I much regret our loss, or my ignorance, of two Arabic works of the serentacentury, a life of Musa, and a poem on the exploits of Tarik. Of these authenticpieces, the former was composed by a grandson of Musa, who had escaped fromthe massacre of his kindred; the latter by the vizier of the first Abdah-auauacaliph of Spain, who might have conversed with some of the veterans of the con­queror. ( Bibliot. Arabico-Hispana, torn. '1. p. 3t;. 139.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 117


the execution; she urged, that the anniversary of theSaviour's birth would be profaned by this inhumanspectacle, and Leo consented with reluctance to a de­cent respite. But on the vigil of the feast, his sleep­less anxiety prompted him to visit at the dead of nightthe chamber in which his enemy was confined: he be­held him released from his chain, and stretched on thejailer's bed in a profound slumber. Leo was alarmedat these signs of security and intelligence; but thoughhe retired with silent steps, his entrance and departurewere noticed by a slave who lay concealed in a cornerof the prison. Under the pretence of requesting thespiritual aid of a confessor, Michael informed the con­spirators, that their lives depended on his discretion,and that a few hours were left to assure their ownsafety, by the deliverance of their friend and country.On the great festivals a chosen band of priests andchanters was admitted into the palace by a private gateto sing matins in the chapel; and Leo, who regulatedwith the same strictness the discipline of the choir andof the camp, was seldom absent from those early devo­tions. In the ecclesiastical habit, but with swords un­der their robes, the conspirators mingled with the pro­cession, lurked in the angles of the chapel, and expected,as the signal of murder, the intonation of the first psalmby the emperor himself. The imperfect light, and theuniformity of dress, might have favoured his escape,while their assault was pointed against a harmlesspriest; but they soon discovered their mistake, and en­compassed on all sides the royal victim. Without aweapon and without a friend, he grasped a weightycross, and stood at bay against the hunters of his life;but as he asked for mercy,—This is the hour, not ofmercy, but of vengeance, was the inexorable reply. Thestroke of a well-aimed sword separated from his bodythe right arm and the cross, and Leo the Armenian wasslain at the foot of the altar.







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 279


instituted, in each year, a fast of thirty days; and stre­nuously recommended the observance, as a disciplinewhich purifies the soul and subdues the body, as a salu­tary exercise of obedience to the will of God and hisapostle. During the month of Ramadan, from the risingto the setting of the sun, the Mussulman abstains fromeating, and drinking, and women, and baths, and per­fumes; from all nourishment that can restore his strength,from all pleasure that can gratify his senses. In the re­volution of the lunar year, the Ramadan coincides byturns with the winter cold and the summer heat; andthe patient martyr, without assuaging his thirst with adrop of water, must expect the close of a tedious andsultry day. The interdiction of wine, peculiar to someorders of priests or hermits, is converted by Mahometalone into a positive and general law :m and a considera­ble portion of the globe has abjured, at his command, theuse of that salutary, though dangerous liquor. Thesepainful restraints are, doubtless, infringed by the liber­tine, and eluded by the hypocrite: but the legislator, bywhom they are enacted, cannot surely be accused of al­luring his proselytes by the indulgence of their sensualappetites. III. The charity of the Mahometans de­scends to the animal creation; and the Koran repeatedlyinculcates, not as a merit, but as a strict and indispensa­ble duty, the relief of the indigent and unfortunate. Ma­homet, perhaps, is the only lawgiver who has defined theprecise measure of charity: the standard may vary withthe degree and nature of property, as it consists either inmoney, in corn or cattle, in fruits or merchandise; butthe Mussulman does not accomplish the law, unless hebestows a tenth of his revenue; and if his conscience ac­


and AI Beidawi. D'Herbelot declares, that Mahomet condemned In vi religietise;and that the first swarms of fakirs, dervises, &c. did not appear till after the year300 of the Hegira. (Bibliot. Orient, p. 292. 718.
m See the double prohibition; (Koran, c. 2. p. 25. c. 5. p. 94.) the one in thestyle of a legislator, the other in that of a fanatic. The public and private motivesof Mahomet are investigated by Prideaux (Life of Mahomet, p. 62—64.)audSale.(Preliminary Discourse, p.







OCR Output








194 ROMAN EMPIRK.


earth, the apostle St. Peter, whose image you threatento destroy."3 The remote and interior kingdoms of thewest present their homage to Christ and his vicege­rent: and we now prepare to visit one of their mostpowerful monarchs, who desires to receive from ourhands the sacrament of baptism." The barbarians havesubmitted to the yoke of the gospel, while you aloneare deaf to the voice of the shepherd. These piousbarbarians are kindled into rage; they thirst to avengethe persecution of the east. Abandon your rash andfatal enterprise; reflect, tremble, and repent. If youpersist, we are innocent of the blood that will be spiltin the contest; may it fall on your own head."Revolt of The first assault of Leo against the images ofA^.'T3B, Constantinople had been witnessed by a crowd&c- of strangers from Italy and the west, who re­lated with grief and indignation the sacrilege of theemperor. But on the reception of his prescriptiveedict, they trembled for their domestic deities; theimages of Christ and the Virgin, of the angels, martyrs,and saints, were abolished in all the churches of Italy;and a strong alternative was proposed to the Romanpontiff, the royal favour as the price of his compliance,degradation and exile as the penalty of his disobedi­ence. Neither zeal nor policy allowed him to hesitate;and the haughty strain in which Gregory addressedthe emperor displays his confidence in the truth of hisdoctrine or the powers of resistance. Without depend­ing on prayers or miracles, he boldly armed againstthe public enemy, and his pastoral letters admonishedthe Italians of their danger and their duty.0 At this
m 'Ov of iffafai 0a7IXetat TIJ; )ysta; v( ®iov CTnyfiov f^owi.


"Awo n; tfttiym SWI*; TOU Xiyc/u«TO 2nrrrau. (p. 665.) The pope appean tohave imposed on the ignorance of the Greeks; he lived and died in the Lateran;and in his time all the kingdoms of the west had embraced Christianity. Maynot this unknown Scptetus have some reference to the chief of th Saxon heptarchv,to Ina, king of Wessex, who, in the pontificate of Gregory II. visited Rome forthe purpose, not of baptism, but of pilgrimage? (Pagi, A. D. 689. no. 2. A.I).726. no. 15.)
0 I shall transcribe the important and decisive passage of the Liber Potifica-lis. Respiciens ergo pius vir profanam principis jussionem, jam contra Impera­







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. 75


Erivan were dispeopled by the cruel policy of the So­phies; and myriads of Christian families were trans­planted to perish or to propagate in the distant provincesof Persia. Under the rod of oppression, the zeal ofthe Armenians is fervent and intrepid: they have oftenpreferred the crown of martyrdom to the white turbanof Mahomet; they devoutly hate the error and idolatryof the Greeks; and their transient union with the La­tins is not less devoid of truth, than the thousand bi­shops whom their patriarch offered at the feet of theRoman pontiff.11 The Catholic or patriarch of the Ar­menians resides in the monastery of Ekmiasin, threeleagues from Erivan. Forty-seven archbishops, eachof whom may claim the obedience of four or five suffra­gans, are consecrated by his hand; but the far greaterpart are only titular prelates, who dignify with theirpresence and service the simplicity of his court. Assoon as they have performed the liturgy, they cultivatethe garden; and our bishops will hear with surprise,that the austerity of their life increases in just propor­tion to the elevation of their rank. In the fourscorethousand towns or villages of his spiritual empire, thepatriarch receives a small and voluntary tax from eachperson above the age of fifteen; but the annual amountof six hundred thousand crowns is insufficient to sup­ply the incessant demands of charity and tribute. Sincethe beginning of the last century, the Armenians haveobtained a large and lucrative share of the commerceof the east: in their return from Europe, the caravanusually halts in the neighbourhood of Erivan; the al­tars are enriched with the fruits of their patient indus­try; and the faith of Eutyches is preached in their re­cent congregations of Barbary and Poland.0


d See a remarkable fact of the twelfth century in the History of Nicetns Cho-niatcs. (p. 258.) Yet three hundred years before, Pholius (Epistol. 2. p. 49. edit.Montacul) had gloried in the conversion of the Armenians—Xarftw n/^tpv ej8oJo£»;.
'The travellmg Armenians are in the way of every traveller, and their mother-church is on the high road between Constantinople and Ispahan: for their presentstate, see Fabricius, (Lax Evangelii, &c. c. 38. p. 40—51.) Olearius, (lib. 4. c.40.) Chardin, (vol. 2. p. 233.) Tonrnefort, (lettre 20.) and, above all, Taver­







OCR Output








310 ROMAN EMPIRE.


the words and looks of the prophet, by the eagernesswith which they collected his spittle, a hair that drop­ped on the ground, the refuse water of his lustrations,as if they participated in some degree of the propheticvirtue. / have seen (said he) the Chosroes of Persia andthe Ccesar of Rome, but never did I behold a king amonghis subjects like Mahomet among his companions. Thedevout fervour of enthusiasm acts with more energy andtruth than the cold and formal servility of courts.He de' In the state of nature every man has a right tociares war defend, by force of arms, his person and his pos-
agamst . J 'l r
the infi- sessions; to repel, or even to prevent, the vio­lence of his enemies, and to extend his hostili­ties to a reasonable measure of satisfaction and retalia­tion. In the free society of the Arabs, the duties ofsubject and citizen imposed a feeble restraint; anot Ma­homet, in the exercise of a peaceful and benevolent mis­sion, had been despoiled and banished by the injusticeof his countrymen. The choice of an independent peo­ple had exalted the fugitive of Mecca to the rank of asovereign; and he was invested with the just preroga­tive of forming alliances, and of waging offensive or de­fensive war. The imperfection of human rights was sup­plied and armed by the plenitude of divine power: theprophet of Medina assumed, in his new revelations, afiercer and more sanguinary tone, which proves that hisformer moderation was the effect of weakness :b the meansof persuasion had been tried, the season of forbearance waselapsed, and he was now commanded to propagate his re­ligion by the sword, to destroy the monuments of idola­try, and without regarding the sanctity of days ormonths,to pursue the unbelieving nations of the earth. Thesame bloody precepts, so repeatedly inculcated in theKoran, are ascribed by the author to the Pentateuch and


h The eighth and ninth chapters of the Koran are the loudest and most vehement;and Maracci (Prodromus, part 4. p. 59—64.)has inveighed with more justice thandiscretion against the double dealing of the impostor.







OCR Output








56 ROMAN EMPIRE,


every age that two wills or energies are harmonized inthe person of Christ. The majesty of the pope and theRoman synod was represented by two priests, one dea­con, and three bishops; but these obscure Latins hadneither arms to compel, nor treasures to bribe, nor lan­guage to persuade; and I am ignorant by what arts theycould determine the lofty emperor of the Greeks to ab­jure the catechism of his infancy, and to persecute thereligion of his fathers. Perhaps the monks and peopleof Constantinople0 were favourable to the Lateran creed,which is indeed the least favourable of the two: and thesuspicion is countenanced by the unnatural moderationof the Greek clergy, who appear in this quarrel to beconscious of their weakness. While the synod debated,a fanatic proposed a more summary decision, by raisinga dead man to life: the prelates assisted at the trial, butthe acknowledged failure may serve to indicate, that thepassions and prejudices of the multitude were not enlist­ed on the side of the Monothelites. In. the next gene­ration, when the son of Constantine was deposed andslain by the disciple of Macarius, they tasted the feastof revenge and dominion: the image or monument ofthe sixth council was defaced, and the original acts werecommitted to the flames. But in the second year, theirpatron was cast headlong from the throne, the bishopsof the east were released from their occasional confor­mity, the Roman faith was more firmly replanted by theorthodox successors of Bardanes, and the fine problemsof the incarnation were forgotten in the more popularand visible quarrel of the worship of images.?
• The Monothelite Constans was hated by all tw ra mum (says Theophancs,Chron. p. 292.) i/xwnfln (rtyAfa waja •aanm. When the Monothelite monk failed inthis miracle, the people shouted o Xacc xnBovm. (Concil. torn. 7. p. 1032.) But thiswas a natural and transient emotion; and I much fear that the latter is an anti­cipation of orthodoxy in the good people of Constantinople.
P The history of Monothelitism may be found in the Acts of the Synods of Rome(torn. 7. p. 77—395. 601—608.) and Constantinople, (p. 609—1429.) Baroniusextracted some original documents from the Vatican library ; and his chronologyi» rectified by the diligence of Pagi. Even Dupin (Bibliotheque Eccles. torn. 6. p.57—71.) and Basnage (Hist, de 1'EgUse, torn. 1. p. 541—555.) afford a tolerableabridgment.







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 403


inside the entrance of the castle. They overpoweredthe guard, unbolted the gate, let down the drawbridge,and defended the narrow pass, till the arrival of Caled,with the dawn of day, relieved their danger and assuredtheir conquest. Youkinna, a formidable foe, becamean active and useful proselyte; and the general of theSaracens expressed his regard for the most humble merit,by detaining the army at Aleppo till Dames was curedof his honourable wounds. The capital of Syria was stillcovered by the castle of Aazaz and the iron bridge ofthe Orontes. After the loss of these important posts,and the defeat of the last of the Roman armies, theluxury of Antiochr trembled and obeyed. Her safetywas ransomed with three hundred thousand pieces ofgold; but the throne of the successors of Alexander, theseat of the Roman government in the east, which hadbeen decorated by Caesar with the titles of free, andholy, and inviolate, was degraded under the yoke of thecaliphs to the secondary rank of a provincial town.*„. , , In the life of Heraclius, the glories of the Per-Heraciius. sian war are clouded on either hand by the dis­grace and weakness of his more early and hislater days. When the successors of Mahomet unsheathedthe sword of war and religion, he was astonished at theboundless prospect of toil and danger; his nature was in­dolent, nor could the infirm and frigid age of the empe­ror be kindled to a second effort. The sense of shame,and the importunities of the Syrians, prevented his hastydeparture from the scene of action; but the hero was no


'The date of the conquest of Antioch by the Arabs ia of some importance. Bycomparing the years of the world in the chronography of Theopbanes with the yearsof the Hegira in the history of Elmacin, we shall determine, that it was taken be­tween January 23 and September 1, of the year of Christ 638. (Pagi, Ciitica, inBaron. Anna1, torn. 2. p. 814,813.) Al Wakidi (Ockley, vol. 1. p. 314 ) assignsthat event to Tuesday, August 21, an inconsistent date; since Easter fell that yearon Aprils, the 21st of August must have been a Friday. (See the Tables of the Artde Verifier les Dates.)
'Hi s bounteous edict, which tempted the grateful city to assume the victory ofPharsalia for a perpetual era, i» given tt Aviux"a T /u»rf«roMi, li^a not mtni\y,iut aurmpv, x.ii of^iurn xai ^uia^/uini TO; aynToXx;. John Malala, in Chron. p. PI.edit. Vi-nri. We may distinguish his authentic information of domestic facts fromIn* gross ignorance of general history.


2 D 2







OCR Output








188 ROMAN EMPIRE.


mency or justice of the conqueror. The son of Leo, inthe first year of his reign, had undertaken an expeditionagainst the Saracens: during his absence, the capital,the palace, and the purple, were occupied by his kinsmanArtavasdes, the ambitious champion of the orthodoxfaith. The worship of images was triumphantly re­stored ; the patriarch renounced his dissimulation, or dis­sembled his sentiments; and the righteous claim of theusurper was acknowledged, both in the new and in an­cient Rome. Constantine flew for refuge to his paternalmountains; but he descended at the head of the bold andaffectionate Isaurians; and his final victory confoundedthe arms and predictions of the fanatics. His long reignwas distracted with clamour, sedition, conspiracy, andmutual hatred, and sanguinary revenge: the persecutionof images was the motive, or pretence, of his adversaries;and, if they missed a temporal diadem, they were reward­ed by the Greeks with the crown of martyrdom. Inevery act of open and clandestine treason, the emperorfelt the unforgiving enmity of the monks, the faithfulslaves of the superstition to which they owed their richesand influence. They prayed, they preached, they ab­solved, they inflamed, they conspired; the solitude ofPalestine poured forth a torrent of invective; and thepen of St. John Damascenus/ the last of the Greek fa­thers, devoted the tyrant's head, both in this world andthe next.1 I am not at leisure to examine how far themonks provoked, nor how much they have exaggerated,


J John, or Mansur, was a noble Christian of Damascus, who held a consider­able office in the service of the caliph. His zeal in the cause of images exposedhim to the resentment and treachery of the Greek emperor; and on the suspicionof a treasonable correspondence, he was deprived of his right hand, which was mi­raculously restored by the Virgin. After this deliverance, he resigned his office,distributed his wealth, and buried himself in the monastery of St. Sebaa, betweenJerusalem and the Dead Sea. The legend is famous; but his learned editor, fa­ther Lequien, has unluckily proved that St. John Damascenus was already a monkbefore the Iconoclast dispute. (Opera, torn. 1. Vit , St. Joan. Damascen. p. 10—13. et Notas ad loc.)
* After sending Leo to the devil, he introduces his heir—TO juiapgr aurou -,i;-.r/i,i.iuu nt xaxia; »UTOU xXnjwoiuo; i» Jurx» ytnftaot. (Opera Damascen. torn. 1. p. 625.)If the authenticity of this piece be suspicious, we are sure that in other works, nolonger extant, Damascenns bestowed on Constantine the title of nai M»M^n8, Xpr-ro/taxpi, mraXiov. (torn. 1. p. 306.)







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 361


invaded the successors of Augustus, and those of Ar-taxerxes; and the rival monarchies at the same instantbecame the prey of an enemy whom they had been solong accustomed to despise. In the ten years of theadministration of Omar, the Saracens reduced to hisobedience thirty-six thousand cities or castles, destroyedfour thousand churches or temples of the unbelievers,and edified fourteen hundred moschs for the exercise ofthe religion of Mahomet. One hundred years after hisflight from Mecca, the arms and the reign of his suc­cessors extended from India to the Atlantic ocean, overthe various and distant provinces, which may be com­prised under the names of, I. Persia; II. Syria; III.Egypt; IV. Africa; and, V. Spain. Under this generaldivision, I shall proceed to unfold these memorabletransactions; dispatching with brevity the remote andless interesting conquests of the east, and reserving afuller narrative for those domestic countries, which hadbeen included within the pale of the Roman empire.Yet I must excuse my own defects by a just complaintof the blindness and insufficiency of my guides. TheGreeks, so loquacious in controversy, have not beenanxious to celebrate the triumphs of their enemies.kAfter a century of ignorance, the first annals of the Mus­sulmans were collected in a great measure from the voiceof tradition.1 Among the numerous productions of


k For the seventh and eighth centuries, we have scarcely any original evidenceof the Byzantine historians, except the chronicles ofTheophanes (Theophanis Cou-fessoris Chronographia, Gr. et Lit. cum noti-, Jacobi Goar. Paris, 1655, in folio);and the abridgment of Nicephorus (Nicephori Patriarchae C. P. Breviarum His-toricum, Gr. et Lat. Paris, 1648, in folio); who both lived in the beginning of theninth century, (see flam-kins de Scriptor. Byzant. p. 200—246.) Their contem­porary Pholius does not seem to be more opulent. After praising the style ofNicephorus, he adds, Kai i\x; iroXXoi*; ITI Ttn wp» aimv avoxfuvrojunc; Tjii THCicrT;.;ia.-, TI fvt^fa^v, and only complains of his extreme brevity. (Phot. Bibliot.cod. 66. p. 100.) Some additions may be gleaned from the more recent historiesof Cedrenus and Zonaras of the twelfth century.
. 'Tabari, or Al Tabari, a native of Taborestan, a famous imam of Bagdad, andthe 1 ,i v v of the Arabians, finished his general history in the year of the Hegira S03.(A.I). 914.) At the request of his friends, he reduced a work of thirty thousandsheets to a more reasonable size. But his Arabic original is known only by thePersian and Turkish versions. The Saracenic history of Ebn Amid, or Klmacin,is said to be an abridgment of the great Tabari. (Ockley's Hist, of the Saracens,vol.2. preface, p. 39. aud, list of authors, d'Herbclot, p. 866. 870. 1014.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 197


ninety-three bishops against the heresy of the Icono­clasts. With their consent he pronounced a generalexcommunication against all who by word or deedshould attack the tradition of the fathers and the imagesof the saints; in this sentence the emperor was tacitlyinvolved/ but the vote of a last and hopeless remon­strance may seem to imply that the anathema was yetsuspended over his guilty head. No sooner had theyconfirmed their own safety, the worship of images, andthe freedom of Rome and Italy, than the popes appearto have relaxed of their severity, and to have sparedthe relics of the Byzantine dominion. Their moderatecounsels delayed and prevented the election of a newemperor, and they exhorted the Italians not to separatefrom the body of the Roman monarchy. The exarchwas permitted to reside within the walls of Ravenna, acaptive rather than a master; and till the imperial co­ronation of Charlemagne, the government of Rome andItaly was exercised in the name of the successors ofConstantine."
Republic r"-1^e liberty of Rome, which had been op-of Home, pressed by the arms and arts of Augustus, wasrescued, after seven hundred and fifty years of servi­tude, from the persecution of Leo the Isaurian. By theCaesars, the triumphs of the consuls had been annihi­lated: in the decline and fall of the empire, the godTerminus, the sacred boundary, had insensibly recededfrom the ocean, the Rhine, the Danube, and the Eu­phrates: and Rome was reduced to her ancient terri­tory from Viterbo to Terracina, and from Narni to the


'Yet Leo was undoubtedly comprised in the si quis .... imaginum aacraram.... destructor.... extiterit sit extorris a corpore D. N. Jesu Christi vel todusecclesiae imitate. The canonists may decide whether the guilt or the name consti­tutes tbe excommunication; and the decision is of the last importance to theirsafety, since, according to the oracle, (Gratian Cans. 33. p. 5. c. 47. apud Span-helm, Hist. Imag. p. 113.) homicidas non esse qui excommunicates trucidant.
Compescuit tale consilium Pontifex, sperans conversionem principle. (Ana-Mas, p. 156.) Sed ne desisterent ab amore et fide R. J. admonebat. (p. 157.)The popes style Leo and Constantine Corpronymus, Imperatores et Domini, withthe strange epithet of Piiisimi. A famous mosaic of the Lateran (A. D. 798.) re­presents Christ, who delivers the keys to St. Peter and the banner to Constan­tine V. (Muratori, Annali d'ltalia, torn. 6. p. 337.)







OCR Output








58 ROMAN EMPIRE,


and useful allies of Rome were taught to consider theemperor not as the chief, but as the enemy of the Chris­tians. Language, the leading principle which unitesor separates the tribes of mankind, soon discriminatedthe sectaries of the east, by a peculiar and perpetualbadge, which abolished the means of intercourse andPerpetual the hope of reconciliation. The long domi-ortheorT nion of the Greeks, their colonies, and, above all,entai sects, their eloquence, had propagated a language,doubtless the most perfect that has been contrived bythe art of man. Yet the body of the people, both inSyria and Egypt, still persevered in the use of their na­tional idioms; with this difference, however, that theCoptic was confined to the rude and illiterate peasantsof the Nile, while the Syriac," from the mountains ofAssyria to the Red sea, was adapted to the higher topicsof poetry and argument. Armenia and Abyssinia wereinfected by the speech or learning of the Greeks; andtheir barbaric tongues, which had been revived in thestudies of modern Europe, were unintelligible to the in­habitants of the Roman empire. The Syriac and theCoptic, the Armenian and the Ethiopic, are consecratedin the service of their respective churches; and theirtheology is enriched by domestic versions,' both of theScriptures and of the most popular fathers. After aperiod of thirteen hundred and sixty years, the spark ofcontroversy, first kindled by a sermon of Nestorius, stillburns in the bosom of the east, and the hostile com­munions still maintain the faith and discipline of their


* The Syriac, which the natives revere as the primitive language, was divided
into three dialects 1. The Aramtean, as it was refined at Edessa and the cities of
Mesopotamia. 2. The Palestine, which was used in Jerusalem, Damascus.and therest of Syria, 3. The Nabathwan. the rustic idiom of the mountains of Assyria andthe villages of Irak. (Gregor. Abulpharag. Hist. Dynast, p. 11.) On the Syriac,nee Ebed. Jesu, (Asseman. torn. 3. p. 326, &c.) whose prejudice alone could prefer
'I shall not enrich my ignorance with the spoils of Simon, Walton, Mill, Wet-stein, Assemannus, Ludolphos,'La Croze, whom I have consulted with some care.It appears, 1. That of all the versions which are celebrated by the Others, it isdoubtful whether any are now extant in their pristine integrity. 2. That the Sy­riac has the best claim; and that the consent of the oriental sects is a proof thatit is more ancient than their schisrn.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 125


pitable exile, in the province of Macedonia: Adrianoplewas their final settlement. During several generationsthey maintained the dignity of their birth; and theirRoman patriotism rejected the tempting offers of thePersian and Arabian powers, who recalled them totheir native country. But their splendour was insen­sibly clouded by time and poverty; and the father ofBasil was reduced to a small farm, which he cultivatedwith his own hands: yet he scorned to disgrace theblood of the Arsacide by a plebeian alliance—his wife,a widow of Adrianople, was pleased to count among herancestors, the great Constantine; and their royal infantwas connected by some dark affinity of lineage or coun­try with the Macedonian Alexander. No sooner washe born, than the cradle of Basil, his family, and hiscity, were swept away by an inundation of the Bulga­rians: he was educated a slave in a foreign land; andin this severe discipline, he acquired the hardiness ofbody and flexibility of mind which promoted his futureelevation. In the age of youth or manhood he sharedthe deliverance of the Roman captives, who generouslybroke their fetters, marched through Bulgaria to theshores of the Euxine, defeated two armies of the bar­barians, embarked in the ships which had been stationedfor their reception, and returned to Constantinople,from whence they were distributed to their respectivehomes. But the freedom of Basil was naked and des­titute: his farm was ruined by the calamities of war:after his father's death, his manual labour or service,could no longer support a family of orphans; and heresolved to seek a more conspicuous theatre, in whichevery virtue and every vice may lead to the paths ofgreatness. The first night of his arrival at Constanti­nople, without friends or money, the weary pilgrim slepton the steps of the church of St Diomede: he was fedby the casual hospitality of a monk; and was introducedto the service of a cousin and namesake of the emperor







OCR Output








CHAP. LII. 511


Capitol was saved from the yoke of the prophet ofMecca. The same danger still impended on the headsof the Roman people: and their domestic force was un­equal to the assault of an African emir. They claimed theprotection of their Latin sovereign; but the Carlovin-gian standard was overthrown by a detachment of thebarbarians: they meditated the restoration of the Greekemperors; but the attempt was treasonable, and thesuccour remote and precarious/ Their distress appearedto receive some aggravation from the death of their spi­ritual and temporal chief; but the pressing emergencysuperseded the forms and intrigues of an election; andthe unanimous choice of pope Leo the Fourth' was thesafety of the church and city. This pontiff was bora aRoman; the courage of the first ages of the republicglowed in his breast; and, amidst the ruins of his coun­try, he stood erect, like one of the firm and lofty columnsthat rear their heads above the fragments of the RomanForum. The first days of his reign were consecrated tothe purification and removal of relics, to prayers andprocessions, and to all the solemn offices of religion,which served at least to heal the imagination, and re­store the hopes, of the multitude. The public defencehad been long neglected, not from the presumption ofpeace, but from the distress and poverty of the times.As far as the scantiness of his means and the shortnessof his leisure would allow, the ancient walls were re­paired by the command of Leo; fifteen towers, in themost accessible stations, were built or renewed; two ofthese commanded on either side of the Tyber; and an


'One of the most eminent Bomann (Gratiamis, magurtcr mil it u<n ct Romanipalatii superifita) was accused of declaring, Quia Franci mini nobis boni faciunt,Deque adjutorium prabent, sed magia quiu nostra sunt violentcr tollunu Quarenun advocamus Grscos, et cum eis foedus pacis componentes, Francorum regemct gentem de noatro regno et dominatione expeHimusP Anastasins in tieotre IV.p. 199.
• Voltaire (Hist. Generate, torn. 2. c. 38. p. 124.) appears to be remarkablyStruck with the character of pope Leo IV. I hare borrowed his general expres­sion, but the sight of the Forum has furnished me with a more distinct and livelyimage. •







OCR Output








242 ROMAN EMPIRE.


service was chastised with a blow by his new father.The blow was productive of a revolution. Romans(exclaimed the youth), once you were the masters of theworld, and these Burgundians the most abject of yourslaves. They now reign, these voracious and brutal sa­vages, and my injuiy is the commencement of your servi­tude.' The alarum-bell was rung to arms in everyquarter of the city; the Burgundians retreated with basteand shame; Marozia was imprisoned by her victoriousson; and his brother pope John XL, was reduced to theexercise of his spiritual functions. With the title ofprince, Alberic possessed above twenty years the go­vernment of Rome, and he is said to have gratified thepopular prejudice, by restoring the office, or at leastthe title, of consuls and tribunes. His son and heirOctavian assumed, with the pontificate, the name ofJohn XII.: like his predecessor, he wa"s provoked bythe Lombard princes to seek a deliverer for the churchand republic; and the services of Otho were rewardedwith the imperial dignity. But the Saxon was impe­rious, the Romans were impatient, the festival of thecoronation was disturbed by the secret conflict of pre­rogative and freedom, and Otho commanded his sword-bearer not to stir from his person, lest he should be as­saulted and murdered at the foot of the altar.1john0xii. Before he repassed the Alps, the emperor chas-. D. 967. tised the revolt of the people, and the ingrati­tude of John XII. The pope was degraded in a synod;the prefect was mounted on an ass, whipped throughthe city, and cast into a dungeon; thirteen of the mostguilty were hanged, others were mutilated or banished;and this severe process was justified by the ancientlaws of Theodosius and Justinian. The voice of fame


i Romanorum aliqusndo servi, scilicet Burgundiones, Romania impereat? ..Roman;'.' urbis dignitas ad tantam est stultitiirn ductaf ut meretricum etiam im-perio pareat? (Liutprand, lib. 3. c. 12. p. 450.) Sigonius (lib. 6. p. 400.) po­sitively affirms the renovation of the consulship; but in the old writers Albericusis more frequently styled princeps Romanorurn.
; Ditmar, p. 354. apud Schmidt, torn. 3. p. 439.







OCR Output








CHAP. LI. 405


along the sea-shore, till their banners were joined underthe walls of the Phoenician cities: Tripoli and Tyre wereEnd of Strayed; and a fleet of fifty transports, whichthe Sy- entered without distrust the captive harbours,brought a seasonable supply of arms and provi­sions to the camp of the Saracens. Their labours wereterminated by the unexpected surrender of Caesarea: theRoman prince had embarked in the night ;u and the de­fenceless citizens solicited their pardon with an offeringof two hundred thousand pieces of gold. The remainderof the province, Ramlah, Ptolemais or Achre, Sichemor Neapolis, Gaza, Ascalon, Berytus, Sidon, Gabala,Laodicea, Apamea, Hierapolis, no longer presumed todispute the will of the conqueror; and Syria bowedunder the sceptre of the caliphs seven hundred yearsafter Pompey had despoiled the last of the Macedoniankings. *
The con- "^6 sieges and battles of six campaigns hadqueron of consumed many thousands of the Moslems.A.D. They died with the reputation and cheerfulnessess—639. Qf martvrs . and the simplicity of their faith maybe expressed in the words of an Arabian youth, when heembraced, for the last time, his sister and mother. Itis not (said he) the delicacies of Syria, or the fading de­lights of this world, that has prompted me to devote mylife in the cause of religion. But I seek the favour ofGod and his apostle; and I have heard, from one of thecompanions of the prophet, that the spirits of the martyrswill be lodged in the crops of green birds, who shall tastethe fruits, and drink of the rivers of paradise. Fare­


* In tbe loose and obscure chronology of the times, lam guided by an authenticrecord (in the book of ceremonies of Constantino Porphyrogenitus) which certifiesthat June 4, A.D. 638, the emperor crowned his younger son Heraclins in thepresence of his eldest Constantine, and in the palace of Constantinople; that Ja­nuary 1, A. D. 639. the royal procession visited the great church, and on thefourthof the same month the hippodrome.
« Sirty-flve years before Christ, Syria Pontusque monumenta sunt Cn. Pompeiivinutij, (Veil. Patercul. 2. 38.) rather of his fortune and power: he adjudgedSyria to be a Roman province, and the last of the Seleucides were incapable ofdrawing a sword in the defence of their patrimony. (See the original text* collectedby Usher, Annal. p. 420.)







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 345


were subdued or seduced by his crafty rival; and thestroke of fanaticism which was aimed against -the threechiefs of the nation, was fatal only to the cousin of Ma­homet. In the temple of Mecca, three Charegites orenthusiasts discoursed of the disorders of the church andstate ; they soon agreed, that the deaths of Ali, of Moa-wiyah, and of his friend Amrou, the viceroy of Egypt,would restore the peace and unity of religion. Each ofthe assassins chose his victim, poisoned his dagger, de­voted his life, and secretly repaired to the scene*of action.Their resolution was equally desperate; but the firstmistook the person of Amrou, and stabbed the deputywho occupied his seat; the prince of Damascus wasdangerously hurt by the second; the lawful caliph, inthe mosch of Cufa, received a mortal wound from thehand of the third. He expired in the sixty-third yearof his age, and mercifully recommended to his children,that they would dispatch the murderer by a single stroke.The sepulchre of Ali° was concealed from the tyrants ofthe house of Ommiyah,p but in the fourth age of theHegira, a tomb, a temple, a city, arose near the ruins ofCufa.q Many thousands of the Schiites repose in holyground at the feet of the vicar of God; and the desert isvivified by the numerous and annual visits of the Per­sians, who esteem their devotion not less meritorious thanthe pilgrimage of Mecca.
Reign of The persecutors of Mahomet usurped the in-M^^'heritance of his children; and the championsor 66i— of idolatry became the supreme heads of his re­ligion and empire. The opposition of Abu So­


• Abulfeda, a modem Sonnite, relates the different opinions concerning thehutiiil of AH, but adopts the sepulchre of Cufa, hodie fam& numeroque religioseirequentantium celebraturn. This number is reckoned by Niebuhr to amount an­nually to (wo thousand of the dead, and five thousand of the living, (torn.*,p. 208, 209.)
P All the tyrants of Persia, from Adhad el Dowlat (A. D. 977, d'Herbelot, p. 58,59. 95.) to Nadir Shah, (A.D. 1743, Hist, de Nadir Shah, torn. 9. p. 155.) haveenriched the tomb of Ali with the spoils of the people. The dome is copper, witha bright and massy gilding, which glitters to the sun at the distance of many a mile.
i The city of Meshed Ali, five or six miles from the ruins of Cufa, and onehundred and twenty to the south of Bagdad, is of the size and form of the modernJerusalern. Meshed Hosein, larger and more populous, is at the distance of thirtymiles.







OCR Output








CHAP. L. 289


in his native land of Chaldea: of the myriads of pro­phets, Moses and Christ alone lived and reigned; andthe remnant of the inspired writings was comprised inthe books of the Old and the New Testament. Themiraculous story of Moses is consecrated and embel­lished in the Koran;0 and the captive Jews enjoy thesecret revenge of imposing their own belief on thenations whose recent creeds they deride. For the au­thor of Christianity, the Mahometans are taught by theprophet to entertain a high and mysterious reverence.11Jesus. Verily, Christ Jesus, the-son of Mary, is theapostle of God, and his word, which he conveyed intoMary, and a Spirit proceeding from him: honourable inthis world, and in the world to come; and one of thosewho approach near to the presence of God.* The won­ders of the genuine and apocryphal gospels'are profuselyheaped on his head; and the Latin church has not dis­dained to borrow from the Koran the immaculate con­ception* of his virgin mother. Yet Jesus was a meremortal; and, at the day of judgment, his testimony willserve to condemn both the Jews, who reject him as aprophet, and the Christians, who adore him as the Sonof God. The malice of his enemies aspersed his repu­tation, and conspired against his life; but their inten­tion only was guilty, a phantom or a criminal was sub­stituted on the cross, and the innocent saint was trans­lated to the seventh heaven.' During six hundred years


0 The articles of Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Sec. in the Bibliotheque ofd'Herbelot, are gaily bedecked with the fanciful legends of the Mahometans, whohave built on the ground-work of Scripture and the Talmud.
P Koran, c. 7. p. 128, &c. c. 10. p. 173, &c. D'Herbelot, p. 647, &c.
1 Koran, c. 3. p. 40. c. 4. p. 80. D'Herbelot, p. 399, &c.
'See the gospel of St. Thomas, or of the Infancy, in the Codex ApocryphusN.T. of Fabricius, who collects the various testimonies concerning it. (p. 128—158.) It was published in Greek by Cotelier, and in Arabic by Sike, who thinksour present copy more recent than Mahomet. Yet his quotations agree with theoriginal about the speech of Christ in his cradle, his living birds of clay, &c. (Sikt,c. 1. p. 168, 169. c. 36. p. 198,199. c. 46. p. 206. CoUlier, c. 2. p. 160, 161.)
• It is darkly hinted in the Koran, (c. 3. p. 39.) and more clearly explained bythe tradition of the Sonnites. (Sale's Note, and Maracci, torn. 2. p. 112.) In thetwelfth century, the immaculate conception was condemned by St . Bernard as apresumptuous novelty. (Fra Paolo, Istoria del Concilio di Trento, lib. 2.)
'See the Koran, c. 3. v. 53. and c. 4. v. 156. of Maracci's edition. Deus estprestantissimus dolose agentium (an odd phrase) .... nee crucifizerunt eum, aed
VOL. VI. U







OCR Output








146 ROMAN EMPIRE.


command of provinces and armies. Their fraternalunion doubled the force and reputation of the Comneni,and their ancient nobility was illustrated by the mar­riage of the two brothers with a captive princess of Bul­garia, and the daughter of a patrician, wh9 had obtainedthe name of Charon from the number of enemies whomhe had sent to the infernal shades. The soldiers hadserved with reluctant loyalty a series of effeminate mas­ters; the elevation of Michael VI. was a personal insultto the more deserving generals; and their discontentwas inflamed by the parsimony of the emperor and theinsolence of the eunuchs. They secretly assembled inthe sanctuary of St. Sophia, and the votes of the militarysynod would have been unanimous in favour of the oldand valiant Catacalon, if the patriotism or modesty ofthe veteran had not suggested the importance of birthas well as merit in the choice of a sovereign. IsaacComnenus was approved by general consent, and theassociates separated without delay to meet in the plainsof Phrygia at the head of their respective squadrons anddetachments. The cause of Michael was defended in asingle battle by the mercenaries of the imperial guard,who were aliens to the public interest, and animatedonly by a principle of honour and gratitude. After theirdefeat, the fears of the emperor solicited a treaty, whichwas almost accepted by the moderation "of the Comne-nian. But the former was betrayed by his ambassadors,and the latter was prevented by his friends. The soli­tary Michael submitted to the voice of the people; thepatriarch annulled their oath of allegiance; and as heshaved the head of the royal monk, congratulated hisbeneficial exchange of temporal royalty for the kingdomof heaven: an exchange, however, which the priest onhis own account, would probably have declined. Bythe hands of the same patriarch, Isaac Comnenus wassolemnly crowned: the sword which he inscribed on hiscorns, might be an offensive symbol, if it implied his







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVII. Ba


successor of An astasius, replanted the orthodox standardin the east; Severus fled into Egypt: and his friend, theeloquent Xenaias,01 who had escaped from the Nestoriansof Persia, was suffocated in his exile by the Melchitesof Paphlagonia. Fifty-four bishops were swept fromtheir thrones, eight hundred ecclesiastics were cast intoprison," and, notwithstanding the ambiguous favour ofTheodora, the oriental flocks, deprived oftheirshepherds,must insensibly have been either famished or poisoned.In this spiritual distress, the expiring faction was revived,and united, and perpetuated, by the labours of a monk;and the name of James Baradaeus" has been preservedin the appellation of Jacobites; a familiar sound, whichmay startle the ear of an English reader. From theholy confessors in their prison of Constantinople, hereceived the powers of bishop of Edessa and apostle ofthe east, and the ordination of fourscore thousand bi*shops, priests, and deacons, is derived from the sameinexhaustible source. The speed of the zealous mission­ary was promoted by the fleetest dromedaries of a de­vout chief of the Arabs; the doctrine and discipline ofthe Jacobites were secretly established in the dominionsof Justinian; and each Jacobite was compelled to vio­late the laws and to hate the Roman legislator. The.successors of Severus, while they lurked in convents orvillages, while they sheltered their proscribed heads inthe caverns of hermits, or the tents of the Saracens, still


"Assemanni, (BiWiot. Orient, torn. 2. p. 10—46.) and La Croze, (Christianismed'Ethaope, p. 36—40.) will supply the history of Xenaias or Philn vcnus, bishop ofMabog, or Hierapolis, in Syria. He was a perfect master of the Syriac language,and the author or editor of a version of the New Testament.
• The names and titles of fifty-four bishops, who were exiled by Justin, are pre-urved in the Chronicle of Dionysius. (apud Asseman. torn. 2. p. 34.) Severus waspersonally summoned to Constantinople—for bis trial, says Liberatus, (Brer, c,19.)—that his tongue might be cut out, says Evagrius (lib. 4. c. 4.) The prudentpatriarch did not stay to examine the difference. This ecclesiastical revolution isfixed by Pagi in the month of September of the year 518. (Critica, torn. i!. p. 506.)
0 The obscure history of James, or Jacobus Baradaus, or Zanzalus, nay be ga­thered from Entycbius, (Annal. torn. 2. p. 144.147.) Renaudot, (Hist. Patriarch,Alex, p. 153.) and A ssemannus, (Bibliot. Orient, torn. 1. p. 424. torn. 2. p. 62—69.344—334. p. 414. torn. 3. p. 385—388.) He seemsto be unknown to the Greeks.The Jacobites themselves had rather deduce their name and pedigree from St.JttBeo the apostle.







OCR Output








138 ROMAN EMPIRE.


emperor's brother, he was degraded from the office ofgeneral of the east, to that of director of the posts, andhis murmurs were chastised with disgrace and exile.But Zimisces was ranked among the numerous loversof the empress: on her intercession he was permitted toreside at Chalcedon, in the neighbourhood of the capi­tal: her bounty was repaid in his clandestine andamorous visits to the palace; and Theophano consentedwith alacrity to the death of an ugly and penurioushusband. Some bold and trusty conspirators wereconcealed in her most private chambers; in the dark­ness of a winter night, Zimisces, with his principalcompanions, embarked in a small boat, traversed theBosphorus, landed at the palace stairs, and silentlyascended a ladder of ropes, which was cast down by thefemale attendants. Neither his own suspicions, nor thewarnings of his friends, nor the tardy aid of his brotherLeo, nor the fortress which he had erected in the pa­lace, could protect Nicephorus from a domestic foe, atwhose voice every door was opened to the assassins.As he slept on a bear-skin on the ground, he wasroused by their noisy intrusion, and thirty daggersglittered before his eyes. It is doubtful whether Zi­misces imbrued his hands in the blood of his sovereign;but he enjoyed the inhuman spectacle of revenge.The murder was protracted by insult and cruelty; andas soon as the head of Nicephorus was shewn from thewindow, the tumult was hushed, and the Armenianwas emperor of the east. On the day of his coronation,he was stopped on the threshold of St. Sophia, by theintrepid patriarch; who charged his conscience withthe deed of treason and blood; and required, as a signof repentance, that he should separate himself from hismore criminal associate. This sally of apostolic zealwas not offensive to the prince, since he could neitherlove nor trust a woman who had repeatedly violated themost sacred obligations; and Theophano, instead of







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIX. 239


their tyrants; and such was their indigence after theloss and usurpation of the ecclesiastical patrimonies,that they could neither support the state of a prince,nor exercise the charity of a priest." The influence oftwo sister prostitutes, Marozia and Theodora, wasfounded on their wealth and beauty, their political andamorous intrigues; the most strenuous of their loverswas rewarded with the Roman mitre, and their reign0may have suggested to the darker agesp the fableq of afemale pope/ The bastard son, the grandson, and thegreat grandson, of Marozia, a rare genealogy, wereseated in the chair of St. Peter, and it was at the ageof nineteen years that the second of these became thehead of the Latin church. His youth and manhoodwere of a suitable complexion; and the nations of pil­grims could bear testimony to the charges that wereurged against him in a Roman synod, and in the pre-


n The oppression and vices of the Roman church in the tenth century arestrongly painted in the history and legation of Liutprand; (see p. 440. 450. 471—47&, 479, &c.) and it ia whimsical enough to observe Muratori temperingthe invectives of Baronius against the popes. But these popes had been chosen,not by the cardinals, but by lay-patrons.
• The time of pope Joan (pupusa Joanna) is placed somewhat earlier than Theo­dora or Marozia; and the two years of her imaginary reign are forcibly insertedbetween Leo IV. and Benedict III. But the contemporary Anastasius indissolu-bly links the death of Leo and the elevation of Benedict: (iUico, mox, p. 247.)and the accurate chronology of Pagi, Muratori, and Leibnitz, fixes both events tothe year 867.
P The advocates for pope Joan produce one hundred and fifty witnesses, or ra­ther echoes, of the fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth centuries. They bear tes­timony against themselves and the legend, by multiplying the proof that so curi­ous a story must have been repeated by writers of every description to whom itwas known. On those of the ninth and tenth centuries, the recent event wouldhave flashed with a double force. Would Photius have spared such a reproach?Could Liutprand have missed such scandal'! It is scarcely worth while todiscussthe various readings of Martinus Folonus, Sigebert of Gemblouis, or even Maria-nus Scotus; but a most palpable forgery is the passage of pope Joan, which hasbeen foisted into some MSS. and editions of the Roman Anastasius.
1 As fatte, it deserves that name; but I would not pronounce it incredible.Suppose a famous French chevalier of our own times to have been born in Italy,and educated in the church, instead of the army: her merit nr fortune might havoraised her to St. Peter's chair; her amours would have been natural; her deliveryin the streets unlucky, but not improbable.
'Till the Reformation, the tale was repeated and believed without offence; andJoan's female statue long occupied her place among the popes in the cathedral ofSienna. (Pagi, Critica, torn. 3. p. 624—6?6.) She has been annihilated bytwo learned Protestants, Blondel and Baylo (Dictionnaire Critique, PAPZssE,Poiosus, BLOKDEL); but their brethren were scandalized by this equitable andgenerous criticisrn. Spanheim and Lenfant attempt to save this poor engine ofcontroversy; and even Mosheim condescends to cherish some doubt and suspi­cion, (p. 189.)







OCR Output








CHAP, XLVII. 57


Union of Before the end of the seventh century, theand^iS creed of the incarnation, which had been de-churches, fined at Rome and Constantinople, was uniform­ly preached in the remote islands of Britain and Ire­land,1' the same ideas were entertained, or rather thesame words were repeated, by all the Christians whoseliturgy was performed in the Greek or the Latin tongue.Their numbers, and visible splendour, bestowed an im­perfect claim to the appellation of Catholics: but in theeast, they were marked with the less honourable nameof Mdchites or royalists ;r of men, whose faith, insteadof resting on the basis of Scripture, reason, or tradition,had been established, and was still maintained, by thearbitrary power of a temporal monarch. Their adver­saries might allege the words of the fathers of Constan­tinople, who profess themselves the slaves of the king;and they might relate, with malicious joy, how the de­crees of Chalcedon had been inspired and reformed bythe emperor Marcian and his virgin bride. The pre­vailing faction will naturally inculcate the duty of sub­mission, nor is it less natural that dissenters should feeland assert the principles of freedom. Under the rod ofpersecution, the Nestorians and Monophysites degene­rated into rebels and fugitives; and the most ancient


* In the Lateran synod of 679, Wilfrid, an Anglo-Saxon bishop, subscribed proomni aquilonali parte Britannia et Hibemiac, quae ab Anglorum et Brittonum, nee-non Scotorum et Pictorum gentibus colebantur. (Eddius.in Vit. St. Wilfrid, c.31.apud Pagi, Critica, torn. 3. p. 88.) Theodore (magnffl insulae Britanniae archiepis-copus et pbilosophus) was long expected at Home; (Concil. torn. 7. p. 714.) but hecontented himself with holding (A. D. 680.) his provincial synod of Hatfield, inwhich he received the decrees of pope Martin and the first Lateran council againstthe MonotheKtes. (Concil. torn. 7. p. 597, &c.) Theodore, a monk of Tarsus in CiU-cia, had heen named to the primacy of Britain by pope Vitalian (A. D. 668, seeBaronius and Pagi), whose esteem for his learning and piety was tainted by somedistrust of his national character—ne quid contrarium veritati fidei, Gracorummore, in ecclesiam cui praesset introduceret. The Cilician was sent from Rometo Canterbury under the tuition of an African guide. (Bedic Hist. Eccles. Anglorum,lib. 4. c. 1.) He adhered to the Roman doctrine ; and the same creed of the incar­nation has been uniformly transmitted from Theodore to the modem primates,whose sound understandings are perhaps seldom engaged with that abstruse mystery.
'This name, unknown till the tenth century, appears to be of Syriac origin. Itwas invented by the Jacobites, and eagerly adopted by the Nestorians and Maho­metans; but it wasaccepted without shame by the Catholics, and is frequently usedin the Annals of Eutychius. (Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, torn. 2. p. 507, &c. torn. 3.p. 355. Renandot. Hist. Patriarch. Alexandrin. p. 119.) 'H/JU; JcuXw -mi Bz7i\tai;,was the acclamation of the fathers of Constantinople. (Concil. tom. 7. p. 765.)







OCR Output








26 ROMAN EMPIRE.


of eulogies and benedictions, the courtiers of both sexeswere bribed according to the measure of their powerand rapaciousness. But their incessant demands de­spoiled the sanctuaries of Constantinople and Alexan­dria; and the authority of the patriarch was unable tosilence the just murmur of his clergy, that a debt of60,000/. had already been contracted to support the ex­pense of this scandalous corruption.11 Pulcheria, whorelieved her brother from the weight of an empire, wasthe firmest pillar of orthodoxy; and so intimate was thealliance between the thunders of the synod and thewhispers of the court, that Cyril was assured of successif he could displace one eunuch, and substitute anotherin the favour of Theodosius. Yet the Egyptian couldnot boast of a glorious or decisive victory. The empe­ror, with unaccustomed firmness, adhered to his pro­mise of protecting the innocence of the oriental bishops;and Cyril softened his anathemas, and confessed, withambiguity and reluctance, a twofold nature of Christ,before he was permitted to satiate his revenge againstthe unfortunate Nestorius."
The rash and obstinate Nestorius, before theNestorius, end of the synod, was oppressed by Cyril, be-"' trayed by the court, and faintly supported by hiseastern friends. A sentiment of fear or indignationprompted him, while it was yet time, to affect theglory of a voluntary abdication ;f his wish, or at leasthis request, was readily granted; he was conducted


'' Clerici qui hie sunt contristantur, quod ecclesia Alexandrina nudata sit hojuscausa turbelae; et debet prater ilia qua hinc transmissa sint auri libras millequuigintas. Et mme ei scriptum est ut prastet; sed de tua ecclesia pricsta ava-ritiaj quorum nosti, &c. This curious and original letter, from Cyril's archdeaconto his creature the new bishop of Constantinople, has been unaccountably pre­served in an old Latin version. (Synodicon, c. 403. Concil. torn. 4. p. 465—468.)The mask is almost dropped, and the saints speak the honest language of interestand confederacy.
• The tedious negotiations that succeeded the synod of Ephesus are diffusely re­lated in the original Acts, (Concil. torn. 3. p. 1339—1771, ad fin. vol. and the Sy­nodicon, in torn. 4.) Socrates, (lib. 7. c. 28. 35. 40, 41.) Evagrius, (lib. 1. c. 6—8.12.) Liberatus, (c. 7—10.) Tillemont, Mern. Eccles. torn. 14. p. 487—676.)The most patient reader will thank me for compressing so much nonsense andfalsehood in a few lines.
'AUTO U Ti »uJtn8svTOf, tmrftm nan ro toum mravawXtiwai poraa-Tr,(i«. Evagrius,lib. 1. c. 7. The original letters in the Synodicon (c. 15. 24—26) justify th?







OCR Output








90 ROMAN EMPIRE.


be extended to a whole people, that the energy of thesword is communicated to the pen; and it will befound by experience that the tone of history will rise orfall with the spirit of the age.
From these considerations, I should haveabandoned without regret the Greek slaves and


servile historians, had not I reflected thatof the fate of the Byzantine monarchy is passively
theworld. J i T i i .
connected with the most splendid and import­ant revolutions which have changed the state of theworld. The space of the lost provinces was imme­diately replenished with new colonies and rising king­doms: the active virtues of peace and war desertedfrom the vanquished to the victorious nations; and it isin their origin and conquests, in their religion and go­vernment, that we must explore the causes and effectsof the decline and fall of the eastern empire. Nor willthis scope of narrative, the riches and variety of thesematerials, be incompatible with the unity of design andcomposition. As, in his daily prayers, the Mussulmanof Fez or Delhi still turns his face towards the temple ofMecca, the historian's eye shall be always fixed on thecity of Constantinople. The excursive line may em­brace the wilds of Arabia and Tartary, but the circlewill be ultimately reduced to the decreasing limit of theRoman monarchy.
Ran of 0° tnis principle I shall establish the plan ofihe.re: the following volumes of the present work. The
mamder » » MI
oftha first chapter will contain, in a regular series,the emperors who reigned at Constantinopleduring a period of six hundred years, from the days TofHeraclius to the Latin conquest: a rapid abstract,which may be supported by a general appeal to the or­der and text of the original historians. In this intro­duction I shall confine myself to the revolutions of thethrone, the succession of families, the personal cha­racters of the Greek princes, the mode of their life and







OCR Output








84 ROMAN EMPIRE.


to solicit a colony of smiths, carpenters, tilers, masons,printers, surgeons, and physicians, for the use of theircountry. But the public danger soon called for the in­stant and effectual aid of arms and soldiers to defend anunwarlike people from the barbarians who ravaged theinland country, and the Turks and Arabs who advancedfrom the sea-coast in more formidable array. Ethiopiawas saved by four hundred and fifty Portuguese, whodisplayed in the field the native valour of Europeans,and the artificial powers of the musket and cannon. Ina moment of terror, the emperor had promised to recon­cile himself and his subjects to the Catholic faith; aLatin patriarch represented the supremacy of the pope ;uthe empire, enlarged in a tenfold proportion, was sup­posed to contain more gold than the mines of America;and the wildest hopes of avarice and zeal were built onthe willing submission of the Christians of Africa.„. . . But the vows which pain had extorted, werethe Jesuits, forsworn on the return of health. The Abys-sinians still adhered with unshaken constancyto the Monophysite faith; their languid belief was in­flamed by the exercise of dispute; they branded theLatins with the names of Arians and Nestorians, andimputed the adoration of four gods to those who sepa­rated the two natures of Christ. Fremona, a place ofworship, or rather of exile, was assigned to the Jesuitmissionaries. Their skill in the liberal and mechanicarts, their theological learning, and the decency oftheir manners, inspired a barren esteem; but they werenot endowed with the gift of miracles," and they vainlysolicited a reinforcement of European troops. The


"John Bermudez, whose relation, printed at Lisbon, 1569, was translated intoEnglish by Purchat), (Pilgrims, lib. 7. c. 7. p. 1149, &c.) and from thence intoFrench )»y La Croze, (Christianisme d'.£thiope, p. 9t—165.) The piece is curious;,bat the author may be suspected of deceiving Abyssinia, Rome, and Portugal.His title to the rank of patriarch is dark and doubtful. (Ludolph. Comment, no.101. p. 473.)
* Religio Romana .... nee precibus patrum nee miraculis ab ipsis editis snf-fultiebatur, is the uncontradicted assurance of the devout emperor Susneus to hispatriarch Mendez; (Ludolpb. Comment, no. 126. |,. 529.) and such assurances,should be preciously kept, as an antidote against any marvellous legends.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVIII. 171


prus was not more propitious to the rebel than to thetyrant. His throne was subverted by a rival withoutmerit, and a people without arms. Isaac Angehis, adescendant in the female line from the great Alexius,was marked as a victim, by the prudence or superstitionof the emperor. In a moment of despair, Angelus de­fended his life and liberty, slew the executioner, and fledto the church of St. Sophia. The sanctuary was insen­sibly filled with a curious and mournful crowd, who, inhis fate, prognosticated their own. But their lamenta­tions were soon turned to curses, and their curses tothreats: they dared to ask, Why do we fear? why dowe obey? we are many, and he is one; our patience isthe only bond of our slavery. With the dawn of daythe city burst into a general sedition, the prisons werethrown open, the coldest and most servile were rousedto the defence of their country, and Isaac, the secondof the name, was raised from the sanctuary to thethrone. Unconscious of his danger, the tyrant was ab­sent; withdrawn from the toils of state, in the deliciousislands of the Propontis. He had contracted an inde­cent marriage with Alice, or Agnes, daughter of LewisVII. of France, and relict of the unfortunate Alexius:and his society, more suitable to his temper than to hisage, was composed of a young wife and a favourite con­cubine. On the first alarm he rushed to Constanti­nople, impatient for the blood of the guilty; but he wasastonished by the silence of the palace, the tumult of thecity, and the general desertion of mankind. Andronicusproclaimed a free pardon to his subjects; they neitherdesired nor would grant forgiveness: he offered to re­sign his crown to his son Manuel; but the virtues ofthe son could not expiate his father's crimes. The seawas still open for his retreat; but the news of the revo­lution had flown along the coast; when fear had ceased,obedience was no more; the imperial galley was pur­sued and taken by an armed brigantine; and the tyrant



