


OCR Output








AWk THE DECLINE AND FALL


them w*re sewn thousand eunuchs, four thousand of them white, the remaindeyblack. The porters or door-keepers were in number seven hundred. Barges-and boats, with the most superb decorations, were seen swimming upon the Ti­gris. Nor was the palace itself less splendid, in which were hung up thirty-eightthousand pieces of tapestry, twelve thousand five hundred of which were of sdkembroidered with gold. The carpets on the floor were twenty-two thousand. Ahundred lions were brought out, with a keeper to each lion.(l) Among the otherspectacles of rare and stupendous luxury, was a tree of gold and silver spreadinginto eighteen large branches, on which, and on the lesser boughs, sat a variety cfbirds, made of the same precious metals, as well as leaves of the tree. Whilethe machinery affected spontaneous motions, the several birds warbled their natu­ral harmony. Through this scene of magnificence, the Greek ambassador wasled by the vizier to the foot of the caliph's throne. "(2) In the west, the Om-miades of Spain supported, with equal pomp, the title of commander of the faith­ful. Three miles from Cordova; in honour of his favourite sultana, the third andgreatest of the Abdalrahmans constructed the city, palace, and gardens, of Zeh-ra. Twenty-five years, and above three millions sterling were employed Dy.thefounder: his liberal taste invited the artists of Constantinople, the most skilfulsculptors and architects of the age; and the buildings were sustained or adornedby twelve hundred columns of Spanish and African, of Greek and Italian marble.The hall of audience was incrusted with gold and pearls, and a great basin in thecentre was surrounded with the curious and costly figures of birds and quad­rupeds. In a lofty pavilion of the gardens, one of these basins and fountains, sodelightful in a sultry climate, was replenished, not with water, but with the purestquicksilver. The seraglio of Abdalrahman, his wives, concubines, and black eu­nuchs, amounted to six thousand three hundred persons; and he was attended tothe field by a guard of twelve thousand horse, whose belts and scimitars were stud­ded with gold. (3)
In a private condition, our desires are perpetually repressed by poverty and sub­ordination; but the lives and labours of millions are devoted to the service of a de­spotic prince, whose laws are blindly obeyed and whose wishes are instantly gra­tified. Our imagination is dazzled by the splendid picture; and whatever may bethe cool dictates of reason, there are few among us who would obstinately refuse atrial of the comforts and the cares of royalty. It may therefore be of some use toborrow the experience of the same Abdalrahman, whose magnificence has per­haps excited our admiration and envy, and to transcribe an authentic memorialwhich was found in the closet of the deceased caliph. " I have now reignedabove fifty years in victory or peace; beloved by my subjects, dreaded by my ene­mies, and respected by my allies. Riches and honours, power and pleasure, havewaited on my call, nor does any earthly blessing appear to have been wanting tomy felicity. In this situation I have diligently numbered the days of pure and ge­nuine happiness which have fallen to my lot: they amount to fourteen:—O man!place not thy confidence in this present world!"(4) The luxury of the caliphs,so useless to their private happiness, relaxed the nerves, and terminated the pro­gress, of the Arabian empire. Temporal and spiritual conquests had been thesole occupation of the first successors of Mahomet; and after supplying themselveswith the necessaries of life, the whole revenue was scrupulously devoted to thatsalutary work. The Abbassides were impoverished by the multitude of theirwants, and their contempt of economy. Instead of pursuing the great object ofambition, their leisure, their affections, the powers of their mind, were divertedby pomp and pleasure; the rewards of valour were embezzled by women and eu­nuchs, and the royal camp was encumbered by the luxury of the palace. A si-
(1) When Bell of Amermony (Travels, vol. i. p. 89.) accompanied the Russian ambassador to the audience ofthe unfortunate Shah Hussein or Persia, <tw> lions were introduced to denote the power of the king over thefiercest animals.
(2) Abulfeda, p. 237. d'Herbelor,p. 509. This embassy was received at Bagdad, A. H. 305, A. D. 917. 1st the
Sassagc of Abulfeda, 1 have used, with some variations, the English translation of the learned and amiable Air.[arris of Salisbury, (Philological Inquiries, p. 363,364.)
(3) Cardonne Histoire de l'Afrique et de 1'Kspagne, tons. i. p.330—336. A just ideaof the taste and architectureof the Arabians of Spain, may be conceived from the description and plates of the ALbamhn o* Grenada,(Swinburne's Travels, p. 171—188.)
(4) Cardonne,tom. i. p. 329,330. This confession, the complaints of Solomon of the vanity of this world (readPrior's verbose but eloquent poem,) and the happy ten days of the emperor Seghed, (Rambler, no. 204, 205.)will be triumphantly quoted by the detractors of human life. Their expectations are commonly immoderate;their estimates are seldom impartial. If I may speak of myself (the only person of whom I can speak wincertainty,) my happy hours have tar exceeded, and far exceed, the scanty numbers of tha caliph of Spain: US1 shall not sample to add, that many sf than are due to the pleasing labour of fte presmt composition.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE* 193


couraged his subjects and allies to march with the successors of Constantino underthe faithful and victorious banner of the cross. When the legions of Lucullus andPompey first passed the Euphrates, they blushed at their easy victory over thenatives of Armenia. But the long experience of war had hardened the minds andbodies of that effeminate people; their zeal and bravery were approved in the ser­vice of a declining empire; they abhorred and feared the usurpation of the houseof Sassan, and the memory of persecution envenomed their pious hatred of theenemies of Christ. The limits of Armenia, as it had been ceded to the emperorMaurice, extended as far as the Araxes; the river submitted to the dignity of abridge;(l) and Heraclius, in the footsteps of Mark Antony, advanced towards thecity of Tauris or Gandzaca,(2) the ancient and modern capital of one of the pro­vinces of Media. At the head of forty thousand men, Chosroes himself had re­turned from some distant expedition to oppose the progress of the Roman arms;but he retreated on the approach of Heraclius, declining the generous alternative ofpeace or battle. Instead of half a million of inhabitants, which have been ascribedto Tauris under the reign of the Sophys, the city contained no more than threethousand houses: but the value of the royal treasures was enhanced by a tradi­tion, that they were the spoils of Crossus, which had been transported by Cyrus,from the citadel of Sardes. The rapid conquests of Heraclius were suspendedonly by the winter season; a motive of prudence or superstition,(3) determined hisretreat into the province of Albania, along the shores of the Caspian; and his tentswere most probably pitched in the plains of Mogan,(4) the favourite encampmentof oriental princes. In the course of this successful inroad, he signalized the zealand revenge of a Christian emperor: at his command, the soldiers extinguishedthe fire, and destroyed the temples of the Magi: the statues of Chosroes, who as­pired to divine honours, were abandoned to the flames; and the ruins of ThebarmaorOrmia,(5) which had given birth to Zoroaster himself, made some atonementfor the injuries of the holy sepulchre. A purer spirit of religion was shown in therelief and deliverance of fifty thousand captives. Heraclius was rewarded bytheir tears and grateful acclamations; but this wise measure, which spread thefame of his benevolence, diffused the murmurs of the Persians against the prideand obstinacy of their own sovereign.
Amidst the glories of a succeeding campaign, Heraclius is almost lost to our eyes,and to those of the Byzantine historians. (6) From the spacious and fruitful plains ofAlbania, the emperor appears to follow the chain of Hyrcanian mountains, to de­scend into the province of Media or Irak, and to carry his victorious arms as faras the royal cities of Casbin and Ispahan, which had never been approached by aRoman conqueror. Alarmed by the danger of his kingdom, the powers of Chos­roes were already recalled from the Nile and the Bosphorus, and three formida­ble armies surrounded, in a distant and hostile land, the camp of the emperor.The Colchian allies prepared to desert his standard; and the fears of the bravestveterans were expressed, rather than concealed, by their desponding silence."Be not terrified," said the intrepid Heraclius, " by the multitude of your foes.With the aid of Heaven, one Roman may triumph over a thousand barbarians.But if we devote our lives for the salvation of our brethren, we shall obtain the
(1) Et Pontem indignatus Araxes. Virgil. £neid, viii. 728.
Toe river Araxes Is noisy, rapid, vehement, and, with the melting: of the mows, irresistible; the strongest amimost massy bridges are swept away by the current; and lits indignation is attested by the vuins of manyarches near the old town of Zulfa. Voyages de Chardin, torn. i. p. 252.
(2) Chardin, torn. s. p. 255—259. With the orientals (d'Herbelot, Bibliotb. Orient, p. 834.) he ascribes (hefoundation of Tauris, or Tebris, to Zobeide. the wife of the famous kbalif Haroun Alrashid; hut it appearsto have been more ancient; and the names of Gandzaca, Gazaca. Gaza, are expressive of the royal treasure.The number of five hundred and fifty thousand inhabitants is reduced by Chardin from one million to ont;hundrrd thousand, the popular estimate.
(3) He opened the gospel, and applied or interpreted the first casual passage to the name and situation ofAlbania. Theophanes, p. 258.
(4) The heath of Mogan, between the Cyrus and the Araxes. is sixtv parasanes in lenerth. and twenty inbreadth (Olearius, p. 1023,1024..) abounding in waters and fruitful pastures (Hist, de Nadir Shah, translatedby Mr. Jones from a Persian MS. part ii. p. 2,3.) See the encampments of Timur (Hist, par Sfcerefeddin AH,rib. v. c. 37. lib. vi. c. 13.,; and the coronation of Nadir Shah (Hist. Persanne, p. 3—13. and the English life ofMr. Jones, p. 64,65.)
(5) Thebarma lml Ormia near the lake Spanto, are proved to be the same city by D'Anville (Memoires dePAeademie, torn, xxviii. p. 564,565.) It is honoured as the birth place of Zoroaster according to the Persians(Schultens, Index Geograpb. p. 48.;) and their tradition is fortified by M. Perron d'Anquetil (Mem. de I'AcaaLdes Inscript. torn. xxxi. p. 375.,) with some texts from his, or their Zendavesta.
(6) I cannot find, and (what is much more) M. D'AnviMe does not attempt to seek the Salban, Tarentnm,territorv of the Huns, ore. mentioned by Theoplianei (p. 260—262.) Antychins (Anna), 'nm. ii. p. 231, 232.)an insufficient author, names Aspahan; and Casbin is most probably the cily of Sapor. Ispahan is twenty-four days'journev from Tauris. and Casbin half way between t!tem (Voyages de Taveniier, torn, i. p. ft3-*82.)
Vol.. III. 2"T







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. rs


t» the banners of the Turks, preserved the memory, or rather suggested the idea,of a fable, which was invented, without any mutual intercourse, by the shepherdsof Latium and those of Scy thia. At the equal distance of two thousand miles fromthe Caspian, the Icy, the Chinese, and the Bengal seas, a ridge of mountains isconspicuous, the centre, and perhaps the summit, of Asia; which, in the languageof different nations, has been styled Imaus, and Caf,(l) and Altai, and the GoldenMountains, and the Girdle of the Earth. The sides of the hills were productiveof minerals; and the iron forges, (2) for the purpose of war, were exercised by theTurks, the most despised portion of the slaves of the great khan of the Geougen.But their servitude could only last till a leader, bold and eloquent, should arise, topersuade his countrymen, that the same arms, which they forged for their mas­ters, might become, in their own hands, the instruments of freedom and victory.They sallied from the mountain;(3) a sceptre was the reward of his advice; andthe annual ceremony, in which a piece of iron was heated in the fire, and a smith'shammer was successively handled by the prince and his nobles, recorded for agesthe humble profession and rational pride of the Turkish nation. Bertezena, theirfirst leader, signalized their valour and his own in successful combats against theneighbouring tribes; but when he presumed to ask in marriage the daughter of thegreat khan, the insolent demand of a slave and a mechanic was contemptuously re­jected. The disgrace was expiated by a more noble alliance with the princess ofChina; and the decisive battle, which almost extirpated the nation of the GeougeD,established in Tartary the new and more powerful empire of the Turks. Theyreigned over the north; but they confessed the vanity of conquest, by their faithfulattachment to the mountain of their fathers. The royal encampment seldom lostsight of mount Altai, from whence the river Irtish descends to water the rich pas­tures of the Calmucks,(4) which nourish the largest sheep and oxen in the world.The soil is fruitful, and the climate mild and temperate: the happy region was igno­rant of earthquake and pestilence; the emperor's throne was turned towards the east,and a golden wolf, on the top of a spear, seemed to guard the entrance of his tent.One of the successors of Bertezena was tempted by the luxury and superstition ofChina; but his design of building cities and temples was defeated by the simple■wisdom of a barbarian counsellor. '1 The Turks," he said,'' are not equal in num­ber to one-hundreth part of the inhabitants of China. If we balahce their power,and elude their armies, it is because we wander without any fixed habitations, inthe exercise of war and hunting. Are we strong? we advance and conquer: arewe feeble? we retire and are concealed. Should the Turks confine themselveswithin the walls of the cities, the loss of a- battle would be the destruction of theirempire. The Bonzes preach only patience, humility, and the renunciation of theworld. Such, O king! is not the religion of heroes." They entertained with lessreluctance the doctrines of Zoroaster; but the greatest part of the nation acquiesced,without inquiry, in the opinions, or rather in the practice, of their ancestors. Thehonours of sacrifice were reserved for the supreme Deitv; they acknowledged, inrude hymns, their obligations to the air, the fire, the water, and the earth; and theirpriests derived some profit from the art of divination. Their unwritten laws werevigorous and impartial: theft was punished by a tenfold restitution; adultery, trea­son, and murder, with death: and no chastisement could be inflicted too severe forthe rare and inexpiable guilt of cowardice. As the subject nations marched un­der the standard of the Turks, their cavalry, both men and horses, were proudlycomputed by millions; one of their effective armies consisted of four hundred thou­sand soldiers, and in less than fifty years they were connected in peace and warwith the Romans, the Persians, and the Chinese. In their northern limits, some


(1) From Caf to Caf; which a more rational geography would interpret from Imaus, perhaps to mount At-1*1. According to the religious philosophy of the Mahometans, the basis of mount Caf is an emerald, whosereflection produces the azure of the sky. The mountain is endowed with a sensitive action in its roots ornerves: and their vibration, at the command of God, is the cause of earthquakes (D'Herbelot, p. 230,231.)
(2) The Siberian iron is the best and most plentiful in the world: and in (he southern parts, above sixtymines are now worked by the industry of the Russians (Strahlenberg, Hist, of Siberia, p. 342. 387. Voyage enliberie, par l'Abbe Chappe cTAuteroche, p. 603.608. edit, in 12mo. Amsterdam, 1770.) The Turks offered ironfor sale; yet the Roman ambassadors, with strange obstinacy, persisted in believing that it was all a trick, andthat their country produced none (Menander in Excerpt. Leg. p. Ifi2.)
(3) Of Irgana-kon (Abulgbazi Khan, Hist. Genealogique des Tartars, P. 2. c. 5. p. 71—77. c. IS. p. 1»5.)The tradition of the Moguls, of the four hundred and fifty years which they passed in the mountains, agree*with the Chinese periods of the history of the Huns and Turks (De Guigncs, torn. i. part 2. p. 376,) and thetwenty generations, from the restoration to Zingis.
(4) The country of the Turks, now of the Catmucks, is well described in the Genealogical History, p. $21—*»2. The curious notes of the Freuoh translator are enlarged and digested in the second volume of the Eng­lish version.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 391


rnay hope to meet in the bosom of Abraham: but the complaint, that three bishopscould no longer be found to consecrate a brother, announces the speedy and inevit­able ruin of the episcopal order. The Christians of Africa and Spain had longsince submitted to the practice of circumcision and the legal abstinence from wineand pork; and the name of Mazarabes(l) (adoptive Arabs) was applied to theircivil or religious conformity. (2) About the middle of the twelfth century, theworship of Christ and the succession of pastors were abolished along the coast ofBarbary, and in the kingdoms of Cordova and Seville, of Valentia and Grenada. (3)The throne of the Almohades, or unitarians, was founded on the blindest fanati­cism, and their extraordinary rigour might be provoked or justified by the recentvictories and intolerant zeal of the princess of Sicily and Castille, of Arragon andPortugal. The faith of the Mozarabes was occasionally revived by the papal mis­sionaries; and on the landing of Charles V. some families of Latin Christians wereencouraged to rear their heads at Tunis and Algiers. But the seed of the gospelwas quickly eradicated, and the long province from Tripoli to the Atlantic haslost all memory of the language and religion of Rome. (4)
After the revolution of eleven centuries, the Jews and Christians of the Turkishempire enjoy the liberty of conscience which was granted by the Arabian caliphs.During the first age of the conquest, they suspected the loyalty of the catholics,whose name of Melchites betrayed their secret attachment to the Greek emperor,while the Nestorians and Jacobites, his inveterate enemies, approved themselvesthe sincere and voluntary friends of the Mahometan government. (5) Yet this par­tial jealousy was healed by time and submission; the churches of Egypt wereshared with the catholics,(6) and all the oriental sects were included in the com­mon benefits of toleration. The rank, the immunities, the domestic jurisdiction, ofthe patriarchs, the bishops and the clergy, were protected by the civil magistrate:the learning of individuals recommended them to the employments of secretariesand physicians; and they were enriched by the lucrative collection of the revenue;and their merit was sometimes raised to the command of cities and provinces. Acaliph of the house of Abbas was heard to declare, that the Christians were mostworthy of trust in the administration of Persia. " The Moslems," said he, " willabuse their present fortune; the Magians regret their fallen greatness; and the Jewsare impatient for their approaching(7) deliverance." But the slaves of despotismare exposed to the alternatives of favour and disgrace. The captive churches ofthe east have been afflicted in every age by the avarice or bigotry of their rulers:and the ordinary and legal restraints must be offensive to the pride or the zeal ofthe Christians. (8) About two hundred year&ftfter Mahomet, they were separatedfrom their fellow-subjects by a turban or girdle of a less honourable colour; insteadof horses or mules, they were condemned to ride on asses, in the attitude of wo­men. Their public and private buildings were measured by a diminutive standard;


(1) Mozarabes, or Mottarabet, adtcltUii, as it is interpreted in Latin. (Pocock, Specimen Hist. Arabum. p.39,40. Bibliot. Arabico-Hispana, torn. ii. p. 18.) The Mozarabic liturgy, the ancient ritual of the church ofToledo, has been attacked by the popes and exposed to the doubtful trials of the sword and of fire. (Marian.Hist. Hispan. torn. i. lib. ix. c. 18. p. 378.) It was, or rather it is, in the Latin tongue; yet in the eleventh cen­tury it was found necessary (A. j£. C. 1687. A. D. 1039.) to transcribe an Arabic version of the canons of thecouncils of Spain, (Bibliot. Arab. Hist. torn. i. p. 547.) for the use of the bishops and clergy in the Moorishkingdoms.
(2) About the middle of the tenth century, the clergy of Cordova was reproached with this criminal compli­ance, by the intrepid envoy of the emperor Otho L (Vit. Johan. Gorz, in Secul. Benedict V. no. 115. apudFleury; Hist. Eccles. torn. xii. p. 91.)
(3) Pagi, Critica, torn. iv. A. D. 1149, no. 8,9. He justly observes, that when Seville, &c. were retaken byFerdinand of Castille, no Christians, except captives, were found in the place; and that the Mozarabic churchesof Africa and Spain, described by James a Vitnaco, A. D. 1218, (Hist. Hierosol. c. 80. p. 1095. in Gest. Dei perFrancos) are copied from some older book. I shall add, that the date of the Hegira 677, (A. 1278.) must applyto the copy, not to the composition, of a treatise ol'jurisprudence, which states the civil rights of the Christiansof Cordova; (Bibliot. Arab. Hist. torn. i. p. 471.) and that the Jews were the only dissenters whom Abul Wa­led, king of Grenada, (A. D. 1313.) could either discountenance or tolerate, (torn. ii. p. 288.)
(4) Renaudot, Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p. 283. Leo Africanus would have flattered his Roman masters, couldbe have discovered any latent relics of the Christianity of Africa.
(5) Absit (said the catholic to the vizier of Bagdad,) lit pari loco habeas Nestorianos, quorum prseter Arabasnullus alius rex est, et Grace* quorom reges amovendo Aribibus bellonon desistunt, Sec. Sec in the collec­tions of Assemannus, (Bibliot. Orient, torn. iv. p. 94—101.) the s'ate of the Nestorians under the caliphs. Thatof the Jacobites is more concisely exposed in the Preliminary Dissertation ol the second volume of Assemannus.
(6) Eutych. Annal. torn. ii. 584. 3S7, 388. Renaudot, Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p. 205,206. 257. 332. A taint ofthe Monothelite heresy might render the first of these Greek patriarchs less loyal to the emperors and less ob­noxious to the Arabs.
(7) Motadhed, who reigned from A. D. 892 to 902. The Magians still held their name and rank among thereligions of the empire. (Assemanni, Bibliot. Orient, torn. iv. p. 97.)
(8) Reland explains the general restraints of the Mahometan policy and jurisprudence. (Dissertat. torn, iii-p. 16—20.) The oppressive edicts of the caliph Motawakkel, (A. D. 847—861.) which are still in force, are no­ticed by Eutychius, (Annal. torn. ii. p. 448.) and d'Herbelot. (Bibliot. Orient, p. 640.) A persecution of the ca­liph Omar II. is related, and most probably magnified, by the Greek Theophanes,(Chron. p. 334.)







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


faithful natives devoted their labours to the service of Amrou; some sparks ofmartial spirit were perhaps rekindled by the example of their allies; and thesanguine hopes of Mokawkas had fixed his sepulchre in the church of St. John ofAlexandria. Eutychius the patriarch observes, that the Saracens fought withthe courage of lions; they repulsed the frequent and almost daily sallies of the be­sieged, and soon assaulted in their turn the walls and towers of the city. In eve­ry attack, the sword, the banner of Amrou, glittered in the van of the Moslems.On a memorable day, he was betrayed by his imprudent valour: his followerswho had entered the city were driven back; and the general, with a friend and aslave, remained a prisoner in the hands of the Christians. When Amrou wasconducted before the prefect, he remembered his dignity and forgot his situation:a lofty demeanour, and resolute language, revealed the lieutenant of the caliph,and the battle-axe of a soldier was already raised to strike off the head of theaudacious captive. His life was saved by the readiness of his slave, who instant­ly gave his master a blow on the face, and commanded him, with an angry tone,to be silent in the presence of his superiors. The credulous Greek was deceived;he listened to the offers of a treaty, and his prisoners were dismissed in the hopeof a more respectable embassy, till the joyful acclamations of the.camp announcedthe return of their general, and insulted the folly of the infidels. At length, aftera siege of fourteen nionths,(l) and the loss of three-and-twenty thousand men,the Saracens^prevailed: the Greeks embarked their dispirited and diminishednumbers, and the standard of Mahomet was planted on the walls of the capital ofEgypt. *' I have taken," said Amrou to the caliph, " the great city of the west.It'is impossible for me to enumerate the variety of its riches and beauty; and Ishall content myself with observing, that it contains four thousand palaces, fourthousand baths, four hundred theatres or places of amusement, twelve thousandshops for the sale of vegetable food, and forty thousand tributary Jews. Thetown has been subdued by force of arms, without treaty or capitulation, and theMoslems are impatient to seize the fruits of their victory. "(2) The commanderof the faithful rejected with firmness the idea of pillage, and directed his lieute­nant to reserve the wealth and revenue of Alexandria for the public service andthe propagation of the faith: the inhabitants were numbered; a tribute was im­posed; the zeal and resentment of the Jacobites were curbed, and the Melchites,who submitted to the Arabian yoke, were indulged in the obscure but tranquil ex­ercise of their worship. The intelligence of this disgraceful and calamitous eventafflicted the declining health of the emperor; and Heraclius died of a dropsyabout seven weeks after the loss of Alexandria. (3) Under the minority of hisgrandson, the clamours of a people, deprived of their daily sustenance, com­pelled the Byzantine court to undertake the recovery of the capital of Egypt.In the space of four years, the harbour and fortifications of Alexandria weretwice occupied by a fleet and army of Romans. They were twice expelled bythe valour of Amrou, who was recalled by the domestic peril from the distantwars of Tripoli and Nubia. But the facility of the attempt, the repetition of theinsult, and the obstinacy of the resistance, provoked him to swear, that if a thirdtime he drove the infidels into the sea, he would render Alexandria as accessibleon all sides as the house of a prostitute. Faithful to his promise, he dismantledseveral parts of the walls and towers, but the people were spared in the chas­tisement of the city, and the mosch of Mercy was erected on the spot where thevictorious general had stopped the fury of his troops.
I should deceive the expectation of the reader, if I passed in silence the fate ofthe Alexandrian library, as it is described by the learned Abulpharagius. Thespirit of Amrou was more curious and liberal than that of his brethren, and inhis leisure hours, the Arabian chief was pleased with the conversation of John,the last disciple of Ammonius, and who derived the surname of P/iilofionus from
(1) Both Eutychius (Anna), torn. ii. p. 319.) and Elmacin (Hist. Saracen, p. 23.) concur in fixine; thetaking of A lexandria to Friday uf the new moon of Muharram of the twentieth year of the Hejrira (Decem­ber 22. A. D. 640.) In reckoning backwards fourteen months spent belore Alexandria, seven months beforeBabylon, &c. Amrou rni^ht have invaded Krjypt about the end of the year 633; hut we are assured that becn-teied the country the twelfth ot Bavni. sixth of June (Murtadi Merveilles de i'Efrypte, p. 164. Sev.-rus, apudRenaudut. p. 152.) Tiie Saracen, and afterwards Louis IX. of France, halted at Pelusiunj, or Damietta, duringthe season of the inundation of the Nile.
(2) Kutych. Annal. torn. ii. p. 316. 319.
(3) Notwithstanding some inconsistencies of Theophanes and Cedrenus, the accuracy of Pie^t (Critica, tout,ii. p. 824.) (.as estraeted from Nicephorus and the Chronicon Orientale the true date of the death uf Heraclius,February 11. A. D. 641, fifty daysafter the lost of Alexandria. A foartn of that time was sufficient to conreythe intelligence.







OCR Output








182 THE DECLINE AND FALL.


rians, was uniformly restored by the repose and safety of the winter season. Aprince who could promote and support this unworthy favourite, must derive noglory from the accidental merit of his colleague Priscus.(l) In five successivebattles, which seem to have been conducted with skill and resolution, seventeenthousand two hundred barbarians were made prisoners; near sixty thousand, withfour sons of the chagan, were slain: the Roman general surprised a peaceful dis­trict of the Gepidi, who slept under the protection of the Avars; and his last tro­phies were erected on the banks of the Danube and the Teyss. Since the deathof Trajan, the arms of the empire had not penetrated so deeply into the old Da-cia: yet the success of Priscus was transient and barren; and he was soon recalled,by the apprehension, that Baian, with dauntless spirit and recruited forces, waspreparing to avenge his defeat under the walls of Constantinople. (2)
The theory of war was not more familiar to the camps of Csesar and Trajan,than to those of Justinian and Maurice. (3) The iron ot Tuscany or Pontus stillreceived the keenest temper from the skill of the Byzantine workmen. Themagazines were plentifully stored with every species of offensive and defensivearms. In the construction and use of ships, engines, and fortifications, the barba­rians admire the superior ingenuity of a people whom they had so often vanquishedin the field. The science of tactics, the order, evolutions, and stratagems, of an­tiquity, were transcribed and studied in the books of the Greeks and Romans.But the solitude or degeneracy of the provinces could no longer supply a race ofmen to handle those weapons, to guard those walls, to navigate those ships, andto reduce the theory of war into bold and successful practice. The genius of Be-lisarius and Narses had been formed without a master, and expired without adisciple. Neither honour, nor patriotism, nor generous superstition, could ani­mate the lifeless bodies of slaves and strangers, who had succeeded to the honoursof the legions: it was in the camp alone that the emperor should have exercised adespotic command; it was only in the camps that his authority was disobeyed and in­sulted: he appeased and inflamed with gold the licentiousness of the troops; buttheir vices were inherent, their victories were accidental, and their costly main­tenance exhausted the substance of a state which they were unable to defend-After a long and pernicious indulgence, the cure of this inveterate evil was under­taken by Maurice; but the rash attempt, which drew destruction on his own head,tended only to aggravate the disease. A reformer should be exempt from thesuspicion of interest, and he must possess the confidence and esteem of thosewhom he proposes to reclaim. The troops of Maurice might listen to the voiceof a victorious leader: they disdained the admonitions of statesmen and sophists,and when they received an edict which deducted from their pay the price of theirarms and clothing, they execrated the avarice of a prince insensible of the dan­gers and fatigues from which he had escaped. The camps both of Asia and Eu­rope were agitated with frequent and funous seditions;(4) the enraged soldiers ofEdessa pursued, with reproaches, with threats, with wounds, their trembling ge­nerals: they overturned the statues of the emperor, cast stones against the mira­culous image of Christ, and either rejected the yoke of all civil and military laws,or instituted a dangerous model of voluntary subordination. The monarch, al­ways distant, and often deceived, was incapable of yielding or persisting accordingto the exigence of the moment. But the fear of a general revolt induced him tooreadily to accept any act of valour, or any expression of loyalty, as an atonementfor the popular offence; the new reform was abolished as hastily as it had been an­nounced, and the troops, instead of punishment and restraint, were agreeably sur­prised by a gracious proclamation of immunities and rewards. But the soldiersaccepted without gratitude the tardy and reluctant gifts of the emperor; their in­solence was elated by the discovery of his weakness and their own strength; andtheir mutual hatred was inflamed beyond the desire of forgiveness or the hope ofreconciliation. The historians of the times adopt the vulgar suspicion, that Mau-


(1) See the exploits of Priscus, Kb. viii. c. 2, 3.t (2) The general detail of the war against the Avars mny be traced in the first, second, sixth, seventh, andeighth books of the history of the Emperor Maurice, by Theophylact Simoeatta. As he wrote in the reign ofHeraclius.he had no temptation to flatter: but his want of judgment renders him diffuse in trifles, and con­cise in the most interesting facts.
, (3) Maurice himself composed twelve books on the military art, which are still extant, and have been pub­lished (Upsal, 1664.) by John Schefler at the end of the Tactics of Arrian, (Fabricius, Bibliot. Grscca, lib. iv.c. 8. torn. iii. p. 278.) who promises to speak more fully of his work in its proper place.
(4) See the mutinies under the reign of Maurice, in Theophylact, lib. hi. c. 1—4; lib. vi. c. 7,8, Id; lib. vii.c. 7; lib. Tin, c. 6,6a:.







OCR Output








168 THE DECLINE AND FALL


serving from his own experience, that the juster cause had often been oppressedby successful violence. Whatever merit may be discovered in the laws of theLombards, they are the genuine fruit of the reason of the barbarians, who neveradmitted the bishops of Italy to a seat in their legislative councils. But the suc­cession of their kings is marked with virtue and ability; the troubled series oftheir annals is adorned with fair intervals of peace, order and domestic happi­ness; and the Italians enjoyed a milder and more equitable government, thanany of the other kingdoms which had been founded on the ruins of the westernempire. (1)
Amidst the arms of the Lombards, and under the despotism of the Greeks, weagain inquire into the fate of Rome, (2) which had reached, about the close of thesixth century, the lowest period of her depression. By the removal of the seat ofempire, and the successive loss of the provinces, the sources of public and privateopulence were exhausted; the lofty tree, under whose shade the nations of theearth had reposed, was deprived of its leaves and branches, and the sapless trunkwas left to wither on the ground. The ministers of command, and the messengersof victory, no longer met on the Appian or Flaminian way; and the hostile ap­proach of the Lombards was often felt and continually feared. The inhabitantsof a potent and peaceful capital, who visit without an anxious thought the gardenof the adjacent country, will faintly picture in their fancy the distress of the Ro­mans; they shut or opened their gates with a trembling hand, beheld from thewalls the flames of their houses, and heard the lamentations of their brethren, whowere coupled together like dogs, and dragged away into distant slavery beyondthe sea and the mountains. Such incessant alarms must annihilate the pleasuresand interrupt the labours of a rural life; and the Campagna of Rome was speedilyreduced to the state of a dreary wilderness, in which the land is barren, the wa­ters are impure, and the air is infectious. Curiosity and ambition no longer at­tracted the nations to the capital of the world: but if chance or necessity directedthe steps of a wandering stranger, he contemplated with horror the vacancy andsolitude of the city, and might be tempted to ask, Where is the senate, and whereare the people? In a season ef excessive rains, the Tiber swelled above its banks,and rushed with irresistible violence into the valleys of the seven hills. A pesti­lential disease arose from the stagnation of the deluge, and so rapid was the conta­gion, that fourscore persons expired in an hour, in the midst of a solemn procession,which implored the mercy of heaven. (3) A society, in which marriage is encou­raged and industry prevails, soon repairs the accidental losses of pestilence and.war; but as the far greater part of the Romans was condemned to hopeless indi­gence and celibacy, the depopulation was constant and visible, and the gloomy en­thusiasts might expect the approaching failure of the human race. (4) Yet thenumber of citizens still exceeded the measure of subsistence: their precarious foodwas supplied from the harvests of Sicily or Egypt; and the frequent repetition offamine betrays the inattention of the emperor to a distant province. The edificesof Rome were exposed to the same ruin and decay; the mouldering fabrics wereeasily overthrown by inundations, tempests, and earthquakes, and the monks, whohad occupied the most advantageous stations, exulted in their base triumph overthe ruins of antiquity. (5) It is commonly believed, that pope Gregory I. attackedthe temples and mutilated the statues of the city; that by the command of the bar­barian, the Palatine library was reduced to ashes; and that the history of Livy wasthe peculiar mark of his absurd and mischievous fanaticism. The writings ofGregory himself reveal his implacable aversion to the monuments of classic genius:and he points his severest censure against the profane learning of a bishop, whotaught the art of grammar, studied the Latin poets, and pronounced with the same


(1) Read (he history of Paul Wamefrid: particularly lib. iii. e. 16. Baroniui rejects the praise, which ap­pears to contradict the invectives of pope Gregory the Greek; hut Mnratori (Annali d'ltalia, torn. v. p. 217.)presumes to insinuate that the saint may have magnified the faults of Arians and enemies.
(2) The passages of the homilies of Gregory, which represent the miserable state of the city and country,are transcribed in the annals of Baronius, A. D. 590. No. 16. A. D. 595. No. 2, &c. &e.
(3) Theinundation and plague were reported by a deacon, whom his bishop, Gregory of Tours, had des­patched to Rome for some relies. The ingenious messenger embellished his tale and the river with a greatdragon.and a train of little serpents (Greg. Turon. lib. x. c. 1.)
(4) Gregory of Rome (Dialog, lib. ii. c. 15.) relates a memorable prediction of St. Benedict. Roma a Gen-tihbus non extenninabitur sed tempegtatibus, coruscis turbinibus ac terrse motu in semetipsa mareeseet.Such a prophecy melts into true history, and becomes the evidence of the fact after it was invented.
(5) Quia in uno se ore cum Jovis laudibus, Christi laudes non capiunt, et quant grave nefand qmque sit epis-copis canere tjuod nee laico religion) conveniat, ipse considera (lib. ix. ep. 4.) The writings of GrKrory hini-Klf attest his lujiocence of any classjc taste or literature.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 79


Disputes have often arisen between the sovereigns of Asia, for the title of kingof the world; while the contest has proved that it could not belong to either of thecompetitors. The kingdom of the Turks was bounded by the Oxus or Gihon;and Touran was separated by that great river from the rival monarch of Iran, orPersia, which, in a smaller compass, contained perhaps a larger measure of powerand population. The Persians, who alternately invaded and repulsed the Turksand Romans, were ruled by the house of Sassan, which ascended the throne threehundred years before the accession of Justinian. His cotemporary, Cabades, orKobad, had been successful in war against the emperor Anastasius; but the reignof that prince was distracted by civil and religious troubles. A prisoner in thehands of his subjects; an exile among the enemies of Persia; he recovered his li­berty by prostituting the honour of his wife, and regained his kingdom with thedangerous and mercenary aid of the barbarians, who had slain his father. Hisnobles were suspicious that Kobad never forgave the authors of his expulsion, oreven those of his restoration. The people were deluded and inflamed by the fa­naticism of Mazdak,(l) who asserted the community of women,(2) and the equa­lity of mankind, whilst he appropriated the richest lands and most beautiful fe­males to the use of his sectaries. The view of these disorders, which had beenfomented by his laws and example, (3) imbittered the declining age of the Persianmonarch; and his fears were increased by the consciousness of his design to reversethe natural and customary order of succession, in favour of his third and most fa­voured son, so famous under the names of Chosroes and Nushirvan. To renderthe youth more illustrious in the eyes of the nations, Kobad was desirous that heshould be adopted by the emperor Justin: the hope of peace inclined the Byzan­tine court to accept this singular proposal; and Chosroes might have acquired aspecious claim to the inheritance of his Roman parent. But the future mischiefwas diverted by the advice of the questor Proclus: a difficulty was started, whe­ther the adoption should be performed as a civil or military rite;(4) the treaty wasabruptly dissolved; and the sense of this indignity sunk deep into the mind of Chos­roes, who had already advanced to the Tigris on his road to Constantinople. Hisfather did not long survive the disappointment of his wishes; the testament oftheir deceased sovereign was read in the assembly of the nobles; and a powerfulfaction, prepared for the event, and regardless of the priority of age, exaltedChosroes to the throne of Persia. He filled that throne during a prosperous pe­riod of forty-eight years;(5) and the Justice of Nushirvan is celebrated as thetheme of immortal praise by the nations of the east.
But the justice of kings is understood by themselves, and even by their subjects,with an ample indulgence for the gratification of passion and interest. The vir­tue of Chosroes was that of a conqueror, who, in the measures of peace and war,is excited by ambition and restrained by prudence; who confounds the greatnesswith the happiness of a nation, and calmly devotes the lives of thousands to thefame, or even the amusement, of a single man. In his domestic administration,the just Nushirvan would merit, in our feelings, the appellation of a tyrant. Histwo elder brothers had been deprived of their fair expectations of the diadem:their future life, between the supreme rank and the condition of subjects, wasanxious to themselves and formidable to their master; fear as well as revengemight tempt them to rebel; the slightest evidence of a conspiracy satined the au­thor of their wrongs; and the repose of Chosroes was secured by the death ofthese unhappy princes, with their families and adherents. One guiltless youth
drawn from the Extracts of Menander, (p. 106—110. m—154.161—164.) in which we often regret the want oforder and connexion.
(1) Seed'Herbelot,(Bibliot. Orient, p. 56B. 929.) Hyde, (de Religione Vet. Persarum, c. 21. p. 290, 291.) Po-cock, (Specimen Hist. Arab. p. 70,71.) Eutychius, (Anna!, torn. ii.p. 176.) Teseira, (in Stevens Hist, of Per-lia, lib. i. c 34.)
(2) The tame of the new law for the community of women was soon propagated in Syria (Asseman. Bibliot.. Orient, torn. iii. p. 402.) and Greece. (Procop. Persic, lib. i. c. 5.)
(3) He offered his own wife and sister to the prophet; but the prayers of Nushirvan saved his mother, andthe indignant monarch never forgave the humiliation to which his filial piety had stooped: pedes tuos deoscn-latus, (said he toMazdak)cujusftetor adhue nares occupat. (Pococfc, Specimen Hist. Arab. p. 71.)
(4) Procopius, Persic, lib. i. c. 11. Was not Proclus overwise ? Was not the danger imaginary ? The ex-cnse,at least, was injurious to a nation not ignarant of letters: ou yea/tueurt oi (SzpSxpt too,- trxtoxi mtoumxt xkk>oitXmv o-xsutf. Whether any mode of adoption was practised in Persia I much doubt.
(5) From Procopius and Agathias, (torn. ii. p. 543. 676.) has proved that Chosroe9 Nushirvan ascended thethrone in the fifth year of the reign of Justinian. (A. D. 531. April t. A. D. 532. April 1.) But the true Chro.nology, which harmonizes with the Greeks and Orientals, is ascertained by John Malala, (torn. ii. 211.) Caba­des. or Kobad, after a reign of forty-three years and two months, sickened the 8th and died the 13th of Sep­tember, A. D. 531, aged eighty-two years. According to the Annals of Eutychius, Nushirvan reigned forty-se­ven years and six months; and his death must consequently be placed in March, A. D. 579.







OCR Output








380 THE DECLINE AND PALL


crated to the important service. In the vicissitudes of war, the interior provincefhad been alternately won and lost by the Saracens. But the sea-coast still re*mained in the hands of the Greeks; the predecessors of Hassan, had respected thename and fortifications of Carthage; and the number of its defenders was recruitedby the fugitives of Cabes and Tripoli. The arms of Hassan were bolder and morefortunate; he reduced and pillaged the metropolis of Africa; and the mention ofscaling-ladders may justify the suspicion that he anticipated, by a sudden assault,the more tedious operations of a regular siege. But the joy of the conquerors wassoon disturbed by the appearance of the Christian succours. The prefect and pa­trician John, a general of experience and renown, embarked at Constantinople theforces of the eastern empire;(l) they were joined by the ships and soldiers of Si­cily, and a powerful re-enforcement of Goths(2) was obtained from the fears andreligion of the Spanish monarch. The weight of the confederate navy broke thechain that guarded the entrance of the harbour; the Arabs retired to Cairoan, orTripoli; the Christians landed; the citizens hailed the ensign of the cross, and thewinter was idly wasted in the dream of victory or deliverance. But Africa wasirrecoverably lost; the zeal and resentment of the commander of the faithful(3)prepared in the ensuing spring a more numerous armament by sea and land; andtlie patrician in his turn was compelled to evacuate the post and fortifications ofCarthage. A second battle was fought in the neighbourhood of Utica: the Greeksand Goths were again defeated; and their timely embarkation saved them fromthe sword of Hassan, who had invested the slight and insufficient rampart of theircamp. Whatever yet remained of Carthage, was delivered to the flames, and thecolony of Dido(4) and C:esar lay desolate above two hundred years, till a part,perhaps a twentieth, of the old circumference was repeopled by the first of theFatimite caliphs. In the beginning of the sixteenth century, the second capital ofthe west was represented by a mosch, a college without students, twenty-five orthirty shops, and the huts of five hundred peasants, who, in their abject poverty,displayed the arrogance of the Punic senators. Even that paltry village was sweptaway by the Spaniards whom Charles V. had stationed in the fortress of the Go-letta. The ruins of Carthage have perished; and the place might be unknown, ifsome broken arches of an aqueduct did not guide the footsteps of the inquisitivetraveller. (5)
The Greeks were expelled, but the Arabians were not yet masters of the coun­try. In the interior provinces of the Moors or Berbers,{&) so feeble under thefirst Csesars, so formidable to the Byzantine princes, maintained a disorderly re­sistance to the religion and power of the successors of Mahomet. Under the stand­ard of their queen Cahina, the independent tribes acquired some degree of unionand discipline; and as the Moors respected in their females the character of a


(1) Ai9tri9; . . . xxxvrx T* 'P-j^ixa *Sid^ifi jrXoi/ui, ffYAarayw « ijr' auTOi; IwsevKi rov rTxTPixior, fjuyf ifov rutstoaijmmv, ff-poxMpOTqviMs wfJ." Kxf^ovx «t» Tu"> ii*p«Ki;vwv »Ei;ri/*'vJv. Nieephori Constantinopolitani Breviar.p. 28. The patriarch of Constantinople, with Thcophanes, (Chronograph, p. 309.) have slightly mentioned thislast attempt for the relief of Africa. Pagi (Critica, torn. iii. p. 129. 141.) has nicely ascertained the chronologyby a strict comparison of the Arabic and Byzantine historians, who often disagree both in time and fact. Seclikewise a note of Otter, (p. 121.) ,
(2) Dove's erano ridoni i nt.bili Romani e i Gotti; and afterward, i Romani suggirono e i Gotti lasciarono Car-tlmgine. (Leo African, fol. 72. recto.) I know not from what Arabic writer the African derived his Goths: butthe faet, though new, is so interesting and so probable, that I will accept it on the slightest authority.
(3) This con>mander is styled by Nicephorus, Bxrit.tu; ixpctxuvwv, a vague though not improper definition,of the caliph. Theophanes introduces the strange appellation of nforotm/ifloxoc, which his interpreter Goarexplains by V'zir Axtn. They may approach the truth, in assigning the active part of the minister, ratherthan the prince-, l,ut they forgot that the Omtniades had only o Aaree, or secretary, and that the office of vi­zier wns not revived or instituted till the one hundred and thirty-second ytar of the Hegira. (D'Herbelot,p. 912.)
(4) According to Solinut, (lih. 27. p. 3fi. edit. Salmas.) the Carthage of Dido stood either six hundred and se­venty-seven or seven hundrtd and thirty-seven years; a various reading, which proceeds from the difference ofMSS. or editions. (Salinas. Plinian. Exercil. torn. i. 228.) The former of these accounts, which gives eighthundred and twenty-three years hefore Christ, is more consistent with the well-weighed testimony of VelleiusPatercilus; but the latter is preferred l>y our clironologisls, (Marsham. Canon. Chrou. p. 398.) as more agreea­ble to the Hebrew and I'yrian annals.
(5) Leo African, fol. 71. verse, 72. recto. M«rn,ol, torn. ii. p. 445—447. Shaw. p. 80.
(6) The history of the word Barbar may be classed under four periods.—1. in the time of Homer, when theGreeks and Asiatics might probably use a common idiom, the imitative sound of Barbar was applied to theruder tribes, whose pronunciation was most harsh, whose grammar was most defective. Kapj; Bapfifiefoewc.(Iliad 2. 867. with the Oxford Scholiast, Clarke's Annotation, and Henry Stephen's Greek Thesaurus, torn. i. p.720.) 2. From the time, at least, of Herodotus, it was extended to all the nations who were stranger* to thelanguage and manners of the Greeks. 3. In the age of Plautus, the Romans submitted to the insult, (PompeiusFestus, lib. ii. p. 48. edit. Dacier,)and freely gave themselves the name of barbarians. They insensibly claimedan exemption for Italy, and her subject provinces; and at length removed the disgraceful appellation to the sa­vage or hostile nations beyond the pale of the empire. 4. In every sense it was due to the Moors; the familiar-word was borrowed from the Latin Provincials by the Arabian conquerors, and has justly settled at a local de­nomination (Barbary) along the northern coast of Africa.







OCR Output








THE BECLINE AND FALL


good man may deceive others, how the conscience may slumber in a mixed andmiddle state between self-illusion and voluntary fraud. Charity may believe thatthe original motives of Mahomet were those of pure and genuine benevolence;but a human missionary is incapable of cherishing the obstinate unbelievers whoreject his claims, despise his arguments, and persecute liis life; he might forgivehis personal adversaries, he may lawfully hate the enemies of God; the sternpassions of pride and revenge were kindled in the bosom of Mahomet, and hesighed like the prophet of Nineveh, for the destruction of the rebels whom hehad condemned. The injustice of Mecca, and the choice of Medina, transformedthe citizen into a prince, the humble preacher into the leader of armies; but hissword was consecrated by the example of the saints; and the same God who af­flicts a sinful world with pestilence and earthquakes, might inspire for their con­version, or chastisement, the valour of his servants. In the exercise of politicalgovernment, he was compelled to abate of the stern rigour of fanaticism, to com­ply, in some measure, with the prejudices and passions of his followers, and toemploy even the vices of mankind as the instruments of their salvation. The useof fraud and perfidy, of cruelty and injustice, were often subservient to the propa­gation of the faith; and Mahomet commanded or approved the assassination ofthe Jews and idolaters who had escaped from the field of battle. By the repeti­tion of such acts, the character of Mahomet must have been gradually stained;. and the influence of such pernicious habits would be poorly compensated by thepractice of the personal and social virtues, which are necessary to maintain thereputation of a prophet among his sectaries and friends. Of his last years, ambi­tion was the ruling passion; and a politician will suspect, that he secretly smiled(the victorious impostor!) at the enthusiasm of his youth, and the credulity of hisproselytes. (1) A philosopher would observe that their cruelty and his success■would tend more strongly to fortify the assurance of his divine mission, that hisinterest and religion were inseparably connected, and that his conscience wouldbe soothed by the persuasion, that he alone was absolved by the Deity from theobligation of positive and moral laws. If he retained any vestige of his native in­nocence, the sins of Mahomet may be allowed as the evidence of his sincerity.In the support of truth, the arts of fraud and fiction may be deemed less crimi­nal; and he would have started at the foulness of the means, had he not been sa­tisfied of the importance and justice of the end. Even in a conqueror, or a priest,I can surprise a word or action of unaffected humanity; and the decree of Maho­met, that, in the sale of captives, the mother should never be separated fromher children, may suspend or moderate the censure of the historian. (2)
The good sense of Mahomet(3) despised the pomp of royalty; the apostle ofGod submitted t;o the menial offices of the family; he kindled the fire, swept thefloor, milked the ewes, and mended with his own hands his shoes and his woollengarment. Disdaining the penance and merit of a hermit, he observed without ef­fort or vanity, the abstemious diet of an Arab and a soldier. On solemn occasionshe feasted his companions with rustic and hospitable plenty; but in his domesticlife, many weeks would elapse without a fire being kindled on the hearth of theprophet. The interdiction of wine was confirmed by his example; his hunger wasappeased with a sparing allowance of barley-bread; he delighted in the taste ofmilk and honey; but his ordinary food consisted of dates and water. Perfumes andwomen were the two sensual enjoyments which his nature required, and his re­ligion did not forbid: and Mahomet affirmed, that the fervour of his devotion wasincreased by these innocent pleasures. The heat of the climate inflames the bloodof the Arabs; and their libidinous complexion has been noticed by the writers ofantiquity. (4) Their incontinence was regulated by the civil and religious laws ofthe Koran: their incestuous alliances were blamed, the boundless license of poly­gamy was reduced to four legitimate wives or concubines; their rights both of bedand of dowry were equitably determined; the freedom of divorce was discouraged,
(1) In some passage of his voluminous writings, Voltaire compares the prophet, in his old age to a fakir,—" qui detaebi le cbaine de son cou pour en donner sur les oreilles a ses confreres."
(2) Gagnier relates, with the same impartial pen, this humane law of the prophet, and the murders of Caaband Sophian, which he prompted and approved (Vie de Mahomet, torn. ii. p. 69. 97.208.)
(3) For the domestic life of Mahomet, consult Gagnier, and the corresponding chapters of Ahulfeda: for hisdiet (torn. iii. p. 285—288.) his children (p. 189—289.) his wives (p. 290—303.) his marriage with Zeineb (mm. ii.p. 152—160.) his amour with Mary (303—309.) the false accusation of Ayesha (p. 185—199. The most originalevidence of the three lasttransactions,is contained in the twenty-fourth, thirty-third, and sixty-sixth chapters ofthe Koran, with Sale's commentary. Prideanx (Lire of Mahomet, p. 80—90,) and Maracci (Prodrom. Alcoran,part iv. p. 49—59.) have maliciously exaggerated the frailties of Mahomet.
(4) Incredibile est quo ardorc apud cos in venercm uturque solvitur sexus (Aromian, Marcellin. lib. xiv. c. 4.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 93


graC l) were honoured with the crown of martyrdom. (2) The churches of Ara­bia implored the protection of the Abyssinian monarch. The Negus passed theRed Sea with a fleet and army, deprived the Jewish proselyte of his kingdom andlife, and extinguished a race of princes, who had ruled above two thousand yearsthe sequestered region of myrrh and frankincense. The conqueror immediatelyannounced the victory of the gospel, requested an orthodox patriarch, and sowarmly professed his friendship to the Roman empire, that Justinian was flatteredby the hope of diverting the silk-trade through the channel of Abyssinia, andof exciting the forces of Arabia against the Persian king. Nonnosus, descendedfrom a family of ambassadors, was named by the emperor to execute this import­ant commission. He wisely declined the shorter, but more dangerous road throughthe sandy deserts of Nubia; ascended the Nile, embarked on the Red Sea, andsafely landed at the African port of Adulis. From Adulis to the royal city ofAxume is no more than fifty leagues, in a direct line; but the winding passes of themountains detained the ambassador fifteen days; and as he traversed the forests,he saw, and vaguely computed, about five thousand wild elephants. The capital,according to his report, was large and populous; and the -village of Axume is stillconspicuous by the regal coronations, by the ruins of a Christian temple, and bysixteen or seventeen obelisks inscribed with Grecian characters. (3) But the Ne-sjus gave audience in the open field, seated on a lofty chariot, which was drawn bytour elephants superbly caparisoned, and surrounded by his nobles and musicians.He was clad in a linen garment and cap, holding in his hand two javelins and a lightshield; and, although his nakedness was imperfectly covered, he displayed thebarbaric pomp of gold chains, collars, and bracelets, richly adorned with pearlsand precious stones. The ambassador of Justinian knelt; the Negus raised himfrom the ground, embraced Nonnosus, kissed the seal, perused the letter, accept­ed the Roman alliance, and, brandishing his weapons, denounced implacable waragainst the worshippers of fire. But the proposal of the silk-trade was eluded;and notwithstanding the assurances, and perhaps the wishes, of the Abyssinians,these hostile menaces evaporated without effect. The Homerites were unwillingto abandon their aromatic groves, to explore a sandy desert, and to encounter, af­ter all their fatigues, a formidable nation from whom they had never received any-personal injuries. Instead of enlarging his conquests, the king of Ethiopia was in­capable of defending his possessions. Abrahah, the slave of a Roman merchantof Adulis, assumed the sceptre of the Homerites; the troops of Africa were se­duced by the luxury of the climate; and Justinian solicited the friendship of theusurper, who honoured, with a slight tribute, the supremacy of his prince. Af­ter a long series of prosperity, the power of Abrahah was overthrown before thegates of Mecca; his children were despoiled by the Persian conqueror; and theEthiopians were finally expelled from the continent of Asia. This narrative ofobscure and remote events is not foreign to the decline and fall of the Roman em-ire. If a Christian power had been maintained in Arabia, Mahomet must haveeen crushed in his cradle, and Abyssinia would have prevented a revolution whichhas changed the civil and religious state of the world-(4)
(1) The city of Negra or NegVan, in Yemen, is surrounded with palm-trees, and stands in the high road be­tween Saana, the capita], and Mecca, from the former ten, from the latter twenty days1 journey of a caravanof camels, (Abu Ifeda, Descript. Arabige, p. 520
(2) The martyrdom of St. Arethas, prince of Negra, and his three hundred and forty companions, is em­bellished in the legends of Metaphrastes,and Nicephorus Callistus, copied by Baronius, A. D. 522. No. 22—C6. A. D. 523. No. 16—29.,) and refuted, with obscure diligence, by Basnage (Hist, des Juifs, torn. xii. lib. s. e.ii. p. 333—348.) who investigates the state of the Jews in Arabia and Ethiopia.
(3) Alvarez (in Ramusio, torn. i. fol. 219 vers. 221 vers.) saw the flourishing state of Axume in the year 1520—kiogo molto buono e grande. It was ruined in the same century by the Turkish invasion. No more thanone hundred houses remain; but the memory of its past greatness is preserved by the regal coronatiou (Lu-dolph. Hist, et Comment, lib. ii. c. 11.)
(4) The revolutions of Yemen in the sixth century must be collected from Procopius(Persic, lib. i. c. 19,20.;) Theophanes Byzant.(apud Phot. cod. Ixiii. p. 30.;) St. Theophanes (in Chronograph, p. 144,145.188,180.206,207. who is full of strange blunders;) Pocock (Specimen Hist. Arab. p. 62—65;) d'Herbelot (Bibliot. Orien-tale, p. 12—477.,)and Sale's Preliminary Discourse and Koran (c. 105.) The revolt of Abrahah is mentionedfcy Procopius; and hit fall, though clouded with miracles, is an historical fact.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 361


by the report of the mighty concourse of Jews and Christians, Greeks and Arme­nians, of natives of Syria and of strangers of Egypt, to the number of ten thou­sand, besides a guard of five thousand horse that attended the person of the bride.The Saracens paused. " For my own part," said Abdallah, "I dare not go back-our toss are many, our dangers are great, but our reward is splendid and secure'either in this life or in the life to come. Let every man, according to his inclina­tion, advance or retire." Not a Mussulman deserted his standard. "Lead theway," said Abdallah to his Christian guide, "and you shall see what the compa-nions of the prophet can perform." They charged in five squadrons; but afterthe first advantage of the surprise, they were encompassed and almost over­whelmed by the multitude of their enemies; and their valiant band is fancifullycompared to a white spot in the skin of a black camel. (1) About the hour of sun­set, when their weapons dropped from their hands, when they panted on the vergeof eternity, they discovered an approaching cloud of dust; they heard the welcomesound of the iecbir,(2) and they soon perceived the standard of Calcd, who flewto their relief with the utmost speed of his cavalry. The Christians were brokenby his attack, and slaughtered in their flight, as far as the river of Tripoli. Theyleft behind them the various riches of the fair; the merchandises that were ex­posed for sale, the money that was brought for purchase, the gay decorations ofthe nuptials, and the governor's daughter, with forty of her female attendants.The fruits, provisions, and furniture, the money, plate and jewels, were diligentlvladen on the backs of horses, asses, and mules; and the holy robbers returned intriumph to Damascus. The hermit, after a short and angry controversy with Ca-led, declined the crown of martyrdom, and was left alive in the solitary scene ofblood and devastation.
Syria,(3) one of the countries that have been improved by the most early culti­vation, is not unworthy of the preference. (4) The neat of the climate is temperedby the vicinity of the sea and mountains, by the plenty of wood and water; andthe produce of a fertile soil affords the subsistence, and encourages the propaga­tion, of men and animals. From the age of David to that of Heraclius, the coun­try was overspread with ancient and flourishing cities: the inhabitants were nu­merous and wealthy; and, after the slow ravage of despotism and superstition, af­ter the recent calamities of the Persian war, Syria could still attract and rewardthe rapacious tribes of the desert. A plain, of ten days'journey from Damascusto AUeppo and. Antioch, is watered, on the western side, by the winding course ofthe Orontes. The hills of Libanus and Anti-Lihanus are planted from north tosouth, between the Orontes and the Mediterranean, and the epithet of hollow (Ccs-lesyria) was applied to a long and fruitful valley, which is confined in the same di­rection by the two ridges of snowy mountains. (5) Among the cities, which areenumerated by Greek and oriental names in the geography and conquest of Syria,we may distinguish Emesa or Hems, Heliopolis or Baalbec, the former as the me­tropolis of the plain, the latter as the capital of the valley. Under the last of theCicsars, they were strong and populous: the turrets glittered from afar; an amplespace was covered with public and private buildings; and the citizens were illus­trious by their spirit, or at least by their pride, by their riches, or at least by their
(1) I am bolder than Mr. Oekley, (vol. i. p. 164.) who dares not insert this figurative expression in the text,though he observes in a marginal'note, tlmt the Arabians often borrow their similes from that useful and fami­liar animal. The rein-deer may be equally famous in the tongs of the Laplanders.
(2) We heard the tecbir; so the Arabs call
Their shout of onset, when with loud appealThey challenge heaven, as if demanding conquest.
This word, so formidable in their holy wars, is a verb activa (says Oekley in his index) of the second conjuga­tion, from Kabbara, which signifies saying Alia Achar, God is most mighty!
(3) In the geography of Abulfeda, the description of Syria, his native country, is the most interesting andauthentic portion. It was published in Arabic and Latin, Lipsiae, 1706, in quarto, with the learned notes ofKochler and Reiske, and some extracts of geography and natural history from the Ibu Ol Wardii. Among themodern travels, Poeock's description of the east (of Syria and Mesopotamia, vol. ii. p. 88—209.) is a work of su­perior learning and dignity; bnt the author too confounds what he had, seen and what he had read.
(4) The praises of Dionysins are just and lively. Kk» th f*sv (Syria) mhkot n x*t o\3ioi ixflwriv, (in Pe-riegesi. v. 903. in torn. iv. Geograph. Minor. Hudson.) In another place he styles the eountry paa.ux-roXiv *wv(v. 898.) He proceeds to say,
YlxVX $E T01 A.i:TMpt] TS %»t !l)30T3? tVTKlTQ %»t»1
Mi)A.« ti Qip3tiuv*t x%( dtvSpstrt KKp^ov aigiir. r. 921,922.
This poetical geographer lived in the age of Augustus, and his description of the world is illustrated by theGreek commentary of Eustathius, who paid the same compliment to Homer and Dionysius. (Fabric. Bibliot.Grsec. lib. iv. c. 2. torn. iii. p. 21, &c.
(5) The tonography of the Libanus and Anti-Libanus, is excellently described by the reaming and sense ofJltland.i (Palestin. torn. i. p. 311—320.)
Vol. ill 46







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


vihces under his civil jurisdiction. The number of their subordinate officers,clerks, messengers, or assistants, was minutely expressed; three hundred andninety-six for the prefect himself, fifty for each of his vicegerents; and the rigiddefinition of their fees and salaries was more effectual to confirm the right, thanto prevent the abuse. These magistrates might be oppressive, but they were notidle: and the subtle questions of justice and revenue were infinitely propagated un­der the new government, which professed to revive the freedom and equity of theRoman republic. The conqueror was solicitous to exact a prompt and plentifulsupply from his African subjects; and he allowed them to claim, even in the thirddegree, and from the collateral line, the houses and lands of which their families"had been unjustly despoiled by the Vandals. After the departure of Belisarius,"who acted by a high and special commission, no ordinary provision was made fora master-general of the forces; but the office of pretorian prefect was intrusted toa soldier; the civil and military powers were united, according to the practice ofJustinian, in the chief governor; and the representative of the emperor in Africa,as well as in Italy, was soon distinguished by the appellation of Exarch. (1)
Yet the conquest of Africa was imperfect, till her former sovereign was deli­vered, either alive or dead, into the hands of the Romans. Doubtful of the event,Gelimer had given secret orders that a part of his treasure should be transportedto Spain, where he hoped to find a secure refuge at the court of the king of theVisigoths. But these intentions were disappointed by accident, treachery, and theindefatigable pursuit of his enemies, who intercepted his flight from the sea-shore,and chased the unfortunate monarch, with some faithful followers, to the inacces­sible mountain of Papua,(2) in the inland country of Numidia. He was immedi­ately besieged by Pharas, an officer whose truth and sobriety were the more ap­plauded, as such qualities could seldom be found among the Heruli, the most cor­rupt of the barbarian tribes. To his vigilance Belisarius had intrusted this impor­tant charge; and, after a bold attempt to scale the mountain, in which he lost ahundred and ten soldiers, Pharas expected, during a winter siege, the operationof distress and famine on the mind of the Vandal king. From the softest habits ofpleasure, from the unbounded command of industry and wealth, he was reducedto share the poverty of the Moors,(3) supportable only to themselves by their ig­norance of a happier condition. In their rude hovels of mud and hurdles, whichconfined the smoke and excluded the light, they promiscuously slept on the ground,perhaps on a sheep-skio, with their wives, their children, and their cattle. Sor­did and scanty were their garments; the use of bread and wine was unknown; andtheir oaten or barley cakes, imperfectly baked in the ashes, were devoured almostin a crude state by the hungry savages. The health of Gelimer must have sunk\inder these strange and unwonted hardships, from whatsoever cause they hadbeen endured; but his actual misery was imbittered by the recollection of pastgreatness, the daily insolence of his protectors, and the just apprehension, that thelight and venal Moors might be tempted to betray the rights of hospitality. Theknowledge of his situation dictated the humane and friendly epistle of Pharas.—
Like yourself (said the chief of the Heruli) I am an illiterate barbarian, but Ispeak the language of plain sense, and an honest heart. Why will you persist inhopeless obstinacy? Why will you ruin yourself, your family, and nation? Thelove of freedom and abhorrence of slavery? Alas! my dearest Gelimer, are younot already the worst of slaves, the slave of the vile nation of the Moors? Wouldit not be preferable to sustain at Constantinople a life of poverty and servitude, ra­ther than to reign the undoubted monarch of the mountain of Papua? Do youthink it a disgrace to be the subject of Justinian? Belisarius is his subject; and weourselves, whose birth is not inferior to your own, are not ashamed of our obedienceto the Roman emperor. That generous prince will grant you a rich inheritanceof lands, a place in the senate, and the dignity of a patrician: such are his graciousintentions, and you may depend with full assurance on the word of Belisarius. Solong as Heaven lias condemned us to suffer, patience is a virtue; but if we rejectthe proffered deliverance, it degenerates into blind and stupid despair."—"I am


(1) The African laws of Justinian are illustrated by his German biographer (Cod. lib. i. tit. 27. Novel. 36,37.131. Vit. Justinian, p. 349—377.)
(2) Mount Papua is placed by d'Anville (torn. Hi. p. 92. and Tabul. Imp. Horn. Occident.,) near Hippo Ke-gius and the sea; yet this situation ill agrees with the long pursuit beyond Hippo, and the words of Procopius(sib. ii. c. 4.,) fv to*,- KtotuSnos 6CZs*T0I?.
(3) Shaw (Travels, p. 220.) most accurately represents the manners of the Bedoweens and Kabyles, the lastof whom, by their language, are the remnant of the Moors: yet how changed—how civilized are these modemsavages.' provisions arc plenty among them, and bread is common.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,


abuse, or even the use of wine was chastised by fourscore strokes on the soles ofthe feet, and in the fervour of their primitive zeal, many secret sinners revealedtheir fault, and solicited their punishment. After some hesitation, the commandof the army was delegated to Abu Obeidah, one of the fugitives of Mecca andcompanions of Mahomet; whose zeal and devotion were assuaged, without beingabated, by the singular mildness and benevolence of his temper. But in all theemergencies of war, the soldiers demanded the superior genius of Caled; andwhoever might be the choice of the prince, the sword of God was both in factand fame the foremost leader of the Saracens. He obeyed without reluctance;he was consulted without jealousy; and such was the spirit of the man, or ratherof the times, that Caled professed his readiness to serve under the banner of thefaith, though it were in the hands of a child or an enemy. Glory, and riches, anddominion, were indeed promised to the victorious Mussulman; but he was care­fully instructed, that if the goods of this life were his only incitement, they like­wise would be his only reward.
One of the fifteen provinces of Syria, the cultivated lands to the eastward ofthe Jordan, had been decorated by Roman vanity with the name of Arabiai{Y)and the first arms of the Saracens were justified by the semblance of a nationalright. The country was enriched by the various benefits of trade; by the vigi­lance of the emperors it was covered with a line of forts; and the populous citiesof Gerasa, Philadelphia, and Bosra,(2) were secure, at least from a surprise, bythe solid structure of their walls. The last of these cities was the eighteenthstation of Medina: the road was familiar to the caravans of Hejaz and Irak, whoannually visited this plenteous market of the province and the desert: the per­petual jealousy of the Arabs had trained the inhabitants to arms; and twelvethousand horse could sally from the gates of Bosra, an appellation which signi­fies, in the Syriac language, a strong tower of defence. Encouraged by their firstsuccess against the open towns and flying parties of the borders, a detachment offour thousand Moslems presumed to summon and attack the fortress of Bosra.They were oppressed by the numbers of the Syrians; they were saved by thepresence of Caled, with fifteen hundred horse; he blamed the enterprise, restoredthe battle, and rescued his friend, the venerable Serjabil, who had vainly invokedthe unity of God and the promise of the apostle. After a short repose, the Mos­lems performed their ablutions with sand instead of water;(3) ana the morningprayer was recited by Caled before they mounted on horseback. Confident oftheir strength, the people of Bosra threw open their gates, drew their forces intothe plain, and swore to die in the defence of their religion. But a religion ofpeace was incapable of withstanding the fanatic ciy of Fight, fightl Paradise,paradise.' that re-echoed in the ranks of the Saracens; and the uproar of thetown, the ringing of bells,(4) and the exclamations of the priests and monks, in­creased the dismay and disorder of the Christians. With the loss of two hundredand thirty men, the Arabs remained masters of the field; and the ramparts ofBosra, in expectation of human or divine aid, were crowded with holy crosses andconsecrated banners. The governor Romanus had recommended an early sub­mission ; despised by the people, and degraded from his office, he still retainedthe desire and opportunity of revenge. In a nocturnal interview, he informedthe enemy of a subterraneous passage from his house under the wall of the city:the son of the caliph, with a hundred volunteers, were committed to the faith ofthis new ally, and their successful intrepidity gave an easy entrance to their com­panions. After Caled had imposed the terms of servitude and tribute, the apos­tate or convert avowed in the assembly of the people his meritorious treason."I renounce your society," said Romanus, " both in this world, and the world to


(!) Huic Arabia est conserta, ex alio latere Nahathrcis contiirua; opima varietate commerciorum, castrisqueoppleta validis et castellis, quae ad repellendos gentium vicinarum excursus, solicitudo pervigil neterum per op-portnnos saltus erexit et cautei. Amraian. Marcellin. 14. 8. He land. Palestin. torn. i. p. 85, 86.
(2) With Gerasa and Philadelphia, Ammianus praises the fortifications of Bosra firmitate cautissitnas. Theydeserted the same praise in the time of Abnlfeda, (Tabid. Syria;, p. 99.) who describes the city, the metropolis-of Hawran (Auranitis,) four days' journey from Damascus. The Hebrew etymology I learn from Reland. Pa­lestin. torn. ii. p. 666.
(3) The apostle of a desert and an army was obliged to allow this ready succedaneum for water; (Koran, c. 3.p. 66. C. 5. p. 83.) but the Arabian and Persian casuists have embarrassed his free permission with many nicetiesand distinction;. Reland. de Relic;. Mohammed, lib. i. p. 82, 83. Chardin, Voyages en Perse, torn, iv.)
(4) The belli rung! Oekley, vol. i. p. 38. Yet I much doubt whether this expression can be justified by thetext of Al Wakidi, or the practice of the times. Ad Grzcos, says the learned Ducangc, (Glossar. med. etinnrn. Grsecitat. torn. i. p. 774.) campanarum usus serius transit et etiam num rarissimus est. The otdest ex­ample which he can find m the Byzantine writers is of the vear 1040; but the Venetians pretend, that they in­troduced bells at Constantinople in the ninth century.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN-EMPIRE.


III. Such were the fleeting shadows of the Docetes. A more substantial,though less simple hypothesis, was contrived by Cerinthus of Asia,(l) who daredto oppose the last of the apostles. Placed on the confines of the Jewish and Gen­tile world, he laboured to reconcile the Gnostic with the Ebionite, by confessingin the same Messiah the supernatural union of a man and a God: and this mysticdoctrine was adopted with many fanciful improvements by Carpocrates, Basihdes,and Valentine,(2) the heretics of the Egyptian school. In their eyes, Jesusof Nazareth was a mere mortal, the legitimate son of Joseph and Mary; but he wasthe best and wisest of the human race, selected as the worthy instrument to restoreupon earth the worship of the true and supreme Deity. When he was baptized in theJordan, the Christ, the first of the seons, the son of God himself, descended on Je­sus in the form of a dove, to inhabit his mind, and direct his actions during the al­lotted period of his ministry. When the Messiah was delivered into the hands ofthe Jews, the Christ, an immortal and impassable being, forsook his earthly ta­bernacle, flew back to the fileroma or world of spirits, and left the solitary Jesus to-suffer, to complain, and to expire. But the justice and generosity of such a deser­tion are strongly questionable; and the fate or an innocent martyr, at first impelled,and at length abandoned by his divine companion, might provoke the pity andindignation of the profane. Their murmurs were variously silenced by the sec­taries who espoused and modified the double system of Cerinthus. It was alleged,that when Jesus was nailed to the cross, he was endowed with a miraculous apa­thy of mind and body, which rendered him insensible of his apparent sufferings.It was affirmed, that these momentary, though real pangs, would be abundantlyrepaid by the temporal reign of a thousand years, reserved for the Messiah in hiskingdom of the New Jerusalem. It was insinuated, that if he suffered, he de­served to suffer; that human nature is never absolutely perfect; and that the crossand passion might serve to expiate the venial transgressions of the son of Joseph,before his mysterious union with the Son of God. (3)
IV. All those who believe the immateriality of the soul, a specious and nobletenet, must confess, from their present experience, the incomprehensible union ofmind and matter. A similar union is not inconsistent with a much higher, or evenwith the highest, degree of mental faculties; and the incarnation of an a:on or arch­angel, the most perfect of created spirits, does not involve any positive contradic­tion or absurdity. In the age of religious freedom, which was determined by thecouncil of Nice, the dignity of Christ was measured by private judgment, accord­ing to the indefinite rule of Scripture, or reason, or tradition. But wlien his pureand proper divinity had been established on the ruins of Arianism, the faith ofthe catholics trembled on the edge of a precipice, where it was impossible to re­cede, dangerous to stand, dreadful to fall; and the manifold inconveniences of theircreed were aggravated by the sublime character of their theology. They hesi­tated to pronounce, that God himself, the second person of an equal and consub-stantial trinity, was manifested in the flesh ;(4) that a being who pervades the uni­verse, had been confined in the womb of Mary; that his eternal duration had beenmarked by the days, and months, and years, of human existence; that the Al­mighty had been scourged and crucified; that his impassable essence had felt painand anguish; that his omniscience was not exempt from ignorance, and that the
(1} St. John and Cerinthus (A. D. SO. Cleric. Hiit. Eceles. p. 493.) accidentally met in the public bath ofEphesus; but the apostle fled from the heretic, lest the building should tumble on their heads. This foolishstory reprobated by Dr. Middleton, (Miscellaneous Works, toI. u.) is related however by Irenseut/3. 30 on theevidence of Polycarp, and was prObabljr suited to the time and residence of Cerinthus. The obsolete,yet probably the true reading of 1. Joun,iv. 3.—oUvji tow Iijo-ouv—alludes to the double nature of that primi­tive heretic.
(2) The Valentinians embraced a complex, and almost incoherent system.—1. Both Christ and Jesus weresons, though of different degrees; the one acting as the rational soul, the other as the divine spirit of the Sa­viour. 3. At the time of the passion, they both retired, and left onlya sensitive soul and# a human body.3. Even that body was etberial, and perhaps apparent.—Such are the lahorious conclusions of Mosheim.But I much doubt whether the Latin translator understood Irenseus, and whether Itenxus and the Valenti­nians understood themselves.
(3) The heretics abused the passionate exclamation of-" My God, My God, why hast thou forsaken me!"Rousseau, who has drawn an eloquent, but indecent parallel between Christ and Socrates: forgets that not aword of impatience or despair escaped from the mouth of the dying philosopher. In the Messiah.^ such senti­ments could be only apparent; and such ill-sounding words are properly explained as the application of apsalm and prophecy.
(4) This strong expression mirrht he justified by the language of St. Paur(l Tim. iii. 16.;) but we are de­ceived by our modem Bibles. The word o (which) was altered to flio? (God) at Constantinople in the begin­ning of the sixth century: the true reading, which is visible in the Latin and Syriac versions, still exists inthe reasoning of the Greek, as well as of the Latin fathers; and this fraud, with that of the three witnesses ofSt. John, is admirably detected by Sir Isaac Newton (See his two letters translated by M. de^Missy, in theJournal Rritannique. torn. xv. p. 148—190.351—300. I have weighed the arguments, and may yield to tbe au­thority, of the lint of philosophers, who was deeply skilled in critical and theological studies.







OCR Output








THE decline and fall


affectionate Zeid was tempted by the prospect of freedom: the illustrious Ali, theson of Abu Taleb, embraced the sentiments of his cousin with the spirit of ayouthful hero; and the wealth, the moderation, the veracity of Abubeker, con­firmed the religion of the propheftnvhom he was destined to succeed. . By his per­suasion, ten of the most respectable citizens of Mecca were introduced to the pri­vate lessons of Islam; they yielded to the voice of reason and enthusiasm; theyrepeated the fundamental creed,—" There is but one God, and Mahomet is theapostle of God;" and their faith, even in this life, was rewarded with riches andhonours, With the command of armies, and the government of kingdoms. Threeyears were silently employed in the conversion of fourteen proselytes, the firstfruits of his mission; but in the fourth year he assumed the prophetic office, andresolving to impart to his family the light of divine truth, he prepared a banquet,a lamb, as it is said, and a bowl of milk, for the entertainment of forty guests ofthe race of Hashem. " Friends and kinsmen," said Mahomet to the assembly," I offer you, and I alone can offer, the most precious of gifts, the treasures of thisworld and of the world to come. God has commanded me to call you to his ser­vice. Who among you will support my burden ? Who among you will be mycompanion and my vizir No answer was returned, till the silence of asto­
nishment, and doubt, and contempt, was at length broken by the impatient cou­rage of Ali, a youth in the fourteenth year of his age. " O prophet, I am theman; whosoever rises against thee, I will dash out his teeth, tear out his eyes,break his legs, rip up his belly. O prophet, I will be thy vizir over them." Ma­homet accepted his offer with transport, and Abu Taleb was ironically exhortedto respect the superior dignity of his son. In a more serious tone, the father ofAli advised his nephew to relinquish his impracticable design. " Spare your re­monstrances," replied the intrepid fanatic to his uncle and benefactor, "if they' should place the sun on my right hand, and the moon on my left, they should notdivert me from my course." He persevered ten years in the exercise of his mis­sion; and the religion which has overspread the east and the west, advanced witha slow and. painful progress within the walls of Mecca. Yet Mahomet enjoyedthe satisfaction of beholding the increase of his infant congregation of unitarians,who revered him as a prophet, and to whom he seasonably dispensed the spiritualnourishment of the Koran. The number of proselytes may be estimated by theabsence of eighty-three men and eighteen women, who retired to Ethiopia in theseventh year of his mission; and his party was fortified by the timely conversionof his uncle Hamza, and of the fierce and inflexible Omar, who signalized inthe cause of Islam the same zeal which he had exerted for its destruction. Norwas the charity of Mahomet confined to the tribe of Koreish or the precincts of Mec­ca: on solemn festivals, in the days of pilgrimage, he frequented the Caaba, ac­costed the strangers of every tribe, and urged, both in private converse and pub­lic discourse, the belief and worship of a sole deity. Conscious of his reason andof his weakness, he asserted the liberty of conscience, and disclaimed the use ofreligious violence;(2) but he called the Arabs to repentance, and conjured themto remember the ancient idolaters of Ad and Thamund, whom the divine justicehad swept away from the face of the earth. (3)
The-people of Mecca were hardened in their unbelief by superstition and envy.The elders of the city, the uncles of the prophet, affected to despise the presump­tion of an orphan, the reformer of his country: the pious orations of Mahomet inthe Caaba were answered by the clamours of Abu Taleb. " Citizens and pil­grims, listen not to the tempter, hearken not to his impious novelties. Stand fastin the worship of Al Lata and Al Uzzah." Yet the son of Abdallah was everdear to the aged chief; and he protected the fame and person of his nephew againstthe assaults of the Koreishites, who had long been jealous of the pre-eminence ofthe family of Hashem. Their malice was coloured with the pretence of religion:
(1) Vezirw, portitor, bqjulus, onus fa-em! and this plebeian name was transferred by an apt metaphor tothe pillars of the state. (Gagnier. Not. ad Abulfed. p. 19.) I endeavour to preserve the Arabian idiom, as far asI can feel it myself in a Latin or French translation.
(2) The passages of the Koran in the behalf of toleration, are strong and numerous: c 2.T. 357. e. 16.129. e.17. 54. c. 45.15. e. 50.39. c. 88. 21, &c. with the notes of Maracei and Sale. This character alone may gene­rally decide the doubts of the learned, whether a chapter was revealed at Mecca or Medina.
(3) See the Koran (passim, and especially e. 7. p. 123,124. &c.Jand the tradition of the Arabs (Pocock, Spe­cimen, p. 35—37.) The caverns of the tribe of Thamund, fit for men of the ordinary stature, were shown inthe midway between Medina and Damascns,( Abulfed. Arabia Descript. p. 43, 44.) and may be probably ascribedto the Troglodites of the primitive world, Michaelis, and Lowth tie I'oesi Hebrteor. p. 131—134, Recherche**ur les Egyptiens, torn. ii. p. 48, &c.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


thousand feet, were united by two bridges of sixty and of thirty boats, connectedin the middle stream by the small island of Rouda, which was covered with gar­dens and habitations. (1) The eastern extremity of the bridge was terminated bythe town of Babylon and the camp of a Roman legion, which protected the pas­sage of the river and the second capital of Egypt. This important fortress,which might fairly be described as a part of Memphis or Misrah, was invested byIhe arms of the lieutenant of Omar: a re-enforcement of four thousand Saracenssoon arrived in his camp; and the military engines, which battered the walls,may be imputed to the art and labour of his Syrian allies. Yet the siege was pro­tracted to seven months; and the rash invaders were encompassed and threatenedby the inundation of the Nile.(2) Their last assault was bold and successful: theypassed the ditch, which had been fortified with iron spikes, applied their scaling-ladders, entered the fortress with the shout of God is victorious! and drove theremnant of the Greeks to their boats, and the isle of Rouda. The spot was af­terward recommended to the conqueror by the easy communication with the gulfand the peninsula of Arabia: the remains of Memphis were deserted; the tentsof the Arabs were converted into permanent habitations: and the first mosch wasblessed by the presenim of fourscore companions of Mahomet.(3) A new cityarose in their camp on the eastward bank of the Nile; and the contiguous quar­ters of Babylon and Fostat are confounded in their present decay by the appella­tion of old Misrah or Cairo, of which they form an extensive suburb. But thename of Cairo, the town of victory, more strictly belongs to the modern capitalwhich was founded in the tenth century by the Fatimite caliphs. (4) It has gra­dually receded from the river; but the continuity of buildings may be traced byan attentive eye from the monuments of Sesostris to those of Saladin.(5)
Yet the Arabs, after a glorious and profitable enterprise, must have retreatedto the desert, had they not found a powerful alliance in the heart of the country.The rapid conquest of Alexander was assisted by the superstition and revolt ofthe natives; they abhorred their Persian oppressors, the disciples of the Magi,who had burnt the temples of Egypt, and feasted with sacrilegious appetite on theflesh of the god Apis. (6) After a period of ten centuries the same revolution wasrenewed by a similar cause: and in the support of an incomprehensible creed,the zeal of the Coptic Christians was equally ardent. I have already explainedthe origin and progress of the Monophysite controversy, and the persecution of theemperors, which converted a sect into a nation, and alienated Egypt from theirreligion and government. The Saracens were received as the deliverers of theJacobite church; and a secret and effectual treaty was opened during the siege ofMemphis between a victorious army and a people of slaves. A rich and nobleEgyptian, of the name of Mokawkas, had dissembled his faith to obtain the ad­ministration of his province; in the disorders of the Persian war he aspired to in­dependence; the embassy of Mahomet ranked him among princes; but he declined,with rich gifts and ambiguous compliments, the proposal of a new religion.(7)The abuse of his trust exposed him to the resentment of Heraclius; his submis­sion was delayed by arrogance and fear; and his conscience was prompted by in-proper Egypt, Ammianns enumerates Memphis among the four cities, maximis utbibns quibus provincia nilet;(22. 16.) and the name of Memphis appears with distinction in the Roman Itinerary and episcopal lists.
(1) These rare and curious facts, the breadth (two thousand nine hundred and forty-six feet) and the bridgeof the Nile, are only to be found in the Danish traveller and the Nubian geographer, (p. 98.)
(2) From the month of April, the Nile begins impeiceptibly to rise; the swell becomes strong and visible inthe moon after the summer solstice, (Piin. Hist. Nat 5. 10.) and is usually proclaimed at Cairo on St. Peter'sday. (June 29.) A register of thirty successive years marks the greatest height of the waters between Jury 25and August 18. (Maillet, Description de l'Egypte, letlre 11. p. 67, &c. Pocoek's Description of the East, vol.i. p. 200. Shaw's Travels, p. 383.)
(3) Murtadi, MerreiUes de l'Egypte, 243 —259. He expatiates on the subject with the zeal and minutenessof a citizen and a bigot, and his local traditions have a strong air of truth and accuracy.
(4) D'Herbelot,BibliotlieqtteOrientale, p. 233.
(5) The position of New and Old Cairo is well known, and has been often described. Two writers, who wereintimately acquainted with ancient and modern Egypt, have fixed, after a learned inquiry, the city of Mem­phis at Gach, directly opposite the Old Cairo. (Sicard, Nouveaux Memoirs des Missions du Levant, torn. vi. p.S, 6. Shaw's Observations and Travels, p. 296—304.) Yet we may not disregard the authority or the argumentsufPocock. (vol. i. p. 25—41.) Niebuhr, (Voyage, tom.i. p. 77—106.) and, above all, of d'Anville, (Descriptionde l'Egypte, p. Ill, 112. 130—149.) who have removed Memphis towards the village of Mohannah, some milesfarther to the south. In their bear, the disputants have forgot that the ample space of a metropolis covers andannihilates the far greater part of the controversy.
(6) See Herodotus, lib. in. c. 27—29. jE'ian Hist. Var. lib. iv. c. 8. Suidas, in £!%».-, torn. ii. p. 774. Diodor.Sictil. torn. ii. lib. xvii. p. 197. edit. Wesseling. Tov Ilsprav w-&wrm it; t« nf«, says the last of these historians.. (») Mi.kawkas sent the prophet two Coptic damsels, with two maids, and one eunuch, an alabaster vase, aningot of pure gold, oil. honey, and ilie finest white linen of Egypt, with a hone, a mule, and an ass, distin­guished by iheir respective qualifications. The embassy of Mahumet was despatched from Medina its the se­venth year of the Hegira. (A. D. 623.) See Gaguier, (Viede Mahomit, torn. ii. p. 255,256.303.) from Al JannaVi.







OCR Output








152 THE DECLINE AND FALL


defendant: and the judges of Milo, by the retrenchment of fifteen on each si.de;>•were reduced to fifty-one voices or tablets, of acquittal, of condemnation, or of fa­vourable doubt. (1) 3. In this civil jurisdiction, the pretorof the city was trulya judge, and almost a legislator; but as soon as he had prescribed the action oflaw, he often referred to a delegate the determination of the fact. With the increaseof legal proceedings, the tribunal of the centumvirs, in which he presided, ac­quired more weight and reputation. But whether he acted alone, or with the ad­vice of his council, the most absolute powers might be trusted to a magistrate whowas annually chosen by the votes of the people. The rules and precautions offreedom have required some explanation; the order of despotism is simple and in­animate. Before the age of Justinian, or perhaps of Diocletian, the decuries ofRoman judges had sunk to an empty title; the humble, advice of the assessorsmight be accepted or despised; and in each tribunal, the civil and criminal juris­diction was administered by a single magistrate, who was raised and disgraced bythe will of the emperor.
A Roman accused of any capital crime might prevent the sentence of the lawby voluntary exile, or death. Till his guilt had been legally proved, his inno­cence was presumed, and his person was free; till the votes of the last century hadbeen counted and declared, he might peaceably secede to any of the allied citiesof Italy, or Greece, or Asia. (2) His fame and fortunes were preserved, at leastto his children, by this civil death; and he might still be happy in every rationaland sensual enjoyment, if a mind accustomed to the ambitious tumult of Romecould support the uniformity and silence of Rhodes or Athens. A bolder effortwas required to escape from the tyranny of the Cxsars; but this effort was ren­dered familiar by the maxims of the stoics, the examples of the bravest Romans,and the legal encouragements of suicide. The bodies of condemned criminalswere exposed to public ignominy, and their children, a more serious evil, were re­duced to poverty by the confiscation of their fortunes. But if the victims of Ti­berius and Nero anticipated the decree of the prince or senate, their courage anddespatch were recompensed by the applause of the public, the decent honours ofburial, and the validity of their testaments. (3) The exquisite avarice and cru­elty of Domitian, appeared to have deprived the unfortunate of this last consola­tion, and it Was still denied, even by the clemency of the Antonines. A voluntarydeath, which, in the case of a capital offence, intervened between the accusationand the sentence, was admitted as a confession of guilt, and the spoils of the de­ceased were seized by the human claims of the treasury. (4) Yet the civilianshave always respected the natural right of a citizen to dispose of his life; and theposthumous disgrace invented by Tarquin(5) to check the despair of his subjects,was never revived or imitated by succeeding tyrants. The powers of this worldhave indeed lost their dominion over him who is resolved on death; and his armcan only be restrained by the religious apprehension of a future state. Suicidesare enumerated by Virgil among the unfortunate, rather than the guilty;(6) andthe poetical fables of the infernal shades could not seriously influence the faith or
Jiractice of mankind. But the precepts of the gospel, or the church, have atength imposed a pious servitude on the minds of Christians, and condemn themto expect, without a murmur, the last stroke of disease or the executioner.
The penal statutes form a very small proportion of the sixty-two books of thecode and pandects; and, in all judicial proceeding, the life or death of a citizen isdetermined with less caution and delay than the most ordinary question of cove­nant or inheritance. This singular distinction, though something may be allowedfor the urgent necessity of defending the peace of society, is derived from the na-
£1) We are indebted for this interesting fact to a fragment of Asconius Pedianus,who flourished under thereign of Tiberius. The loss of his Commentaries on the Orations of Cicero, hai deprived us of a valuablefund of historical and legal knowledge.
(2) Polyb. lib. vi. p. 643. The extension of the empire and city of Rome, obliged the exile to seek a rooredistant place of retirement.
(3) Quidesestatuebant.humabantur corpora, manebant testamenta; pretium festinandi. Tacit. Annal. 6.25. with the notes of Lipsius.
(4) Julius Paulus (Sentent. Recepr. lib. v. tit. 12. p. 476, the Pandects (lib. xlviii. tit. 810 the Code (lib. ix. tit.1.,) Bynkershoek (torn. i. p. 59. Observat. J. C R. 4.4.,) and Montesquieu (Esprit des Loix, lib. xxix. c. 9.J de­fine the civil limitations of the liberty and privileges of suicide. The criminal penalties are the production ofa later and darker age.
(i) Plin. Hist. Natur. 36.24. When he fatigued his subjects in building the Capitol, many of the labourerswere provoked to despatch themselves; be nailed their dead bodies to crosses.
(*) The sole resemblance of a violent and premature death has engaged Virgil (ASnetd, vi. 434—439.) to con­found suicides with infants, lovers,and persons unjustly condemned. Heyne, the best of his editors, is at a losso deduce the idea, or ascertain the .iiirisprudence'of the Roman poet.







OCR Output








148 THE DECLINE AND FALL


' exact this unprofitable penalty of life or limb. As the manners of Rome were in­sensibly polished, the criminal code of the decemvirs was abolished by the humani­ty of accusers, witnesses, and judges: and impunity became the consequence of im­moderate rigour. The Porcian and Valerian laws prohibited the magistratesfrom inflicting on a free citizen any capital, or even corporal punishment; and theobsolete statutes of blood were artfully, and perhaps truly, ascribed to the spirit,not of patrician, but of regal, tyranny.
In the absence of penal laws and the insufficiency of civil actions, the peace andjustice of the city were imperfectly maintained by the private jurisdiction of thecitizens. The malefactors who replenish our gaols, are the outcasts of society, andthe crimes for which they suffer may be commonly ascribed to ignorance, poverty,and brutal appetite. For the perpetration of similar enormities, a vile plebeianmight claim and abuse the sacred character of a member of the republic: but onthe proof or suspicion of guilt, the slave, or the stranger was nailed to a cross, andthis strict and summary justice might be exercised without restraint over the great­est part of the populace of Rome. Each family contained a domestic tribunal,which was not confined, like that of the pretor, to the cognizance of external ac­tions: virtuous principles and habits were inculcated by the discipline of education;and the Roman father was accountable to the state for the manners of his children,Since he deposed, without appeal, of their life, their liberty, and their inheritance.In some pressing emergencies, the citizen was authorized to avenge his private orpublic wrongs. The consent of the Jewish, the Athenian, and the Roman laws,approved the slaughter of the nocturnal thief; though in open daylight a robbercould not be slain without some previous evidence of danger and complaint. Who­ever surprised an adulterer in his nuptial bed might freely exercise his revenge;(l)the most bloody or wanton outrage was excused by the provocation;{2) nor was itbefore the reign of Augustus that the husband was reduced to weigh the rank ofthe offender, or that the parent was condemned to sacrifice his daughter with herguilty seducer. After the expulsion of the kings, the ambitious Roman who shoulddare to assume their title, or imitate their tyranny, was devoted to the infernalgods: each of his fellow-citizens was armed with a sword of justice; and the act ofBrutus, however repugnant to gratitude or prudence, had been already sanctifiedby the judgment of his country. (3) The barbarous practice of wearing arms inthe midst of peace, (4) and the bloody maxims of honour, were unknown to the Ro­mans; and, during the two purest ages, from the establishment of equal freedomto the end of the Punic wars, the city was never disturbed by sedition, and rarelypolluted with atrocious crimes. The failure of penal laws was more sensibly feltwhen every vice was inflamed by faction at home and dominion abroad. In thetime of Cicero, each private citizen enjoyed the privilege of anarchy; each minis­ter of the republic was exalted to the temptations of legal power, and their vir­tues are entitled to the warmest praise as the spontaneous fruits of nature or phi­losophy. After a triennial indulgence of lust, rapine, and cruelty, Verres, the ty­rant of Sicily, could only be sued for the pecuniary restitution of three hundredthousand pounds sterling; and such was the temper of the laws, the judges, andperhaps the accuser himself,(5) that on refunding a thirteenth part of his plunder,Verres could retire to an easy and luxurious exile. (6)
The first imperfect attempt to restore the proportion of crimes and punishments,was made by the dictator Sylla, who in the midst of his sanguinary triumph, as­pired to restrain the license, rather than to oppress the liberty, of the Romans.He gloried in the arbitrary proscription of four thousand seven hundred citizens. (7)
(1) The first speech of Lysias (R<*iske, Orator. Gitec. torn. v, p. 2—48.) is in defence of a husband who had"killed the adulterer. The right of husbands and fathers at Rome and Athens is discussed with much learning"by Dr, Taylor (Lectiones Lysiaca;, c. xi, in Reiske. torn. vi. p. 301—308.)
(2) See Cassation ad Athenaeum (lib. i. c. v. p. 19.) Percurrent raphanique mugilesqne (Catntl. p. 41, 42.edtt. Vossian.) Hune miKrilr* inlrat (Juvenal. Satir. x. 317.) Hunc perminxere catones (Horat. lib. i. Satir. n.44.) familiie stnprandum dedit . . . uaiuli non fnit. (Val. Maxim, lib. vi. e. 1. No. 13.)
(3) This law is noticed by Liv-y (2. 8.) and Plutarch Cin Publicola, torn. i. p. 197.;) and it fully justifies thepublic opinion on the death of Caesar, which Suetonius could publish under the imperial government. Jurecsesns existimatur (in Julio, c. Ixxvi.) Read the letters that passed betweenCicero and Marius a few monthsafter the ides of March (ad Fain. si. 27,28.)
(4) rljwTOi Se A&V*"' tow n trioNipou x*t:S:vto. Thucyd'ul. lib. i. c. 6. Thehistorian also considers this circum­stance as the test of civilization, would disdain the barbarism of a European court.
(5) He first rated at millies (800,000/.) the damages of Sicily (Divinatio in Ccecilifem, e. v.) which he after­wards reduced to quadringenties (320,000/—1. Actio in Verrem, c. xviii.) and was finally content with tricies(24,000/.) Plutarch in Ciceron. (torn. iii. p. 1584.) has not dissembled the popular suspicion and report.
(6) Verre, lived near thirty years after his trial, till the second triumvirate, when ne was proscribed by the■taste of Mark Antony for the sake of his Corinthian plate (Plin. Hist. Natur. xxxiv. 3.)
(7) Such is the number assigned by Valerius Maximus (lib, i. c. 2. No. 10 Florus (4.21.) distinguishes two







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


<


was awakened by the last insolent demand of the Persian conqueror; but at themoment when Heraclius assumed the spirit of a hero, the only hopes of the Ro­mans were drawn from the vicissitudes of fortune which might threaten the proudprosperity of Chosroes, and must be favourable to those who had attained thelowest period of depression. (1) To provide for the expenses of war, was thefirst care of the emperor; and for the purpose of collecting the tribute, he was al­lowed to solicit the benevolence of the eastern provinces. But the revenue nolonger flowed in the usual channels: the credit of an arbitrary prince is annihilatedby his power; and the courage of Heraclius was first displayed in daring to borrowthe consecrated wealth of churches, under the solemn vow of restoring, withusury, whatever he had been compelled to employ in the service of religion andof the empire. The clergy themselves appear to have sympathized with the pub­lic distress, and the discreet patriarch of Alexandria, without admitting the pre­cedent of sacrilege, assisted his sovereign by the miraculous or seasonable revelationof a secret treasure. (2) Of the soldiers who had conspired with Phocas, onlytwo were found to have survived the stroke of time and of the barbarians;(3) theloss, even of these seditious veterans, was imperfectly supplied by the new leviesof Heraclius, and the gold of the sanctuary united in the same camp, the names,and arms, and languages, of the east and west. He would have been content withthe neutrality of the Avars; and his friendly entreaty that the chagan would act,not as the enemy but as the guardian of the empire, was accompanied with a morepersuasive donative of two hundred thousand pieces of gold. Two days after thefestival of Easter, the emperor, exchanging his purple for the simple garb of apenitent and warrior(4) gave the signal of his departure. To the faith of thepeople, Heraclius recommended his children: the civil and military powers werevested in the most deserving hands, and the discretion of the patriarch and senatewas authorized to save or surrender the city, if they should be oppressed in his ab­sence by the superior forces of the enemy.
The neighbouring heights of Chalcedon were covered with tents and arms; butif the new levies of Heraclius had been rashly led to the attack, the victory of thePersians in the sight of Constantinople might have been the last day of the Ro­man empire. As imprudent would it have been to advance into the provinces ofAsia, leaving their innumerable cavalry to intercept his convoys, and continuallyto hang on the lassitude and disorder of his rear. But the Greeks were still mas­ters of the sea; a fleet of galleys, transports, and store-ships, was assembled in theharbour; the barbarians consented to embark; a steady wind carried them throughthe Hellespont; the western and southern coast of Asia Minor lay on their lefthand; the spirit of their chief, was first displayed in a storm; and even the eunuchs-of his train were excited to suffer and to work by the example of their master. Helanded his troops on the confines of Syria and Cilicia, in the gulf of Scanderoon,where the coast suddenly turns to the south :(5) and his discernment was expressedin the choice of this important post. (6) From all sides the scattered garrisons ofthe maritime cities and the mountains might repair with speed and safety to his.
0) ....••..*. * E< t«; ear'axpOvupuEvse; im%tx;
Kurds) to Xoiwov tv xxxoi; tin Ilipo-iJo?
Airio-rpaipw; &c. George Pitid. Acroas. 1. 51, &c. p. 4.
Tbe orientals are not leas fond of remarking this strange vicissitude: and I remember some story of KhosroT*Parviz, not very unlike the ring; of Polycrates of Samos.
(2) Baronius gravely relates this discovery, or rather transmutation of barrels, not of honey, but of gold,.(Annal. Eccles. A. D. 620. No. 3, See.) Yet the loan was arbitrary, since it was collected by soldiers, who wereordered to leave the patriarch of Alexandria no more than one hundred pounds of gold. Nicephoras, (p. 110two hundred years afterward, speaks with ill humour of this contribution, which the church of Constantino­ple might still feel.
(3) Theophylact, Simocatta, lib. viii. e. 12. This circumstance need not excite our surprise. The muster-roil of a regiment, even in time of peace, is renewed in less than twenty or twenty-five years.
(4) He changed his purple, for black buskins, and dyed them red in the blood of the Persians (Georg. Pisid,Acroas, 3.118.121,122. See the notes of Foggini,p. 35.)
(5) George of Pisidia (Acroas. ii. 10.p.8.)has fixed this important point of the Syrian anil Cilician gates.They are elegantly described by Xenophon, who marched through them a thousand years before. A narrowpass of three stadia between steep high rocks (n-sTpai ,ia.i<3xti»i) and the Mediterranean was closed at each end bystrong gates, impregnable to the land ( wupvJinv evx *v accessible by sea (Anabasis, lib. i. p. 35,36. withHutchinson's Geographical Dissertation, p. 6.) Tbe gates were thirty.five parasangs. or leagues from Tarsus(Anabasis, lib. i. p. 33,34.) and eight or ten from Antioch. (Compare Itinerar. Wesseling. p. 580, 581. Schul-rens. Index Geograph. ad calcem Vit. Saladin. p. 9. Voyage en Turquie et en Perse, par M. Otter, torn. i. p.
(6) Heraclius might write to a friend in the modest words of Cicero.—" Gastra habuimus et ipsa quae contraDarium habnerat apud Issum Alexander, imperator haud paulo melior quam aut tu aut ego." Ad Atticum,v. 20. Issus, a rich and flourishing city in the time of Xenophon,was ruined by the prosperity of Alexandriaor Scandaroon, on the other side of the bay.







OCR Output








OF THE KOMAN EMPIRE.


dain his diminutive planet and momentary existence. The costly instruments ofobservation were supplied by the caliph Almamon, and the land of the Chaldeansstill afforded the same spacious level, the same unclouded horizon. In the plainsof Sinaar, and a second time in those of Cufa, his mathematicians accurately mea­sured a degree of the great circle of the earth, and determined at twenty-fourthousand miles the entire circumference of our globe. (1) From the reign of theAbbassides to that of the grand-children of Tamerlane, the stars without the aidof glasses, were diligently observed; and the astronomical tables(2) of Bagdad,Spain, and Samarcand, correct some minute errors, without daring to renouncethe hypothesis of Ptolemy, without advancing a step towards the discovery of thesolar system. In the eastern courts, the truths of science could be recommendedonly by ignorance and folly, and the astronomer would have been disregarded,had he not debased his wisdom or honesty by the vain predictions of astrology. (3)But in the science of medicine, the Arabians have been deservedly applauded.The names of Mesua and Geber, of Hazis and Avicenna, are ranked with theGrecian masters: in the city of Bagdad, eight hundred and sixty physicians werelicensed to exercise their lucrative profession:(4) in Spain, the life of the catholicprinces was intrusted to the skill of the Saracens,(5) and the school of Salerno,with their legitimate offspring revived in Italy and Europe the precepts of thehealing art. (6) The success of each professor must have been influenced by per­sonal and accidental causes; but we may form a less fanciful estimate of their ge­neral knowledge of anatomy,(7) botany,(8) and chemistry,(9) the three-fold basisof their theory and practice. A superstitious reverence for the dead confined boththe Greeks and the Arabians to the dissection of apes and quadrupeds; the moresolid and visible parts were known in the time of Galen, and the finer scrutiny ofthe human frame was reserved for the microscope and the injections of modernartists. Botany is an active science, and the discoveries of the torrid zone mightenrich the herbal of Dioscorides with two thousand plants. Some traditionaryknowledge might be secreted in the temples and monasteries of Egypt; much use­ful experience had been acquired in the practice of arts and manufactures; butthe science of chemistry owes its origin and improvement to the industry of the Sa­racens. They first invented and named the alembic for the purposes of distilla­tion, analyzed the substances of the three kingdoms of nature; tried the distinctionand affinites of alkalis and acids, and converted the poisonous minerals into softand salutary medicines. But the most eager search of Arabian chemistry was thetransmutation of metals, and the elixir of immortal health: the reason and the for­tunes of thousands were evaporated in the crucibles of alchymy, and the consum­mation of the great work was promoted by the worthy aid of mystery, fable, andsuperstition.
But the Moslems deprived themselves of" the principal benefits of a familiar in­tercourse with Greece and Rome, the knowledge of antiquity, the purity of taste,and the freedom of thought. Confident in the riches of their native tongue, the
(1) Ahulfeda (Annal. Modem, p. 210, 211. vers. Reiske) describes this operation according to Ibn Chalecau•nd the best histurinns. This degree most accurately contains two hundred thousand royal or Hathemite cu­bits, which Arabia had derived from the sacred and legal practice hnlh of Palestine and Egypt. This ancientcubit is repeated four hundred times in each basis of the great pyramid, and seems to indicate the primitive unciuniversal measures of the east. See the Metrologie of the laborious M. Paucton, p. 101—105.r' (2) See the Astronomical Tables of TJlugh Begh, with the preface of Dr. Hyde, in the first volume of LisSyntagma Dissertationum, Oxon. 1767.
(3) The truth of astrology wis allowed by Albumazar, and the best of the Arabian astronomers, who drewtheir most certain predictions, not from Venus and Mercury, but from Jupiter and the sun. (Abulpharag.Dynast, p. 161—16».) For Use state and science of the Persian astronomers, see Cliardin. (Voyages en Perse,torn. iii. p. 162—203.)
(4) Biblior. Aribico-IIispana, torn. i. 'p. 438. The original relates a pleasant tale, of an ignorant but harmlesspractitioner.
(5) In the year 056, Sancho the Fat, king of Leon was cured by the physicians of Cordova. (Mariana, lib.viii. c. 7. torn. i. p. 318.)
(6) The school of Salemo, and the introduction of the Arabian sciences into Italy, are discussed with learn­ing and judgment by Muratori, (A ntiquitat. Italia; Medii £vi, torn. iii. p. 932—940.) and Giannone. (IstoriaCtvili di Napoli, torn. ii. p. 119—127.)
(7) See a good view of the progress of anatomy in Wotton. (Reflections on ancient and modern Learning, p.208—2J6.) Hit repulation has been unworthily depreciated by the wits in the controversy of Boyle and Bent-ley.
(8) Bibliot. Arab. Hispana, torn. i. p. 275. Al Beithar of Malaga, their greatest botanist, had travelled into Af­rica, Persia, and India.
(o) Dr. Watson (Elements of Chemistry, vol. i. p. 17. &c.) allows the original merit of the Arabians. Vet hequotes the modest confession of the famous Geber of the ninth century, (d'Herbelot, p. SI7.) that he had drawnmost of his science, perhaps of the transmutaiion of metals, from the ancient sages. Whatever might he theorigin or extent of their knowledge, the arts of chemistry and alchymy appear to have been known in Egypt atleast tliree hundred years before Mahomet. (Wotton's Reflections, p. 121—153. Paow, Recherches sur leiUgTptiens tt let Chinois, torn. \. p. 376—429.)







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


sions, he was the scourge; when he consulted his reason, the father of his people*In the exercise of private justice, he was equitable and rigorous: a shameful andpernicious venality was abolished, and the offices were filled with the most de­serving candidates, by a prince who had sense to choose, and severity to punish.He prohibited the inhuman practice of pillaging the goods and persons of ship­wrecked mariners; the provinces, so long the objects of oppression or neglect, re­vived in prosperity and plenty, and millions applauded the distant blessings of hisreign, while he was cursed by the witnesses of his daily cruelties. The ancient
Eroverb, that blood-thirsty is the man who returns from banishment to power,ad been applied with too much truth to Marius and Tiberius; and was now veri­fied for the third time in the life of Andronicus. His memory was stored with ablack list of the enemies and rivals, who had traduced his merit, opposed hisgreatness, or insulted his misfortunes: and the only comfort of his exile was thesacred hope and promise of revenge. The necessary extinction of the young em­peror and his mother, imposed the fatal obligation of extirpating the friends, whohated, and might punish, the assassin: and the repetition of murder rendered himless willing, and less able, to forgive. A horrid narrative of the victims whom hesacrificed by poison or the sword, by the sea or the flames, would be less expres­sive of his cruelty, than the appellation of the Halcyon-days, which was appliedto a rare and bloodless week of repose: the tyrant strove to transfer, on the lawsand the judges, some portion of his guilt; but the mask was fallen, and his subjectscould no longer mistake the true author of their calamities. The noblest ot theGreeks, more especially those who, by descent or alliance, might dispute theComnenian inheritance, escaped from the monster's den: Nice or Prussa, Sicilyor Cyprus, were their places of refuge: and as their flight was already criminal,they aggravated their offence by an open revolt, and the imperial title. Yet An­dronicus resisted the daggers and swords of his most formidable enemies: Niceand Prussa were reduced and chastised: the Sicilians were content with the sack ofTh'essalonica; and the distance of Cyprus was not more propitious to the rebelthan to the tyrant. His throne was subverted by a rival without merit, and a peo­ple without arms. Isaac Angelus, a descendant in the female line from the greatAlexis, was marked as a victim, by the prudence or superstition of the emperor.In a moment of despair, Angelus defended his life and liberty, slew the execu­tioner, and fled to the church of St. Sophia. The sanctuary was insensibly filledwith a curious and mournful crowd, who, in his fate, prognosticated their own.But their lamentations were soon turned to curses, and their curses to threats:they dared to ask, " Why do we fear ? why do we obey ? we are many, and he isone; our patience is the only bond of our slavery." With the dawn of day, thecity burst into a general sedition, the prisons were thrown open, the coldest andmost servile were roused to the defence of their country, and Isaac, the second ofthe name, was raised from the sanctuary to the throne. Unconscious of his danger,the tyrant was absent: withdrawn from the toils of state, in the delicious islandsof the Propontis. He had contracted an indecent marriage with Alice, or Agnes,daughter of Lewis VII. of France, and relict of the unfortunate Alexius: and hissociety, more suitable to his temper than to his age, was composed of a young wifeand a favourite concubine. On the first alarm he rushed to Constantinople, im­patient for the blood of the guilty; but he was astonished by the silence of the pa­lace, the tumult of the city, and the general desertion of mankind. Andronicusproclaimed a free pardon to his subjects; they neither desired nor would grant for­giveness: he offered to resign his crown to his son Manuel; but the virtues of. theson could not e5cpiate,his fathers crimes. The sea was still open for his retreat;but the news of the revolution had flown along the coast; when fear had ceased,obedience was no more; the imperial galley was pursued and taken by an armedbrigantine; and the tyrant was dragged to the presence of Isaac Angelus, loadedwith fetters, and a long chain round his neck. His eloquence, and the tears of hisfemale companions, pleaded in vain for his life; but, instead of the decencies of alegal execution, the new monarch abandoned the criminal to the numerous suf­ferers, whom he had deprived of a father, a husband, or a friend. His teeth andhair, an eye and a hand, were torn from him, as a poor compensation for theirloss; and a short respite was allowed, that he might feel the bitterness of death.Astride on a camel, without any danger of rescue, he was carried through thecity, and the basest of the populace rejoiced to trample on the fallen majesty oftheir prince. After a thousand blows and outrages, Andronicus was hung by thefeet between two pillars that supported the statues of a wolf and sow; and every







OCR Output








IIS THE DECLINE AND FALL


a sinner, ignorant of the limits of his own power: the second, in the midst of four/hundred thousand soldiers and eight thousand slaves, concealed from every human;eye the chamber where he attempted to sleep. Their sons were educated in thevices of kings; and both Egypt and Syria were recovered and possessed by the Ab­bassides during an interval of thirty years. In the decline of their empire, Me­sopotamia, with the important cities of Mosul and Aleppo, was occupied by theArabian princes of the tribe of Hamadan. The poets of their court could repeat,,•without a blush, that nature had formed their countenances for beauty, theirtongues for eloquence, and their hands for liberality and valour: but the genuinetale of the elevation and reign of the Hamadanites exhibits a scene of treachery,murder and parricide. At the same fatal period, the Persian kingdom was againusurped by the dynasty of the Bowides, by the sword of three brothers, who, un­der various names, were styled the support and columns of the state, and who, fromthe Caspian sea to the ocean, would suffer no tyrants but themselves. Under theirreign, the language and genius of Persia revived, and the Arabs, three hundredand four years after the death of Mahomet, were deprived of the sceptre of theeast.
Radhi, the twentieth of the Abbassides, and the thirty-ninth of the successorsof Mahomet, was the last who deserved the title of commander of the faithful;(t)the last (says Abulfeda) who spoke to the people, or conversed with the learned;the last who, in the expense of his household, represented the wealth and magni­ficence of the ancient caliphs. After him, the lords of the eastern world were re­duced to the most abject misery, and exposed to the blows and insults of a servilecondition. The revolt of the provinces circumscribed their dominions within thewalls of Bagdad; but that capital still contained an innumerable multitude, vain oftheir past fortune, discontented with their present state, and oppressed by the de­mands of a treasury, which had formerly been replenished by the spoil and tri­bute of nations. Their idleness was exercised by faction and controversy. Underthe mask of piety, the rigid followers of Hanbal(2) invaded the pleasures of do­mestic life, burst into the houses of plebeians and princes, spilled the wine, brokethe instruments, beat the musicians, and dishonoured, with infamous suspicions,the associates of every handsome youth. In each profession, which allowed roomfor two persons, the one was a votary, the other an antagonist, of Ali; and the Ab­bassides were awakened by the clamorous grief of the sectaries, who denied theirtitle, and cursed their progenitors. A turbulent people could only be repressedby a military force; but who could satisfy the avarice, or assert the discipline, ofthe mercenaries themselves ? The African and the Turkish guards drew theirswords against each other, and the chief commanders, the emirs al Omra,(3) im­prisoned or deposed their sovereigns, and violated the sanctuary of the mosch andharam. If the caliphs escaped to the camp or court of any neighbouring prince,their deliverance was a change of servitude, till they were prompted by despairto invite the Bowides, the sultans of Persia, who silenced the factions of Bagdadby their irresistible arms. The civil and military powers were assumed by Moe-zaldowlat, the second of the three brothers, and a stipend of sixty thousand poundssterling was assigned by his generosity for the private expense of the commanderof the faithful. But on the fortieth day, at the audience 'of the ambassadors ofChorasan, and in the presence of a trembling multitude, the caliph was draggedfrom his throne to a dungeon, by the command of the stranger, and the rudehands of his Dilemites. His palace was pillaged, his eyes were put out, and themean ambition of Abbassides aspired to the vacant station of danger and disgrace.In the school of adversity, the luxurious caliphs resumed the grave and abstemi­ous virtues of the primitive times. Despoiled of their armour and silken robes,
fl) Hie est ultimas chalifah qui multum atque csepius pro concione perorarit. . .. Fuit etiam ultimas qaiolium cum eruditis et facetis hominibus fallere hilariterque agere soferet. Ultimus tandem chalitarum cutsumptus, 5tipendia,r('ditus, et thesauri, culina:, cseteraque omim aujica pompa priorum chalifarura ad instarcomparata fuerint. _ Videbimos enim paullo poet quam indignis et servitibus ludibriis exagitati, quam ad hu-milcm fortunam ultimumque eontemptum abjecti fuerint hi quondam potentissimi totius terrarum Orienta-Kuinorbisdomini. Abulfed. Annal. Moslem, p. 261. I have given this passage at the manner and tone ofAbulfeda; but the cast of Latiu eloquence belongs moreproperly to Reiske. The Arabian historian (p. 255.257.261—269.283, See.) bas supplied me with the most interesting facts of this paragraph.
(2) Their master, on a similar occasion, showed himself of a more indulgent and tolerating spirit. AhmedEbn Hanbal, the head of one of the four orthodox sects, was born at Bagdad, A. H. 164, anil died there A. H.241. He fought and suffered in the dispute concerning the creation of the Koran.
(3) The office of vizier was superseded by the emir alOmra Imperator Imperatorum, a title first institutedby Radhi, and which merged at length in the Bowides and Seljukides; Tectigalibus. et tributis, et curiis per©nines regiones prsefecit.jussitque in omnibus suggestis nominis ejus in concionibus mentionenrfieri. (Abul-liharagius,Dynait. p. 190.) It is likewise mentioned bv F.rmacin. (p. 254.255.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN. EMPIRE.


rant than the greater part of his cotemporaries in church and state; that his edu­cation had been directed by the learned Photius; and that several books of profaneand ecclesiastical science were composed by the pen, or in the name, of the im­perial fihilosofiher. But the reputation of his philosophy and religion was over­thrown by a domestic vice, the reputation of his nuptials. The primitive ideas ofthe merit and holiness of celibacy were preached by the monks and entertainedby the Greeks, Marriage was allowed as a necessary means for the propagationof mankind: after the death of either party, the survivor might satisfy, by a se­cond union, the weakness or the strength of the flesh; but a third marriage wascensured as a state of legal fornication; and a fourth was a sin or scandal yet un­known to the Christians of the east. In the beginning of his reign, Leo himselfhad abolished the state of concubines, and condemned without annulling, thirdmarriages; but his patriotism and love soon compelled him to violate his own laws,and to incur the penance, which in a similar case he had imposed on his subjects.In his three first alliances, his nuptial bed was unfruitful; the emperor required afemale companion: and the empire a legitimate heir. The beautiful Zoe was in­troduced into the palace as a concubine; and after a trial of her fecundity, and thebirth of Constantine, her lover declared his intention of legitimating the motherand the child, by the celebration of his fourth nuptials. But the patriarch Nicho­las refused his blessing: the imperial baptism of the young prince was obtained bya promise of separation; and the contumacious husband of Zoe was excluded fromthe communion of the faithful. Neither the fear of exile, nor the desertion of hisbrethren, nor the authority of the Latin church, nor the danger of failure or doubtin the succession to the empire, could bend the spirit of the inflexible monk. Af­ter the death of Leo, he was recalled from exile to the civil and ecclesiastical ad­ministration; and the edict of union which was promulgated in the name of Con­stantine, condemned the future scandal of fourth marriages, and left a tacit impu­tation on his own birth.
In the Greek language fiurfile and fiorfihyry are the same word: and as the co­lours of nature are invariable, we may learn, that a dark deep red was the Tyriandye which stained the purple of the ancients. An apartment of the Byzantinepalace was lined with porphyry: it. was reserved for the use of the pregnant em­presses; and the royal birth of their children was expressed by the appellation ofporfihyrogenite, or born in the purple. Several of the Roman princes had beenblessed with an heir; but this peculiar surname was first applied to Constantine VELHis life and titular reign were of equal duration; but of fifty-four years, six hadelapsed before his father's death; and the son of Leo was ever the voluntary orreluctant subject of those who oppressed his weakness or abused his confidence.His uncle Alexander, who had long been invested with the title of Augustus, wasthe first colleague and governor of the young prince: but in a rapid career of viceand folly, the brother of Leo already emulated the reputation of Michael; andwhen he was extinguished by a timely death, he entertained a project of castratinghis nephew, and leaving the empire to a worthless favourite. The succeedingyears of the minority of Constantine were occupied by his mother Zoe, and a suc­cession of councils of seven regents, who pursued their interest, gratified their pas­sions, abandoned the republic, supplanted each other, and finally vanished hr the
{wesence of a soldier. From an obscure origin, Romanus Lecapenus had raisedlimself to the command of the naval armies; and in the anarchy of the times, haddeserved, or at least had obtained, the national esteem. With a victorious and af­fectionate fleet, he sailed from the mouth of the Danube into the harbour of Con­stantinople, and was hailed as the deliverer of the people, and the guardian of theprince. His supreme office was at first defined by the new appellation of fatherof the emperor; but Romanus soon disdained the subordinate powers of a minister,and assumed, with the titles of Gsesar and Augustus, the full independence of roy­alty, which he held near five-and-twenty years. His three sons, Christopher,Stephen, and Constantine, were successively adorned with the same honours, andthe lawful emperor was degraded from the first to the fifth rank in this college ofprinces. Yet, in the preservation of his life-and crown, he might still applaud hisown fortune and the clemency of the usurper. The examples of ancient and modernhistory would have excused the ambition of Romanus: the powers and the laws ofthe empire were in his hand; the spurious birth of Constantine would have justi­fied his exclusion; and the grave or the monastery was open to receive the son ofthe concubine. But Lecapenus does not appear to have possessed either the virtuesor the vices of a tyrant. The spirit and activity of his private life dissolved away







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


for themselves: and the powers which had been delegated to the patrician, were!irrevocably granted to the French and Saxon emperors of the west. The brokenrecords of thetimes(l) preserve some remembrance of their palace, their mint,their tribunal, their edicts, and the sword of justice, which, as late as the thir­teenth century, was derived from Caesar to the prefect of the city. (2) Betweenthe arts of the popes and the violence of the people, this supremacy was crushedand annihilated. Content with the titles of emperor and Augustus, the succes­sors of Charlemagne neglected to assert this local jurisdiction. In the hour ofprosperity, their ambition was diverted by more alluring objects; and in the decayand division of the empire, they were oppressed by the defence of their hereditaryprovinces. Amidst the ruins of Italy, the famous Marozia invited one of theusurpers to assume the character of her third husband; and Hugh, king of Bur­gundy, was introduced by her faction into the mole of Hadrian or castle of St. An-gelo, which commands the principal bridge and entrance of Rome. Her son bythe first marriage, Alberic, was compelled to attend at the nuptial banquet; buthis reluctant and ungraceful service was chastised with a blow by his new father.The blow was productive of a revolution. "Romans," exclaimed the youth,"once you were the masters of the world, and these Burgundians the most abjectof your slaves. They now reign, these voracioos and brutal savages, and my in­jury is the commencement of your servitude. "(3) The alarum bell was rung toarms in every quarter of the city, the Burgundians retreated with haste and shame;Marozia was imprisoned by her victorious son; and his brother, pope John XL,was reduced to the exercise of his spiritual functions. With the title of prince,Alberic-possessed above twenty years the government of Rome; and he is said to-have gratified the popular prejudice, by restoring the office, or at least the title,of consuls and tribunes. His son and heir Octavian assumed, with the pontificate,the name of John XII.: like his predecessor, he was provoked by the Lombardprinces to seek a deliverer for the church and republic; and the services of Othowere rewarded.with the imperial dignity. But the Saxon was imperious, the Ro­mans were impatient, the festival of the coronation was disturbed by the secretconflict of prerogative and freedom, and Otho commanded his sword bearer notto stir from his person, lest he should be assaulted and murdered at the foot ofthe altar.(4) Before he repassed the Alps, the emperor chastised the revolt ofthe people, and the ingratitude of John XII. The pope was degraded in a synod;the prefect was mounted on an ass, whipped through the city, and cast into a dun­geon; thirteen of the most guilty were hanged, others were mutilated or banished;and this severe process was justified by the ancient laws of Theodosius and Justi­nian. The voice ,of fame has accused the second Otho of a perfidious and bloodyact, the massacre of the senators, whom he had invited to his table under the fairsemblance of hospitality and friendship. (5) In the minority of his son Otho III.,Rome made a bold attempt to shake off" the Saxon yoke, and the consul Crescen-tius was the Brutus of the republic. From the condition of a subject and an ex­ile, he twice rose to the command of the city, oppressed, expelled, and created,the popes, and formed a conspiracy for restoring the authority of the Greek em­perors. In the fortress of St. Angelo, he maintained an obstinate siege, till theunfortunate consul was betrayed by a promise of safety: his body was suspendedon a gibbet, and his head was exposed on the battlements of the castle. By a re­verse of fortune,.Otho, after separating his troops, was besieged three days, with­out food in his palace; and a disgraceful escape saved him from the justice or furyof the Romans. The senator Ptolemy was the leader of the people, and the wi­dow of Crescentius enjoyed the pleasure or the fame of revenging her husband by apoison which she administered to her imperial lover. It was the design of OthoIII. to abandon the ruder countries of the north, to erect his throne in Italy, and
(1) For the history of the emperors in Rome and Italy, lea Sigonius de Regno Italise, Opp. torn. ii. with thenotesof Saxius,and the Annals of Muratori, who might refer more distinctly to the authors of his great col­lection.
(2) See the Dissertation of Le Blanc at the end of his Treatise des Monnoyes de France, in which he pro­duces some Roman coins of the French emperors.
(3) Romanorum aliquando servi, scilicet Burgundiones, Romanit imperent? . . . Romanteurbisdignitas adtantam est stultitiara ducu. ut meretricum etiam imperio pareat? (Liutprand, lib. iiL c. 12. p. 450.) Sigoniusflib. vi. p. 400.) positively affirms the renovation of the consulship; but in the old writers Albericus is morefrequently stylfd princem Romanorum.
(4) Ditmar, p. 354 apnd Schmidt, torn. iii. p. 439.
(5) This bloody feast is described in Leonine verse in the Pantheon of Godfrey of Viterbo, (Script. Ital.tonuvu. p. 436,437.) who flourished towards the end of the twelfth centuryj (Fabricius, BiblioU Latin, ineJ.et irmmijBvi,tom.in.p.69.edit. Mansi;) but his evidence, which imposed on Sigonius, is reasonably suspectriby Mnratoii. (Annali, torn. viii. p. 177.) -







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIUE.


rice conspired to destroy the troops whom he had laboured to reform: the miscon­duct and favour of Commentiolus are imputed to this malevolent design; and everyage must condemn the inhumanity or avarice(l) of a prince, who by the trifling ran­som of six thousand pieces of gold, might have prevented the massacre of twelvethousand prisoners in the hands of the chagan. In the first fervour of indignation,an order was signified to the army of the Danube, that they should spare the mag­azines of the province, and establish their winter-quarters in the hostile countryof the Avars. The measure of their grievances was full: they pronounced Mau­rice unworthy to reign, expelled or slaughtered his faithful adherents, and, underthe command of Phocas, a simple centurion, returned by hasty marches to theneighbourhood of Constantinople. After a long series of legal succession, the mi­litary disorders of the third century were again revived; yet such was the noveltyof the enterprise, that the insurgents were awed by their own rashness. Theyhesitated to invest their favourite with the vacant purple; and while they rejectedall treaty with Maurice himself, they held a friendly correspondence with his sonTheodosius; and with Germanus, the father-in-law of the royal youth. So ob­scure had been the former condition of Phocas, that the emperor was quite igno­rant of the name and character of his rival: but as soon as he learned, that thecenturion, though bold in sedition, was timid in the face of danger, Alas! (criedthe desponding prince) if he is a coward, he will surely be a murderer.
Yet if Constantinople had been firm and faithful, the murderer might havespent his fury against the walls; and the rebel army would have been graduallyconsumed or reconciled by the prudence of the emperor. In the games of thecircus, which he repeated with unusual pomp, Maurice disguised, with smiles ofconfidence, the anxiety of his heart, condescended to solicit the applause of thefactions, and flattered their pride by accepting from their respective tribunes alist of nine hundred blues and fifteen hundred greens, whom he affected to esteem


his weakness and hastened his fall; the green faction were the secret accomplicesof the rebels, and the blues recommended lenity and moderation in a contest withtheir Roman brethren. The rigid and parsimonious virtues of Maurice had longsince alienated the hearts of his subjects; as he walked barefoot in a religious pro­cession, he was rudely assaulted with stones, and his guards were compelled topresent their iron maces inthe defence of his person. A fanatic monk ran throughthe streets with a drawn sword, denouncing against him the wrath and the sen­tence of God; and a vile plebeian, who represented his countenance and apparel,was seated on an ass, and pursued by the imprecations of the multitude. (2) Theemperor suspected the popularity of Germanus with the soldiers and citizens; hefeared, he threatened, but he delayed to strike; the patrician fled to the sanctuaryof the church; the people rose in his defence, the walls were deserted by theguards, and the lawless city was abandoned to the flames and rapine of a noctur­nal tumult. In a small bark the unfortunate Maurice, with his wife and ninechildren, escaped to the Asiatic shore; but the violence of the wind compelledhim to land at the church of St. Autonomus,(3) near Chalcedon, from whence hedespatched Theodosius, his eldest son, to implore the gratitude and friendship ofthe Persian monarch. For himself, he refused to fly; his body was tortured withsciatic pains,(4) his mind was enfeebled by superstition; he patiently awaited theevent of the revolution, and addressed a fervent and public prayer to the Almighty,that the punishment of his sins might be inflicted in this world rather than in 3future life. After the abdication of Maurice, the two factions disputed the choiceof an emperor; but the favourite of the blues, was rejected by the jealousy of
(1) Theophylact and Theophanes teem ignorant or the conspiracy ami avarice of Maurice. These charges,,so unfavourable to the memory of that emperor, are first mentioned by the author of the Paschal Chronicle(p. 379,380.:) from whence Zonaras (torn. ii. lib. 14. p. IT, 78.) has transcribed them. Cedrenus (p. 390.) has fol­lowed another computation of the ransom.
(2) In their clamours against Maurice, the people of Constantinople branded him with the name of Marciff-nite of Marcionist: a heresy, (says Theopltylacr, lib. viii. c. 9.) fur* tivcc *u«p»; ,trt.x,8i»»; euxSik rt kxi wwwjt-x*tto;. Did tiiey only cast out a vague reproach, or had the emperor really listened to some obscure teacher ofthose ancient Gnostics ?
(3) The church of St. Antonomus (whom I have not the honour to know) was one hundred and fifty stadiafrom Constantinople. (Theophylact, lib. viii. c. 9.) The port of Eutropius, where Maurice and his childrenwere murdered, is described by Gyllius (de Bosphoro Thracio, lib. iii. c. 11.) as one of the two harbours ofChalcedon.
(4) The inhabitants of Constantinople were generally subject to the voo-oi apfipuriJij; and Theophylact in­sinuates (lib. viii. c. 9.) that if it were consistent with the rules of history, he could assign the medical cause.Yet suoh a digression would not have been more impertinent than his inquiry (lib. vii, c. lfi, 17.) into the an­nual inundations of the Nile, and ail the opinions of the Greek philosophers on that subject-


as the solid pillars of his throne.


 







OCR Output








76 THE DECLINE AND FALL


vestige maybe discovered of the form and situation of Kamtschatka, of a people ofhunters and fishermen, whose sledges were drawn by dogs, and whose habitationswere buried in the earth* The Turks were ignorant of astronomy; but the obser­vation taken by some learned Chinese, with a gnomon of eight feet, fixes the royalcamp in the latitude of forty-nine degrees, and marks their extreme progress with­in three, or at least ten degrees, of the polar circle. (1) Among their southern con­quests, the most splendid was that of the Nepthalites or White Huns, a polite andwarlike people, who possessed the commercial cities of Bochara and Samarcand,who had vanquished the Persian monarch, and carried their victorious armsalong the banks, and perhaps to the mouths, of the Indus. On the side of thewest, the Turkish cavalry advanced to the Lake Mxotis. They passed thatlake on the ice. The khan, who dwelt at the foot of mount Altai, issued his com­mands for the siege of Bosphorus,(2) a city, the voluntary subjects of Rome, andwhose princes had formerly been the friends of Athens>(3) To the east, theTurks invaded China, as often as the vigour of the government was relaxed:and I am taught to read, in the history of the times, that they mowed downtheir patient enemies like hemp or grass; and that the mandarins applauded thewisdom of an emperor who repulsed these barbarians with golden lances. Thisextent of savage empire compelled the Turkish monarch to establish three sub­ordinate princes of his own blood, who soon forgot their gratitude and allegiance.The conquerors were enervated by luxury, which is always fatal, except to anindustrious people; the policy of China solicited the vanquished nations to resumetheir independence; and the power of the Turks was limited to a period of twohundred years. The revival of their name and dominion in the southern countriesof Asia, are the events of a later age; and the dynasties, which succeeded to theirnative realms, may sleep in oblivion; since their history bears no relation to thedecline and fall of the Roman empire. (4)
In the rapid career of conquest, the Turks attacked and subdued the nation ofthe Ogors or Varchonites on the banks of the river Til, which derived the epithetof black from its dark water or gloomy forests.(5) The khan of the Ogors wasslain with three hundred thousand of his subjects, and their bodies were scatteredover the space of four days* journey; their surviving-countrymen acknowledgedthe strength and mercy of the Turks; and a small portion, about twenty thousandwarriors, preferred exile to servitude, They followed the well-known road of theVolga, cherished the error of the nations who confounded them with the Avars,and spread the terror of that false though famous appellation, which had not how­ever, saved its lawful proprietors from the yoke of the Turks. (6) After a longand victorious march, the new Avars arrived at the foot of Mount Caucasus, in thecountry of the Alani(7) artd Circassians, where they first heard of the splendourand weakness of the Roman empire. They humbly requested their confederate,the prince of the Alani, to lead them to this source of riches; and their ambassa­dor, with the permission of the governor of Lazica, was transported by the Euxinesea to Constantinople. The whole city was poured forth to behold with curiosityand terror the aspect of a strange people; their long hair, which hung in tressesdown their backs, was gracefully bound with ribbons, but the rest of their, habit,appeared to imitate the fashion of the Huns. When they were admitted to theaudience of Justinian, Cand'wsh, the first of the ambassadors, addressed the Romanemperor in these terms:—" You see before you, O mighty prince, the representa-
(1) VUdeIon, p. 141.151. The fact, though it strictly belongs to a subordinate and successive tribe, may be-introduced here. ' &
(2) Procopius, Persic, lib. i. c. 12. lib. ii. c. 3. Peysstmuel (Observations sur les Peuples Barbares, p. 99 ioo.)defines the distance between Caffa and the old Bosphoru, at sixteen long Tartar leagues.
(3) See, in a Memoir of M. de Boze (Mem. de I'Academie des Inscriptions, torn. vi. p. 549-565..) the ancientkings and medals ot the Cimmerian Bosphorus; and the gratitude of Athens, in the Oration of Demosthenesagainst Leptines (in Reiske, Orator. Greec. torn. i. p. 468,467.)
(4) For the origin and revolutions of the first Turkish empire, the Chinese details are borrowed from DeGuignes (Hist, des Hons, torn. i. p. 2. p. 367-462,,) and Visdelou (Supplement a la Bibliotheque Orient. d'Her-helot, p. 82—114.) The Greek or Roman hints are gathered in Menander (p. 108—164.) and Theophylact Si-mocatta (lib. vu. c. 7, 8.) 1K
(5?,TJie "ler V Tnl"' accnrdinB «o the geography of De Guignes (torn. i. part 2. p. 58. and 352.,) is asmall though grateful stream of the desert, that Alls into the Orhou, Selinga, &c. See Bell, Journey fromPetersburg!; to Pekin (vol. ii.p. 124.;) yet his own description of the Keat, down which he sailed into the Oby,represents the name and attributes of the black river (p. 139.)
(6) Theophylact, lib. vii. c. 7,8. And yet his true Avars are invisible even to the eyes of M. de Guignes: andwhat canibe moreitllustripns than the false? The right of the fugitive Ogors to that national appellation isconfessed by the 1 urks theiuselves. (Menander, p. 108.)
(7) The Alani are still found in the Genealogical History of the Tartan, (p. 617.) and in d'Anville's maps.They opposed the march of the generals of Zingis round the Caspian Sea, and were overthrown in a grea*battle (Hist. deGengitcan, ]ib.iv. c. 9. p. 447.1







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


The experiment was tried without effect, and the timid or vehement catholicscondemned even the semblance of a retreat in the presence of a subtle and auda­cious enemy. The orthodox (the prevailing) party devised new modes of speech,and argument, and interpretation, to their nature of Christ, they preciously ap­plied a proper and distant energy; but the difference was no longer visible whenthey allowed that the human and the divine will were invariably the same. (1) Thedisease was attended with the customary symptoms; but the Greek clergy, as ifsatiated with the endless controversy of the incarnation, instilled a healing coun­sel into the ear of the prince and people. They declared themselves monothe-lites (assertors of the unity of will,) but they treated the words as new, thequestions as superfluous; and recommended a religious silence as the most agree­able to the prudence and charity of the gospel. This law of silence was suc­cessively imposed by the ecthesis or exposition of Heraclius, the type or model ofhis grandson Constans:(2) and the imperfect edicts were subscribed with alacrityor reluctance by the four patriarchs of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, andAntioch. But the bishop and monks of Jerusalem sounded the alarm: in the lan­guage, or even in the silence, of the Greeks, the Latin churches detected a latentheresy; and the obedience of pope Honorius to the commands of his sovereignwas retracted and censured by the bolder ignorance of his successors. Theycondemned the execrable and abominable heresy of the Monothelites, who re­vived the errors of Manes, Apollinaris, Eutyches, &c.; they signed the sentenceof excommunication on the tomb of St. Peter; the ink was mingled with the sacra­mental wine, the blood of Christ; and no ceremony was omitted that could fill thesuperstitious mind with horror and affright. As the representative of the westernchurch, pope Martin and his Lateran synod anathematized the perfidious andguilty silence of the Greeks; one hundred and five bishops of Italy, for the mostpart the subjects of Constans, presumed to reprobate his wicked tyfie and the im­pious ecthesis of his grandfather, and to confound the authors, and their adherents,with the twenty-one notorious heretics, the apostates from the church, and the or­gans of the devil. Such an insult under the tamest reign could not pass with im­punity. Pope Martin ended his days' on the inhospitable shore of the TauricChersonesus; and his oracle, the abbot Maximus, was inhumanly chastised by theamputation of his tongue and his right hand. (3) But the same invincible spiritsurvived in their successors, and the triumph of the Latins avenged their recentdefeat, and obliterated the disgrace of the three chapters. The synods of Romewere confirmed by the sixth general council of Constantinople, in the palace andthe presence of a new Constantine, a descendant of Heraclius. The royal con­vert converted the Byzantine pontiff and a majority of the bishops;(4) the dis­senters, with their chief, Macarius of Antioch, were condemned to the spiritualand temporal pains of heresy; the east condescended to accept the lessons of thewest; and the creed was finally settled, which teaches the catholics of every age,that two wills or energies are harmonized in the person of Christ. The majestyof the pope and the Roman synod was represented by two priests, one deacon, andthree bishops: but these obscure Latins had neither arms to compel, nor treasuresto bribe, nor language to persuade; and I am ignorant by what arts they could de­termine the lofty emperor of the Greeks to abjure the cathechism of his infancy,and to persecute the religion of his fathers. Perhaps the monks and people ofConstantinople^) were favourable to the Lateran creed, which is indeed the least
it. p. 292.) Hid. Dynast, p. 21. vers. Latin Poeock,) and Assemah himself, torn. iv. p. 218.) They seem igno­rant that they might allege the positive authority of the ecthesis. *0 pixpoc Nso-to^o? xxma Suttpvv tijv oei*?tou Kvptow ev^vSpjmiiriv, xxi Sua lurxyw vtouf, (the common reproach of the Monophysites,) Sua 5sxij«*t* tovt**t^iiv am ETOAjujn, Tauvxvriav £f tmto BmUw t«jv .... Sua Traao-M^m eiogsetre. Concil. torn. vii. p. 205.)
(1) See the orthodox faith in Petavius: (Dogmata Theolog. torn. v. lib. is. e. 6—10, p. 433—447.) all thedepths of this controversy are founded in the Greek dialogue between Maximus and Pyrrhus, (ad calcem, torn.Tut. Amial. Baron, p. 755—794.) which relates a real conference, and produced as short-lived a conversion.
(2) Implissimam ecthesim .... scelerosum typum (Concil. torn. vii. p. 366.) diabolical operationis geninri-na, (sors, germina, or else the Greek yjwtpa-ra in the original. Concil. p. 363,364.) are the expressions of theeighteenth anathema. The epistle of pope Martin to Amandus, a Gallican bishop, stigmatizes the Monothe­lites and their heresy with equal virulence, (p. 392.)
(3) The sufferings of Martin and Maximus are described with pathetic simplicity in the original letters andacts. _ (Concil. torn. vii. p. 68—78. Baron. Annal. Eccies. A. D. 656, No. 2. et annos. subsequent.) Yet thechastisement of their disobedience, egopia and o-w^ztc; 0*1x107*0;, had been previously announced in tie type ofConstans. (Concil. torn. vii. p. 240.)
(4) Eutychius (Annal. torn. ii. p. 368.) most erroneously supposes that the one hundred and twenty-four bi­shops of the Roman synod transported themselves to Constantinople; and, by adding them to the one hundredand sixty-eight Greeks, thus composes the ninth council of two hundred and ninety-two fathers.
(5) The Monothelite Constans was hated by all Sua vat twjw (says Theophanes, Chron. p. 292.) sMie-rfn o$ojp■.r*jx show When the Jlouothclite monk foiled in this inioicIe,the people shouted c j.»t; .n^rs. (Coacil.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 269


liand, that Could reach the public enemy, inflicted on his body some mark of in­genious or brutal cruelty, till two friendly Italians, plunging their swords into hisbody, released him from all human punishment. In this long and painful agony—"Lord, have mercy on me!" and " why willyou bruise a broken reed.'" werethe only words that escaped from his mouth. Our hatred for the tyrant is lost inpity for the man; nor can we blame his pusillanimous resignation, since a GreekChristian was no longer master of his life.
I have been tempted to expatiate on the extraordinary character and adventuresof Andronicus; but I shall here terminate the series of the Greek emperors sincethe time of Heraclius. The branches that sprang from the Comnenian trunk hadinsensibly withered; and the male line was continued only in the posterity of An­dronicus himself, who, in the public confusion, usurped the sovereignty of Trebi-zond, so obscure in history, and so famous in romance. A private citizen of Phi­ladelphia, Constantine Angelus, had emerged to wealth and honours by his mar­riage with a daughter of the emperor Alexius. His son Andronicus is conspicuousonly by his cowardice. His grandson Isaac punished and succeeded the tyrant;but he was dethroned by his own vices and the ambition of his brother; and thediscord introduced the Latins to the conquest of Constantinople, the first great pe­riod in the fall of the eastern empire.
If we compute the number and duration of the reigns; it will be found, that aperiod of six hundred years is filled by sixty emperors, including in the Augustanlist some female sovereigns; and deducting some usurpers who were never ac­knowledged in the capital, and some princes who did not live to possess their in­heritance. The average proportion will allow ten years for each emperor, far be­low the chronological rule of Sir Isaac Newton, who, from the experience of morerecent and regular monarchies, has defined about eighteen or twenty years as theter,m of an ordinary reign. The Byzantine empire was most tranquil and pros­perous when it could acquiesce in hereditary succession; five dynasties, the Hera-clian, Isaurian, Amorian, Basilian, and Comnenian families, enjoyed and trans­mitted the royal patrimony during their respective series of five, four, three, six,and four generations; several princes number the years of their reign with those oftheir infancy: and Constantine VII. and his two grandsons occupy the space of anentire century. But in the intervals of the Byzantine dynasties, the succession israpid and broken, and the name of a successful candidate is speedily erased by amore fortunate competitor. Many were the paths that led to the summit of roy­alty; the fabric of rebellion was overthrown by the stroke of conspiracy, or un­dermined by the silent arts of intrigue; the favourite of the soldiers or people, ofthe senate or clergy, of the women and eunuchs, were alternately clothed withthe purple; the means of their elevation were base, and their end was often con­temptible or tragic. A being of the nature of man, endowed with the same fa­culties, with a longer measure of existence, would cast down a smile of pity andcontempt on the crimes and follies of human ambition, so eager, in a narrow span,to grasp at a precarious and short-lived enjoyment. It is thus that the experienceof history exalts and enlarges the horizon of our intellectual view. In a compo­sition of some days, in a perusal of some hours, six hundred years have rolledaway, and the duration of a life or reign is contracted to a fleeting moment: thegrave is ever beside the throne; the success of a criminal is almost instantly fol­lowed by the loss of his prize; and our immortal reason survives and disdains thesixty phantoms of kings who have passed before our eyes, and faintly dwell onour remembrance. The observation, that in every age and climate, ambition hasprevailed with the same commanding energy, may abate the surprise of a philo­sopher; but while he condemned the vanity, he may search the motive, of this uni­versal desire to obtain and hold the sceptre of dominion. To the greater part ofthe Byzantine series, we cannot reasonably ascribe the love of fame and mankind.The virtue alone of John Comnenus was beneficent and pure: the most illustri­ous of the princes, who precede or follow that respectable name, have trod withsome dexterity and vigour, the crooked and bloody paths of a selfish policy; inscrutinizing the imperfect characters of Leo the Isaurian, Basil I., and AlexiusComnenus, of Theophilus, the second Basil, and Manuel Comnenus, our esteemand censure are almost equally balanced; and the remainder of the imperial crowdcould only desire and expect to be forgotten by posterity. Was personal happi­ness the aim and object of their ambition ? I shall not descant on the vulgar topicof the misery of kings; but I may surely observe, that their condition, of all others,k the most pregnant with fear, and the least susceptible of hope. For these op­







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








OF T.HE ROMAN EMPIRE. 419


they fasted, they prayed, they studied the Koran and the tradition of the San-nites; they performed with zeal and knowledge the functions of their ecclesiasti­cal character. The respect of nations still waited on the successors of the apos­tle, the oracles of the law and conscience of the faithful; and the weakness or di­vision of their tyrants sometimes restored the Abbassides to the sovereignty ofBagdad. But their misfortunes had been imbittered by the triumph of of the Fa-timites, the real or spurious progeny of Ali. Arising from the extremity of Afri­ca, these successful rivals extinguished in Egypt and Syria, both the spiritual andtemporal authority of the Abbassides; and the monarch of the Nile insulted thehumble pontiff on the banks of the Tigris.
In the declining age of the caliphs, in the century which elapsed after the warof Theophilus and Motassem, the hostile transactions of the two nations wereconfined to some inroads by sea and land, the fruits of their close vicinity and in­delible hatred. But when the eastern world was convulsed and broken, theGreeks were roused from their lethargy by the hopes of conquest and revenge.The Byzantine empire, since the accession of the Basilian race, had reposed inpeace and dignity; and they might encounter with their entire strength the frontof some petty emir, whose rear was assaulted and threatened by his national foesof the Mahometan faith. The lofty titles of the morning star, and the death ofthe Saracens,(l) were applied in the public acclamations to Nicephorus Phocas, aprince as renowned in the camp as he was unpopular in the city. In the subordi­nate station of great domestic, or general of the east, he reduced the island ofCrete, and extirpated the nest of pirates who had so long defied, with impunity,the majesty of the empire. (2) His military genius was displayed in the conductand success of the enterprise, which had so often failed with loss and dishonour.The Saracens were confounded with the landing of his troops on safe and levelbridges, which he cast from the vessels to the shore. Seven months were con­sumed in the siege of Candia: the despair of the native Cretans was stimulated bythe frequent aid of their brethren of Africa and Spain; and after the massy walland double ditch had been stormed by the Greeks, a hopeless conflict was stillmaintained in the streets and houses of the city. The whole island was subduedin the capital, and a submissive people accepted, without resistance, the baptismof the conqueror. (3) Constantinople applauded the long-forgotten pomp of a tri­umph; but the imperial diadem was the sole reward that could repay the services,or satisfy the ambition, of Nicephorus.
After the death of the younger Romanus, the fourth in lineal descent of the Ba-silian race, his widow Theophania successively married Nicephorus Phocas, andhis assassin John Zimisces, the two heroes of the age. They reigned as the guar­dians and colleagues of her infant sons; and the twelve years of their militarycommand form the most splendid period of the Byzantine annals. The subjectsand confederates, whom they led to war, appeared, at least in the eyes of an ene­my, two hundred thousand strong: and of these about thirty thousand were armed■with cuirasses:(4) a train of four thousand mules attended their march; and theirevening camp was regularly fortified with an enclosure of iron spikes. A seriesof bloody and undecisive combats is nothing more than an anticipation of whatwould have been effected in a few years by the course of nature; but I shall brieflyprosecute the conquests of the two emperors from the hills of Cappadocia to thedesert of Bagdad. The sieges of Mopsuestia and Tarsus in Cicilia first exercisedthe skill and perseverance of their troops, on whom, at this moment, I shall nothesitate to bestow the name of Romans. In the double city of Mopsuestia, whichis divided by the river Sarus, two hundred thousand Moslems were predestined todeath or slavery,(5) a surprising degree of population, which must at least include
(1) Liutprand, whose choleric temper was imbittered by his uneasy situation, suggests the names of re­proach and contempt more applicable to Nicephorus than the vain titles of the Greeks, Ecce venit stelia matu-tina, surgit Eous, rererberat obtutu solis radios, pallida Saracenorum mors, Nicephorus /uW.
(2) Notwithstanding the insinuations of Zonaras, x*i s* etc. (torn. ii. lib.xvi; p. 197.) it is an undoubt­ed fact, that Crete was completely and finally subdued by Nicephorus Phocas. (Pagi, Critica, torn. iii. p. 873.—875. Meursius, Creta, lib. iii. c. 7. torn. iii. p. 404,465.
(3) A Greek life of St. Nicon, the Armenian, was found in the Sforza library, and translated into Latin bythe Jesuit Sirmond for the use of cardinal Baronius. This cotemporary legend casts a ray of light on Creteand Peloponnesus in the tenth century. He found the newly recovered island, fasdis dctestandse Agarenorumsuperstitionis vestigiis adhuc plenam ac refertam ... but Mie rictorious missionary, perhaps with some carnalaid, adbaptismum omnes verseque fiilei disciplinam pepnlit. Eccletiis per-totam insulam sedificaris, &c.(Anual. Eccies. A. D.961.)
(4) Elmacin, Hist. Saracen, p. 278, 279. Liutprand was disposed to depreciate the Greek power, yet he-owns that Nicephorus led against Assyria an army of eighty thousand men.
(5) Ducenta fere millia horainum numerabat urbs, (Abulfeda. Annal. Moslem, p. 231.) of Mopsuestia, orJlafifa, Mampsyita, MaiuislB, Manuita, at it is corruptly, Or perhaps more correctly, styled in the middle ag*v.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


flict of eight years, the loss of some French generals was avenged by the slaughterof the most noble Huns: the relics of the nation submitted: the royal, residence ofthe chagan was left desolate and unknown: and the treasures, the rapine of twohundred and fifty years, enriched the victorious troops, or decorated the churchesof Italy and Gaul.(l) After the reduction.of Pannonia the empire of Charle­magne was bounded only by the conflux of the Danube with the Teyss and theSave: the provinces of Istria, Libumia, and Dalmatia, were an easy, though un­profitable, accession; and it was an effect of his moderation, that he left the ma­ritime cities under the real or nominal sovereignty of the Greeks. But these dis­tant possessions added more to the reputation than to the power of the Latin em­peror; nor did he risk any ecclesiastical foundations to reclaim the barbarians fromtheir vagrant life and idolatrous worship. Some canals of communication betweenthe river, the Saone and the Meuse, the Rhine and the Danube, were faintly at­tempted. (2) Their execution would have vivified the empire: and more cost andlabour were often wasted in the structure of a cathedral.
If we retrace the outlines of this geographical picture, it will be seen that theempire of the Franks extended between east and west, from the Ebro to the Elbeor Vistula; between the north and south, from the duchy of Beneventum to theriver Eyder, the perpetual boundary of Germany and Denmark. The personaland political importance of Charlemagne was magnified by the distress and divisionof the rest of Europe. The islands of Great Britain and Ireland were disputed bya crowd of princes of Saxon or Scottish origin; and, after the loss of Spain, theChristian and Gothic kingdom of Alphonso the Chaste, was confined to the nar­row range of the Aslurian mountains. These petty sovereigns revered the poweror virtue of the Carlovingian monarch, implored the honour and support of his al­liance, and styled him their common parent, the sole and supreme emperor of thewest(3) He maintained a more equal intercourse with the caliph Harun alRashid,(4) whose dominion stretched from Africa to India, and accepted from hisambassadors a tent, a water-clock, an elephant, and the keys of the holy sepulchre.It is not easy to conceive the private friendship of a Frank and an Arab, who werestrangers to each other's person, and language, and religion* but their public cor­respondence was founded on vanity, and their remote situation left no room for acompetition of interest. Two-thirds of the western empire of Rome were subjectto Charlemagne, and the deficiency was amply supplied by his command of theinaccessible or invincible nations of Germany. But in the choice of his enemies,we may be reasonably surprised that he so often preferred the poverty of the northto the riches of the south. The three and thirty campaigns laboriously consumedin the woods and morasses of Germany, would have sufficed to assert the ampli­tude of his title by the expulsion of the Greeks from Italy and the Saracens fromSpain. The weakness of the Greeks would have ensured an easy victory: and the^oly crusade against the Saracens would have been prompted by glory and revenge,and loudly justified by religion and policy. Perhaps, in his expeditions beyondthe Rhine and the Elbe, he aspired to save his monarchy from the fate of the Ro­man empire, to disarm the enemies of civilized society, and to eradicate the seedof future emigrations. But it has been wisely observed, that in a light of precau­tion, all conquest must be ineffectual, unless it could be universal; since the in­creasing circle must be involved in a larger sphere of hostility.(5) The subjugationof Germany withdrew the veil which had so long concealed the continent or islandof Scandinavia from the knowledge of Europe, and awakened the torpid courageof their barbarous natives. The fiercest of the Saxon idolaters escaped from the
(1) Jdaot pralia in eo gesta! quantum sanguinis efTusum sit! Testatur racna omni habitations Pannonia, etlocus in quo regia Cagani fuit ita desertus, ut ne vestigium quidem humanee habitationis appareat. Tota inhoc bello Hunbrum nobilitas periit, tota gloria decidit, omnis pecunia et congesti ex longo tempore thesaufidirepti sunt.
(2} The junction of the Rhine and Danube was undertaken only for the service of the Pannonian war.(Gaillard, Vie de Charlemagne, torn. ii. p. 312—315.) The canal, which would have been only two leagues inlength, and of which some traces are still extant in Swabta, was interrupted by excessive rains, military avo­cations, and superstitious fears, fSctuepflin, Hist, de l'Academie des Inscriptions, torn, xviii. p. 256. Molimina fluviorura, See. jungendorum, p. 59—62.)
(3) See Eginhanri, c 16. and Gaillard, torn. ii. p. 361—385. who mentions, with a loose reference, the inter­course of Charlemagne and Egbert, the emperor's gilt of his own sword, and the modest answer of his Saxondisciple. The anecdote, if genuine, would have adorned our English histories.
(4) The correspondence is mentioned only in the French annals, and the Orientals are ignorant of the ca­liph's friendship for the Christian dog—a polite appellation, which Harun bestows on the emperor of theCreeks,
(5) Gaillard, torn. ii. p. 301—365. 471—470. 492. I have borrowed his judicious remarks on Charlemagne'splan of conquest, and the judicious distinction of his stnemies of the first and the second tnctinte. Horn. it. p,'84, 509, etc.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 1-7


infallible rule, the logic of Aristotle and the stoics, reduced particular cases to ge­neral principles, and diffused over the shapeless mass, the light of order and elo­quence. Cicero, his cotemporary and friend, declined the reputation of a pro­fessed lawyer; but the jurisprudence of his country was adorned by his incomparablegenius, which converts into gold every object that it touches. After the exampleof Plato, he composed a republic; and, for the use of his republic, a treatise oflaws; in which he labours to deduce from a celestial origin, the wisdom and jus­tice of the Roman constitution. The whole universe, according to his sublimehypothesis, forms one immense commonwealth: gods and men, who participateof the same essence, are members of the same community; reason prescribesthe law of nature and nations; and all positive institutions, however modified byaccident or custom, are drawn from the rule of right, which the Deity has in­scribed on every virtuous mind. From these philosophical mysteries, he mildlyexcludes the sceptics who refuse to believe, and the Epicureans who are unwill­ing to act. The latter disdain the care of the republic; he advises them to slum­ber in their shady gardens. But he humbly entreats that the new academy wouldbe silent, since her bold objections would too soon destroy the fair and well-orderedstructure of his lofty system. (1) Plato, Aristotle, and Zeno, he represents as theonly teachers who arm and instruct a citizen for the duties of social life. Of these,the armour of the stoics(2) was found to be of the firmest temper; and it waschiefly worn, both for use and ornament, in the schools of jurisprudence. Fromthe portico, the Roman civilians learned to live, to reason, and to die: but theyimbibed in some degree the prejudices of the sect; the love of paradox, the perti­nacious habits of dispute, and a minute attachment to words and verbal distinc­tions. The superiority of form to matter, was introduced to ascertain the rightof property: and the equality of crimes is countenanced by an opinion of Treba-tius,(3) that he who touches the ear, touches the whole body; and that he whosteals from a heap of corn, or a hogshead of wine, is guilty of the entire theft. (4)Arms, eloquence, and the study of the civil law, promoted a citizen to the ho­nours of the Roman state; and the three professions were sometimes more conspi­cuous by their union in the same character. In the composition of the jedict, alearned pretor gave a sanction and preference to his private sentiments: the opi­nion of a censor, or a consul, was entertained with respect: and a doubtful inter­pretation of the laws might be supported by the virtues or triumphs of the ci­vilian. The patrician arts were long protected by the veil of mystery; and inmore enlightened times, the freedom of inquiry established the general principlesof jurisprudence. Subtle and intricate cases were elucidated by the disputes ofthe forum; rules, axioms, and definitions,(5) were admitted as the genuine dic­tates of reason; and the consent of the legal professors was interwoven into thepractice of the tribunals. But these interpreters could neither enact nor executethe laws of the republic; and the judges might disregard the authority of Scxvo-las themselves, which was often overthrown by the eloquence or sophistry of aitingenious pleader.(6) Augustus and Tiberius were the first to adopt, as a usefulengine, the science of the civilians; and their servile labours accommodated theold system to the spirit and views of despotism. Under the fair pretence of se­curing the dignity of the art, the privilege of subscribing legal and valid opinions,was confined to the sages of senatorian or equestrian rank, who had been previ­ously approved by the judgment of the prince; and this monopoly prevailed, tillHadrian restored the freedom of the profession to every citizen conscious of hisabilities and knowledge. The discretion of the pretor was now governed by the
Servim Sulpicioi (in Bruto, c. 41. J whose praises are elegantly varied in Ihe classic Latinity of the RomanGravina (p. 80.)
(1) Perturbatricem aatem omnium harum rerura academiam, banc ab Arcesila et Cameade recentem, exo-remits ut sileat, nam si invaserit in haec, quae satis scite instruct* et composita videantur, nimis cdet ruinas,quam quidein ego placare cupio, submovere non audeo (de Legibus, i. 13.) From this passage alone Bentlcy(Remarks on Free-thinking, p. 250.) might hare learned how firmly Cicero believed in the specious doctrineswhich he has adorned.
(2) The Stoic philosophy was first taught at Rome by Pansetius, the friend of the younger Scipio (see hislife in the Mem. de V Academie ties Inscriptions, torn. x. p. 75—89.)
(3) As he is quoted by Ulpian (leg. 40. ad Sarbinnm in Pandect, lib. slvii. tit. ii. leg. xxi.) Yet Trebatiui, af.ter he was a leading civilian, qui familiam duxit, became an Epicurean (Cicero ad Fam. 7. 5.) Perhaps hewas not constant or sincere in his new sect.
(4) See Gravina (p. 45.51.) and the ineffectual cavils of Maseou. Keineccius (Hist. J. R. No. 125.) quotes,mnd approves a dissertation of Everard Otto de Stoica Jurisconsultorum Philosophia.
(I) We have heard of the Catonian rule, the Aquilian stipulation, and the Manilian forms, of two hundrciand eleven maxims, and of two hundred and forty-seven definition] (Pandect, lib. i. tit. 16,17.)(9) Read Cicero, lib. i. de Oratore, Topic*, pro Mareaa.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 149


But in the character of a legislator, he respected the prejudices of the times; andinstead of pronouncing a sentence, of death against the robber or assassin, the ge­neral who betrayed an army, or the magistrate who ruined a province, Sylla wascontent to aggravate the pecuniary damages by the penalty of exile, or, in moreconstitutional language, by the interdiction of fire and water. The Cornelian, andafterwards the Pompeian'and Julian laws, introduced a new system of criminal ju­risprudence ;(1) and the emperors, from Augustus to Justinian, disguised their in­creasing rigour under the names of the uriginal authors. But the invention andfrequent use of extraordinary fiains, proceeded from the desire to extend and con­ceal the progress of despotism. In the condemnation of illustrious Romans, thesenate was always prepared to confound, at the will of their masters, the judicialand legislative powers. It was the duty of the governors to maintain the peace oftheir province, by the arbitrary and rigid administration of justice; the freedom ofthe city evaporated in the extent of the empire, and the Spanish malefactor, whoclaimed the privilege of a Roman, was elevated by the command of Galba on afairer and more lofty cross. (2) Occasional receipts issued from the throne to de­cide the questions, which by their novelty or importance, appeared to surpass theauthority and discernment of a proconsul. Transportation and beheading werereserved for honourable persons; meaner criminals were either hanged or burnt,or buried in the mines, or exposed to the wild beasts of the amphitheatre. Armedrobbers were pursued and extirpated as the enemies of society; the driving awayhorses or cattle was made a capital offence;(3) but simple theft was uniformlyconsidered as a mere civil and private injury. The degrees of guilt, and the modesof punishment, were too often determined by the discretion of the rulers, and thesubject was left in ignorance of the legal danger which he might incur by everyaction of his life.
A sin, a vice, a crime, are the objects of theology, ethics, and jurisprudence.Whenever their judgments agree, they corroborate each other; but as often asthey differ, a prudent legislator appreciates the guilt and punishment accordingto the measure of social injury. On this principle, the most daring attack onthe life and property of a private citizen, is judged less atrocious than the crimeof treason, or rebellion, which invades the majesty of the republic: the obse­quious civilians unanimously pronounced, that the republic is contained in theperson of its chief: and the edge of the Julian law was sharpened by the inces­sant diligence of the emperors. The licentious commerce of the sexes may betolerated as an impulse of nature, or forbidden as a source of disorder and cor­ruption: but the fame, the fortunes, the family of the husband, are seriously in-• jured by the adultery of the wife. The wisdom of Augustus, after curbing thefreedom of revenge, applied to this domestic offence the animadversion of thelaws: and the guilty parties, after the payment of heavy forfeitures and fines,were condemned to long or perpetual exile in two separate islands. (4) Religionpronounces an equal censure against the infidelity of the husband: but as it is notaccompanied by the same civil effects, the wife was never permitted to vindicateher wrongs;(5) and the distinction of simple or double adultery, so familiar andso important in the canon law, is unknown to the jurisprudence of the code andPandects. I touch with reluctance, and despatch with impatience, a more odiousvice, of which modesty rejects the name, and nature abominates the idea. The


 


thousand senators and knights; Appian (de Boll. Civil, lib. i. c. 95. torn. ii. p. 13.1. edit. Sehweigaeuser) more ac­curately computes forty victims of the tenatorian rank, and one thousand six hundred of the equestrian ceu-aus or order.
(1) For the penal law (Leges Cornelia;. Pompeise.Jniise, of Sylla. Pompey,and (he Caesars.) see (he sentencesof Paulus (lib. is. til. 18—30. p. 497—518. edit. Sehultitig,) the Gregorian Code (Fragment, lib. six. p. 705, 70S.in Schulting.) the Cnllatio Legum Mosaicarum et Romanarum (tit. 1. 15.,' the Theodosian Code (lib. ix..) theCode af Justinian (lib. ix.,) the Pandects (48.,) the Institutes (lib. iv. tit. 18.,) and the Greek version of Theo-pbilus(p.917—926.)
(2) It was a guardian who had poisoned his ward. The crime was atrocious; yet the punishment is reckonedby Suetonius (c. ix.) among the acts in which Galba showed himself acer vehemens, et in delictis coercendisimmodicus.
(3) The abactores or abigeatnres, who drove one horse, or two mares or oxen, or five hogs, or ten goats, weresubject to capital punishment (Paul. Senlent. R.-cepT. lib. iv. tit. 18. p. 497,498.) Hadrian (ad Concil. Breticae.)most severe where the offence was most frequent, condemns the criminals, ad gtadium, ludi damnationem (Ul-pian de Officio Proconsulis, tib. viii. in Collatione Leguro Mosaic, et Rom. tit. xi. p. 235.)
(4) Till the publication of the Julius Paulus of Sehnitiug (lib. ii. tit. 26. p. 317—323.,) it was affirmed andbelieved, that the Julian laws punished adultery with death; and the mistake arose from the fraud or error ofTribonian. Yet Lipsius had suspected the truth from the narrative of Tacitus (Annal. ii. 50. iii. 24. iv. 42.,)and even from the practice of Augustus, who distinguished the treasonable frailties of his female kindred.
(5) In cases of adultery, Severus confined to the husband the right of public accusation (Cod. Justinian, lib.ix. tit. 9. lee. 1.) Nor is this privilege unjust—so different are the effects of male or female infiddirv.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 49


tired and twenty miles, a rare variety of soil and climate; the intermediate valleysand elevated plains abound with rich pastures, perpetual streams, and fruits of adelicious taste and uncommon magnitude. This fair solitude is decorated with theruins of Lambesa, a Roman city, once the seat of a legion, and the residence offorty thousand inhabitants. The Ionic temple of iEsculapius is encompassed withMoorish huts; and the cattle now graze in the midst of an amphitheatre, underthe shade of Corinthian columns. A sharp perpendicular rock rises above thelevel of the mountain, where the African princes deposited their wives and trea­sure; and a proverb is familiar to the Arabs, that the man may eat fire, who daresto attack the craggy cliffs and inhospitable natives of mount Aurasius. This har­dy enterprise was twice attempted by the eunuch Solomon: from the first, he re­treated with some disgrace; and in the second, his patience and provisions werealmost exhausted; and he must again have retired, if he had not yielded to the im-tuous courage of his troops, who audaciously scaled, to the astonishment of theoors, the mountain, the hostile camp, and the summit of the Geminian rock.A citadel was erected to secure this important conquest, and to remind the barba­rians of their defeat: and as Solomon pursued his march to the west, the long-lostprovince of Mauritanian Sitifi was again annexed to the Roman empire. TheMoorish war continued several years after the departure of Belisarius; but thelaurels which he resigned to a faithful lieutenant, may be justly ascribed to his owntriumph.
The experience of past faults, which may sometimes correct the mature age ofan individual, is seldom profitable to the successive generations of mankind. Thenations of antiquity, careless of each others safety were separately vanquished and•enslaved by the Romans. This awful lesson might have instructed the barbariansof the west to oppose, with timely counsels and confederate arms, the unboundedambition of Justinian. Yet the same error was repeated, the same consequenceswere felt, and the Goths, both of Italy and Spain, insensible of their approachingdanger, beheld with indifference, and even with joy, the rapid downfal of theVandals. After the failure of the royal line, Theudes, a valiant and powerfulchief, ascended the throne of Spain, which he had formerly administered in thename of Theodoric, and his infant grandson. Under his command, the Visigothsbesieged the fortress of Ceuta on the African coast: but, while they spent the sab­bath day in peace and devotion, the pious security of their camp was invaded by asally from the town; and the king himself, with some difficulty and danger, es­caped from the hands of a sacrilegious enemy. (1) It was not long before his prideand resentment were gratified by a suppliant embassj' from the unfortunate Geli-mer, who implored, in his distress, the aid of the Spanish monarch. But, insteadof sacrificing these unworthy passions to the dictates of generosity and prudence,Theudes amused the ambassadors, till he was secretly informed of the loss of Car­thage, and then dismissed them with the obscure and contemptuous advice, to seekin their native country a true knowledge of the state of the Vandals.(2) Thelong continuance of the Italian war delayed the punishment of the Visigoths; andthe eyes of Theudes were closed before they tasted the fruits of his mistaken po­licy. After his death, the sceptre of Spain was disputed by a civil war. Theweaker candidate solicited the protection of Justinian; and ambitiously subscribeda treaty of alliance, which deeply wounded the independence and happiness of biscountry. Several cities, both on the ocean and the Mediterranean, were ceded tothe Roman troops, who afterwards refused to evacuate those pledges, as it shouldseem, either of safety or payment; and as they were fortified by perpetual sup­plies from Africa, they maintained their impregnable stations, for the mischie­vous purpose of inflaming the civil and religious factions of the barbarians. Se­venty years elapsed before this painful thorn could be extirpated from thebosom of the monarchy; and as long as the emperors retained any share ofthese remote and useless possessions, their vanity might number Spain in the list oftheir provinces, and the successors of Alaric in the rank of their vassals. (3)
The eiTor of the Goths who reigned in Italy was less excusable than that oftheir Spanish brethren, and their punishment was still more immediate and terri-
(1) Iiidor. Chron. p. 72S. edit. Grot. Mariana, Hist. Hispan. lib. t. c. 8. p. 175. Yet according to Isidore, the>iege of Ceuta, and the death of Theudes, happened, A.M. H. 586. A. D. 548. and the place was defended, notby the Vandali, but by the Roman*. •
(2) Procopius, Vandal, lib. i. c. 24.
(3) See the original chronicle of Isidore, and the fifth and sixth books of the History of Spain by Mariana.The Itomani were finally ejpelled by SuintiU), the king of the Visigoths, (A. D. 621-6260 after thejtr reunionto the catholic church.
Vol. HI 7







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 77


t)ves of the strongest and most populous of nations, the invincible, the irresistibleAvare. We are willing to devote ourselves to your service: we are able to van­quish and destroy all the enemies who now disturb your repose. But we expect,as the price of our alliance, as the reward of our valour, precious gifts, annual sub'sidies, and fruitful possessions." At the time of this embassy, Justinian hadreigned above thirty, he had lived above seventy-five years; his mind as well ashis body, was feeble and languid; and the conqueror of Africa and Italy, carelessof the permanent interests ot his people, aspired only to end his days in the bosomeven of inglorious peace. In a studied oration, he imparted to the senate his reso­lution to dissemble the insult, and to purchase the friendship, of the Avars; andthe whole senate, like the mandarins of China, applauded the incomparable wis­dom and foresight of their sovereign. The instruments of luxury were immedi­ately prepared to captivate the barbarians: silken garments, soft and splendid beds,and chains and collars incrusted with gold. The ambassadors, content with sucha liberal reception, departed from Constantinople, and Valentin, one of the empe­ror's guards, was sent with a similar character to their camp at the foot of mountCaucasus. As their destruction or their success must be alike advantageous to theempire, he persuaded them to invade the enemies of Rome; and they were easilytempted, by gifts and promises, to gratify their ruling inclinations. These fugi­tives, who fled before the Turkish arms, passed the Tanais and Borysthenes, andboldly advanced into the heart of Poland and Germany, violating the law of na­tions, and abusing the rights of victory. Before ten years had elapsed, their campswere seated on the Danube and the Elbe, many Bulgarian and Sclavonian nameswere obliterated from the earth, and the remainder of their tribes are found, as tri­butaries and vassals, under the standard of the Avars. The chagan, the peculiartitle of their king, still affected to cultivate the friendship of the emperor; and Jus­tinian ■entertained some thoughts of fixing them in Pannonia, to balance the pre­vailing power of the Lombards. But the virtue or treachery of an Avar betrayedthe secret enmity and ambitious designs of their countrymen: and they loudly com­plained of the timid, though jealous policy, of detaining their ambassadors, anddenying the arms which they had been allowed to purchase in the capital ofthe empire.(l)
Perhaps the apparent change in the dispositions of the emperors, may be ascri­bed to the embassy which was received from the conquerors of the Avars. (2) Theimmense distance, which eluded their arms, could not extinguish their resentment:the Turkish ambassadors pursued the footsteps of the vanquished to the Jaik, theVolga, mount Caucasus, the Euxine, and Constantinople, and at length appearedbefore the successor of Constantine, to request that he would not espouse thecause of rebels and fugitives. Even commerce had some share in this remarkablenegotiation: and the Sogdoites, who were now the tributaries of the Turks, em­braced the fair occasion of opening, by the north of the Caspian, a new road forthe importation of Chinese silk into the Roman empire. The Persian, who pre­ferred the navigation of Ceylon, had stopped the caravans of Bochara and Samar-cand: their silk was contemptuously burnt: some Turkish ambassadors died inPersia, with a suspicion of poison; and the great khan permitted his faithful vas­sal Maniach, the prince of the Sogdoites, to propose, at the Byzantine court, atreaty of alliance against their common enemies. Their splendid apparel and richpresents, the fruit of oriental luxury, distinguished Maniach and his colleaguesfrom the rude savages of the north: their letters, in the Scythian character andlanguage, announced a people who had attained the rudiments of science;(3) theyenumerated the conquests, they offered the friendship and military aid of theTurks; and their sincerity was attested by direful imprecations (if they were guil-tv of falsehood) against their own head, and the head of Disabul their master.The Greek prince entertained with hospitable regard the ambassadors of a remoteand powerful monarch: the sight of silkworms and looms disappointed the hopes
(1) The embassies and first conquests of the Avars may be read in Menander (Excerpt. l>gat. p. 99—10!.154, 155..) Theophanes (p. 156.,) the Historia Miscella(lib. xvi.p. 109.,) and Gregory of Tours (lib. iv. c. 23.29.^in the Historians of France, torn. ii. p. 314.217.)
(2) Theophanes (Chvon. p. 204.) and the Hist. Miscella (lib. xvi. p. 110..) as understood by De Guignet (com.s. part 2. p. 354..) appear to speak of a Turkish embassy to Justinian himself; but that of Maniach* in thefourth year of his successor Justin, is positively the first that reached Constantinople (Menander, p. 108.)
(3) The Russians have found characters, rude hieroglyphics, on the Irtish and Yeniser, on medals, tombs,idols, rocks, obelisks. &c. (Slrahlenberg, Hist, of Siberia, p. 324. 348. 428,429.) Dr. Hyde (de Religione Vete-rum Persarum, p. 521, See.) has given two alphabets of Thibet and of the Eygours. I have long harbonreda suspicion that atftlie Scythian, and tome, perhaps much, of the Indian science, was derived from fiie Greeksof Bactriana.







OCR Output








316 THE DECLINfc AND FALL


exempted him from shame or reproach, but he was reduced to a narrow circle ofexistence, and deprived of those faithful mirrors, which reflect to our mind theminds of sages and heroes. Yet the book of nature and of man was open to hisview; and some fancy has been indulged in the political and philosophical obser­vations which are ascribed to the Arabian travelier.{t) He compares the nationsand the religions of the earth; discovers the weakness of the Persian and Romanmonarchies; beholds, with pity and indignation, the degeneracy of the times; andresolves to unite* under one God and one king) the invincible spirit and primitivevirtues of the Arabs. Our more accurate inquiry will suggest, that instead of vi*siting the courts* the camps, the temples, of the east, the two journeys of Maho­met into Syria were confined to the fairs of Bostra and Damascus; that he wasonly thirteen years of age when he accompanied the caravan of his uncle, andthat his duty compelled him to return as soon as he had disposed of the merchan­dise of Cadijah. In these hasty and superficial excursions, the eye of geniusmight discern some objects invisible to his grosser companions; some seeds ofknowledge might be cast upon a fruitful soil: but his ignorance of the Syriac lan­guage must have checked his curiosity; and I cannot perceive in the life or wri­tings of Mahomet, that his prospect was far extended beyond the limits of the Ara­bian world. From every region of that solitary world, the pilgrims of Meccawere annually assembled, by the calls of devotion and commerce: in the free con­course of multitudes, a simple citizen, in his native tongue, might study the poli­tical state and character of the tribes, the theory and practice of the Jews andChristians. Some useful strangers might be tempted or forced, to implore therights of hospitality; and the enemies of Mahomet have named the Jew, the Per­sian, and the Syrian monk, whom they accuse of lending their secret aid to thecomposition of the Koran. (2) Conversation enriches the understanding, but soli­tude is the school of genius; and the uniformity of a work denotes the hand of asingle artist. From his earliest youth, Mahomet was addicted to religious contem­plation: each year, during the month of Ramadan, he withdrew from the worldand from the arms of Cadijah: in the cave of Hera, three miles from Mecca,(3)he consulted the spirit of fraud or enthusiasm, whose abode is not in the heavens,but in the mind of the prophet. The faith which, under the name of Islam, hepreached to his family and nation, is compounded of an eternal truth, and a ne­cessary fiction, That there is only one God, AND that Mahomet is theapostle of God.
It is the boast of the Jewish apologists, that while the learned nations of anti­quity were deluded by the fables of polytheism, their simple ancestors of Pales­tine preserved the knowledge and worship of the true God. The moral attri­butes of Jehovah may not easily be reconciled with the standard of human virtueshis metaphysical qualities are darkly expressed; but each page of the Pentateuchand the prophets is an evidence of his power: the unity of his name is inscribed onthe first table of the law; and his sanctuary was never defiled by any visible image ofthe invisible essence. After the ruin of the temple, the faith of the Hebrew exileswas purified, fixed, and enlightened, by the spiritual devotion of the synagogue;and the authority of Mahomet will not justify his perpetual reproach, that theJews of Mecca or Medina adored Ezra as the son of God. (4) But the children ofIsrael had ceased to be a people; and the religions of the world were guilty, atleast in the eyes of the prophet, of giving sons, or daughters* or companions, tothe supreme God. In the rude idolatry of the Arabs, the crime is manifest andaudacious: the Sabians arc poorly excused by the pre-eminence of the first planet,
tlie mask: nor ran any conclusion be drawn from ihe words of disease and delirium. The lettered youth, beforehe aspired to the prophetic character, must have often excrcised.in private life, the arts of reading and writing,and his first converts of his own family, would have been the ftrR to detect and upbraid his scandalous hypo­crisy. (White's Sermons, p. 203, 204. Notes, p. 36—38.)
(1) The count de Boulainvillers (Vie de Mahomed, p. 202—228.) leads his Arabian pupil, like the Telemachtisof Fenelon, or the Cyrus of Ramsay. His journey to the court of Prrsia is probably a fiction; nor can I trace theorigin of his exclamation," Les Grecs sont pourtant des hommes." The two Syrian journeys are expressed byalmost all the Arabian writers both Mahometans and Christians. (Gagnier, ad Abulfed. p. 10.)
(2) I am not at leisure to pursue the fables or conjectures which name the strangers accused or suspected bythe infidels of Mecca. (Koran, c. 16. p. 223. c. 55. p. 297. with Sale's Remarks. Pndeaus's Life of Mahomet, p.22—27. Gagnier, Not. ad Abulfed. p. 11. 74. Maracci, torn. ii. p. 400.) JXven Prideaux has observed that thetransaction must have been secret, and that the scene lay in the heart of Arabia.
(3) Abulfeda, in Vit. e. 7. p. 1 i. Gagnier, torn. i. p. 133. 133. The situation of mount Hera is remarked byAbulfeda. (Geograph. Arab. p. 4.) Yet Mahomet had never read of the cave of Egcria, ubi nocturnse Numaconstituebat amicte, of the Idsean mount where Minos conversed with Jove, &c.
(4) Koran, c. 9. p. 153* Al Beidawi, and the other commentators quoted by Sale, adhere to the charge; bat tdo not understand that it is coloured by the most obscure or absurd tradition of the Talmudists.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


first license of his youth, Basil II. devoted his life, in the palace and the camp, tothe penance of a hermit, wore the monastic habit under his robes and armour, ob­served a vow of continence, and imposed on his appetites a perpetual abstinencefrom wine and flesh. In the sixty-eighth year of his age, his martial spirit urgedhim to embark in person for a holy war against the Saracens of Sicily; he was pre­vented by death, and Basil, surnamed the slayer of the Bulgarians, was dismissedfrom the world, with the blessings of the clergy and the curses of the people. Afterhis decease, his brother Constantine enjoyed, about three years, the power, orrather the pleasures, of royalty; and his only care was the settlement of his suc­cession. He had enjoyed sixty-six years the title of Augustus; and the reign ofthe two brothers is the longest, and most obscure, of the Byzantine history.
A lineal succession of five emperors in a period of one hundred and sixty years,had attached the loyalty of the Greeks to the Macedonian dynasty, which hadbeen thrice respected by the usurpers of their power. After the death of Con­stantine IX., the last male of the royal race, a new and broken scene presented it­self, and the accumulated years of twelve emperors do not equal the space of hissingle reign. His elder brother had preferred his private chastity to the publicinterest,, and Constantine himself had only three daughters, Eudocia, who took theveil, and Zoe and Theodora, who were preserved till a mature age in a state ofignorance and virginity. When their marriage was discussed in the council oftheir dying father, the cold or pious Theodora refused to give an heir to the em­pire, but her sister Zoe presented herself a willing victim at the altar. RomanusArgyrus, a patrician of a graceful person and fair reputation, was chosen for herhusband, and on his declining that honour, was informed, that blindness or deathWas the second alfernative. The motive of his reluctance was conjugal affection;but his faithful wife sacrificed her own happiness to his safety and greatness; andher entrance into a monastery removed the only bar to the imperial nuptials. Af­ter the decease of Constantine, the sceptre devolved to Romanus III., but his la­bours at home and abroad were equally feeble and fruitless; and the mature age,the forty-eight years of Zoe, were less favourable to the hopes of pregnancy thanto the indulgence of pleasure. Her favourite chamberlain was a handsome Paph-lagonian of the name of Michael, whose first trade had been that of a money-chan^ger; and Romanus, either from gratitude or equity, connived at their criminal in­tercourse, or accepted a slight assurance of their innocence. But Zoe soon justi­fied the Roman maxim, that every adulteress is capable of poisoning her husband;and the death of Romanus was instantly followed by the scandalous marriage andelevation of Michael IV. The expectations of Zoe were, however, disappointed;instead of a vigorous and grateful lover, she had placed in her bed a miserablewretch, whose health and reason were impaired bv epileptic fits, and whose con­science was tormented by despair and remorse. The most skilful physicians ofthe mind and body were summoned to his aid; and his hopes were amused by fre­quent pilgrimages to the baths, and to the tombs of the most popular saints: themonks applauded his penance, and, except restitution (but to whom should he haverestored?) Michael sought every method of expiating his guilt. While he groanedand prayed in sackcloth and ashes, his brother, the eunuch John, smiled at his re­morse, and enjoyed the harvest of a crime of which himself was the secret andmost guilty author. His administration was only the art of satiating his avarice,and Zoe became a captive in the palace of her fathers and in the hands of herslaves. When he perceived the irretrievable decline of his brother's health, heintroduced his nephew,-another Michael, who derived his surname of Calaphatesfrom his father's occupation in the careening of vessels: at the command of theeunuch, Zoe adopted for her son the son of a mechanic; and the fictitious heir wasinvested with the title and purple of the Ciesars, in the presence of the senate andclergy. So feeble was the characterof Zoe, that she was oppressed by the libertyand power which he recovered by the death of the Paphlagonian; and at the end offour days, she placed the crown on the head of Michael V., who had protested,with tears and oaths, that he should ever reign the first and most obedient of heysubjects. The only act of his short reign was his base ingratitude to his benefactors,the eunuch and the empress. The disgrace of the former was pleasing to the pub­lic; but the murmurs, and at length the clamours, of Constantinople deplored theexile of Zoe, the daughter of'so many emperors; her vices were forgotten, andMichael was taught, that there is a period in which the patience of the tamestslaves rises into fury and revenge. The citizens of everv degree assembled in a.Vol. III. 33







OCR Output








22 THE DECLINE AND FALL


French philosopher(l) have demonstrated the possibility of such a mirror; and,-since it is possible, I am more disposed to attribute the art to the greatest mathe­maticians of antiquity, than to give the merit of the fiction to the idle fancy of amonk or a sophist. According to another story, Proclus applied sulphur to thedestruction of the Gothic fleet:(2) in a modern imagination, the name of sulphuris instantly connected with the suspicion of gunpowder, and that suspicion is pro­pagated by the secret arts of his disciple Anthemius. (3) A citizen of Tralles inAsia had five sons, who were all distinguished in their, respective professions bymerit and success. Olympius excelled in the knowledge and practice of the Ro­man jurisprudence. Diosconjs and Alexander became learned physicians; butthe skill of the former was exercised for the benefit of his fellow-citizens, whilehis more ambitious brothers acquired wealth and reputation at Rome. The fameof Metrodorus the grammarian, and of Anthemius the mathematician and archi­tect, reached the ears of the emperor Justinian, who invited them to Constantino­ple; and while the one instructed the rising generation in the schools of eloquence,the other filled the capital and provinces with more lasting monuments of hisart. In a trifling dispute, relative to the walls or windows of their contiguoushpuses, he had been vanquished by the eloquence of his neighbour Zeno; but theorator was defeated in his turn by the master of mechanics, whose malicious,though harmless stratagems, are darkly represented by the ignorance of Aga-thias. In a lower room, Anthemius arranged several vessels, or cauldrons of wa­ter, each of them covered by the wide bottom of a leathern tube, which rose toa narrow top, and was artificially conveyed among the joists and rafters of theadjacent building. A fire was kindled beneath the cauldron; the steam of theboiling water ascended through the tubes; the house was shaken by the efforts ofimprisoned air, and its trembling inhabitants might wonder that the city was un­conscious of the earthquake, which they had felt. At another time, the friendsof Zeno, as they sat at table, were dazzled by the intolerable light which flashedin their eyes from the reflecting mirrors of Anthemius; they were astonished bythe noise which he produced from a collision of certain minute and sonorous par­ticles; and the orator declared, in tragic style to the senate, that a mere mortalmust yield to the power of an antagonist, who shook the earth with the trident ofNeptune, and imitated the thunder and lightning of-Jove himself. • The geniusof Anthemius and his colleague Isidore the Milesian, was excited and employedby a prince, whose taste for architecture had degenerated into a mischievous andcostly passion. His favourite architects submitted their designs and difficulties toJustinian, and discreetly confessed, how much their laborious meditation weresurpassed by the intuitive knowledge or celestial inspiration of an emperor, whoseviews were always directed to the benefit of his people, the glory of his reign,and the salvation of his soul. (4)
The principal church, which was dedicated by the founder of Constantinopleto St. Sophia, or the eternal Wisdom, had been twice destroyed by fire; after theexile of John Chrysostom, and during the Nika of the blue and green factions.No sooner did the tumult subside, than the Christian populace deplored their sa­crilegious rashness: but they •might have rejoiced in the calamity, had they fore­seen the glory of the new temple, which at the end of forty days, was strenuouslyundertaken by the piety of Justinian. (5) The ruins were cleared away, a morespacious plan was described, and, as it required the consent of some proprietors
(1) Without anyj>revious knowledge of Tzetzes or Anthemius, the immortal Buffon imagined and exe­cuted a set of burning-glasses, with which he could inflame planks at the distance of two hundred feet. Sup-pleiwnt a 1'Hisr. Naiureile, torn. i. p. 389—483. quarto edition.) What miracles would not his genius haveperformed for the public serviee, with roval expense, and in the strong sun of Constantinople or Syracuse!
(2) John Malala (torn. ii. p. 120—124.) relates the fact; but he seems to confound the names or persons ofProclus and Mavitius.
(3) Agathias, lib. v. p. 149—152. The merit of Anthemius as an architect, is loudly praised by Frocopius,(de Edit. lih. i. c. 1.) and Faulus Silentiarius. (part i. 134, &c.)
(4) SeeProcopius. (de Edifictis, lib. i. c. 1, 2. lib. ii. c. 3.) He relates a coincidence of dreams which sup­poses some fraud in Justinian or his architect. They both saw, in a vision, the same plan for stopping an in­undation at Data. A stone quarry near Jerusalem was revealed to the emperor: (lib. v. c. 6.) an angel wastricked into the perpetual custody of St. Sophia. .(Anonym, de Antiq. CP. lib. iv. p. 70.)
(5) Among the ctowd of ancients and moderns, who have celebrated the edifice of St. Sophia, I shall distin­guish and follow,—1. Four original spectators and historians: Procopius, (de Edific. lib. i. c. 1.) Agathias, (lib.v. p. 152, 153.) Paul Sllentiarim, (in a poem of one thousand and twenty-six hexameters, ad calcem Anna:*Cumnem. Alexiad.) and Evagrius. (lib. iv. c. 31.) 2. Two legendary Greeks of a later period: George Codi-■nus, (de Origin. C. P. p?64—74.) and the anonymous writer of Banduri. (Imp. Orient, torn. i. lib. iv. p. 65—80.)3. The great Byzantine antiquarian Ducange. (Comment, ad Paul. Silentiar. p. 525—598. and C. P. Christ,lib. iii. p. 5—78.) 4. Two French travellers—the one. Peter Gyllius (de Topograph. C. P. lib. c. 3, 4.) in thesixteenth; the other, Grelot: (Voyage de C. P. 95—164. Paris, 1680. in 4to.) he has given plans, prospects, andinside views of St. Sophia; and his plans, though on a smaller scale, appear more correct than those of Du-•cange. I have adopted and reduced the measure of Grelot: but as no Christian can now ascend the dome, theheight is borrowed from EvagiUis,compared with Gyllius Greaves,and the Oriental Geographer.







OCR Output








3SS THE BECLINE AND FALL


their eastern progenitors. 1'he victorious though motley bands of Tarik andMusa asserted, by the name of Spaniards, their original claim of conquest; yetthev allowed their brethren of Egypt to share their establishments of Murcia andLisbon. The royal legion of Damascus was planted at Cordova; that of Emesaat Seville; that of Kinnisrin or Chalcis at Jaen; that of Palestine at Algezire andMedina Sidonia. The natives of Yemen and Persia were scattered around Toledoand the inland country; and the fertile seats of Grenada, were bestowed on tenthousand horsemen of Syria and Irak, the children of the purest and most nobleof the Arabian tribes. (1) A spirit of emulation, sometimes beneficial, more fre­quently dangerous, was nourished by these hereditary factions. Ten years afterthe conquest, a map of the province'was presented to the caliph: the seas, the ri­vers, and the harbours, the inhabitants and cities, the climate, the soil, and themineral productions of the earth. (2) In the space of two centuries, the gifts ofnature were improved by the agriculture,(3) the manufactures, and the commerceof an industrious people; and the effects of their diligence have been magnified bythe idleness of iheir fancy. The first of the Ommiades who reigned in Spain so­licited the support of the Christians; and, in his edict of peace and protection, hecontents himself with a modest imposition of ten thousand ounces of gold, tenthousand pounds of silver, ten thousand horses, as many mules, one thousand cui­rasses, with an equal number of helmets and lances. (4) The most powerful.ofhis successors derived from the same kingdom the annual tribute of twelve mil­lions and forty-five thousand dinars or pieces of gold, about six millions of sterlingmoney;(5) a sum which, in the tenth century, most probably surpassed the unitedrevenues of the Christian monarchs. His royal seat of Cordova contained sixhundred moschs, nine hundred baths, and two hundred thousand houses: he gavelaws to eighty cities of the first, to three hundred of the second and third, order;and the fertile banks of the Guadalquiver were adorned with twelve thousand vil­lages and hamlets. The Arabs might exaggerate the truth, but they created andthey describe the most prosperous era of the riches, the cultivation, and the popu-lousness of Spain. (6)
The wars of the Moslems were sanctified by the prophet; but among the va­rious precepts and examples, of his life, the caliphs selected the lessons of tole­ration that might tend to disarm the resistance of the unbelievers. Arabia wasthe temple and patrimony of the God of Mahomet; but he beheld with less jea­lousy and affection the nations of the earth. The polytheists and idolaters who•were ignorant of his name, might be lawfully extirpated by his votaries, (7) but awise policy supplied the obligation of justice; and after some acts of intolerant zealthe Mahometan conquerors of Hindostan have spared the pagods of that devoutand populous country. The disciples of Abraham, of Moses, and of Jesus, weresolemnly invited to accept the more fierftct revelation of Mahomet; but if theypreferred the payment of a moderate tribute, they were entitled to the freedom
(1) Bibliot. Arab. Hispana, torn. ii. p. 32. 252. The former of these quotations is taken from a BiographicHispanica, by an Arabian of Valentia; (see the copious extracts of Casiri. torn. it. p. 30—121.) and the latterfrom a general chronology of the Caliphs, and of the African and Spanish Dynasties, with a particular Historyof the Kingdom of Grenada,of which Casiri has given almost an entireversion. (Bibliot. Arabico-Hispana, torn,ii. p. 177—3190 The author Ebn Khateb, a native of Grenada, and a cotemporary of Novairi and Abtilfeda,(born A. D. 1313, died A. D. 1374.) was an historian, geographer, physician, poet, &c. (torn. ii. p. 71,72.)
(2) Cardonne, Hist, de PAfrique et de i'Espagne, torn. iv. p. 116,117.
(3) A copious treatise of husbandry, by an Arabian of Seville, in the twelfth century, is in the Escurial li­brary, and Casiri had some thoughts of translating it. He gives a list of the authors quoted, Arabs as well asGreeks, Latins, 8cc; but it is much if the Andalusiau saw these strangers through the medium of countrymanColumella. Casiri, Bibliot. Arabico-Hispana, torn. i. p. 323—338.)
(4\ Bibliot. Arabico-Hispana, torn. ii. p. 104. Casiri translates the original testimony of the historian Rasis,as it is alleged, in the Arabic Bingraphia Hispanica, pars 9. But I am most exceedingly surprised at the ad­dress, Frincipibni cseteriique Christianis Hispanis suis Castellte. The name of Castellae was unknown in theeighth century; the kingdom was not erected till the year 1022, a hundred years after the time of Rasis, (Bi­bliot. torn. ii. p. 330.) and the appellation was always expressive, not of a tributary province, but of a line ofcastles independent of the Moorish yoke. (D'Anville, Etats tie I'Europe, p. 166—170.) Had Casiri been a cri­tic, he would have cleared a difficulty, perhaps of his own making.
(5) Cardonne, lorn. i. p. 337,338. He computes the revenue at one hundred and thirty millions of Frenchlivres. The entire picture of peace and prosperity relieves the bloody uniformity of the Moorish annals.
(6) I am happy enough to possess a splendid and interesting work, which has only been distributed in pre­sents by the court oi Msdrid; Bibliethtca Arabico-Hispana Escurialensis, Optra et studio Michaelis Casiri, Sure-Maronitai: Macriti, in/olio, tomus prior, 1760, tomus posterior, 1770. The execution of this work does honourto the Spanish press: the MSS. to the number of one thousand eight hundred and fifty-one, are judiciouslyclassed by the editor, and Ins copious extracts throw some light on the Mahometan literature and history ofSpain. These relics are now secure, but the task has been supinely delayed, till, in the year 1671, a fire con­sumed the greatest part of the Escurial library, rich in the spoils of Grenada and Morocco.
(7) The Habii, as they are styled, qui tolerari niqueunt, are, 1. .Those who, besides God, worship the sun,moon, or idols. 2. Atheists. Utnqui, quanidiu princeps aliquis inter Mahommedanos superest, oppugnari de-bent donee religionem ampleciantur, nee requies iis concedenda est, nec pretium acceptandum pro obtinendaeonicuntiK libertate: (Reland, Dissertat. 10. dejure Miliari Mohamin-tlan. torn. iii. p. 14.) a rigid theory!







OCR Output








' OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 89


thousand years by Shah Abbas, the wisest and most powerful of his successors. (1)His ambition was fired by the hope of launching a Persian navy from the Phasis,of commanding the trade and navigation of the Euxine sea, of desolating thecoast of Pontus and Bithynia, of distressing, perhaps of attacking, Constantinople,and of persuading the barbarians of Europe to second his arms and counsels againstthe common enemy of mankind. Under the pretence of a Scythian war, he si­lently led his troops to the frontiers of Iberia; the Colchian guides were preparedto conduct them through the woods and along the precipices of mount Caucasus;and a narrow path was laboriously formed into a safe and spacious highway, forthe march of cavalry, and even of elephants. Gubazes laid his person and dia­dem at the feet of the king of Persia; his Colchians imitated the submission oftheir prince: and after the walls of Petra had been shaken, the Roman garrisonprevented, by a capitulation, the impending fury of the last assault. But the Lazisoon discovered, that their impatience had urged them to choose an evil more in­tolerable than the calamities which they strove to eacape. The monopoly of saltand corn was effectually removed by the loss of those valuable commodities. Theauthority of a Roman legislator was succeeded by the pride of an oriental despot,who beheld with equal disdain, the slaves whom he had exalted, and the kings■whom he had humbled before the footstool of his throne. The adoration of fire■was introduced into Colchos by the zeal of the Magi: their intolerant spirit pro­voked the fervour of a Christian people; and the prejudice of nature or educationwas wounded by the impious practice of exposing the dead bodies of their parents,on the summit of a lofty tower, to the crows and vultures of the air. (2) Con­scious of the increasing hatred, which retarded the execution of his designs, thejust Nushirvan had secretly given orders to assassinate the king of the Lazi, totransplant the people into some distant land, and to fix a faithful and warlike colo­ny on the banks of the Phasis. The watchful jealousy of the Colchians foresawand averted the approaching ruin. Their repentance was accepted at Constanti­nople by the prudence, rather than the clemency, of Justinian; and he commandedDagisteus with seven thousand Romans, and one thousand of the Zani, to expelthe Persians from the coast of the Euxine.
siege of Petra, which the Roman general, with the aid of the Lazi, imme-undertook, is one of the most remarkable actions of the age. The city wason a craggy rock, which hung over the sea, and communicated by a steepand narrow path with the land. Since the approach was difficult, the attack mightbe deemed impossible; the Persian conqueror had strengthened the fortificationsof Justinian; and the places least inaccessible were covered by additional bulwarks.In this important fortress, the vigilance of Chosroes had deposited a magazine ofoffensive and defensive arms, sufficient for five times the number, not only of thegarrison, but of the besiegers themselves. The stock of flour and salt provisions■was adequate to the consumption of five years; the want of wine was supplied byvinegar, and of grain, from whence a strong liquor was extracted; and a tripleaqueduct eluded the diligence, and even the suspicions, of the enemy. But thefirmest defence of Petra was placed in the valour of fifteen hundred Persians, whoresisted the assaults of the Romans, whilst in a softer vein of earth a mine was se­cretly perforated. The wall, supported by slender and temporary props, hungtottering in the air; but Dagisteus delayed the attack till he had secured a specificrecompense; and the town was relieved before the return of his messenger fromConstantinople. The Persian garrison was reduced to four hundred men, of whomno more than fifty were exempt from sickness or wounds; yet such had been theirinflexible perseverance, that they concealed their losses from the enemy, by en­during, without a murmur, the sight and putrifying stench of the dead bodies oftheir eleven hundred companions. After their deliverance, the breaches werehastily stopped with sand-bags; the mine was replenished with earth; a new wallwas erected on a frame of substantial timber; and a fresh garrison of three thou­sand men was stationed at Petra, to sustain the labours of a second siege. The ope-
(1) See the amusing letters of Pietro della Valle.the Roman traveller (Viagsi, torn. ii. p. 207.209.213.215.266.286.300. torn.iii. p.54. 127.) In tbe year 1611,1619, and 1620, he conversed with Shah Abbas, andstrongly encouraged a design which might have united Persia and Europe against their common enemy theTurk.
(2) See Herodotus (lib. i. c.140. p. 69.,) who speaks with diffidence; Larcher (torn. i.p. 399—401. Notes surHerodote:) Procopius (Persic lib. i. c. 11..) ami Airathias(lib.ii. p. 61, 62.) This practice,agreeableto the Zen-rlavesta (Hyde, de Relig. Pers. c. xxxiv. p. 414—421.,) demonstrates that the burial of the Persian kings (Xeno-phon. Cyropsed. lib. viii. p. 658.,) t. yxp toutou ftMu^tarsfan rou ttj /jtttfuvxiyii a Greek fiction, and that theirtombs could be no more than cenotaphs.
Vol. III. 12







OCR Output








528 THE DECLINE AND FALL


vine law:(l) the whole was faithfully collected in one common mass: a fifth of thegold and silver, the prisoners and cattle, the moveables and immoveables, werereserved by the prophet for pious and charitable uses; the remainder was sharedin adequate portions, by the soldiers who had obtained the victory or guarded thecamp; the rewards of the slain devolved to their widows and orphans; and theincrease of cavalry was encouraged by the allotment of a double share to the horseand to the man. From all sides the roving Arabs were allured to the standard ofreligion and' plunder: the apostle sanctified the license of embracing the femalecaptives as their wives or concubines; and the enjoyment of wealth and beautywas a feeble type of the joys of paradise prepared for the valiant martyrs of thefaith. " The sword (says Mahomet) is the key of heaven and of hell; a drop ofblood shed in the cause of God, a night spent in arms, is of more avail than twomonths of fasting or prayer: whosoever falls in battle, his sins are forgiven: at theday of judgment his wounds shall be resplendent as vermilion, and odoriferous asmusk: and the loss of his limbs shall be supplied by the wings of angels and che-rubims." The intrepid souls of the Arabs were fired with enthusiasm: the pic­ture of the invisible world was strongly painted on their imagination; and the deathwhich they had always despised became an object of hope and desire. The Koraninculcates, in the most absolute sense, the tenets of fate and predestination, whichwould extinguish both industry and virtue, if the actions of man were governed byhis speculative belief. Yet their influence in every age has exalted the courageof the Saracens and Turks. The first companions of Mahomet advanced to bat­tle with a fearless confidence: there is no danger where there is no chance: theywere ordained to perish in their beds; or they were safe and invulnerable amidstthe darts of the enemy. (2)
Perhaps the Koreish would have been content with the flight of Mahomet, hadthey not been provoked and alarmed by the vengeance of an enemy, who couldintercept their Syrian trade as it passed and repassed through the territory of Me­dina. Abu Sophian himself, with only thirty or forty followers, conducted a weal­thy caravan of a thousand camels: the fortune or dexterity of his march escapedthe vigilance of Mahomet; but the chief of the Koreish was informed that theholy robbers were placed in ambush to wait his return. He despatched a messen­ger to his brethren of Mecca, and they were roused, by the fear of losing theirmerchandise and their provisions, unless they hastened to his relief with the mi­litary force of the city. The sacred band of Mahomet was formed of three hun­dred and thirteen Moslems, of whom seventy-seven were fugitives, and the restauxiliaries: they mounted by turns a train of seventy camels (the camels of Yath-reb were formidable in war:) but such was the poverty of his first disciples, thatonly two could appear on horseback in the field. (3) In the fertile and famous valeof Beder,(4) three stations from Medina, he was informed by his scouts of the ca­ravan that approached on one side; of the Koreish, one hundred horse, eight hun­dred and fifty foot, who advanced on the other. After a short debate, he sacrificedthe prospect of wealth to the pursuit of glory and revenge; and a slight intrench-ment was formed to cover his troops, and a stream ot fresh water that glidedthrough the valley. " O God," he exclaimed as the numbers of the Koreish de­scended from the hills, " O God, if these are destroyed, by whom wilt thou beworshipped on the earth? Courage, my children, close your ranks; dischargeyour arrows, and the day is your own." At these words he placed himself, withAbubeker, on a throne or pulpit,(5) and instantly demanded the succour of Ga-
(1) The whole subject de jure belli Mohammedanorum, is exhausted in a separate dissertation by the learnedReland. (Dissertationes Miscellaneie, torn. iii. Dissert, x. p. 3—53.)
(2) The doctrine of absolute predestination, on which few religions can reproach each other, is sternly ex­posed in the Koran, (c. 3. p. 52, 53. c. 4. p. 70, &c. with rbe notes of Sale, and c. 17. p. 413. with those of Ma-racci.) Reland (de Relig. Mohamm. p. 61—64.) and Sale (Prelim. Discourse, p. 103.) represents the opinions ofthe doctors, and our modern travellers the confidence, the fading confidence, of the Turks.
(3) Al Jannabi (apud Gagnier, torn. ii. p. 9.) allows him seventy or eighty horse; and on two other occasionsprior to the battle of Ohud, he enlists a body of Thirty (p. 10.) and of five hundred (p. 66.) troopers. Yet theMussulmans, in the field of Ohud, had no more than two horses, according to the better sense of Abnlfeda (inVit. Mohamm. p. 31. p. 65.) In the Stony province, the camels were numerous; but the bone appears to havebeen less common than in the Happy or the Desert Arabia.
(4) Beder Houneene, twenty miles from Medina, and forty from Mecca, is on the high road of the caravan ofEgypt; and the pilgrims annually commemorate the prophet's victory by illuminations, rockets, &c. Shaw'sTravels, p. 477.
(5) The place to which Mahomet retired during the action is styled by Gagnier, (in Abulfeda, c. xxvii. p. 53.Vie de Mahomet, torn. it. p. 30, 33.) Umbraeulunu "tie loge de bw avec une parte. The same Arabic word isrendered by Reiske (Annales de Mosicmici Abulfedte, p. 23.) by Solium Suggestus editor; and the difference isof the utmost moment for the honour both of the interpreter and of the hero. I am sorry to observe the prideand acrimony with which the Reiske chastises his fellow-labourer. Swpe licvt rtit, tit integra: paging; tic­







OCR Output








112 THE DECLINE AND FALL


of guards or domestic troops, had been augmented to the number of five thousandfive hundred men, whose ordinary station was in the peaceful cities of Asia. Butthe places of the brave Armenians were insensibly supplied by lazy citizens, whopurchased an exception from the duties of civil life, without being exposed to thedanger of military service. Of such soldiers, few could be tempted to sally fromthe gates; and none could be persr-aded to remain in the field, unless they wantedstrength and speed to escape from the Bulgarians. The report of the fugitives ex­aggerated the numbers and fierceness of an enemy, who had polluted holy virgins,and abandoned new-born infants to the dogs and vultures; a crowd of rustics, im­ploring food and protection, increased the consternation of the city, and the tentsof Zabergen were pitched at the distance of twenty miles,(l) on the banks of asmall river, which encircles Melanthius, and afterwards falls into the Propontis. (2)Justinian trembled; and those who had only seen the emperor in his old age, werepleased to suppose, that he had lost the alacrity and vigour of his youth. By hiscommand, the vessels of gold and silver were removed from the churches in theneighbourhood, and even the suburbs of Constantinople: the ramparts were linedwith trembling spectators: the golden gate was crowded with useless generals andtribunes, and the senate shared the fatigues and the .apprehensions of the popu­lace.
But the eyes of the prince and people were directed to a feeble veteran, who wascompelled by the public danger to resume the armour in which he had enteredCarthage and defended Rome. The horses of the royal stables, of private citizens,and even of the circus, were hastily collected; the emulation of the old and youngwas roused by the name of Belisarius, and his first encampment was in the presenceef a victorious enemy. His prudence, and the labour of the friendly peasants, se­cured, with a ditch and rampart, the repose of the night: innumerable fires, andclouds of dust, were artfully contrived to magnify the opinion of his strength: hissoldiers suddenly passed from despondency to presumption; and while ten thou­sand voices demanded the battle, Belisarius dissembled his knowledge, that in thehour of trial he must depend on the firmness of three hundred veterans. Thenext morning the Bulgarian cavalry advanced to the charge. But they heard theshouts of multitudes, they beheld the arms and discipline of the front; they wereassaulted on the flanks by two ambuscades which rose from the woods; their fore­most warriors fell by the hand of the aged hero and his guards; and the swiftnessof their evolutions was rendered useless by the close attack and rapid pursuit ofthe Romans. In this action (so speedy was their flight) the Bulgarians lost onlyfour hundred horse; but Constantinople was saved; and Zabergan, who felt thehand of a master, withdrew to a respectful distance. But his friends were nume­rous in the councils of the emperor, and Belisarius obeyed with reluctance, thecommands of envy and Justinian, which forbade him to achieve the deliverance ofhis country. On his return to the city, the people, still conscious of their danger,accompanied his triumph with acclamations of joy and gratitude, which were im­puted as a crime to the victorious general. But when he entered the palace, thecourtiers were silent, and the emperor, after a cold and thankless embrace, dis­missed him to mingle with the train of slaves. Yet so deep was the impression ofhis glory on the minds of men, that Justinian, in the seventy-seventh year of hisage, was encouraged to advance near forty miles from the capital, and to inspectin person the restoration of the long wall. The Bulgarians wasted the summer inthe plains of Thrace; but they were inclined to peace by the failure of their rashattempts on Greece and the Chersonesus. A menace of killing their prisonersquickened the payment of heavy ransoms; and the departure of Zabergan washastened by the report, that double-prowed vessels were built on the Danube tointercept his passage. The danger was soon forgotten; and a vain question, whe­ther their sovereign had shown more wisdom or weakness, amused the idleness ofthe city. (3)
About two years after the last victory of Belisarius, the emperor returned from


(1) The distance from Constantinople to MebuitUas, Villa Ctesariana (Ammian. Mftrcellin. 30.11^) is va-riously fixed at one hundred and two, or one hundred and forty stadia (Suidat, torn. ii. p. 532,523. Agathiat.lib. r. p. 158.0 or cigbuen or nineteen miles (Itineraria, p. 133. 230.323. 332. and Wesseling's Observations JThe first twelve miles, as far as Rhegium, were paved by Justinian, who built a bridge over a morass or gulletbetween a lake and the sea, (Procop. de Edif. lib. iv. c. 8.)
(2) The Atyras (Pompon. Mela. lib. ii. e. 2. p. 169. edit. Vrns.) At the river's mouth, a town or castle ofthe same name was fortified by Justinian (Procop. de Edif. lib. iv. c. 2. Itinear. p, 570. and Wrsscling.)
(3) The Bulgarian war, and the last victory of Belisarius, are imperfectly represented ia the prolix decla*reation of Agathiaj (lib. v. p. 154-171.) and the dry chronicle oi'TUeopkaues (p. 19,138.)







OCR Output








274 THE DECLINE AND FALL


cred and profane letters; but his education, his reason, perhaps his intercoursewith the Jews and Arabs, had inspired the martial peasant with a hatred of images;and it was held to be the dijty of a prince, to impose on his subjects the dictates ofhis own conscience. But in the outside of an unsettled reign, during ten years oftoil and danger, Leo submitted to the meanness of hypocrisy, bowed before theidols, which he despised, and satisfied the Roman pontiff with the annual profes­sions of his orthodoxy and zeal. In the reformation of religion, his first steps weremoderate and cautious; he assembled a great council of senators and bishops, andenacted,, with their consent, that all the images should be removed from the sanc­tuary and altar "to a proper height in the churches, where they might be visibleto the eyes, and inaccessible to the superstition of the people. But it was impossi­ble on either side to check the rapid though adverse impulse of veneration and ab­horrence: in their lofty position, the sacred images still edified their votaries andreproached the tyrant. He was himself provoked by resistance find invective;and his own party accused him of an imperfect discharge of his duty, and urged,for his imitation, the example of the Jewish king, who had broken without scruplethe brazen serpent of the temple. By a second edict, he proscribed the existenceas well as the use of religious pictures; the churches of Constantinople and the pro­vinces were cleansed from idolatry; the images of Christ, the Virgin, and thesaints, were demolished, or a smooth surface of plaster was spread over the wallsof the edifice. The sect of the Iconoclasts was supported by the zeal and despo­tism of six emperors, and the east and west were involved in a noisy conflict of onehundred and twenty years. It was the design of Leo the Isaurian to pronouncethe condemnation of images, as an article of faith, and by the authority of a gene­ral council: but the convocation of such an assembly was reserved for his son Con-stantine;(l) and though it is stigmatized by triumphant bigotry as a meeting of foolsand atheists, their own partial and mutilated acts betray many symptoms of rea­son and piety. The debates and decrees of many provincial synods introduced thesummons of the general council which met in the suburbs of Constantinople andwas composed of a respectable number of three hundred and thirty-eight bishopsef Europe and Anatolia; for the patriarchs of Antioch and Alexandria were theslaves of the caliph, and the Roman pontiff had withdrawn the churches of Italyand the west from the communion of the Greeks. This Byzantine synod assumedthe rank and powers of the seventh general council; yet even this title was a re­cognition of the six preceding assemblies which had laboriously built the structureof the catholic faith. After a serious deliberation of six months, the three hun­dred and thirty-eight bishops pronounced and subscribed a unanimous decree, thatall visible symbols of Christ, except in the eucharist, were either blasphemous orheretical; that image-worship was a corruption of Christianity and a renewal ofpaganism; that all such monuments of idolatry should be broken or erased; andthat those who should refuse to deliver the objects of their private superstition,were guilty of disobedience to the authority of the church and of the emperor. Intheir loud and loyal acclamations, they celebrated the merits of their temporal re­deemer; and to his zeal and justice they intrusted the execution of their spiritualcensures. At Constantinople, as in the former councils, the will of the prince wasthe rule of episcopal faith: but, on this occasion, I am inclined to suspect, that alarge majority of the prelates sacrificed their secret conscience to the temptationsof hope and fear. In the long night of superstition, the Christians had wandered'far away from the simplicity of the gospel, nor was it easy for them to discern theclue, and tread back the mazes of the labyrinth. The worship of images was in­separably blended, at least to a pious fancy, with the cross, the Virgin, the saints,and their relics; the holy ground was involved in a cloud of miracles and visions;and the nerves of the mind, curiosity and scepticism, were benumbed by the ha­bits of obedience and belief. Constantine himself is accused of indulging a royallicense to doubt, to deny, or deride, the mysteries of the catholics,(2) but theywere deeply inscribed in the public and private creed of his bishops; and the bold­est Iconoclast might assault, with a secret horror, the monuments of popular de­ft) Some flowers of rhetoric are Eouvoaoy raprfrouw x*i «d£ov,and the bishops t&i? nxruaQptinv. By Damasceneitis styled axupo; xsei mJshts;. (Opera, torn. i. p. 623.) Spanheim's Apology for the Synod of Constantinople (p.171, &c.) is worked up with truth and ingenuity, from such materials as be could find in the Nicene Acts. (p.1046, &c.) The witty John of Damascus converts ea-irxosrou; into stidcotcu;, makes them xotMoJatAoti;, slavesof their belly, &c. % Opera, torn, i. p. 306.
(2) He is accused of proscribiiifr the title of saint; styling the Virgin, mother of Christ; comparing her afterher delivery to an empty purse; of Arianism, Nestorhmism, &c In his defence, Spanheim (c, 4, p. 207.) issomewhat embarrassed between the interest of a protcitant and the duty of an orthodox divine.







OCR Output








itij THE DECLINE AND FALL


faithful guard the custody of her person. But the services of Justinian were notconsidered by that excellent prince as an aggravation of his offences; after a mildreproof, his treason and ingratitude were forgiven; and it was commonly believed^that the emperor entertained some thoughts of contracting a double alliance withthe rival of his throne. The voice of an angel (such a fable was propagated)might reveal to the emperor, that he should always triumph over his domesticfoes; but Tiberius derived a firmer assurance from the innocence and generosityof his own mind.
With the odious name of Tiberius, he assumed the more popular appellation ofConstantine, and imitated the purer virtues of the Antonines. After recording thevice or folly of so many Roman princes, it is pleasant to repose, for a moment, on acharacter conspicuous by the qualities of humanity, justice, temperance, and for­titude: to contemplate a sovereign affable in his palace, pious in the church, im­partial on the seat of judgment, and victorious, at least by his generals, in the Per­sian war. The most glorious trophy of his victory consisted in a multitude ofcaptives whom Tiberius entertained, redeemed, and dismissed to their nativehome with the charitable spirit of a Christian hero. The merit or misfortunes ofhis own subjects had a dearer claim to his beneficence, and he measured his boun­ty not so much by their expectations as by his own dignity. This maxim, how­ever dangerous in a trustee of the public wealth, was balanced by a principle ofhumanity and justice, which taught him to abhor, as of the basest alloy, the goldthat was extracted from the tears of the people. For their relief as often as they,had suffered by natural or hostile calamities, he was impatient to remit the ar­rears of the past or the demands of future taxes: he sternly rejected the servileofferings of his ministers, which were compensated by tenfold oppression; andthe wise and equitable laws of Tiberius excited the praise and regret of succeed­ing times. Constantinople believed that the emperor had discovered a treasure:but his genuine treasure consisted in the practice of liberal economy, and the con­tempt of all vain and superfluous expense. The Romans of the east would havebeen happy, if the best gift of heaven, a patriot king, had been confirmed asapro-
Ser and permanent blessing. But in less than four years after the death of Justin,is worthy successor sunk into a mortal disease, which left him only sufficienttime to restore the diadem, according to the tenure by which he held it, to themost deserving of his fellow-citizens- He selected Maurice from the crowd, ajudgment more precious than the purple itself: the patriarch and senate were sum­moned to the bed of the dying prince; he bestowed his daughter and the empire;and his last advice was solemnly delivered by the voice of the questor. Tiberiusexpressed his hope, that the virtues of his son and successor would erect the no­blest mausoleum to his memory. His memory was embalmed by the public af­fliction; but the most sincere grief evaporates in the tumult of a new reign, andthe eyes and acclamations of mankind were speedily directed to the rising sun.
The emperor Maurice derived his origin from ancient Rome,(l) but his imme­diate parents were settled at Arabissus in Cappadocia, and their singular felicitypreserved them alive to behold and partake the fortune of their august son. Theyouth of Maurice was spent in the profession of arms; Tiberius promoted him tothe command of a new and favourite legion of twelve thousand confederates; hisvalour and conduct were signalized in the Persian war; and he returned to Con­stantinople to accept, as his just reward, the inheritance of the empire. Mauriceascended the throne at the mature age of forty-three years; and he reigned abovetwenty years over the east and over himself;(2) expelling from his mind the wilddemocracy of passions, and establishing (according to the quaint expression ofEvagrius) a perfect aristocracy of reason and virtue. Some suspicions will degradethe testimony of a subject, though he protests that his secret praise should neverreach the ears of his sovereign, (3) and some failings seem to place the characterof Maurice below the purer merit of his predecessor. His cold and reserved de­meanour might be imputed to arrogance; his justice was not always exempt from
(1) It it therefore singular enough that Paul (lib. iii. c. 15.) should distinguish him as the first Greek empe­ror—primus ex Greecorum genera in imperio constitutus. His immediate predecessors had indeed been bomin the Latin provinces of Europe; and a various reading, in Grcecorum imperio, would apply the expressionto the empire rather than the prince.
(2) Consult for the character and reign of Maurice, the fifth and sixth books of Evagrius; particularly lib.Ti. c. 1. the eight books of his prolix and florid history by Theophylact Simocatta; Theophanes, p. 213, gee. Zo-naras, torn. ii. lib. 14. p. 73. Cedrenus, p. 394.
(3) AuTOKpeeTuip ovtw; ytvafttvo; njy fuv e%A.oxp*T(*sev rmv irx&mv !x T»tf ttiuix; i££vt)X.o»T»j(re ^uxi. (tptirroxpaTiiMv 5i Ifto»; itevToy \eyir/iOt; xxtxttk %^(voc. Evagnus composed his history in the twelfth year of Maurice; and hehad been so wisely indiscreet, that the emperor knew and rewarded his favourable opinion (lib. vi. c. 24.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


midable only as robbers; and in the proud security of peace, the fortifications ofSyria were neglected on the most vulnerable side.
But the national enmity, at least the effects of that enmity, had been suspendedby a truce, which continued above forescore years. An ambassador from the em­peror Zeno accompanied the rash and unfortunate Perozes, in his expeditionagainst the Nepthalites or White Huns, whose conquest had been stretched fromthe Caspian to the heart of India, whose throne was enriched with emeralds,(l)and whose cavalry was supported by a line of two thousand elephants. (2) ThePersians were twice circumvented, in a situation which made valour useless andflight impossible; and the double victory of the Huns was achieved by militarystratagem. They dismissed their royal captive after he had submitted to adorethe majesty of a barbarian: and the humiliation was poorly evaded by the casnis-/tical subtilty of the Magi, who instructed Perozes to direct his attention to therising sun. The indignant successor of Cyrus forgot his danger and his gratitude;he renewed the attack with headstrong fury, and lost both his army and his life. (3)The death of Perozes abandoned Persia to her foreign and domestic enemies; andtwelve years of confusion elapsed before his son Cabades or Kobad could embraceany designs of ambition or revenge. The unkind parsimony of Anastasius wasthe motive or pretence of a Roman war;(4) the Huns and Arabs marched underthe Persian standard, and the fortifications of Armenia and Mesopotamia were, atthat time, in a ruinous or imperfect condition. The emperor returned his thanksto the governor and people of Matyropolis, for the ,prompt surrender of a citywhich could not be successfully defended, and the conflragration of Theodosopolismight justify the conduct of their prudent neighbours. Amida sustained a longand destructive siege: at the end of three months the loss of fifty thousand of thesoldiers of Cabades was not balanced by any prospect of success, and it was invain that the Magi deduced a flattering prediction from the indecency of the wo­men on the ramparts, who had revealed their most secret charms to the eyes ofthe assailants. At length, in a silent night, they ascended the most accessibletower which was guarded only by some monks, oppressed after the duties of thefestival, with sleep and wine. Scaling ladders were applied at the dawn of day;the presence of Cabades, his stern command, and his drawn sword, compelledthe Persians to vanquish; and before it was sheathed, fourscore thousand of theinhabitants had expiated the blood of their companions. After the siege ofAmida, the war continued three years, and the unhappy frontier tasted the fullmeasure of its calamities. The gold of Anastasius was offered too late, the num­ber of his troops was defeated by the number of their generals; the country wasstripped of its inhabitants, and both the living and the dead were abandoned to thewild beasts of the desert. The resistance of Edessa, and the deficiency of spoil,inclined the mind of Cabades to peace; he sold his conquests for an exorbitantprice: and the same line, though marked with slaughter and devastation, still se­parated the two empires. To avert the repetition of the same evils, Anastasiusresolved to found a new colony, so strong, that it should defy the power of thePersian, so far advanced towards Assyria, that its stationary troops might defendthe province by the menace or operation of an offensive war. For this purpose, thetown of Dara,(5) fourteen miles from Nisibis, and four days'journey from the Ti­gris, was peopled ami adorned; the hasty works of Anastasius were improved bythe perseverance of Justinian; and without insisting on places less important, thefortifications of Dara may represent the military architecture of the age. Thecity was surrounded with two walls, and the interval between them of fifty paces,
(1) They were purchased from the merchants of AdnUa who traded to India (Cosmas, Topograph. Christ,lira. xi. p. 339.:^ yet, in the estimate of precious stones, the Scythian emerald was the first, the Bacrrian the se­cond, the Ethiopian only the third (Hill's Theophrastus, p. el, &c. 920 The production, mines, &e. of eme­ralds, are involved in darkness; and it is doubtful whether we possess any of the twelve sorts known to the an­cients (Goguet. Origine des Loix, See. part ii. lib. ii. c. 2. art. S.) In this M-ar the Huns got, or at least Perozes
• loat, the finest pearl in the world, of which Procopius relates a ridiculous fable.
(2) The Indo-Scythae continued to reign from the time of Augustus (Dionys. Perieget. 1088. with the Com­mentary of Eustatnius, in Hudson, Geograph. Minor, torn, iv.) to that of the eldest .lustin. (Cosmas, Topo­graph. Christ, lib. xi. p. 338,339.) On their origin and conquests, see d'Amille (sur l'lnde, p. 18. 45, &e. 69.85. 89.) In the second century they were masters of Larice or Guezerat.
(3) See the fate of Phirouz, or Perozes, and its consequences, in Proeopius, (Persic, lib, i. c. 3—6.) who maybe compared with the fragments of oriental history (d'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orient, p. 351. and Texeira, Historyof Persia, translated or abridged by Stevens, lib. i. c. 32. p. 132—138.) The chronology is ably ascertained byAsseman. (Bibliot. Orient, torn. iii. p_. 396—427.)
(4) The Persian war, under the reigns of Anastasius and Justin, may be collected from Procopius (Persic,lib. i. c. 7—9.,) Theophanes (in Chronograph, p. 124—127.,) Evagrius (lib. iii. c. 37.,) Marcellinus (m Chron. p.47.,) and Josne Stylites (apud Asseman. torn. i. p. 272—281.)
(5) The description of Dara is atnply and correctly given by Procopius (Persic, lib. i. c. 10. lib. ii. c. 13. DeEdefic. lib. ii.e. 1—3. lib. iii. c. 5.) See the situation in d'Anville (PEnprateet le Tigre, p. 53—55.,) though heseems to double the interval between Dara and Nisibis.







OCR Output








344 THE DECLINE AND FALL


religion. The twelfth and last of the Imams, conspicuous by the title of Mahadiror the Guide, surpassed the solitude and sanctity of his predecessors. He con­cealed himself in a cavern near Bagdad: the time and place of his death are un­known; and his votaries pretend that he still lives, and will appear before the dayof judgment to overthrow the tyranny of Deial, or the antichrist. (1) In the lapseof two or three centuries, the posterity of Abbas, the uncle of Mahomet, hadmultiplied to the number of thirty-three thousand ;(2) the race of Ali, might beequally prolific: the meanest individual was above the first and greatest of princes;and the most eminent were supposed to excel the perfection of angels. But theiradverse fortune, and the wide extent of the Mussulman empire, allowed an amplescope for every bold and artful impostor, who claimed affinity with the holy seed;the sceptre of the Almohades in Spain and Africa, of the Fatimites in Egypt andSyria,(3) of the sultans of Yemen, and of the sophis of Persia,(4) has been con­secrated by this vague and ambiguous title. Under their reigns it might be dan-to dispute the legitimacy of their birth; and one of the Fatimite caliphs si-an indiscreet question, by drawing his scimitar. " This" said Moez, "ismy pedigree; and these," casting a handful of gold to his soldiers, " are my kin­dred and my children." In the various conditions of princes, or doctors, or no­bles, or merchants, or beggars, a swarm of the genuine or fictitious descendantsof Mahomet and Ali is honoured with the appellation of sheiks, or sherifs,_oremirs. In the Ottoman empire they are distinguished by a green turban, receivea stipend from the treasury, are judged only by their chief, and, however debasedby fortune or character, still assert the proud pre-eminence of their birth. A fa­mily of three hundred persons, the pure and orthodox branch of the caliph Has­san, is preserved without taint or suspicion in the holy cities of Mecca and Medi­na, and still retains, after the revolutions of twelve centuries, the custody of thetemple and the sovereignty of their native land. The fame and merit of Maho­met would ennoble a plebeian race, and the ancient blood of the Koreish tran­scends the recent majesty of the kings of the earth. (5)
The talents of Mahomet are entitled to our applause, but his success has perhapstoo strongly attracted our admiration. Are we surprised that a multitude of pro­selytes should embrace the doctrine and the passions of an eloquent fanatic? Inthe heresies of the church, the same seduction has been tried and repeated fromthe time of the apostles to that of the reformers. Does it seem incredible that aprivate citizen should grasp the sword and the sceptre, subdue his native country,and erect a monarchy by his victorious arms? In the moving picture of the dy­nasties of the east, a hundred fortunate usurpers have arisen from a baser origin,surmounted more formidable obstacles; and filled a larger scope of empire and con­quest Mahomet was alike instructed to preach and to fight, and the union of theseopposite qualities, while it enhanced his merit, contributed to his success: the ope­ration of force and persuasion, of enthusiasm and fear, continually acted on eachother, till every barrier yielded to their irresistible power. His voice invited theArabs to freedom and victory, to arms and rapine, to the indulgence of their dar­ling passions in this world and the other; the restraints which he imposed were re­quisite to establish the credit of the prophet, and to exercise the obedience of thepeople; and the only objection to his success, was his rational creed of the unityand perfections of God. It is not the propagation but the permanency of his re­ligion that deserves- our wonder: the same pure and perfect impression which heengraved at Mecca and Medina, is preserved, after the revolutions of twelve cen­turies, by the Indian, the African, and the Turkish proselytes of the Koran. If
(1) The name of Antichrist may seem ridiculous, but the Mahometans have liberally borrowed the fables ofevery religion. (Sale's Preliminary Discourse, p. 80.82.) In the royal stable of Ispahan, two horses were al­ways kept saddled, one for the Mnhadi himself, the other for his lieutenant, Jesus the son of Mary.
(2) In the year of the Hegira 200. (A. n.815.) See d'Herbelot. p. 546.
(3) D'Herbelot, p. 342. Theenemies of the Fatimites disgraced them bya Jewish origin. Yet they accnratelydeduced their genealogy from Jaalhr, the sixth Imam: and the impartial Ahulfeda allows (Anna). Moslem, p.230.) that they were owned by many, qui absque controTersia genuini sunt Alidarum, homine propaginum suaegentis exacte callcntes. He quotes some lines from the celebrated Slterifor Radi<— Ejrone humilitatem indoamin terris hostium? (I suspect him to be an Edrissite of Sicily) cum in .Egypto sit Chalifa de gente Alii, qnocumego communem habeo patrem et vindicem.
(4) The kings of Persia of the last dynasty are descended from Sheik Sefi. a saint of the fourteenth century,and through him from Moussa Cassem, the son of Hosein, the son of Ali. (Olearius, p. 957. Chardin, torn. ii'i.p. 288.) But I cannot trace the intermediate degrees in any genuine or fabulous pedigree. If they were trulyFatimites, they might draw their origin from the princes of Mazanderan, who reigned in the ninth century,(d'Herbelot, p. 96.)
(?) The present state of the familyof Mahomet and Ali is most accnrately described by Demetrius Cantemir,(Hist, of the Othman Empire, p. 94.) and Niebubr. (Description de l'Arabie, p. 9—16. 317, 8tc.) It is much tone lamented, that the Danish traveller was unable to purchase the chronicles of Arabia.


 







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 245


conspired against their nephew, before, and after, the death of his father. Theirfirst attempt was pardoned: for the second offence they were condemned to theecclesiastical state; and for the third treason, Nicephorus, the eldest and mostguilty, was deprived of his eyes, and his four brothers, Christopher, Nicetas,Anthemeus, and Eudoxas, were punished, as a milder sentence, by the amputationof their tongues. After five years' confinement, they escaped to the church of St,Sophia, and displayed a pathetic spectacle to the people. "Countrymen andChristians," cried Nicephorus for himself and his mute brethren, "behold thesons of your emperor, if you can still recognize our features in this miserable state.A life, an imperfect life, is all that the malice of our enemies has spared. It isnow threatened, and we now throw ourselves on your compassion." The risingmurmur might have produced a revolution, had it not been checked by the pre­sence of a minister, who soothed the unhappy princes with flattery and hope, andgently drew them from the sanctuary to the palace. They were speedily em­barked for Greece, and Athens was allotted for the place of their exile. In thiscalm retreat, and in their helpless condition, Nicephorus and his brothers weretormented by the thirst of power, and tempted by a Sclavonian chief, who offered tobreak their prison, and to lead them in arms, and in the purple, to the gates ofConstantinople. But the Athenian people, ever zealous in the cause of Irene,prevented her justice or cruelty; and the five sons of Copronymus were plungedin eternal darkness and oblivion.
For himself, that emperor had chosen a barbarian wife, the daughter of thekhan of the Chozars: but in the marriage of his heir, he preferred an Athenianvirgin, an orphan, seventeen years old, whose sole fortune must have consisted inher personal accomplishments. The nuptials of Leo and Irene were celebratedwith royal pomp; she soon acquired the love and confidence of a feeble husband,and in his testament he declared the empress guardian of the Roman world, andof their son Constantine VI. who was no more than ten years of age. During hischildhood Irene most ably and assiduously discharged in her public administrationthe duties of a faithful mother; and her zeal in the restoration of images has de­served the name and honours of a saint, which she still occupies in the Greek ca­lendar. But the emperor attained the maturity of youth; the maternal yoke be­came more grievous; and he listened to the favourites of his own age, who sharedhis pleasures, and were ambitious of sharing his power. Their reasons convincedhim of his right, their praises of his ability, to reign; and he consented to rewardthe services of Irene by a perpetual banishment to the isle of Sicily. But hervigilance and penetration easily disconcerted their rash projects: a similar, ormore severe punishment was retaliated on themselves and their advisers; andIrene inflicted on the ungrateful prince the chastisement of a boy. After thiscontest the mother and the son were at the head of two domestic factions; and,instead of mild influence and voluntary obedience, she held in chains a captive andan enemy. The empress was overthrown by the abuse of victory; the oath offidelity which she exacted to herself alone, was pronounced with reluctant mur­murs; and the bold refusal of the Armenian guards encouraged a free and generaldeclaration, that Constantine VI. was the lawful emperor of the Romans. In thischaracter he ascended his hereditary throne, and dismissed Irene to a life of soli­tude and repose. But her haughty spirit condescended to the arts of dissimulation :she flattered the bishops and eunuchs, revived the filial tenderness of the prince,regained his confidence, and betrayed his credulity. The character of Constan­tine was not less destitute of sense or spirit; but his education had been studiouslyneglected; and his ambitious mother exposed to the public censure the vices whichshe had nourished, and the actions which she had secretly advised; his divorceand second marriage offended the prejudices of the clergy, and by his imprudentrigour he forfeited the attachment of the Armenian guards. A powerful conspi­racy was formed for the restoration of Irene; and the secret, though widely dif­fused, was faithfully kept above eight months, till the emperor, suspicious of hisclanger, escaped from Constantinople, with the design of appealing to the pro­vinces and armies. By this hasty flight, the empress was left on the brink of theprecipice; yet before she implored the mercy of her son, Irene addressed a privateepistle to the friends whom she had placed about his person, with a menace, thatunless they accomplished, she would reveal their treason. Their fear renderedthem intrepid; they seized the emperor on the Asiatic shore, and he was transport­ed to the Pophyry apartment of the palace where he had first seen the light. Inthe mind of Irene, ambition had stifled every sentiment of humanity and nature;







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 218


end of four hundred years, the Montanists of Phrygia,(l) still breathed the wildenthusiasm of perfection and prophecy, which they had imbibed from their maleand female apostles, the special organs of the Paraclete. On the approach of thecatholic priests and soldiers, they grasped with alacrity the crown of martyrdom;the conventicle and the congregation perished in the flames; but these primitivefanatics were not extinguished three hundred years after the death of their tyrant.Under the protection of the Gothic confederates, the church of the Arians ofConstantinople had braved the severity of the laws; their clergy equalled thewealth a^l magnificence of the senate; and the gold and silver, which were seizedby the rapacious hand of Justinian, might perhaps be claimed as the spoils of theprovinces and the trophies of the barbarians. A second remnant of pagans, whostill lurked in the most refined and the most rustic conditions of mankind, excitedthe indignation of the Christians, who were perhaps unwilling that any strangersshould be the witnesses of their intestine quarrels. A bishop was named as theinquisitor of the faith, and his diligence soon discovered, in the court and city, themagistrates, lawyers, physicians, and sophists, who still cherished the superstitionof the Greeks. They were sternly informed that they must choose without delaybetween the displeasure of Jupiter or Justinian, and that their aversion to the gos­pel could no longer be disguised under the scandalous mask of indifference or im­piety. The patrician Photius perhaps alone was resolved to live and to die like hisancestors: he enfranchised himself with the stroke of a dagger, and left his tyrantthe poor consolation of exposing with ignominy the lifeless corpse of the fugitive.His weaker brethren submitted to their earthly monarch, underwent the cere­mony of baptism, and laboured, by their extraordinary zeal, to erase the suspicion,or to expiate the guilt, of idolatry. The native country of Homer, and the thea­tre of the Trojan war, still retained the last sparks of his mythology: by the careof the same bishop, seventy thousand pagans were detected and converted in Asia,Phrygia, Lydia, and Caria; ninety-six churches were built for the new proselytes;and linen vestments, Bibles, and liturgies, and vases of gold and silver, were sup­plied by the pious munificence of Justinian. (2) The Jews, who had been graduallystripped of their immunities, were oppressed by a vexatious law, which compelledthem to observe the festival of Easter the same day on which is was celebratedby the Christians. (3) And they might complain with the more reason, since thecatholics themselves did not agree with the astronomical calculations of their so­vereign: the people of Constantinople delayed the beginning of their Lent a wholeweek after it had been ordained by authority; and they had the pleasure of fastingseven days, while meat was exposed for sale by the command of the emperor. TheSamaritans of Palestine, (4) were a motley race, an ambiguous sect, rejected asJews by the pagans, by the Jews as schismatics, and by the Christians as idola­ters. The abomination of the cross had already been planted on their holy mountof Garizim,(5) but the persecution of Justinian offered only the alternative of bap­tism or rebellion. They chose the latter: under the standard of a desperateleader, they rose in arms, and retaliated their wrongs on the lives, the property,and the temples of a defenceless people. The Samaritans were finally subduedby the regular forces of the east; twenty thousand were slain, twenty thousandwere sold by the Arabs to the infidels of Persia and India, and the remains of thatunhappy nation atoned for the crime of treason by the sin of hypocrisy. It hasbeen computed that one hundred thousand Roman subjects were extirpated in theSamaritan war,(6) which converted the once fruitful province into a desolate andsmoking wilderness. But in the creed of Justinian, the guilt of murder could not


(1) See the character and principles of the Montanists, in Moiheim, de Rchus Christ, ante Constantlnum,
p. 410-12.1.
(2) Theophan. Chron. p. 153. John de Monophysite bishop of Asia, is a more authentic witness of this trans­action.in which he was himself employed by the emperor. (Asieiuan. Rib. Orient, torn. ii. p. 85.)
(3) Compare Proeopiu, (Hist. Atean. c. 2». and Aleman'l Notes with Theophanes. (Chron. p. 190.) Thecouncil of Nice has intrusted the patriarch, or rather the aitronomers of Alexandria, with the usual procla­mation of Kastei; and we still read, or rather we do not read, many of the Paschal epistles of St. Cyril. Sincethe reign of Munophytism in Egypt, the catholics were perplexed by as foolish a prejudice as that which solong opposed, among the protestants, the reception of the Gregorian style.
(4) For the religion and history of the Samaritans, consult Basnage, Histoires des Juifs. a learned and im­partial work.
(5) Sicbem, Neapolis. Nnplous, the ancient and modern seat of the Samaritans, is situate in ft valley be­tween the barren Ebal, the mountain of cursing to the north, the fruttfu I Garizim, or mountain of coningto the south, ten or eleven hours' travel from Jerusalem. Sec Mnundrel. Journey from Aleppo, tic. p. 39—63.
(6) Procop. Anecdot. c. xi. Tbeophan. Chron. p. 152. John Malata, Chron. torn. ii. p. G2. I remember aitobservation, half philosophical, half superstitiout, that the province which had been ruiard by the fcjgQtryuf Justinian, was the tainu through which the Mahometans penetrated into theenyuce.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 39


changes of each instant, weighed every possible advantage, transported his personto the scenes of danger, and communicated his spirit in calm and decisive orders.The contest was fiercely maintained from the morning to the evening; the Gothswere repulsed on all sides, and each Roman might boast that he had vanquishedthirty barbarians, if the. strange disproportion of numbers were not counterba­lanced by the merit of one man. Thirty thousand Goths, according to the con­fession of their own chiefs, perished in this bloody action; and the multitude of thewounded was equal to that of the slain. When they advanced to the assault, theirclose disorder suffered not a javelin to fall without effect; and as they retired thepopulace of the city joined the pursuit, and slaughtered, with impunity, the backsof their flying enemies. Belisarius instantly sallied from the gates; and while thesoldiers chanted his name and victory, the hostile engines of war were reduced toashes. Such was the loss and consternation of the Goths, that, from this day, thesiege of Rome degenerated into a tedious and indolent blockade; and they were in­cessantly harassed by the Roman general, who, in frequent skirmishes, destroyedabove five thousand of their bravest troops. Their cavalry was unpractised in the useof the bow; their archers served on foot; and this divided force was incapable of con­tending with their adversaries, whose lances and arrows, at a distance, or at hand,were alike formidable. The consummate skill of Belisarius embraced the favour­able opportunities: and as he chose the ground and the moment, as he pressed thecharge, or sounded the retreat,(l) the squadrons which he detached were seldomunsuccessful. These partial advantages diffused an impatient ardour among thesoldiers and people, who began to feel the hardships of a siege, and to disregardthe dangers of a general engagement. Each plebeian conceived himself to be ahero, and the infantry, who, since the decay of discipline, were rejected from thelineof battle, aspired to the ancient honours of the Roman legion. Belisariuspraised the spirit of his troops, condemned their presumption, yielded to their cla­mours, and prepared the remedies of a defeat, the possibility of which he alonehad courage to suspect. In the quarter of the Vatican, the Romans prevailed; andif the irreparable moments had not been wasted in the pillage of the camp, theymight have occupied the Milvian bridge, and charged in the rear of the Gothichost. On the other side of the Tiber, Belisarius advanced from the Pincian, andSalarian gates. But his army, four thousand soldiers perhaps, was lost in a spa­cious plain; they were encompassed and oppressed by fresh jnultitudes, who con­tinually relieved the broken ranks of the barbarians. The valiant leaders of theinfantry were unskilled to conquer: they died: the retreat (a hasty retreat) wascovered by the prudence of the general, and the victors started back with affrightfrom the formidable aspect of an armed rampart. The reputation of Belisariuswas unsullied by a defeat; and the vain confidence of the Goths was not less ser­viceable to his designs than the repentance and modesty of the Roman troops.
From the moment that Belisarius had determined to sustain a siege, his assidu­ous care provided Rome against the danger of famine, more dreadful than the Go­thic arms." An extraordinary supply of corn was imported from Sicily; the har­vests of Campania and Tuscany were forcibly swept for the use of the city: andthe rights of private property were infringed by the strong plea of the public safe­ty. It might easily be foreseen that the enemy would intercept the aqueducts;and the cessation of the water-mills was the first inconvenience, which was spee­dily removed by mooring large vessels, and fixing mill-stones in the current of theriver. The stream was soon embarrassed by the trunks of trees, and pollutedwith dead bodies; yet so effectual were the precautions of the Roman general, thatthe waters of the Tiber still continued to give motion to the mills and drink to theinhabitants; the more distant quarters were supplied from domestic wells; and abesieged city might support, without impatience, the privation of her public baths.A large portion of Rome, from the Pranestine gate to the church of St. Paul, wasnever invested by the Goths; their excursions were restrained by the activity ofthe Moorish troops; the navigation of the Tiber, and the Latin, Appian, and Os-tian ways, were left free and unmolested for the introduction of corn and cattle,or the retreat of the inhabitants, who sought a refuge in Campania or Sicily. Anx­ious to relieve himself from a useless and devouring multitude, Belisarius issuedhis peremptory orders for the instant departure of the women, the children, and
(1) For the Roman trumpet and its various notes, consult Lipsius, de Militia Romano, (Opp. torn. iii. lib. iv.Dialog, x. p. 125—120.) A mode of distinguishing the charge by the horse trnmpet of solid brass, and the re­treat by the foot trumpet of leather anrt light wood, was recommended bv Procopius, and adopted by Belisa­rius (Goth. lib. ii. c. 23.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. I-1J


perty is seldom indulged: it was introduced at Athens by the laws of Solon; andthe private testaments of the father of a family are authorized by the twelve ta­bles. Before the time of the decemvirs,(l) a Roman citizen exposed his wishesand motives to the assembly of thirty curia; or parishes, and the general law of in­heritance was suspended by an occasional act of the legislature. After the per­mission of the decemvirs, each private lawgiver promulgated his verbal or writtentestament in the presence of five citizens, who represented the five classes of theRoman people; a sixth witness attested their concurrence: a seventh weighed thecopper money, which was paid by an imaginary purchaser; and the estate wasemancipated by a fictitious sale and immediate release. This singular cere­mony,^) which excited the wonder of the Greeks, was still practised in the ageof Severus; but the pretors had already approved a more simple testament, forwhich they required the seals and signatures of seven witnesses, free from all le­gal exception, and purposely summoned for the execution of that important act.A domestic monarch, who reigned over the fives and fortunes of his children,might distribute their respective shares according to the degrees of their merit orhis affection: his arbitrary displeasure chastised an unworthy son by the loss of hisinheritance and the mortifying preference of a stranger. But the experience ofunnatural parents recommended some limitations of their testamentary powers.A son, or, by the laws of Justinian, even a daughter, could no longer be disinheri­ted by their silence: they were compelled to name the criminal, and to specify theoffence; and the justice of the emperor enumerated the sole causes that could jus­tify such a violation of the first principles of nature and society.(3) Unless a legi­timate portion, a fourth part, had been reserved for the children, they were enti­tled to institute an action or complaint of inofficious testament, to suppose that theirfather's understanding was impaired by sickness or age; and respectfully to appealfrem his rigorous sentence to the deliberate wisdom of the magistrate. In the Ro­man jurisprudence, an essential distinction was admitted between the inheritanceand the legacies. The heirs who succeeded to the entire unity, or to any of thetwelve fractions of the substance of the testator, represented his civil and religiouscharacter, asserted his rights, fulfilled his obligations, and discharged the gifts offriendship or liberality which his last will had bequeathed under the name of le­gacies. But as the imprudence or prodigality of a dying man might exhaust the.inheritance, and leave only risk and labour to his successor, he was empowered toretain the Falcidian portion; to deduct, before the payment of the legacies, a clearfourth for his own emolument. A reasonable time was allowed to examine theproportion between the debts and the estate, to decide whether he should acceptor refuse the testament; and if he used the benefit of an inventory, the demands ofthe creditors could not exceed the valuation of the effects. The last will of a citi­zen might be altered during his life, or rescinded after his death: the persons whomhe named might die before him, or reject the inheritance, or be exposed to somelegal disqualification. In the contemplation of these events, he was permitted tosubstitute second and third heirs, to replace each other according to the order ofthe testament; and the incapacity of a madman or an infant to bequeath his pro­perty, might be supplied by a similar substitution. (4) But the power of the testa­tor expired with the acceptance of the testament: each Roman of mature age anddiscretion acquired the absolute dominion of his inheritance, and the simplicity ofthe civil law was never clouded by the long and intricate entails which confinethe happiness and freedom of unborn generations.
Conquest and the formalities of law established the use of codicils. If a Ro­man was surprised by death in a remote province of the empire, he addressed a
519.527.)alearned, rambling,spirited writer. In the second and third bookj the method of the Institutesis doubtless preposterous; and the chancellor Duqnesseau (CBuvres, torn. i. p. 275.) wishes his countryman Do-mat in the place of Tribonian. Yet covenants before succession 11 not surely the natural order of the civillaws.
(1) Prior example of testaments are perhaps fabnlous. At Athens, a childless father only could make awill. (Plutareh. ul Solon, torn. i. p. 164. See Itsetis aud Jones.
(2) The testament of Augustus is specified by Suetonius, (in August, c. 101. in Neron. c. 4.) who may bestudied as a code of Roman antiquities. Plutarch (Opuscul. torn. ii. p. 270.) is surprised »x«» Ji Ji»9uk*s y p»f »~tiv jrtpM- inv at7n\timt9-i ;rAj]psvo,usc, tnpoi Si r -> rmt wiac. The language of Ulpian (Fragment, tit. xx. p.627.edit. Schulting) is almost too exclusive,solum in usu est.
(3) Justinian (Novel, lis. No. 3, 4,) enumerates only the public and private crimes, for which a son mightlikewise disinherit his father.
(4) The substitutions fidei commissaries of the modern civil law is a feudal idea grafted on the Roman juris­prudence, and bears scarcely any resemblance to the ancient fidei commissa. (Institutions du droit Francois .torn. i. p. 347—383. Denissart, Decisions de Jurisprudence, torn. iv. p. 577—604.) They were stretched to th'Jfourth degree by an abuse of the hundred and fifty-ninth Novel; a partial, perplexed, declamatory law.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


ca might applaud the success and spirit of the faithful, who had already lost sightof the northern bear, and had almost transcended the bounds of the habitableworld. (1) Again turning towards the west and the Roman empire, they repassedthe Tigris over the bridge of Mosul, and, in the captive provinces of Armenia andMesopotamia, embraced their victorious brethren of the Syrian army. From thepalace of Madayn their eastern progress was not less rapid or extensive. Theyadvanced along the Tigris and the gulf; penetrated through the passes of themountains into the valley of Estachar or Persepolis; and profaned the last sanc­tuary of the Magian empire. The grandson of Chosroes was nearly surprisedamong the falling columns and mutilated figures; a sad emblem of the past andpresent fortune of Persia:(2) he fled with accelerated haste over the desert of Kir-man,'implored the aid of the warlike Segestans, and sought an humble refuge onthe verge of the Turkish and Chinese power. But a victorious army is insensibleof fatigue: the Arabs divided their forces in the pursuit of a timorous enemy; andthe caliph Othman promised the government of Chorasan to the first general whoshould enter that large and populous country, the kingdom of the ancient Bac-trians. The condition was accepted; the prize was deserved; the standard of Ma­homet was planted on the walls of Herat, Merou, and Balch; and the successfulleader neither halted nor reposed till his foaming cavalry had tasted the waters ofthe Oxus. In the public anarchy, the independent governors of the cities andcastles obtained their separate capitulations; the terms were granted or imposedby the esteem, the prudence, or the compassion of the victors; and a simple pro­fession of faith established the distinction between a brother and a slave. Aftera noble defence, Harmozan, the prince or satrap of"Ahwaz and Susa, was com­pelled to surrender his person and his state to the discretion of the caliph; andtheir interview exhibits a portrait of the Arabian manners. In the presence, andby the command of Omar, the gay barbarian was despoiled of his silken robes em­broidered with gold, and of his tiara bedecked with rubies and emeralds. " Are
?rau now sensible," said the conqueror to his naked captive, "are you now sensi-)le of the judgment of God, and of the different rewards of infidelity and obedi- ,ence?" " Alas!" replied Harmozan, " I feel them too deeply. In the days of ourcommon ignorance, we fought with the weapons of the flesh, and my nation wassuperior. God was then neuter: since he has espoused your quarrel, you havesubverted our kingdom and religion." Oppressed by this painful dialogue, thePersian complained of intolerable thirst, but discovered some apprehensions lesthe should be killed whilst he was drinking a cup of water. " Be of good courage,"said the caliph, " your life is safe till you have drank this water;" the crafty satrapaccepted the assurance, and instantly dashed the vase against the ground. Omarwould have avenged the deceit; but his companions represented the sanctity ofan oath; and the speedy conversion of Harmozan entitled him not only to a freepardon, but even to a stipend of two thousand pieces of gold. The administrationof Persia was regulated by an actual survey of the people, the cattle, and thefruits of the earth ;(3) and this monument, which attests the vigilance of the ca­liphs, might have instructed the philosophers of every age.(4)
The flight of Yezdegerd had carried him beyond the Oxus, and as far as theJaxavtes, two rivers(S) of ancient and modern renown, which descend from themountains of India towards the Caspian sea. He was hospitably entertained byTarkhan, prince of Fargana,(6) a fertile province on the Jaxartes; the king of Sa­


to Ic is in such a style of ignorance and wonder that the Athenian orator describes the Arctic conquest! ofAlexander, who never advances beyond the shores of the Caspian, A**!:xvJpo? ms «pxrou ui m; oixcwumkaltymSiiv, muriK /*i&ijTT»ixsi. Esrhines contra Ctesiphontem, torn. iii. p.554.edit. Grace. Orator. Reiske. This me­morable cause was pleaded at Athens, Olymp. 112. 3., (before Chnst 300) in the autumn (Tayler, praefat. p.370, &c.) about a year after the battle of Arbclal and Alexander, in the pursuit of Darius, was marching to­wards Hyrcania and Bactriana.
(2) We are indebted for this curious particular to the Dynasties of Ahulpharagitis, p. 118. but it is needlessto prove the identity of Estachar and Persepolis (d'Herbelot, p. 327.) and still more needless to copy the draw­ing* and descriptions of Sir John Chardin, or Corneille le Bruyn.
(3) After the conquest of Persia, Theophones, adds, «u™ y; Tw xpova fxs\nj<rt, Cvuxeo, av%yp*&nnt snsnsv -rt*
uir <euTCv OIXM/Uvxv. eysMTO £l ») stvxypx$x xxi avBpoiruiv xo»i xtkvwv xxi Juimv, (Chronograph, p. 283.)
(4) Amidst our meagre relations, I must regret, that d'Herbelot has not found and used a Persian translationof Tabari, enriched, as he says, with many extracts from the native historians of the Ghebers or Magi. (Biblio-theque Orientate, p. 1014.)
(5) The most authentic accounts of the two rivers, the Sihon, (Jaxartes) and the Gihon, (Oxus,) may be foundin Sherif al Edrisi, (Geograph. Kubiens. p. 138.) Abulfeda, Descript. Chorasan. in Hudson, torn. iii. p. 23.)Abulghazi Khan, who reigned on their banks, (Hist. Genealogique ties Tartars, p. 32. 57.700.) and the Turk­ish Geographer, a MS. in tho king of France's library. (Examen Critique des Huloriens d' Alexander, p. 194
(6) The territory of Fargana is described by Abulfeda, p. W, 77.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


great khan, who passed the Oxus at the head of three or four hundred thousandTurks. The imprudent Hormouz accepted their perfidious and formidable aid;the cities of Khorasan or Bactriana were commanded to open their gates; themarch of the barbarians towards the mountains of Hyrcania revealed the corres­pondence of the Turkish and Roman arms; and their union must have subvertedthe throne of the house of Sassan.
, Persia had been lost by a king; it was saved by a hero. After his revolt, Va-ranes or Bahrain is stigmatized by the son of Hormouz as an ungrateful slave: theproud and ambiguous reproach of despotism, since he was truly descended fromthe ancient princes of Rei,(l) one of the seven families whose splendid, as well assubstantial prerogatives exalted them above the heads of the Persian nobility. (2)At the siege of Dara, the valour of Bahram was signalized under the eyes of Nu-shirvan, and both the father and son successively prompted him to the commandof armies, the government of Media, and the superinteh'dance of the palace. Thepopular prediction which marked him as the deliverer of Persia, might be in­spired by his past victories and extraordinary figure: the epithet Giubin is ex­pressive of the quality of dry wood; he had the strength and stature of a giant,and his savage countenance was fancifully compared to that of a wild cat. Whilethe nation trembled, while Hormouz disguised his terror by the name of suspicion,and his servants concealed their disloyalty under the mask of fear, Bahram alonedisplayed his undaunted courage and apparent fidelity; and as soon as he foundthat no more than twelve thousand soldiers would follow him against the enemy,he prudently declared, that to this fatal number, Heaven had reserved the ho­nours of the triumph. The steep and narrow descent of the Pule Rudbar,(3) orHyrcanian rock, is the only pass through which an army can penetrate into theterritory of Rei and the plains of Media. From the commanding heights, a bandof resolute men might overwhelm with stones and darts the myriads of the Turkishhost: their emperor and his son were transpierced with arrows; and the fugitiveswere left, without counsel or provisions, to the revenge of an injured people. The pa­triotism of the Persian general was stimulated by his affection for the city of his fore­fathers; in the hour of victory every peasant became a soldier, and every soldier ahero; and their ardour was kindled by the gorgeous spectacle of beds, and thrones,and tables of massy gold, the spoils of Asia, and the luxury of the hostile camp.A prince of a less malignant temper could not easily have forgotten his benefactor,and the secret hatred of Hormouz was envenomed by a malicious report, thaiBahram had privately retained the most precious fruits of his Turkish victory.But the approach of a Roman army on the side of the Araxes compelled the im­placable tyrant to smile and to applaud; and the toils of Bahram were rewardedwith the permission of encountering a new enemy, by their skill and disciplinemore formidable than a Scythian multitude. Elated by his recent success, hedespatched a herald with a bold defiance to the camp of the Romans, requesting"them to fix a day of battle, and to choose whether they would pass the river them­selves, or allow a free passage to the arms of the great king. The lieutenant ofthe emperor Maurice preferred the safer alternative, and this local circum­stance, which would have enhanced the victory of the Persians, rendered their de­feat more bloody, and their escape more difficult. But the loss of his subjects,and the danger of his kingdom, were overbalanced in the mind of Hormouz bythe disgrace of his personal enemy; and no sooner had Bahram collected and re­viewed his forces, than he received from a royal messenger the insulting gift of adistaff, a spinning-wheel, and a complete suit of female apparel. Obedient to the
speak move amply of the Christian images—I bad almost said idols. This, if I am not mistaken, is the old­est (<Kfio*roiitTo; of divine manufacture: but in the next thousand years, many others issued from the sameworkshop.
(1) Ragse,orRei,is mentioned in the apocryphal book of Tobit as already flourishing, seven hundred yearsbefore Christ, under the Assyrian empire. Under the foreign names of Europus and Anacia, this city, fivehundred stadia to the south of the Caspian gates, was successively embellished by the Macedonians ana Par­thian*. (Strata, lib. zi. p. 706.) Its grandeur and populousness in the ninth century is exaggerated beyondthe bounds of credibility; but Rei hat been since ruined by wars and the unwholesomenest of the air. Chap,din. Voyage en Perse, torn.i. p. 270.280. IVHerbelot, Biblioth. Oriental, p. 714.
(2) Theophylact, lib. iii. c. 13. The story of the seven Persians is told In the third book of Herodotus; andtheir noble descendants are often mentioned, especially in the fragments of Ctesias. Yet the independence ofOtanes (Herodot. lib. iii. c. 83,840 is hostile to the spirit of despotism, and it may not seem probable that the-seven families could survive the revolutions or eleven hundred years. They might, however, be representedby the seven ministers; (Brizzon, de Regno Persico, lib. i. p. 190.) and some Persian nobles, like the kings of"Pontui (Polyb. lib. v. p. 540,) and Cappadocia, (Diodor. Sicul. lib. 31. torn. ii. p. 517.) might claim their descentfrom the bold companions of Darius.
(3) See an accurate description of this mountain by Olearius. (Voyage en Perse, p. 997,998.) who ascvn}.ed it with much difficulty and danger in his return from Ispahan to the Caspian tea.







OCR Output








THE
HISTORY
OP TUK
DECLINE AND FALL
OF
THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


EDWARD GIBBON, Esq.


SIXTH AMERICAN, FROM THE LAST CORRECTED LONDON EDITION.
Complete fn jfouv wolvmm.
vol. in.


PHILADELPHIA:
PUBLISHED BY B. F. FRENCH.1830,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 339


religion and empire of the Saracens. The tumult was appeased by the disinte­rested resolution of Omar, who suddenly renouncing his own pretensions, stretchedforth his hand, and declared himself the first subject of the mild and venerableAbubeker. The urgency of the moment, and the acquiescence of the people,might excuse this illegal and precipitate measure; but Omar himself confessedfrom the pulpit, that if any Mussulman should hereafter presume to anticipate thesuffrage of his brethren, both the elector and the elected would be worthy ofdeath. (1) After the simple inauguration of Abubeker, he was obeyed in Medina,Mecca, and the provinces of Arabia; the Hashemites alone declined the oath offidelity; and their chief, in his own house, maintained, above six months, a sullenand independent reserve: without listening to the threats of Omar, whoattemptedto consume with fire the habitation of the daughter of the apostle. The death ofFatima, and the decline of his party, subdued the indignant spirit of Ali; he con­descended to salute the commander of the faithful, accepted his excuse of the ne­cessity of preventing their common enemies, and wisely rejected his courteous of­fer of abdicating the government of the Arabians. After a reign of two years,the aged caliph was summoned by the angel of death. In his testament, with thetacit approbation of the companions, he bequeathed the sceptre to the firm andintrepid virtue of Omar. "I have no occasion," said the modest candidate, " forthe place."—" But the place has occasion for you," replied Abubeker; who ex­pired with a fervent prayer that the god of Mahomet would ratify his choice, and 'direct the Mussulmans in the way of concord and obedience. The prayer was notineffectual, since Ali himself, in a life of privacy and prayer, professed to reverethe superior worth and dignity of his rival; who comforted him for the loss of em­pire, by the most flattering marks of confidence and esteem. In the twelfth yearof his reign, Omar received a mortal wound from the hand of an assassin; he re­jected with equal impartiality the names of his son and of Ali, refused to load hisconscience with the sins of his successor, and devolved on six of the most respec­table companions, the arduous task of electing a commander of the faithful. Onthis occasion, Ali was again blamed by his friends(2) for submitting his right to thejudgment of men, for recognising their jurisdiction by accepting a place amongthe six electors. He might have obtained their suffrage, had he deigned to pro­mise a strict and servile conformity, not only to the Koran and tradition, but like­wise to the determinations of two seniors. (3) With these limitations, Othman,the secretary of Mahomet, accepted the government, nor was it till after the thirdcaliph, twenty-four years after the death of the prophet, that Ali was investedby the popular choice, with the regal and sacerdotal office. The manners of theArabians retained their primitive simplicity, and the son of Abu Taleb despisedthe pomp and vanity of this world. At the hour of prayer, he repaired to themosch of Medina, clothed in a thin cotton gown, a coarse turban on his head, hisslippers in one hand, and his bow in the other, instead of a walking staff. Thecompanions of the prophet, and the chiefs of the tribes saluted their new sove­reign, and gave him their right hands as a sign of fealty and allegiance.
The mischiefs that flow from the contests of ambition are usually confined to thetimes and countries in which they had been agitated. But the religious discordof-the friends and enemies of Ali has been renewed in every age of the Hegira,and is still maintained in the immortal hatred of the Persians and Turks. (4) Theformer, who are branded with the appellation of Shiites or sectaries, have enrichedthe Mahometan creed with a new article of faith; and if Mahomet be the apostle,his companion Ali is the vicar, of God. In their private converse, in their publicworship, they bitterly execrate the three usurpers who intercepted his indefeasi­ble right to the dignity of imam and caliph; and the name of Omar expresses in
(1) Ockley, (Ilist.of the Saracens, vol. i. p. 5,6.) from an Arabian MS. represents Ayesba as averse to thesubstitution of her father in the place of the apostle. This fact, so improbable in itself, is unnoticed by Abnt-feda, Al Jannabi, and Al Bochan, the last of whom quotes the tradition of Ayesha herself. (Vit. Mohammed, p.136. Vie de Mahomet, torn. iii. p. 236.)
(2) Particularly by his friend and cousin Abdallah, the son of Abbas, who died A. D. 687. with the title ofgrand doctor of the Moslems. In Abulfedahe recapitulated the important occasions in which Ali had neglectedhis salutary advice (p. 76. vers. Reiske;) and concludes, (p. 85.) O princeps fidelium, absque controversia tuquidem vere fortis es, at inops boni consilii, et rerum gerendarum parum callens.
(3) I suspect that the two seniors (Abulpharagius, p. 115. Ockley, tool. i. p. 371.) may signify not two actualcounsellors, but his two predecessors, Abubeker and Omar.
(4) The schism of the Persians is explained by all our travellers of the last century, especially in the secondand fourth volumes of their master, Chardin. Niebuhr, though of infinite merit, has the advantage of writingso late as the year 1764. (Voyages en Arabie, &c. torn. ii. p. 208—233.) since the ineffectual attempt of NadirShah to change the religion of the nation. (See his Fenian history translated into French by Sir WilliamJones, torn. ii. p. 5,6. 47,48.144—155.)







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


though it consisted of fewer men, could produce more soldiers than the unwieldyhost of the infidels. I shall here observe, what I must often repeat, that thecharge of the Arabs was not like that of the Greeks and Romans, the effort ofa firm and compact infantry: their military force was chiefly formed of cavalryand archers; and the engagement, which was often interrupted and often renewedby single combats and flying skirmishes, might be protracted without any decisiveevent to the continuance of several days. The periods of the battle of Cadesiawere distinguished by their peculiar appellations. The first, from the well-timedappearance of six thousand of the Syrian brethren, was denominated the day ofsuccour. The day of concussion might express the disorder of one, or perhapsof both, of the contending armies. The third, a nocturnal tumult, received thewhimsical name of the night of barking, from the discordant clamours, whichwere compared to the inarticulate sounds of the fiercest animals. The morningof the succeeding day determined the fate-of Persia; and a seasonable whirlwinddrove a cloud of dust against the faces of the unbelievers. The clangour of armswas re-echoed to the tent of Rustam, who, far unlike the ancient hero of hisname, was gently reclining in a cool and tranquil shade, amidst the baggage of hiscamp, and the train of mules that were laden with gold and silver. On the soundof danger he started from his couch; but his flight was overtaken by a valiantArab, who caught him by the foot, struck off his head, hoisted it on a lance, andinstantly returning to the field of battle, carried slaughter and dismay among thethickest ranks of the Persians. The Saracens confess a loss of seven thousand fivehundred men; and the battle of Cadesia is justly described by the epithets of obsti­nate and atrocious. (1) The standard of the monarchy was overthrown and cap­tured in the field,—a leathern apron of a blacksmith, who, in ancie.it times, hadarisen the deliverer of Persia; but this badge of heroic poverty was disguised, andalmost concealed, by a profusion of precious gems. (2; After this victory, thewealthy province of Irak or Assyria submitted to the caliph, and his conquestswere firmly established by the speedy foundation of Bassora,(3) a place whichever commands the trade and navigation of the Persians. At the distance offourscore miles from the gulf, the Euphrates and Tigris unite in a broad and di­rect current, which is aptly stated the river of the Arabs. In the midway, be­tween the junction and the mouth of these famous streams; the new settlementwas planted on the western bank: the first colony was composed of eight hundredMoslems: but the influence of the situation soon reared a flourishing and populouscapital. The air, though excessively hot, is pure and healthy: the meadows arefilled with palm trees and cattle: and one of the adjacent valleys has been cele­brated among the four paradises or gardens of Asia. Under the first caliphs,the jurisdiction of this Arabian colony extended over the southern provinces ofPersia: the city has been sanctified by the tombs of the companions and martyrs;and the vessels of Europe still frequent the port of Bassora, as a convenient sta­tion and passage of the Indian trade.
After the defeat of Cadesia, a country intersected by rivers and canals mighthave opposed an insuperable barrier to the victorious cavalry; and the walls ofCtesiphon, or Madayn, which had resisted the battering rams of the Romans,would not have yielded to the darts of the Saracens. But the flying Persians wereovercome by the belief, that the last day of their religion and empire was at hand;the strongest posts were abandoned by treachery or cowardice; and the king, witha part of his family and treasures, escaped to Holwan, at the foot of the Medianhills. In the third month after the battle, Said, the lieutenant of Omar, passedthe Tigris without opposition; the capital was taken by assault; and the disorderly-resistance of the people gave a keener edge to the sabres of the Moslems, whoshouted with religious transport,—" This is the white palace of Chosroes, this isthe promise of the apostle of Clod." The naked robbers of the desert were sud­denly enriched beyond the measure of their hope or knowledge. Each chamberrevealed a new treasure secreted with art, or ostentatiously displayed: the gold
and two stations from Cufa. Otter (Voyage, torn. i. p. 163.) reckons fifteen leagues,and observes, that the placeis supplied with dates and water.
(1) Atrox, eontumax, plus semel renovatum, are the well chosen expressions of the translator of Abutfcda(Kenke,p. 69.)
(2) D'Herbelot, Bibliolheque Orientale, p. 297—348.
(3) The reader may satisfy himself on the subject of Bassora. by consulting the following writers,—Geograpn.Nuu'1(™ p. D'Herbelot, Bibliotlieque Orientale,p. 192. D'Anrille, I'Euphrate et le Tigre, p. 130. 133. Its.ll^ynal,Hist. Philosopliique des deux Indes. torn. ii. p. 92—100. Voyages de Pietrodella ValIe,tom. ii. p. 370
He Tavernier, torn. i. p. 240—247. De Thevenot, torn. it. p. 545—584. De Otter, torn. ii. p. 45—78. DeNeibnhr, torn. ii. p. 172-199.







OCR Output








CONTENTS.


A. D. PaOK
1557 Mission of the Jesuits . 234
1626 Conversion of the emperor . ib.
1032 Final expulsion of the Jesuits 235
CHAPTER XLVIII.
Plan of the Remainder of the History—Succession and
Characters of the Greek Emperors of Constantino­
ple, from the Time of Heraclius to the Latin Con­
quest.
a , d. PAGE
Defects of the Byzantine history . 236
Its connexion with the revolutions of the
world . . . 237
Plan of the remainder of the history . ib.
Second marriage and death of Heratlius 238
641 Constantine I/I. , , ib.
Heraeleonas . . ib.
Punishment of Martina and Heraeleonas 33tConstans If. . . ib.
668 Constantine IV- Pogonatns 240
685 Justinian II. . ib.
695-705 His exile . .241
705—711 His restoration and death . 242
711 Philippicus . , .243
713 Anaslasius II. .' . ib.
716 Theodosius III. ... ib.
71H Leo III. the Isaurian . 244
741 Constantine V. Copronymns 245
775 Leo IV 246
780 Constantino VI. and Irene . . . ib.
792 Irene . . 247
102 Jficephorus I. .248
811 Stanracius ... ib.
Michael I. Rhangabe • ib.
813 Leo V. the Jlrmenian : . 249
820 Michael II. the Stammerer . 250
829 Thcophilus ... ib.
842 Michael III. . .241
867 Basil I. the Macedonian . . 252
886 Leo VI. the Philosopher . . 253
911 Alexander, Constantine VII. Porphyroge-
nitus
919 Romanus I. Lecapenus
Christopher, Stephen, Constantine VIII.
945 Constantine VII.
959 Romanus II. junior .
963 Nicephorus if. Phocas
969 John Zimisces, Basil II. Constantine IX.
976 Basil II. and Constantine IX. .
1025 Constantine IX.


PAfJE
271
272
ib.
'.»7:i
ib
ib.


74
ii).
75
76
ib.
277378ib.
379


1028 Romanus III. Argyrus
1034 Michael IV. the Paphlagonian
1041 Michael V. Calaphates
1042 Zoe and Theodora
Constantine X. Monomachns .
1054 Theodora
1056 Michael VI. Stratioticus
1057 Isaac I. Comnenus
1059 Constantine XI. Ducas
1067 Eudocia
Romanus III. Diogenes
1071 Michael VII. Parapinaccs, Andronicns I.
Constantine XII.
1078 Niccphoms III. Botaniates
1081 Alexius I. Comnenus
1118 John, or Calo-Johannes
1143 Manuel
1180 Alexius II. .
Character and first adventures of Adronicus 267
1183 Adronicus I. Comnenus. . . 20"
1185 fsaac II. Angelus- . 2i
CHAPTER XUX.
Introduction, Worship, and Persecution of Images
Revolt of Italy and Rome—Temporary Dominion
of the Popes—Conquest of Italy by the Franks—
Establishmenlof Images— Character and Coronation
of Charlemagne—Restoration and Decay of the Ro­
man Empire in the West—Independence of Italy—
Constitution of the Germanic Body.
A- D. PAQK
Introduction of images into the Christian
church . 270
Their fVorship . ->. ib.


254ib.ib.ib.255ib.
258
257
358
rb.
ib.
259
ib.
ib.
ib.
280
ih.
261
ib.
ib.
ib.
ib.
262
263
264
265
266


The image of Edessat
fts copies
Ojiposition to image worship
726—8-10 Leo the fconoclast, and his successors
754 Their synod at Constantinople
Their creed
726—775 Their persecution of the images and
Monks
State of ftaly
727 Epistle of Gregory II. to the emperor
728 Revolt of Italy
Republic of Rome
730—752 Rome attacked by the lAtmbards
754 Her deliverance by Pepin .
774 Conquest of Lombardy by Charlemagne
751—753—768 Pepin and Charlemagne, kings of
France
Patricians of Rome
Donations of Pepin and Charlemagne to the
Popes . . . 281
Forgery of the donation of Constantine 282
730 Restoration of images in the east by the Em­
press Irene . . ■ 283
787 Vlfth general council, ffnd of Nice 284
842 Final establishment of images by tlte empress
Theodora . . . ib.
794 Reluctance of the Franks and of CItarle-
magne . . . 285
774—800 Final separation of the Popes from the
eastern empire . . ib.
800 Coronation of Charlemagne as emperor of
Rome and of the west
768—814 Reign and character of Charlemagne
Extent of his empire; France
Spain, ftaly, Germany, Hungary
His neighbours and em
His successors
814—887 fn Italy
911 In Germany
987 In France
814—840 Lewis the pious .
840—856 LoOiaire I. .
855—875 Lewis II.
888 Division of the empire
962 Otho, king of Germany, restores and appro­
priates the western empire
Transactions of the western and eastern em­pires ....
800—1060 Authority of the emperors in the elec­
tions of the popes
Disorders ....
1073 Reformation and claims of the church
Autliority of the emperors in Rome
932 Revolt of Alberie
967 Of Pope John XII. .
998 Of the Consul Crescentius
674—1250 The kingdom of Italy
1152—1190 Frederic I.
1198—1250 Frederic II. .
814—1250 Independence of the princes of Ger­
many ....
1250 The Germanic constitution
1347—1378 Weakness and poverty of the German
emperor Charles IV.1356 His ostentation
Contrast ofthepowcr and modesty of Augus­tus ....


281


lb.ib.ib291ib.ib.ibib.
292
ib!
293ib.
291
ib.ib.21)5ib.
2!H!
tb.
ib


301
302


■Mi


CHAPTER L.


Description of Arabia and its Inhabitants—Birth, cha­
racter, and doctrine of Mahomet—He preaches at
Mecca—Flies tn Medina—Propagates his Religion
by the sword—Voluntary or reluctant Submission of
the Arabs—His Death, and Successors—The Claims
and Fortunes of Ali and his Descendants.
a. d. PAGE
Description of Arabia . 304
The soil and climate . . ib-
Division of the Sandy, the Stony, and the
Happy Arabia . . 34V»
Manners of the Bedowecns, orpastoral Arabs ib.
The horse ... 306
The camel . ib.
Cities of Arabia ... 307
Mecca ib.







OCR Output








232 THE DECLINE AND FALL


battle. His troops, under arms, were distributed through the streets; the gatesof the cathedral were guarded, and a chosen band was stationed in the choir, todefend the person of their chief. He stood erect on his throne, and throwing asidethe upper garment of a warrior, suddenly appeared before the eyes of the multi­tude in the robes of patriarch of Alexandria. Astonishment held them mute; butno sooner had Apollmaris begun to read the tome of St Leo, than a volley of curses,and invectives, and stones, assaulted the odious minister of the emperor and thesynod. A charge was instantly sounded by the successor of the apostles; thesoldiers waded to their knees in blood, and two hundred thousand Christians aresaid to have fallen by the sword; an incredible account, even if it be extended fromthe slaughter of a day to the eighteen years of the reign of Apollinaris. Two suc­ceeding patriarchs, Eulogius,(l) and John(2) laboured in the conversion of heretics,with arms and arguments more worthy of their evangelical profession. The theo­logical knowledge of Eulogius was displayed in many a volume, which magnifiedthe errors of Eutyches and Severus, and attempted to reconcile the ambiguous lan­guage of St. Cyril with the orthodox creed of pope Leo and the fathers of Chal-cedon. The bounteous alms of John the eleemosynary were dictated by super­stition, or benevolence, or policy. Seven thousand five hundred poor were main­tained at his expense; on his accession, he found eight thousand pounds of goldin the treasury ot the church; he collected ten thousand for the liberality of thefaithful; yet the primate could boast in his testament, that he left behind him nomore than the third part of the smallest of the silver coins. The churches ofAlexandria were delivered to the catholics, the religion of the Monophysites wasproscribed in Egypt, and a law was revived, which excluded the natives from thehonours and emoluments of the state.
A more important conquest still remained, of the patriarch, the oracle and leaderof the Egyptian church. Theodosius had resisted the threats and promises ofJustinian with the spirit of an apostle or an enthusiast. " Such," (replied the pa­triarch,) "were the offers of the tempter when he showed the kingdoms of theearth. But my soul is far dearer to me than life or dominion. Tfte churches arein the hands of a prince who can kill the body; but my conscience is my own; andin exile, poverty, or chains, I will steadfastly adhere to the faith of my holy pre­decessors, Athanasius, Cyril, and Dioscorus. Anathema to the tome of Leo andthe synod of Chalcedon! Anathema to all who embrace their creed! Anathemato them now and for evermore! Naked came I out of my mother's womb, nakedshall I descend into the grave. Let those who love God, follow me and seek theirsalvation." After comforting his brethren, he embarked for Constantinople, andsustained, in six successive interviews, the almost irresistible weight of the royalpresence. His opinions were favourably entertained in the palace and the city;the influence of Theodora assured him a safe conduct and honourable dismission;and he ended his days, though not on the throne, yet in the bosom of his nativecountry. On the news of his death, Apollinaris indecently feasted the nobles andclergy; but his joy was checked by the intelligence of a new election; and whilehe enjoyed the wealth of Alexandria, his rivals reigned in the monasteries of The-bais, and were maintained by the voluntary oblations of the people. A perpetualsuccession of patriarchs arose from the ashes of Theodosius; and the Monophy-site churches of Syria and Egypt were united by the name of Jacobites and thecommunion of the faith. But the same faith, which has been confined to a nar­row sect of the Syrians, was diffused over the mass of the Egyptian or Coptic na­tion; who, almost unanimously, rejected the decrees of the synod of Chalcedon.A thousand years were now elapsed since Egypt had ceased to be a kingdom, sincethe conquerors of Asia and Europe had trampled on the ready necks of a people,whose ancient wisdom and power ascend beyond the records of history. The con­flict of zeal and persecution rekindled some sparks of their national spirit. Theyabjured, with a foreign heresy, the manners and language of the Greeks: everyMelchite, in their eyes, was a stranger, every Jacobite a citizen; the alliance of
(1) Eulogius, who had been a monk of Antioch, «u more conspicuous for subtlety than eloquence. Heproves that the enemies of the faith, the Gnianites and Thodosians, ought not to be reconciled; that the sameproposition may be orthodox in the mouth of St. Cyril, heretical in that of Severus; that the opposite asser­tions of St. Leo arc equally true, Sec. His writings are no longer extant, except, in the extracts of Photius,who had perused them with care and satisfaction. Cod. 208.225—227. 230—280.
(2) See the life of John the eleemosynary by_ his cotemporary Leontius, bishop of Neapolis in Cyprus, whoseGreek text, either lost or hidden, is reflected in the Latin version of Baroniui, (A. D. 619. No. 9. A. D. 629.No. 8.) Pagi, (Critica. tom.ii. p. 753.1 and Fabricius, (lib. v. c. 11. torn. vii. p. 454.) hare made some critical oV-serrations.







OCR Output








THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 24?


and to assert the right of a military election. They marched towards the capital;yet the clergy, the senate, and the people of Constantinople, adhered to the causeof Michael; and the troops and treasures of Asia might have protracted the mis­chiefs of civil war. But his humanity (by the ambitious it will be termed hisweakness) protested, that not a drop of Christian blood should be shed in his quar­rel, and his messengers presented the conquerors with the keys of the city and thepalace. They were disarmed by his innocence and submission; his life and his eyeswere spared; and the imperial monk enjoyed the comforts of solitude and reli­gion above thirty-two years after he had been stripped of the purple and separatedfrom his wife.
A rebel in the time of Nicephorus, the famous and unfortunate Bardanes, hadonce the curiosity to consult an Asiatic prophet, who, after prognosticating his fall,announced the fortunes of his three principal officers, Leo the Armenian, Michaelthe Phrygian, and Thomas the Cappadocian, the successive reigns of the two for­mer, the fruitless and fatal enterprise of the third. This prediction was verified,or rather was produced by the event. Ten years afterwards, when the Thraciancamp rejected the husband of Procopia, the crown was presented to the same Leo,the first in military rank, and the secret author of the mutiny. As he affected tohesitate,—" With this sword," said his companion Michael, "I will open the gatesof Constantinople to your imperial sway; or instantly plunge it into "your bosom,if you obstinately resist the just desires of your fellow-soldiers." The compli­ance of the Armenian was rewarded with the empire, and he reigned seven yearsand a half under the name of Leo V. Educated in a camp, and ignorant both oflaws and letters, he introduced into his civil government the rigour and even cru­elty of military discipline; but if his severity was sometimes dangerous to the in­nocent, it was always formidable to the guilty. ■ His religious inconstancy was taxedby the epithet of Chameleon, but the catholics have acknowledged* by the voiceof a saint and confessors, that the life of the Iconoclast was useful to the republic.The zeal of his companion Michael was repaid with riches, honours, and militarycommand; and his subordinate talents were beneficially employed in the publicservice. Yet the Phrygian was dissatisfied at receiving as a favour a scanty por­tion of the imperial prize, which he had bestowed on his equal; and his discontent,which sometimes evaporated in a hasty discourse, at length assumed a more threat­ening and hostile aspect against a prince whom he represented as a cruel tyrant.That tyrant, however, repeatedly detected, warned, and dismissed the old com­panion of his arms, till fear and resentment prevailed over gratitude; and Michael,after a scsutiny into his actions, was convicted of treason, and sentenced to beburnt alive in the furnace of the private baths. The devout humanity of the em­press Theophano was fatal to her husband and family. A solemn day, the twenty-fifth of December, had been fixed for the execution; she urged, that the anniver­sary of the Saviour's birth would be profaned by this inhuman spectacle, and Leoconsented with reluctance to a decent respite. But on the vigil of the feast, hissleepless anxiety prompted him to visit at the dead of night the chamber in whichhis enemy was confined: he beheld him released from his chain, and stretched onthe jailor's bed in a profound slumber. Leo was alarmed at these signs of securi­ty and intelligence; but though he retired with silent steps, his entrance and de­parture were noticed by a .slave who lay concealed in a corner of the prison. Un­der the pretence of requesting the spiritual aid of a confessor, Michael informedthe conspirators, that their lives depended on his discretion, and that a few hourswere left to assure their own safety, by the deliverance of their friend and coun­try. On the great festivals a chosen band of priests and chanters was admittedinto the palace by a private gate to sing matins in the chapel; and Leo, who re­gulated with the same strictness the discipline of the choir and of the camp, wasseldom absent from those early devotions. In the ecclesiastical habit, but withswords under their robes, the conspirators mingled with the procession, lurked inthe angles of the chapel, and expected, as the signal of murder, the intonationof the first psalm by the emperor himself. The imperfect light, and the unifor­mity of dress, might have favoured his escape, while their assault was pointedagainst a harmless priest; but they soon discovered their mistake, and encom­passed on all sides the royal victim. Without a weapon and without a friend, hegrasped a weighty cross, and stood at bay against the hunters of his life; but ashe asked for mercy,—"This is the hour, not of mercy, but of vengeance," wasthe inexorable reply. The stroke of a well-aimed sword separated from hisbodvthe right arm and the cross, and Leo the Armenian was slain at tne foot of the altar.







OCR Output








SOS THE DECLINE AND FALL


privileges, of the Jews, who had multiplied to the number of forty thousand, weresecured by the laws of the Caesars and Ptolemies, and a long proscription of sevenhundred years since the foundation of Alexandria. Without any legal sentence,without any royal mandate, the patriarch, at the dawn of day, led a seditious mul­titude to the attack of the synagogues. Unarmed and unprepared, the Jews wereincapable of resistance; their houses of prayer were levelled with the ground, andthe episcopal warrior, after rewarding his troops with the plunder of their goods,expelled from the city the remnant of the unbelieving nation. Perhaps he mightplead the insolence of their prosperity, and their deadly hatred of the Christians,whose blood they had recently shed in a malicious or accidental tumult. Suchcrimes would have deserved the animadversion of the magistrate; but in this pro­miscuous outrage the innocent were confounded with the guilty, and Alexandriawas impoverished by the loss of a wealthy and industrious colony. The zeal ofCyril exposed him to the penalties of the Julian law; but in a feeble government,and a superstitious age, he was secure of impunity, and even of praise. Orestescomplained; but his just complaints were too quickly forgotten by the ministers ofTheodosius, and too deeply remembered by a priest who affected to pardon, andcontinued to hate, the prefect of Egypt. As he passed through the streets, hischariot was assaulted by a band of five hundred of the Nitrian monks; his guardsfled from the wild beasts of the desert; his protestations, that he was a Christianand a catholic, were answered by a volley of stones, and the face of Orestes wascovered with blood. The loyal citizens of /Alexandria hastened to his rescue; heinstantly satisfied his justice and revenge against the monk, by whose hand he hadbeen wounded, and Ammonius expired under the rod of the lictor. At the com­mand of Cyril, his body was raised from the ground, and transported in solemnprocession, to the cathedral; the name of Ammonius was changed to that of Thau-masius the wonderful; his tomb was decorated with the trophies of martyrdom,and the patriarch ascended the pulpit, to celebrate the magnanimity of an assassinand a rebel. Such honours might incite the faithful to combat and die under thebanners of the saint: and he soon prompted, or accepted, the sacrifice of a virgin,who professed the religion of the Greeks, and cultivated the friendship of Orestes.Hypatia, the daughter of Theon the mathematician,(l) was initiated in her fa­ther's studies: her learned comments have elucidated the geometry of Apolloniusand Diophantus, and she publicly taught, both at Athens and Alexandria, the phi­losophy of Plato and Aristotle. In the bloom of beauty, and in the maturity ofwisdom, the modest maid refused her lovers and instructed her disciples; the per­sons most illustrious for their rank or merit were impatient to visit the female phi­losopher, and Cyril beheld, with jealous eye, the gorgeous train of horses andslaves who crowded the door of her academy. A rumour was spread among theChristians, that the daughter of Theon was the only obstacle to the reconciliationof the prefect and the archbishop; and that obstacle was speedily removed. On afatal day, in the holy season of lent, Hypatia was torn from her chariot, strippednaked, dragged to the church, and inhumanly butchered by the hands of Peterthe reader, and a troop of savage and merciless fanatics: her flesh was scrapedfrom her bones.with sharp oyster shells,(2) and her quivering limbs were deliveredto the flames. The just progress of inquiry and punishment was stopped by sea­sonable gifts; but the murder of Hypatia has imprinted an indelible stain on thecharacter and religion of Cyril of Alexandria. (3)
Superstition, perhaps, would more gently expiate the blood of a virgin, thanthe banishment of a saint; and Cyril had accompanied his uncle to the iniquitoussynod of the oak. When the memory of Chrysostom was restored and consecra­ted, the nephew of Theophilus, at the head of a dying faction, still maintainedthe justice of his sentence; nor was it till after a tedious delay, and an obstinate re-


;i) For Theon,and his daughter Hypatia, see Fabricius, Bibliothec.tom. viii. n.210, 311. Her article mthe Lexicon of Suidas is curious and original. Hesychius (Meursii Opera, torn. vii. p. 295,290.) observes, thatsiie was prosecuted Six thv vjre?2>n\hwtrxv o-oQixv; and an epigram in the Greek Anthology (Ub. i. c. 76. p.159. edit. Broilsei) celebrates her knowledge and eloquence. She is honourably mentioned (Epist. 10.15,16 .33—80. 121. 135.153.) by her friend and disciple the philosophic bishop Synerius.
(2) OTTpeticoi,- aiviiXer, x*i/isxtiScv, Sjattrwao-MiTfs, &c. Oyster-shells were plentifully strewed on the sea-beachbefore the Csesareum. I may therefore prefer the literal tense, without rejecting the metaphorical version of"teguUe, tiles, which is used by M. de Valois. I am ignorant, and the assassins were probably regardless, whe­ther their victim was yet alive.
(3) These exploits of St. Cyril are recorded by Socrates; (lib. vii. e. 13—15, and the most reluctant bigotryis compelled to copy an historian who coolly styles the murderers of Hypatia «u5p;; to srpevitp* tv^ifftu. At,Ji T,™'.!?? of that '"j"1*11 name, I am pleased to observe a blush even on the cheek of Baronius. (A. D.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 1T9


Schirin,(l) her wit, her musical talents, are still famous in the history, or ratherin the romances of the east: her own name is expressive, in the Persian tongue, ofsweetness and grace; and the epithet of Parvis alludes to the charms of her royallover. Yet Sira never shared the passion which she inspired, and the bliss ofChosroes was tortured by a jealous doubt, that while he possessed her person, shehad bestowed her affections on a meaper favourite. (2)
While the majesty of the Roman name was revived in the east, the prospect ofEurope is less pleasing and less glorious. By the departure of the Lombards, andthe ruin of the Gepidsc, the balance of power was destroyed on the Danube; andthe Avars spread theirpermanent dominion from the foot of the Alps to the sea-coast of the Euxine. The reign of Baian is the brightest era of their monarchy;their chagan, who occupied the rustic palace of Attila, appears to have imitatedhis character and policy;(3) but as the same scenes were repeated in a smaller cir­cle, a minute representation of the copy would be devoid of the greatness and no­velty of the original. The pride of the second Justin, of Tiberius, and Maurice,was humbled by a proud barbarian, more prompt to inflict, than exposed to sufferthe injuries of war; and as often as Asia was threatened by the Persian arms, Eu­rope was oppressed by the dangerous inroads, or costly friendship of the Avars.When the Roman envoys approached the presence of the chagan, they werecommanded to wait at the door of his tent, till, at the end perhaps of ten or twelvedays, he condescended to admit thera. If the substance or the style of their mes­sage was offensive to his ear, he insulted, with a real or affected fury, their owndignity, and that of their prince; their baggage was plundered, and their liveswere only saved by the promise of a richer present and a more respectful address.But his sacred ambassadors enjoyed and abused an unbounded license in the midstof Constantinople: they urged with importunate clamours, the increase of tribute,or the restitution of captives and deserters; and the majesty of the empire was al­most equally degraded by a base compliance, or by the false and fearful excuses,with which they eluded such insolent demands. The chagan had never seen anelephant; and his curiosity was excited by the strange, and perhaps fabulous, por­trait of that wonderful animal. At his command, one of the largest elephants ofthe imperial stables was equipped with stately caparisons, and conducted by anumerous train to the royal village in the plains of Hungary. He surveyed theenormous beast with surprise, with disgust, and possibly with terror; and smiledat the vain industry of the Romans, who, in search of such useless rarities, couldexplore the limits of the land and sea. He wished, at the expense of the emperor,to repose in a golden bed. The wealth of Constantinople, and the skilful diligenceof her artists, were instantly devoted to the gratification of his caprice; but whenthe work was finished, he rejected with scorn a present so unworthy the majestyof a great king. (4) These were the casual sallies of his pride, but the avarice ofthe chagan was a more steady and tractable passion; a rich and regular supply ofsilk apparel, furniture, and plate, introduced the rudiments of art and luxuryamong the tents of the Scythians; their appetite was stimulated by the pepper andcinnamon of India;(5) the annual subsidy or tribute was raised from fourscore toone hundred and twenty thousand pieces of gold; and after each hostile interrup-
(1) The Greeks only describe her as a Roman by birth, a Christian by religion; but she is represented asthe daughter of the emperor Maurice in the Persian and Turkish Romances, which celebrate the lore ofKhosrou for Schirin, of Schirin for Ferhad, the most beautiful youth of the east. D'Herbelot, Bibtiolh. Ori­ental, p. 789. 097,998.
(2) The whole series of the tyranny of Hormouz, the revolt of Bahram, and the flight and restoration ofChosroes, is related by two cotemporary Greeks—more concisely by Evagrius, (lib. vs. c. 10—19.)—and mostdiffusely by Theophylact Simocatta: (lib. iii. c. vi.—18. lib. iv. c. 1—IS. lib. v. c. 1—1 J.) succeeding compilers,Zonaras and Cedrenus, can only transcribe and abridge. The Christian Arabs Eutychtus, (Annak torn. ii. p.200—208.) and Abulpharagius, (Dynast, p. 96—98.) appear to have consulted some particular memoirs. Thegreat Persian historians of the fifteenth century, Mirkhond and Khondemir, are only known to me by the im­perfect extracts of Sbikark, (Tarikh, p. 150—lis.) Texeira, or rather Stevens, (Hist, of Persia, p. 182—188.) aTurkish MS. translated by the abbe Fourmont, (Hist, de I'Academie des Inscriptions, torn. vii. p. 325—334.)and d'Herbelot,(anx mots, Hormouz, p. 457—459. Bahram, p. 174. Kliosrou Parviz, p. 996. Were I perfect­ly satisfied of their authority. I could wish these oriental materials had been more copious.
(3) A general idea of the pride and power of the chagan may be taken from Mrnander, (Excerp. Legat. p.117, &c. and Theophylact, lib. i. c. 3. lib. vii.c. IS.) whose eight books are much more honourable to the Avarthan to the Roman prince. The predecessors of Baian had tasted the liberality of Rome, and he survivedthe reign of Maurice, (Bunt, Hist, des Peuples Barbares, torn. it. p. 54S.) The chagan who invaded Italy, A.J). 611.(Muratori, Annali. torn. v. p. 305.) was then juvenili setate florentem, (Paul Warnefrid.de Geit Lan-gobard, lib. v. c. 38.) the son, perhaps, or the grandson of Baian.
M) Theophylact, lib. i. c. 5,6. .
(5) Even in the field, the chagan delighted in the use of these aromaties. He solicited as a gift. Mum;.xapuz**;, and received twrtpt Kxt qvkkov Iv&ui-, xxtnxo rt scat tck /.eyo^svoi/ xsarov. Theophylact, lib. vii. CIS.The Europeans of the ruder ages consumed more spices in their meat and drink than is compatible with the.delicacy of a modern palate. Vie Priee des Francois, torn. ri. p. 162,163.







OCR Output








354 THE DECLINE AND FALL


mascus, they reposed near the grove and fountain of Tabuc. Beyond that place,Mahomet declined the prosecution of the war: he declared himself satisfied withthe peaceful intentions; he was more probably daunted by the martial array of theemperor of the east. But the active and intrepid Caled spread around the terrorof his name; and the prophet received the submission of the tribes and cities, fromthe Euphrates to Ailah, at the head of the Red Sea. To his Christian subjects,Mahomet readily granted the security of their persons, the freedom of their trade,the property of their goods, and the toleration of their worship.(l) The weaknessof their Arabian brethren had restrained them from opposing his ambition; thedisciples of Jeslfe were endeared to the enemy of the Jews; and it was the interestof a conqueror to propose a fair capitulation to the most powerful religion of theearth.
Till the age of sixty-three years, the strength of Mahomet was equal to thetemporal and spiritual fatigues of his mission. His epileptic fits, an absurd calum­ny of the Greeks, would be an object of pity rather than abhorrence,(2) but heseriously believed that he was poisoned at Chaibar, by the revenge of a Jewishfemale. (3) During four years, the health of the prophet declined; his infirmitiesincreased; but his mortal disease was a fever of fourteen days, which deprived himby intervals of the use of reason. As soon as he was conscious of his danger, heedified his brethren by the humility of his virtue or penitence. " If there be anyman," said the apostle from the pulpit, " whom I have unjustly scourged, I submitmy own back to the lash of retaliation. Have I aspersed the reputation of a Mus­sulman? let him proclaim my faults in the face of the congregation. Has any onebeen despoiled of his goods? the little that I possess shall compensate the princi­pal and the interest of the debt." " Yes," replied a voice from the crowd, "Iam entitled to three drachms of silver." Mahomet heard the complaint, satisfiedthe demand, and thanked his creditor for accusing him in this world rather thanat the day of judgment. He beheld with temperate firmness the approach ofdeath; enfranchised his slaves (seventeen men, as they are named, and eleven wo­men;) minutely directed the order of his funeral, and moderated the lamenta­tions of his weeping friends, on whom he bestowed the benediction of peace.Till the third day before his death, he regularly performed the function ofpublic prayer; the choice of Abubekcr to supply his place, appeared to markthat ancient and faithful friend as his successor in the sacerdotal and regal office;but he prudently declined the risk and envy of a more explicit nomination. At amoment when his faculties were visibly impaired, he called for pen and ink towrite, or more properly to dictate a divine book, the sum and accomplishment ofall his revelations: a dispute arose in the chamber, whether he should be allowedto supersede the authority of the Koran; and the prophet was forced to reprovethe indecent vehemence of his disciples. If the slightest credit may be affordedto the traditions of his wives and companions, he maintained in the bosom of hisfamily, and to the last moments of his life, the dignity of an apostle, and the faithof an enthusiast; described the visits of Gabriel, who bade an everlasting farewellto the earth, and expressed his lively confidence, not only of the mercy, but ofthe favour of the Supreme Being. In a familiar discourse he had mentioned hisspecial prerogative, that the angel of death was not allowed to take his soul till hehad respectfully asked the permission of the prophet. The request was granted;and Mahomet immediately fell into the agony of his dissolution: his head was re­clined on the lap of Ayesnn, the best beloved of all his wives; he fainted with theviolence of pain; recovering his spirits, he raised his eyes towards the roof of the
(1) The Diploma oectiritatis Aiknsibus, is attested l>y Ahmed Ben Joseph, and the author Libri Splendorum;/ Gagnier, Not. ad Abulfedam, p. 125.) but Abulfeda himself, ns well as Elmacin (Hist. Saraeen, p. 11.0 thoughlie owns Mahomet's regard far the Christians (p. 13..) only mentions peace and tribute. In the year 1630, Sio-nita published at Paris the text and version of Mahomet's patent in favour of the Christians; which was ad­mitted and reprobated by the opposite taste of Salmatius and Grotins (Bayle, Mahomet* Rem. A AO Hottingerdoubts of its authenticity (Hist. Orient, p. 237.;) Renaudot urges the consent of the Mahometans (Hist. Patri­arch. Ales. p. 109.;) but Mmheim (Hist. Eccles. p. 244.) shows the futility of their opinion, and inclines to be­lieve it spurious. Yet Abtilpharagius quotes the impostor's treaty with the Nestorian patriarch (Asseman. Bi-blioth. Orient, torn. ii. n_. 418.;) but Abulpharagius was primate of the Jacobites.
(2) The epilepsy, or falling sickness of Mahomet, is asserted by Theophanes, Zonaras, and the rest of theGreeks; and is greedily swallowed by the gross bigotry of Hottinger (Hist. Orient, p. 10,11.,) Prideanx (Life ofMahomet, p. 12.,) and Maracci (torn. ii. Alcoran, p. 762, 763.) The titles {the wrapped up* the covered) of twochapters ot the Koran (73, 74.) can hardly be strained to such an interpretation: the silence, the ignorance, ofthe Mahometan commentators, is more conclusive than the most peremptory denial; and the charitable side isespoused by Ockley (Hist, of the Saracens, torn. i. p. 301..) Gagnier(ad Abulfed. p. 9. Vie de Mahomet, torn. i.p. 118.,) and Sale (Koran, p. 409—4740
(3) This poison, (more ignominious since it was offered as a test of his prophetic knowledge) is frankly corvleased by his zealous votaries, Abulfeda (p. 92.) and Al Jannabi (apud Gagnier, torn. ii. r- 286—2880







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. . 393


t»f the present hour, who strives to follow the rapid course of the Saracens, muststudy to explain by what means the church and state were saved from this im­pending, and, as it should seem, from this inevitable danger. The deserts of Scy-thia and Sarmatia might be guarded by their extent, their climate, their poverty,and the courage of the northern shepherds; China was remote and inaccessible;but the greatest part of the temperate zone was subject to the Mahometan con­querors, the Greeks were exhausted by the calamities of war and the loss of theirfairest provinces, and the barbarians of Europe might justly tremble at the preci­pitate fall of the Gothic monarchy. In this inquiry I shall unfold the events thatrescued our ancestors of Britain, and our neighbours of Gaul, from the civil andreligious yoke of the Koran; ihat protected the majesty of Home, and delayed theservitude of Constantinople; that invigorated the defence of the Christians, andscattered among their enemies the seeds of division and decay.
Forty-six years after the flight of Mahomet from Mecca, his disciples appearedin arms under the walls of Constantinople. (1) They were animated by a genuineor fictitious saying of the prophet, that, to the first army which besieged the cityof the Csesarsj their sins were forgiven; the long series of the Roman triumphswould be meritoriously transferred to the conquerors of new Rome; and the wealthof nations was deposited in this well-chosen seat of royalty and commerce. Nosooner had the caliph Moawiyah suppressed his rivals and established his throne,than he aspired to expiate the guilt of civil blood, by the success and glory of hisholy expedition ;(2) his preparations by sea and land were adequate to the import­ance of the object; his standard was intrusted to Sophian, a veteran warrior, butthe troops were encouraged by the example and presence of Yezid, the son and
Sresumptive heir of the commander of the faithful. The Greeks had little toope, nor had their enemies any reasons to fear, from the courage and vigilance ofthe reigning emperor, who disgraced the name of Constantine, and imitated onlythe inglorious years of his grandfather Heraclius. Without delay or opposition,the naval forces of the Saracens passed through the unguarded channel of theHellespont, which even now, under the feeble and disorderly government of theTurks, is maintained as the natural bulwark of the capital.(3) The Arabian, fleet cast anchor, and the troops were disembarked near the palace of Hebdomcn,seven miles from the city. During many days, from the dawn of light to the eve­ning, the line of assault was extended from the golden gate to the eastern promon­tory, and the foremost warriors were impelled by the weight and effort of the suc­ceeding columns. But the beseigers had formed an insufficient estimate of thestrength and resources of Constantinople. The solid and lofty walls were guardedby numbers and discipline: the spirit of the Romans was rekindled by the last dan­ger of their religion and empire: the fugitives from the conquered provinces moresuccessfully renewed the defence of Damascus and Alexandria; and the Saracens• were dismayed by the strange and prodigious effects of artificial fire- This firmand effectual resistance diverted their arms to the more easy attempts of plunderingthe European and Asiatic coasts of the Propontis; and, after keeping the sea fromthe month of April to that of September, on the approach of winter they retreatedfourscore miles from the capital, to the isle of Cyzicus, in which they had establishedtheir magazine of spoil and provisions. So patient was their perseverance, or solanguid were their operations, that they repeated, in the six following summers,the same attack and retreat, with a gradual abatement of hope and vigour, till themischances of shipwreck and disease, of the sword and of fire, compelled themto relinquish the fruitless enterprise. They might bewail the loss, or commemo­rate the martyrdom, of thirty thousand Moslems, who fell in the siege of Constan­tinople; and the solemn funeral of Abu Ayub, or Job, excited the curiosity of theChristians themselves. That venerable Arab, one of the last of the companions
(1) Theophanes placet the teven years of the siege of Constantinople in the year of our Christian era 673 (ofthe Alexandrian 695, Sept. 1.) and the peace of the Saracens, four years afterward; a glaring inconsistency!which Petaviua, Guar, and Pagi (Critica, torn. iv. p. 63,64.) have struggled to remove. Of the Arabians, theHegira 52 (A. D. 672, January 8,) is assigned by Elrnacin, the year 48, (A. D. 668, Feb. 20.) by Abulfeda, whosetestimony 1 esteem the most convenient and creditable.
(3) For this first siege ot Constantinople, set; Nicephorus (Breviar. p. 21,22.) Tlirophanes (Chronograph, p.294.) Cedrenus (Compend. p. 437.) Zonaras (Hist. torn. ii. lib. 14. p. 8y.) Einstein, (Hist. Saracen, p. 56,57.)Abulfeda (Annal. Moslem, p. 127, 128. vers. Reiske.) d'Herbelot (Bibiiot. Orient. Ctuistantinah,) Oekk'y's His-tory of the Saracens, vol. ii. p. 127,128.
(3) The state and defence of the Dardanelles is exposed in the Memoires of the Baron de Tott, (torn. iii. p. Jo.—97.) who was sent to fortify them against the Russians. From a principal actor, I should have expected moreaccurate details; but he seems to write for the amusement, rather than the instruction, of his reader. Perhaps,on the approaoh of the enemy, the minister of Constantine was occupied, like that of Mustapha, in finding twoCanary birth, who should sing precisely the lame note.
Vol. HI. 50







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


health again revived their passions and habits; but philosophy must disdain theobservation of Procopius, that the lives of such men were guarded by the peculiarfavour of fortune or providence. He forgot, or perhaps he secretly recollected,that the plague had touched the person of Justinian himself; but the abstemiousdiet of the emperor may suggest, as in the case of Socrates, a more rational andhonourable cause for his recovery. (1) During his sickness, the public consterna­tion was expressed in the habits of the citizens; and their idleness and despondenceoccasioned a general scarcity in the capital of the east.
Contagion is the inseparable symptom of the plague; which, by mutual respira­tion, is transfused from the infected persons to the lungs and stomach of those whoapproach them. While philosophers believe and tremble, it is singular, that theexistence of a real danger should have been denied bv a people most prone to vainand imaginary terrors.(2) Yet the fellow-citizens of Procopius were satisfied, bysome short and partial experience, that the infection could not be gained by theclosest conversation;(3) and this persuasion might support the assiduity of friendsor physicians in the care of the sick, whom human prudence would have con­demned to solitude and despair. But the fatal security, like the predestination ofthe Turks, must have aided the progress of the contagion; and those salutary pre­cautions, to which Europe is indebted for her safety, were unknown to the go­vernment of Justinian. No restraints were imposed on the free and frequent in­tercourse of the Roman provinces; from Persia to France, the nations weremingled and infected by wars and emigrations: and the pestilential odour, whichlurks for years in a bale of cotton, was imported, by the abuse of trade, into themost distant regions. The mode of its propagation is explained by the remark ofProcopius himself, that it always spread from the sea-coast to the inland country;the most sequestered islands and mountains were successively visited; the placeswhich had escaped the fury of its passage, were alone exposed to the contagion ofthe ensuing year. The winds might diffuse that subtle venom; but unless the at­mosphere be previously disposed for its reception, the plague would soon expirein the cold or temperate climates of the earth. Such was the universal corrup­tion of the air, that the pestilence, which burst forth in the fifteenth year of Jus­tinian, was not checked or alleviated by any difference of the seasons. In time, itsfirst malignity was abated and dispersed; the disease alternately languished andrevived; but it was not till the end of a calamitous period of fifty-two years, thatmankind recovered their health, or the air resumed its pure and salubrious qua­lity. No facts have been preserved to sustain an account, or even a conjecture,of the numbers that perished in this extraordinary mortality. I only find, thatduring three months, five, and at length, ten thousand persons died each day atConstantinople, that many cities of the east were left vacant, and that in severaldistricts of Italy, the harvest and the vintage withered on the ground. The tri­ple scourge of war, pestilence, and famine, afflicted the subjects of Justinian, andhis reign is disgraced by a visible decrease of the human species, which has neverbeen repaired in some of the fairest countries of the globe. (4)
(1) It was thui that Socrates had been saved by his temperance, in the plague of Athens. (Aul. Gelliut,Noc. Attie. 2.1.) Dr. Mead accounts for the peculiar salubrity of religious houses, by the two advantages ofseclusion and abstinence (p. 18,19.)
(3) Mead proves that the plague is contagious, from Thucydides, Lucretius, Aristotle, Galen, and commonexperience, (p. 10—SO.;) and he refutes (Preface, p. 2—13.) the contrary opinion of the French physicians whovisited Marseilles in the year 1720. Yet these were the recent and enlightened spectators of a plague which,in a few months, swept away fifty thousand inhabitants (sur la Peste de Marseille, Paris, 1786.) or a city that, inthe present hour of prosperity and trade, contains no more than ninety thousand souls (Neeker, sur les Fi­nances, torn. i. p. 231.)
(3) The strong assertions of Procopius—iwrs yap (xrpw cut, yxp i?i*Tt{—are overthrown by the subsequentexperience of Evagrios.
(4) After some figures of rhetoric, the sands of the sea, &c. Procopius (Anecdot. c. 18.) attempts a more de­finite account: that j*up*»j»v /a>»«c,- had been exterminated and er the reign of the imperial demon."The expression is obscure in grammar and arithmetic, and a literal interpretation would produce several mil­lions of millions. Aleroannus (p. 80.,) and Cousin (torn. iii. p. 178..) translate this passage u two hundred mil­lions;" bnwl am ignorant of their motives. If we drop the iMfx Y*,-, the remaining pvpiKSagp juvcix r, a myriad«f>myriads, wouldI furnish one hundred millions, a number not wholly inadmissible.







OCR Output








102 . THE DECLINE AND FALL


to annoy the feet of the horses; and as new gates could not suddenly be procured,the entrance was guarded by a Spartan rampart of his bravest soldiers. Atthe expiration of twenty-five days, Totila returned by hasty marches from Apu­lia, to avenge the injury and disgrace. Belisarius expected his approach. TheGoths were thrice repulsed in three general assaults; they lost the flower of theirtroops; the royal standard had almost fallen into the hands of the enemy, andthe Fame of Totila sunk, as it had risen, with the fortune of his arms. \Vhateverskill and courage could achieve, had been performed by the Roman general; itremained only, that Justinian should terminate, by a strong and seasonable effort,the war which he had ambitiously undertaken. The indolence, perhaps the im­potence, of a prince who despised his enemies and envied his servants, protractedthe calamities of Italy. After a long silence, Belisarius was commanded to leavea sufficient garrison at Rome, and to transport himself into the province of Luca-nia, whose inhabitants, inflamed by catholic zeal, had cast away the yoke of their' Arian conquerors. In this ignoble warfare, the hero, invincible against the powerof the barbarians, was basely vanquished by the delay, the disobedience, and thecowardice of his own officers. He reposed in his winter-quarters of Crotona, inthe full assurance, that the two passes of the Lucanian hills were guarded by hiscavalry. They were betrayed by treachery or weakness; and the rapid marchof the Goths scarcely allowed time for the escape of Belisarius to the coast of Si­cily. At length a fleet and army were assembled for the relief of Ruscianum, orRossano,(l) a fortress sixty furlongs from the ruins of Sybaris, where the noblesof Lucania had taken refuge. In the first attempt, the Roman forces were dissi-
Eated by a storm. In the second they approached the shore; but they saw theills covered with archers, the landing-place defended by a line of spears, and theking of the Goths impatient for battle. The conqueror of Italy retired with asigh, and continued to languish, inglorious and inactive, till Antonina, who hadbeen sent to Constantinople to solicit succours, obtained, after the death of the em­press, the permission of his return.
The five last campaigns of Belisarius might abate the envy of his competitors,whose eyes had been dazzled and wounded by the blaze of his former glory. In­stead of delivering Italy from the Goths, he had wandered like a fugitive alongthe coast, without daring to march into the country, or to accept the bold and re­peated challenge of Totila. Yet in the judgment of the few who could discriminatecounsels from events, and compare the instruments with the execution, he ap­peared a more consummate master of the art of war, than in the season of hisprosperity, when he presented two captive kings before the throne of Justinian.The valour of Belisarius was not chilled by age; his prudence was matured byexperience, but the moral virtues of humanity and justice seem to have yielded-to the hard necessity of the times. The parsimony or poverty of the emperorcompelled him to deviate from the rule of conduct which had deserved the loveand confidence of the Italians. The war was maintained by the oppression of Ra­venna, Sicily, and all the faithful subjects of the empire; and the rigorous prosecutionof Herodian provoked that injured or guilty officer to deliver Spoleto into the handsof the enemy. The avarice of Antonina, which had been sometimes diverted bylove, now reigned without a rival in her breast. Belisarius himself had alwaysunderstood, that riches, in a corrupt age, are the support and ornament of per­sonal merit. And it cannot be presumed that he should stain his honour for thepublic service, without applying a part of the spoil to his private emolument.The hero had escaped the sword of the barbarians, but the dagger of conspiracy (2)awaited his return. In the midst of wealth aid honours, Ai iiaban, who had chas­tised the African tyrant, complained of the ingratitude of courts. He aspired to-Prsejecta, the emperor's niece, who wished to reward her deliverer; but the im­pediment of his previous marriage was asserted by the piety of Theodora. Thepride of royal descent was irritated by flattery; and the service in which he gloried,had proved him capable of bold and sanguinary deeds. The death of Justinian•was resolved, but the conspirators delayed the execution till they could surprise
(Procopitu, Gothic, lib. iii. c. 24. Just. Lipsius, Poliercetw, lib. r. c. 3.} Tbe metaphor was borrowed from thetrihuli {land caltrops,) an herb with a prickly fruit, common in Italy (Martin, ad Virgil. Georgic. 1.153. vol. ii.p. 33.)
(1) Ruscia, the novate Thurlorum, was transferred to the distance of sixty stadia to Ruscianum, Rossano,-an archbishopric without suffragans. The republic of Sybaris is now the estate of tbe duke of Corigliano,(Kiedesel, Travels into Magna Grtecia and Sicily, p. 166—171.)
(2) This conspiracy is related by Procopius (Gothic, lib. iii. c. Si, 32.) with such freedom and candour, thatthe liberty of the Anecdotes gives him nothing to add.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


widow of Alboin: her situation and her past conduct might justify the most licen­tious proposals; and she readily listened to the passion of a minister, who, evenin the decline of the empire, was respected as the equal of kings. The death ofa jealous lover was an easy and grateful sacrifice, and as Helmichis issued fromthe bath, he received the deadly potion from the hand of his mistress. The tasteof the liquor, its speedy operation, and his experience of the character of Rosa­mond, convinced him that he was poisoned: he pointed his dagger to her breast,compelled her to drain the remainder of the cup, and expired in a few minutes,with the consolation that she could not survive to enjoy the fruits of her wicked­ness. The daughter of Alboin anorRosamond, with the richest spoils of the Lom­bards, was embarked for Constantinople; the surprising strength of Peredeusamused and terrified the imperial court; his blindness and revenge exhibited animperfect copy of the adventures of Samson. By the free suffrage of the nation,in the assembly of Pavia, Clepho, one of their noblest chiefs, was elected as thesuccessor of Alboin. Before the end of eighteen months, the throne was pollutedby a second murder; Clepho was stabbed by the hand of a domestic; the regal of­fice was suspended above ten years, during the minority of his son Authoris; andItaly was divided and oppressed by a ducal aristocracy of thirty tyrants.(l)
When the nephew of Justinian ascended the throne, he proclaimed a new era ofhappiness and glory. The annals of a second Justin(2) are marked with disgraceabroad and misery at home. In the west the Roman empire was afflicted by theloss of Italy, the desolation of Africa, and the conquest of the Persians. Injus­tice prevailed both in the capital and the provinces; the rich trembled for theirproperty, the poor for their safety, the ordinary magistrates were ignorant or ve­nal, the occasional remedies appear to have been arbitrary and violent, and thecomplaints of the people could no longer be silenced by the splendid names of alegislator and a conqueror. The opinion which imputes to the prince all the ca­lamities of his times, may be countenanced by the historian as a serious truth erasalutary prejudice. Yet a candid suspicion will arise, that the sentiments of Jus­tin were pure and benevolent, and that he might have filled his station withoutreproach, if the faculties of his mind had not been impaired by disease, which de­prived the emperor of the use of his feet, and confined him to the palace, a stran­ger to the complaints of the people and the vices of the government. The tardyknowledge of his own impotence determined him to lay down the weight of the dia­dem; and in the choice of a worthy substitute, he showed some symptoms of a dis­cerning and even magnanimous spirit. The only son of Justin and Sophia died in hisinfancy: their daughter Arabia was the wife of Baduarius,(3) superintendant ofthe palace, and afterwards commander of the Italian armies, who vainly aspiredto confirm the rights of marriage by those of adoption. While the empire ap­peared an object of desire, Justin was accustomed to behold with jealousy and ha­tred his brothers and cousins, the rivals of his hopes; nor could he depend on thegratitude of those who would accept the purple as a restitution, rather than a gift.Of these competitors, one had been removed by exile, and afterwards by death;and the emperor himself had inflicted such cruel insults on another, that he musteither dread his resentment or despise his patience. This domestic animosity wasrefined into a generous resolution of seeking a successor, not in his family, but inthe republic: and the artful Sophia recommended Tiberius,(4) his faithful cap­tain of the guards, whose virtues and fortune the emperor might cherish as thefruit of his judicious choice. The ceremony of his elevation to the rank of Cxsaror Augustus, was performed in the portico of the palace, in the presence of thepatriarch and the senate. Justin collected the remaining strength of his mind and


n) See the history of Paul, lib. ii. e, 28—32. I have horrowed some interesting circumstance! from theLiber Fontificalis of Agnellus, in Script. Her. Ital. tom.ii. p. 124. Of all Chronological guides, Muratori isthe safest.
(2) The original authors for the reign of Justin the Younger, are Evagrius, Hist. Eccles. lilj. v. c. 1—12. Theophanes, in Chronograph, p. 204—210. Zonaras, torn. ii. lib. 14. p. 70—72. Cedrcnu9, in Compend. p.588—392.
(3) Dispositorque novus sacra* Baduarius aula.
Successor soceri mox factus Cura palati. Corippus.
Baduarius is enumerated among the descendants and allies of the house of Justinian. A family of noble Ve­netians (Casa Badoero) built churches and gave dukes to the republic as early as the nintb century; and iftheir descent be admitted, no kings in Europe can produce a pedigree so ancient and illustrious. Ducange,Faro. Byzantin. p. 09. Ame'ot de la Houssaye, Gouveineiuent de Venise, torn, ii; p. 5S5.
(4) The praise bestowed on princes before their elevation, is the purest and most weighty. Corippus buscelebrated Tiberius at the time of the accession of Justin, 'lib. i. 212—232.) Yet even a captain of the guardsmight attract the tottery of an African exile.







OCR Output








 


HU 5707 til


This book should be returned tothe Library on or before the last datestamped below.
A fine of five cents a day is incurredby retaining it beyond the specifiedtime.
Please return promptly.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 147


exacted, unless the offender can redeem his pardon by a fine of three hundredpounds of copper. The decemvirs distributed with much liberality the slighterchastisements of flagellation and servitude; and nine crimes of a very different com­plexion are adjudged worthy of death. 1. Any act of (reason against the state,.orof correspondence with the public enemy. The mode of execution was painfuland ignominious; the head of the degenerate Roman was shrouded in a veil, hishands were tied behind his back, and, after he had been scourged by the lictor, hewas suspended in the midst of the forum on a cross, or inauspicious tree. 2. Noc­turnal meetings in the city; whatever might be the pretence, of pleasure, or reli­gion, or the public good. 3. The murder of a citizen; for which the common feel­ings of mankind demanded the blood of the murderer. Poison is still, more odiousthan the sword or dagger; and we are surprised to discover, in two flagitious events,how early such subtle wickedness had infected the simplicity of the republic, andthe chaste virtues of the Roman matrons.(l) The parricide who violated the du­ties of nature and gratitude, was cast into the river or the sea, enclosed in a sack;and a cock, a viper, a dog, and a monkey, were successively added as the mostsuitable companions. (2) Italy produces no monkeys; but the want could never befelt, till the middle of the sixth century first revealed the guilt of a parricide. (3)4. The malice of an incendiary. After the previous ceremony of whipping, "hehimself was delivered to the flames; and in this example alone our reason is tempt­ed to approve the justice of retaliation. 5. Judicial fierjury. The corrupt andmalicious witness was thrown headlong from the Tarpeian rock to expiate hisfalsehood, which was rendered still more fatal by the severity of the penal laws,and the deficiency of written evidence. 6. The corruption of a judge, who accept­ed bribes, to pronounce an iniquitous sentence. 7. Libels and satires, whose rudestrains sometimes disturbed the peace of an illiterate city. The author was beatenwith clubs, a worthy chastisement, but it is not certain that he was left to expireunder the blows of the executioner. (4) 8. The nocturnal mischief of damagingor destroying a neighbour's corn. The criminal was suspended as a grateful vic­tor to Ceres. But the Sylvan deities were less implacable, and the extirpation ofa more valuable tree was compensated by the moderate fine of twenty-five poundsof copper. 9. Magical incantations; which had power, in the opinion of the Latinshepherds, to exhaust the strength of an enemy, to extinguish his life, and removefrom their seats his deep-rooted plantations. The cruelty of the twelve tablesagainst insolvent debtors still remains to be told; and I shall dare to prefer the lite­ral sense of antiquity, to the specious refinements of modern criticism. (5) Afterthe judicial prool or confession of the debt, thirty days of grace were allowed be­fore a Roman was delivered into the power of his fellow-citizens. In this privateprison, twelve ounces of rice was his daily food; he might be bound with a chainof fifteen pounds weight; and his misery was thrice exposed in the market-place,to solicit the compassion of his friends and countrymen. At the expiration of six­ty days, the debt was discharged by the loss of liberty or life; the insolvent debtorwas either put to death, or sold in foreign slavery beyond the Tiber: but if severalcreditors were alike obstinate and unrelenting, they might legally dismember hisbody, and satiate their revenge by his horrid partition. The advocates for thissavage law have insisted, that it must strongly operate in deterring idleness andfraud from contracting debts which they are unable to discharge; but experiencewould dissipate this salutary terror, by proving, that no creditor could be found to
(1) Livy mentions two remarkable and flagitious eras, of three thousand persons accused, and of onehundred and ninety noble matrons convicted of the crime of poisoning "(40.43. 8. 18.) Mr. Hume discrimi­nates the ages of public and private virtue (Essays, vol. i. p. 22,23.) I would rather say that such ebullition*of mischief (as in I?'ranee in the year 1680.) are accidents and prodigies which leave no marks on the mannersof a nation.
(2) The twelve tables and Cicero (pro Roscio Amerino, c. 25,26.) are content with the sack; Seneca (Ex­cerpt. Controvers. v. 4 ) adorns it with serpents; Juvenal pities the guiltless monkey (innoxia simia—Satir.xiii. 156.) Hadrian (apud Dositheuin Magistrum, lib. iii. c. 16. p. 874—876. with Schulting's Note,) Modesti-nus, (Pandect, xlviii. tit. 9. leg. ix.) Constantine (Cod. lib. ix. tit. 17,) and Justinian (Institut. lib. iv. tit. 18.0enumerate all the companions of the parricide. But this fanciful expcutiun was simplified in practice. Hodietamen vivi exurumur vel ad bestias danttir (Paul. Sentent. Recept. lib. v. tit. 24. p. 512. edit. Schulling.)
(3) The first parricide at Rome was I.. Ostius, after the second Punic war, (Plutarch in Romulo, torn. i. p.57.) During the Cimbric, P. Malleolus was frnilty of the first matricide, (Lis*. Epitom. lib. lxviii.)
(4) Horace talks of the formidine fustis (lib. ii. epist. ii. 154.;) but Cicero de Republica (lib. iv. apud Augus-tin. de Civitat. Dei. ix. 6. in Fragment. Phitosoph. torn. iii. p. 393. edit. Olivet.) affirms, that the decemvirsmade libels a capital offence: cum Perpaucas res capite faxissent—perpaucus I
(5) Bynkershoek (Observat. Joris. Rom. lib. i. c. 1. in Opp. torn. i. p. 9—u.) labours to prove that the cre­ditors divided not the body, but the price of the insolvent debtor. Yet this interpretation is one perpetualharsh metaphor; nor can he surmount the Roman authorities ef Qumtilian, Ciecihus, Favonius, and Tetrtul-lian. See Aulus Gellius, Noct. Attic. 210







OCR Output








270 THE DECLINE AND FALL


posite passions, a larger scope was, allowed in the revolutions of antiquity, than inthe smooth and solid temper of the modem world, which cannot easily repeateither the triumph of Alexander or the fall of Darius. But the peculiar infelicityof the Byzantine princes exposed them to domestic perils, without affording anylively promise of foreign conquest. From the pinnacle of greatness, Andronicuswas precipitated by a death more cruel and shameful than than that of the vilestmalefactor; but the most glorious of his predecessors had much more to dreadfrom their subjects than to hope from their enemies. The army_ was licentiouswithout spirit, the nation turbulent without freedom; the barbarians of the eastand west pressed on the monarchy, and the loss of the provinces was terminatedby the final servitude of the capital.
The entire series of Roman emperors, from the first of the Caesars to the last ofthe Constantines, extends above fifteen hundred years: and the term of dominion,unbroken by foreign conquest, surpassesthe measure of the ancient monarchies;the Assyrians or Medes, the successors of Cyrus, or those of Alexander.
CHAPTER XLIX.
Introduction, worship, and persecution of images.—Revolt of Italy and Rome.—Temporaldominion of the popes.—Conquest of Italy by the Franks—Establishment of Images.—Character and coronation of Charlemagne.—Restoration and decay of the Roman em­pire in the west.—Independence of Italy.—Constitution of the Germanic body.
In the connexion of the church and state, I have considered the former as sub­servient only, and relative to the latter; a salutary maxim, if in fact, as well as innarrative, it had ever been held sacred. The oriental philosophy of the Gnostics,tlje dark abyss of predestination and grace, and the strange transformations of theeucharist from the sign to the substance of Christ's body.fl) I have purposelyabandoned to the curiosity of the speculative divines. But I nave reviewed, withdiligence and pleasure, the objects of ecclesiastical history, by which the declineand fall of the Roman empire were materially affected, the propagation of Chris­tianity, the constitution of the catholic church, the ruin of paganism, and the sectsthat arose from the mysterious controversies concerning the Trinity and incarna­tion. At the head of this class, we may justly rank the worship of images, sofiercely disputed in the eighth and ninth centuries; since a question of popular su­perstition produced the revolt of Italy, the temporal power of the popes, and therestoration of the Roman empire in the west.
The primitive Christians were possessed with an unconquerable repugnance tothe use and abuse of images, and this aversion may be ascribed to their descentfrom the Jews, and their enmity to the Greeks. The Mosaic law had severelyproscribed all representations of the Deity; and that precept was firmly established,in the principles and practice of the chosen people. The wit of the Christian apo­logists was pointed against the foolish idolaters, who bowed before the workman­ship of their own hands; the images of brass and marble, which, had they been en­dowed with sense and motion, should have started rather from the pedestal toadore the creative powers of the artist. (2) Perhaps some recent and imperfectconverts of the Gnostic tribe, might crown the statues of Christ and St. Paul withthe profane honours which they paid to those of Aristotle and Pythagoras;(3) butthe public religion of the catholics was uniformly simple and spiritual; and the firstnotice of the use of pictures is in the censure of the council of Illiberis, three hundredyears after the Christian era. Under the successors of Constantine, in the peaceand luxury of the triumphant church, the more prudent bishops condescended toindulge a visible superstition, for the benefit of the multitude; and, after the ruinof paganism, they were no ionger restrained by the apprehension of an odiousparallel. The first introduction of a symbolic worship was in the veneration ofthe cross, and of relics. The saints and martyrs, whose intercession was implored
f 0 The learned Selden has given the history of transnbstantiation in a comprehensive and pithy sentence.—" This opinion is only rhetoric turned into logic." (His Works, vol. iii. p. 2073. in his Tabletalk.)
(2) Nec intelligunt homines ineptissimi, quod si sentire simulacra et rqoveri possent, adoratnra hominemfuissent a quo sunt expolira. (Divin. Instittu. lib. ii. c. 2.) Lactantius is the last as well as (he most eloqueot,of the Latin apologists. Their raillery of idols attacks not only the object, but the form and matter.
(3) See Irenaeus, Epiphauius,and Augustin. fBasnage, Hist, des Egiises Reformees, torn. ii. p. 1313.) ThisGnostic practice has a singular affinity with the private worship of Alexander Severut. (Lampridius, c. 39.Gardner, Heathen Testimonies, vol. iii. p. 34.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. SI


Will as the only rule of moral obligation The studies of Chosroes were osten­tatious and superficial: but his example awakened the curiosity of an ingeniouspeople, and the light of science was diffused over the dominions of Persia. (2) AtGondi Sapor, in the neighbourhood of the royal city of Susa, an academy of phy­sic was founded, which insensibly became a liberal school of poetry, philosophy,and rhetoric. (3) The annals of the monarchy (4) were composed; and while re­cent and authentic history might afford some useful lessons both to the prince andpeople, the darkness of the first ages was embellished by the giants, the dragons,and the fabulous heroes of oriental romance. (5) Every learned or confident stran­ger was enriched by the bounty, and flattered by the conversation, of the monarch :he nobly rewarded a Greek physician,(6) by the deliverance of three thousandcaptives; and the sophists who contended for his favour, were exasperated by thewealth and insolence of Uranius, their more successful rival. Nushirvan be­lieved, or at least respected, the religion of the Magi; and some traces of persecu­tion may be1 discovered in his reign. (7) Yet he allowed himself freely to comparethe tenets of the various sects; and the theological disputes in which he frequent­ly presided, diminished the authority of the priest, and enlightened the minds ofthe people. At his command, the most celebrated writers of Greece and Indiawere translated into the Persian language; a smooth and elegant idiom, recom­mended by Mahomet to the use of paradise; though it is branded with the epi­thets of savage and unmusical, by the ignorance and presumption of Agathias.(8)Yet the Greek historian might reasonably wonder, that it should be found possi­ble to execute an entire version of Plato and Aristotle in a foreign dialect, whichhad not been framed to express the spirit of freedom and the subtleties of philo­sophic disquisition. And, if the reason of the Stagyrite might be equally dark,or equally intelligible, in every tongue, the dramatic art and verbal argumentationof the disciple of Socrates,(9) appear to be indissolubly mingled with the graceand perfection of his Attic style. In the search of universal knowledge, Nushir­van was informed, that the moral and political fables of Pilpay, an ancient Brach-man, were preserved with jealous reverence among the treasures of the kings ofIndia. The physician Perozes was secretly despatched to the banks of the Gan­ges, with instructions to procure, at any price, the communication of this valuablework. His dexterity obtained a transcript, his learned diligence accomplishedthe translation; and the fables of Pilpay (10) were read and admired in the assem­bly of Nushirvan and his nobles. The Indian original, and the Persian copy, havelong since disappeared: but this venerable monument has been saved by the curi­osity of the Arabian caliphs, revived in the modern Persic, the Turkish, the Sy-riac, the Hebrew, and the Greek idioms, and transfused through successive ver­sions into the modern languages of Europe. In their present form, the peculiar


 


(1) A thousand years before his birth, the judges of Persia had [given a solemn opinion—ra B*;*a.iu:tT* n. p-a-inv ^i-sivsei jro*f jiv to av BwMrai (Herodot. lib. w. c. 31. p. 210. edit. Wesseling.) Nor had this constitutionalmaxim been neglected as a useless and barren theory.
(2) On the literary state of Persia, the Greek versions, philosophers, sophists, the learning or ignorance ofChosroes, Agathias (lib. ii.c. 66—71.) displays much information and strong prejudices.
(3) Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, torn. iv. p. 745—7-17.
(4) The Shah Nameh, or Bonk of Kings, is perhaps the original record of history which was translated intoGreek by the interpreter Sergius (Agathias, lib. v. p. 14!..) preserved after the Mahometan conquest, and ver­sified in the year 994, by the national poet Ferdoussi. See d'Anquetil (Mem. de I'Academic, torn. xxxi. p. 379.)and Sir William Jones (Hist, of Nader Shah, p. 161.)
(5) In the fifth century, the name of Restotn or Rostam, a hero who equalled the strength of twelve ele­phants, was familiar to the Armenians (Moses Choronensis. Hist. Armen. lib. ii. c. 7. p. 96. edit. Whiston.) Inthe beginning of the seventh, the Persian Romance of Rostam and lsfendiar was applauded at Mecca (Sale'sKoran, c. xxxi. p. 335.) Yet this exposition of Indicium novte historian is not given by Maracci (Refutat. Alco­ran, p. 544—548.)
(6) Procop. Goth. lib. iv. c. 10. Kobad had a favourite Greek physician, Stephen of Edessa, (Persic, lib. ii.c. 26:) The practice was ancient; and Herodotus relates the adventures of Democedes of Crotona (lib. in. c«125—137.)
(7) Sec Pagi, torn. ii. p. 626. In one of the treaties an honourable article was inserted for the toleration andburial of the catholics (Menander, in Excerpt. Legat. p. 142.) Nushizad, a son of Nushirvan, was a Christian,a rebel, and—a martyr (D'Herbelot, p. 681.)
(8) On the Persian language, and its three dialects, consult d'Anquetil (p. 339—343.) and Jones (p. 153—185.:)fcyfux t*m y K'ji-nti «»* a^us-or*™, is the character which Agathias (lib. ii. p. 66.) ascribes to an idiom in the eastfor poetical softness.
(9) Agathias specifies the Georgias, Phaedon, Parmenides, and Timgeus. Renftudot (Fabricius, Bibliot. Grsec.torn. xii. p. 246—261.) does not mention this barbaric version of Aristotle.
(10) Of these tables, I have seen three copies in three different languages. 1. In Greek, translated by SimeonSeth (A. D. 1100.,) from the Arabic, and published by Starck, at Berlin, in 1697, in 12mo. 2. In Latin, aversion from the Greek, Sapientia Indorum, inserted by Pere Poussin at the end of his edition of Pachymer( p. 547—620. edit. Roman.) 3. In French, from the Turkish, dedicated, in 1540, to sultan Soliman. Contes etFables Indiennes de Bidpal et de Lokraan, par M. M. Galland et Cardonne, Paris, 1778, 3 vols, in 12mo. Mr."Wharton (History of English poetry, vol. i. p. 129—131.) takes a larger scupe.
Vol. III. 11







OCR Output








J.30 THE DECLINE AND FALL


pious fear, that Justinian, like Elijah or Romulus, would be snatched into the air,and translated alive to the mansions of celestial glory. (1)
If Caesar had achieved the reformation of the Roman law, his creative genius,enlightened by reflection and study, would have given to the world a pure andoriginal system of jurisprudence. Whatever flattery might suggest, the emperorof the east was afraid to establish his private judgment as the standard of equity:in the possession of legislative power, he borrowed the aid of time and opinion; andhis laborious compilations are guarded by the sages and legislators of past times.Instead of a statue cast in a simple mould by the hand of an artist, the works ofJustinian represent a tesselated pavement of antique and costly, but too often of in­coherent fragments. In the first year of his reign, he directed the faithful Tribo­nian, and nine learned associates, to revise the ordinances of his predecessors, asthey were contained, since the time of Hadrian, in the Gregorian, Hermogenian,and Theodosian codes; to purge the errors and contradictions, to retrench what­ever was obsolete or superfluous, and to select the wise and salutary laws bestadapted to the practice of the tribunals and the use of his subjects. The workwas accomplished in fourteen months; and the twelve books or tables, which thenew decemvirs produced, might be designed to imitate the labours of their Romanpredecessors. The new code of Justinian was honoured with his name, and con­firmed by his royal signature: authentic transcripts were multiplied by the pens ofnotaries and scribes, they were transmitted to the magistrates of the European,the Asiatic, and afterwards the African provinces: and the law of the empire wasproclaimed on solemn festivals at the doors of churches. A more arduous opera­tion was still behind:, to extract the spirit of jurisprudence from the decisions andconjectures, the questions and disputes of the Roman civilians. Seventeen law­yers, with Tribonian at their head, were appointed by the emperor to exercisean absolute jurisdiction over the works of their predecessors. If they had obeyedhis commands in ten years, Justinian would have been satisfied with their diligence;and their rapid composition of the digest or fandects,(2) in three years, willdeserve praise or censure, according to the merit of the execution.. From the li­brary of Tribonian, they chose forty, the most eminent civilians of former times :(3)two thousand treatises were comprised in an abridgment of fifty books; and it hasbeen carefully recorded, that three millions of lines or sentences, (4) were reduced,in this abstract, to the moderate number of one hundred and fifty thousand. Theedition of this great work was delayed a month after that of the institutes; andit seemed reasonable that the elements should precede the digest of the Romanlaw. As soon as the emperor had approved their labours, he ratified, by his le­gislative power, the speculations of these private citizens i their commentaries onthe twelve tables, the perpetual edict, the laws of the people, and the decrees ofthe senate, succeeded to the authority of the text; and tne text was abandoned, asa useless, though venerable, relic of antiquity. The Cade, the Pandects, and theInstitutes, were declared to be the legitimate system of civil jurisprudence; theyalone were admitted in the tribunals, and they alone were taught in the academiesof Rome, Constantinople, and Berytus. Justinian addressed to the senate andprovinces his eternal oracles; and his pride, under the mask of piety, ascribedthe consummation of this great design to the support and inspiration of the Deity.
(0 ,Thi» story is related by Hesycbius (de Viris IHustribns,) Procopius (Anecdot. c. xiii.,) and Suidas (torn. UWp. SOI.) Such flattery is incredible!
Nihil est quod credere de se
Non potent cum laudator Diis sequa potestas.Firtitenelle (torn. i. p. 32—39.} has ridiculed the impudence of the modest Virgil. But the same Fontenelleplaces the king above the divine Augustus; and the sage Boileau has not blushed to say—11 Le destin a ses yeuxn'oseroit balancer." Yet neither Augustus nor Louis XIV. were fools.
(2) n«v5£icT!et (general receivers) was a common title of the Greek miscellanies (Plin. Preefat. ad Hist. Natur.)The digesta of Scaavola, Marcellinus, and Celsus, were already familiar to the civilians: but Justinian was inthe wrong when he used the two appellations as synonymous. Is the word Pandects Greek or Latin—mascu­line or feminine ? The diligent Brenckman will not presume to decide these momentous controversies 'Hist.Pandect, p. 300—304.)
(3) Angelus Politianus (lib. v. Epist. ult.) reckons thirty-seven (p. 192—200.)<ivilians quoted in the Pandects—a learned, and, for his times, an extraordinary list. The Greek Index to the Pandects enumerates thirty-nine; and forty are produced by the indefatigable Fabricius (Bibliot. Grjec.toro. iii. p. 488—502.) AntoninusAugustus (de Korainibus Propfiis; Pandeet. apud Ludewig, p. 283.) is said to have added fifty-four names; butthey, must be vague or second-hand references.
(4) TheSTtajoi of the ancients MSS. may be strictly defined as sentences or periods of a complete sense, which,•n the breadth of the parchment rolls or volumes, composed as many lines of unequal length. The number ot*£ri£*i in each hook served as a check on the errors of the scribes (Ludfewig, p. 311—215. and his original au­thor Suicer. Thesaur. Ecclesiast. torn. i. p.'1021—1036.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 16.3


cruelty, nor his clemency from weakness; and his rigid economy too often exposedhim to the reproach of avarice. But the rational wishes of an absolute monarchmust tend to the happiness of his people; Maurice was endowed with sense andcourage to promote that happiness, and his administration was directed by the prin­ciples and example of Tiberius. The pusillanimity of the Greeks had introducedso complete a separation between the offices of king and of general, that a privatesoldier who had observed and obtained the purple seldom or never appeared atthe head of his armies. Yet the emperor Maurice enjoyed the glory of re­storing the Persian monarch to his throne: his lieutenants waged a doubtful waragainst the Avars of the Danube, and he cast an eye of pity, of ineffectual pity,t>n the abject and distressful state of his Italian provinces.
From Italy the emperors were incessantly tormented by tales of misery anddemands of succours, which extorted the humiliating confession of their own weak­ness. The expiring dignity of Rome was only marked by the freedom and ener­gy of her complaints. "If you are incapable," she said, "of delivering us fromthe swords of the Lombards, save us at least from the calamity of famine." Ti­berius forgave the reproach, and relieved the distress: a supply of corn was trans­ported from Egypt to the Tiber: and the Roman people, invoking the name, notof Camillus, but of St. Peter, repulsed the barbarians from their walls. But therelief was accidental, the danger was perpetual and pressing: and the clergy andsenate, collecting the remains of their ancient opulence, a sum of three thousandpounds of gold, despatched the patrician Pamphronius to lay their gifts and theircomplaints at the foot of the Byzantine throne. The attention of the court, andthe forces of the east, were diverted by the Persian war; but the justice of Tiberiusapplied the subsidy to the defence of the city: and he dismissed the patrician withhis best advice, either to bribe the Lombard chiefs, or to purchase the aid of thekings of France. Notwithstanding this weak invention, Italy was still afflicted,Rome was again besieged, and the suburb of Classe, only three miles from Raven­na, was pillaged and occupied by the troops of a single duke of Spoleto. Mauricegave audience to a second deputation of priests and senators; the duties and me­naces of religion were forcibly urged in the letters of the Roman pontiff; and hisnuncio, the deacon Gregory, was alike qualified to solicit the powers either of heavenor of the earth. The emperor adopted, with stronger effect, the measures of his pre­decessor: some formidable* chiefs were persuaded to embrace the friendship of theRomans; and one of them, a mild and faithful barbarian, lived and died in the ser­vice of the exarch: the passes of the Alps were delivered to the Franks; and thepope encouraged them to violate, without scruple, their oaths and engagementsto the misbelievers. Childebert, the great grandson of Clovis, was persuaded toinvade Italy by the payment of fifty thousand pieces; but as he had viewed withdelight some Byzantine coin of the weight of one pound of gold, the king of Aus-trasia might stipulate, that the gift should be rendered more worthy of his accept­ance, by a proper mixture of these respectable medals. The dukes of the Lom­bards had provoked, by frequent inroads, their powerful neighbours of Gaul. Assoon as they were apprehensive of a just retaliation, they renounced their feebleand disorderly independence: the advantages of regal government, union, secrecy,and vigour, were unanimously confessed; Autharis, the son of Clepho, had alreadyattained the strength and reputation of a warrior. Under the standard of theirnew king, the conquerors of Italy withstood three successive invasions, one ofwhich was led by Childebert himself, the last of the Merovingian race who de­scended from the Alps. The first expedition was defeated by the jealous animosi­ty of the Franks and Alemanni. In the second they were vanquished in a bloodybattle, with more loss and dishonour than they had sustained since the foundationof their monarchy. Impatient for revenge, they returned a third time with accu­mulated force, and Autharis yielded to the fury of the torrent. The troops andtreasures of the Lombards were distributed in the walled towns between the Alpsand the Apennine. A nation, less sensible of danger, than of fatigue and delay,soon murmured against the folly of their twenty commanders; and the hot vapoursof an Italian sun infected with disease those tramontane bodies which had alreadysuffered the vicissitudes of intemperance and famine. The powers that were in­adequate to the conquest, were more than sufficient for the desolation of the coun­try; nor could the trembling natives distinguish between their enemies and theirdeliverers. If the junction of the Merovingian and imperial forces had been effect­ed in the neighbourhood of Milan, perhaps they might have subverted the throneef the Lombards; but the Franks expected six days the signal of a flaming village,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


cours had arrived, he retired to his tent, assumed the dress and arms of a privatesoldier, and gave the signal of battle. The first line of cavalry advanced withmore courage than discretion, and left behind them the infantry of the second line.They were soon engaged between the horns of a crescent, into which the adversewings had been insensibly curved, and were saluted from either side by the volleysof four thousand archers. Their ardour, and even their distress, drove them for­wards to a close and unequal conflict, in which they could only use their lancesagainst an enemy equally skilled in all the instruments of war. A generous emu­lation inspired the Romans and their barbarian allies: and Narses, who calmlyviewed and directed their efforts, doubted to whom he should adjudge the prize ofsuperior bravery. The Gothic cavalry was astonished and disordered, pressedand broken; and the line of infantry, instead of presenting their spears, or openingtheir intervals, were trampled under the feet of the flying horse. Six thousandof the Goths were slaughtered, without mercy, in the field of Tagina. Their prince,with five attendants, was overtaken by Asbad, of the race of the Gepidx. *' Sparethe king of Italy," cried a loyal voice, and Asbad struck his lance through thebody of Totila. The blow was instantly revenged by the faithful Goths; they trans­ported their dying monarch seven miles beyond the scene of his disgrace; and hislast moments were not imbittered by the presence of an enemy. Compassion af­forded him the shelter of an obscure tomb; but the Romans were not satisfied oftheir victory, till they beheld the corpse of the Gothic king. His hat, enrichedwith gems, and his bloody robe, were presented to Justinian by the messengers oftriumph. (1)
As soon as Narses had paid his devotions to the anthnr of victory, and the blessedVirgin, his peculiar patroness,(2) he praised, rewarded, and dismissed the Lom­bards. The villages had been reduced to ashes by these valiant savages; they ra­vished matrons and virgins on the altar; their retreat was diligently watched by astrong detachment of regular forces, who prevented a repetition of the like disor­ders. The victorious eunuch pursued his march through Tuscany, accepted thesubmission of the Goths, heard the acclamations, and often the complaints, of theItalians, and encompassed the walls of Rome with the remainder of his formidablehost. Round the wide circumference, Narses assigned to himself, and to each ofhis lieutenants, a real or a feigned attack, while he silently marked the place ofeasy and unguarded entrance. Neither the fortifications of Hadrian's mole, nor ofthe port, could long delay the progress of the conqueror; and Justinian once morereceived the keys of Rome, which, under his reign, had been five times taken andrecovered.(3) But the deliverance of Rome was the last calamity of the Romanpeople. The barbarian allies of Narses too frequently confounded the privilegesof peace and war: the despair of the flying Goths found some consolation in sangui­nary revenge: and three hundred youths, of the noblest families, who had beensent as hostages beyond the Po, were inhumanly slain by the successor of Totila.The fate of the senate suggests an awful lesson of the vicissitude of human affairs.Of the senators whom Totila had banished from their country, some were rescuedby an officer of Belisarius, and transported from Campania to Sicily; while otherswere too guilty to confide in the clemency of Justinian, or too poor to provide horsesfor their escape to the sea-shore. Their brethren languished five years in a state ofindigence and exile: the victory of Narses revived their hopes; but their prema­ture return to the metropolis was prevented by the furious Goths; and all thefortresses of Campania were ruined with patrician(4) blood. After a period of thir­teen centuries, the institution of Romulus expired; and if the nobles of Rome stillassumed the title of senators, few subsequent traces can be discovered of a publiccouncil, or constitutional order. Ascend six hundred years, and contemplate thekings of the earth soliciting an audience, as the slaves or freedmen of the Romansenate. (5)
The Gothic war was yet alive. The bravest of the nation retired beyond the


(1) Theophanes, Chron. p. 193. Hist. Miscell. lib. xvi. p. 103.
(!) Engriuf, lib. ir. c. 24. The inspiration of the Virgin revealed to Narses the day, and the word of bat­tle (Paul Diaeon. lib. ii. c. 3, p. 776.)
(3) Et» toutou G*a-iA.iueiPTo; to sts^itto, isXtt. In the year 536 by Belisarius, in 546 by Totila, in 547 byBelisarius, in 549 by Totila,and in 552 by Narses. Maltretus had inadvertently translated sextum; a mistakewhich he afterward retracts: but the mischief was done; and Cousin, with a train of French and Latin rea­ders, have fallen into the snare.
(4) Compare two passages of Proeopius (lib. iii. c. 26. lib. i». c. 24.) which, with some collateral hints fromMareellinus and Jornandes, illustrate the state of the expiring senate.
(5) See, in the example of Prusias, as it is delivered in tbe fragments of Polybius, (Excerpt. Legal, xcvii. p.927,928.) a curious picture of a royal slave.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 393


isants achieved the conquest of Transoxiana and Spain, a third army of Saracensoverspread the provinces of Asia Minor, and approached the borders of the By­zantine capital. But the attempt and disgrace of the second siege, was reservedfor his brother Soliman, whose ambition appears to have been quickened by amore active and martial spirit. In the revolutions of the Greek empire after thetyrant Justinian had been punished and avenged, an humble secretary, Anastasiusor Artemius, was promoted by chance or merit to the vacant purple. He wasalarmed by the sound of war; and his ambassador returned from Damascus withthe tremendous news, that the Saracens were preparing an armament by sea andland, such as would transcend the experience of the past, or the belief of the pre­sent age. The precautions of Anastasius were not unworthy of his station, or ofthe impending danger. He issued a peremptory mandate, that all persons whowere not provided with the means of subsistence for a three years' siege shouldevacuate the city; the public granaries and arsenals were abundantly replenished;the walls were restored and strengthened; and the engines for casting stones, ordarts, or fire, were stationed along the ramparts, or in the brigantines of war, ofwhich an additional number was hastily constructed. To prevent, is safer, aswell as more honourable, than to repel an attack; and a design was meditated,above the usual spirit of the Greeks, of burning the naval stores of the enemy,the cypress timber that had been hewn in mount Libanus, and was piled along thesea-shore of Phoenicia, for the service of the Egyptian fleet. This generous en­terprise was defeated by the cowardice or treachery of the troops, who in the newlanguage of the empire, were styled of the ubseguian theme.(l) They murderedtheir chief, deserted their standard in the isle of Rhodes, dispersed themselvesover the adjacent continent, and deserved pardon or reward by investing with thepurple a simple officer of the revenue. The name of Theodosius might recom­mend him to the senate and people; but, after some months, he sunk into a clois­ter, and resigned, to the firmer hand of Leo, the Isaurian, the urgent defence ofthe capital and empire. The most formidable of the Saracens, Moslemah, thebrother of the caliph, was advancing at the head of one hundred and twenty thou­sand Arabs and Persians, the greater part mounted on horses or camels; and thesuccessful sieges of Tyana, Amorium, and Pergamus, were of sufficient durationto exercise their skill, and to elevate their hopes. At the well-known passage ofAbydus, on the Hellespont, the Mahometan arms were transported for the firsttime, from Asia to Europe. From thence, wheeling round the Thracian cities ofthe Propontis, Moslemah, invested Constantinople on the land side, surrounded hiscamp with a ditch and rampart, prepared and planted his engines of assault, anddeclared, by words and actions, a patient resolution of expecting the return ofseed-time and harvest, should the obstinacy of the besieged prove equal to hisown. The Greeks would gladly have ransomed their religion and empire, by afine or assessment of a piece of gold on the head of each inhabitant of the city;but the liberal offer was rejected with disdain, and the presumption of Moslemahwas exalted by the speedy approach and invincible force of the navies of Egyptand Syria. They are said to have amounted to eighteen hundred ships: the num­ber betrays their inconsiderable size; and of the twenty stout and capacious ves­sels, whose magnitude impeded their progress, each was manned with no morethan one hundred heavy armed soldiers. This huge armada proceeded on asmooth sea and with a gentle gale, towards the mouth of the Bosphorus; the sur­face of the strait was overshadowed, in the language of the Greeks, with a moving;forest, and the same fatal night had been fixed by the Saracen chief for a generalassault by sea and land. To allure the confidence of the enemy, the emperor hadthrown aside the chain that usually guarded the entrance of the harbour; butwhile they hesitated whether they should seize the opportunity, or apprehend thesnare, the ministers of destruction were at hand. The fireships of the Greeks■were launched against them; the Arabs, their arms, and vessels, were involved inthe same flames; the disorderly fugitives were dashed against each other, oroverwhelmed in the waves; and I no longer find a vestige of the fleet, that hadthreatened to extirpate the Roman name. A still more fatal and irreparable losswas that of the caliph Soliman, who died of an indigestion(2) in his camp near
(1) In the division of the themes, or provinces described by Constantine Porphyroffenitus de Thematibus, (lib.i. p. 9,10.) theobieguiwn^n Latin appellation of the army aod palace, wasthefourfn in the public order. Nicevan the metropolis, and its jurisdiction extended from the Hellespont over the adjacent parts of Bithynia andPhrygia, (See the two maps prefixed by Delisle to the Imperinm Orientate of Bfttiduri.)
(2) The caliph had emptied two baskets of egjrsand office, which be swallowed alternately, and the repastw as concluded with marrow and sugar, lu one of his pilgrimages to Mecca, Solomon ate, at a single meal.se­







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


fleet and army into the Adriatic gulf. After suffering from the winds and wavesmuch loss and delay, the Greeks made their descent in the neighbourhood of Ra­venna: they threatened to depopulate the guilty capital, and to imitate, perhaps tosurpass, the example of Justinian II., who had chastised a former rebellion by thechoice and execution of fifty of the principal inhabitants. The women and clergy,in sackcloth and ashes, lay prostrate in prayer; the men were in arms for the de­fence of their country; the common danger had united the factions, and the eventof a battle was preferred to the slow miseries of a siege. In a hard-fought day, asthe two armies alternately yielded and advanced, a phantom was seen, a voice washe.ard, and Ravenna was victorious by the assurance of victory. The strangersretreated to their ships, but the populous sea-coast poured forth a multitude ofboats; the waters of the Po were so deeply infected with blood, that during sixyears, the public prejudice abstained from the fish of the river: and the institutionof an annual feast perpetuated the worship of images, and the abhorrence of theGreek tyrant. Amidst the triumph of the catholic arms, the Roman pontiff con­vened a synod of ninety-three bishops against the heresy of the Iconoclasts. Withtheir consent he pronounced a general excommunication against all who by wordor deed should attack the tradition of the fathers and the images of the saints; inthis sentence the emperor was tacitly involved,(l) but the vote of a last and hope­less remonstrance may seem to imply that the anathema was yet suspended overhis guilty head. No sooner had they confirmed their own safety, the worship ofimages, and the freedom of Rome and Italy, than the popes appear to have relaxedof their severity, and to have spared the relics of the Byzantine dominion. Theirmoderate counsels delayed and prevented the election of a new emperor, and theyexhorted the Italians not to separate from the body of the Roman monarchy. Theexarch was permitted to reside within the walls of Ravenna, a captive ratherthan a master; and till the imperial coronation of Charlemagne,"the government ofRome and Italy was exercised in the name of the successors of Constantine.(2)
The liberty of Rome, which had been oppressed by the arms and arts of Au­gustus, was rescued, after seven hundred and fifty years of servitude, from thepersecution of Leo the IsaUrian. By the Cscsars, the triumphs, of the consuls hadbeen annihilated: in the decline and fall of the empire, the God Terminus, thesacred boundary, had insensibly receded from the ocean, the Rhine, the Danube,and the Euphrates; and Rome was reduced to her ancient territory from Viterboto Xerracina, and from Narni to the mouth of the Tiber. (3) When the kingswere banished, the republic reposed on the firm basis which had been founded bytheir wisdom and virtue. Their perpetual jurisdiction was divided between twoannual magistrates; the senate continued to exercise the powers of administrationand counsel; and the legislative authority was distributed in the assemblies of thepeople, by a well-proportioned scale of property and service. Ignorant of thearts of luxury, the primitive Romans had improved the science of governmentand war: the will of the community was absolute; the rights of individuals weresacred; one hundred and thirty thousand citizens were armed for defence orconquest; and a band of robbers and outlaws was moulded into a nation, deserv­ing of freedom, and ambitious of glory. (4) When the sovereignty of the Greekemperors was extinguished, the ruins of Rome presented the sad image of de­population and decay; her slavery was a habit, her liberty an accident; the ef­fect of superstition, and the object of her own amazement and terror. The lastvestige of the substance, or even the forms, of the constitution, was obliteratedfrom the practice and memory of the Romans; and they were devoid of knowledge,or virtue, again to build the fabric of a commonwealth. Their scanty remnant,
(1) Yet Leo was undoubtedly comprised in the siquis imagtnum sacrartim destructor ....
extiterit sit extorris a corpore I). N. Jesu Christi vel totius ecclesisc unitatc. The canonists may decide whetherthe guilt or the name constitutes the excommunicatiou; and the decision is of the last importance to their safe­ty, since, according to the oracle, (Gratian Caus. 23. p. 5. c. 47. apud Spanheim, Hist. Imag. p. 112.) homicidasnon esse qui excommunicato* trucidant.
(2) Compescuit tale consilium Pontifex, sperans conversionem principis. (Anastas. p. 15ft.) Sed ne desiste-rent ab amore et fide R. J. admonehat (p. 1 *7.) The popes style Leo and Constantine Corpronymus, Impcra-tores et Domini, with the strange epithet of Piissimi. A famous mosaic of the Lateran (A. 0. 798.) repre­sents Christ, who delivers the keys to St. Peter and the banner to Constantine V. (Muraton, Annali d'ltalia,torn. vs. p. 337.)
(3) I have traced the Roman duchy according to the maps, and the maps according to the excellent disserta­tion of father Baretti. (de Chorographia Italia; Medii *5>i.sect. 20. p. 216—232.) Yet I must nicely observe,that Viterbo is of Lombard foundation, (p. 211.) and that Terracina was usurped by the Greeks.
(4) On the extent, population, &e. of the Roman kingdom, the reader may peruse with pleasure the ViscoursPrelimhmire to the RepubliqueRomaine of M. de Beaufort (torn. i.;) who will not be accused of too muchcredulity for the early ages of Rome.







OCR Output








OF THE ROiMAN EMPIRE.


if the original title was deficient, she might be claimed, like other moveables, bythe use and possession of an entire rear. The inclination of the Roman husbanddischarged or withheld the conjugal debt, so scrupulously exacted by the Athenianand Jewish laws;(l) but as polygamy was unknown, he could never admit to hisbed a fairer or more favoured partner.
After the Punic triumphs, the matrons of Rome aspired to the common benefitsof a free and opulent republic: their wishes were gratified by the indulgence of fa­thers and lovers, and their ambition was unsuccessfully resisted by the gravity ofCato the censor. (2) They declined the solemnities of the old nuptials, defeated theannual prescription by an absence of three days, and, without losing their nameor independence, subscribed the liberal and definite terms of a marriage contract.Of their private fortunes, they communicated the use, and secured the property;the estates of a wife could neither be alienated nor mortgaged by a prodigal hus­band; their mutual gifts were prohibited by the jealousy of the laws; ar.d the mis­conduct of either party might afford, under another name, a future subject for anaction of theft. To this loose and voluntary compact, religious and civil rightswere no longer essential; and between persons or a similar rank, the apparentcommunity of life was allowed as sufficient evidence of their nuptials. The dig­nity of marriage was restored by the Christians, who derived all spiritual gracefrom the prayers of the faithful and the benediction of the priest or bishop. Theorigin, validity, and duties of the holy institution, were regulated by the traditionof" the synagogue, the precepts of the gospel, and the canons of general or pro­vincial synods;(3) and the conscience of the Christians was awed by the decreesand censures of their ecclesiastical rulers. Yet the magistrates of Justinian werenot subject to the authority of the church: the emperor consulted the unbelievingcivilians of antiquity, and the choice of matrimonial laws in the Codes and Pan­dects, is directed by the earthly motives of justice, policy, and the natural free­dom of both sexes. (4)
Besides the agreement of the parties, the essence of every rational contract,the Roman marriage required the previous approbation of the parents. A fathermight be forced by some recent laws to supply the wants of a mature daughter;but even his insanity was not generally allowed to supersede the necessity of hisconsent. The causes of the dissolution of matrimony have varied among the Ro-mans;(5) but the most solemn sacrament, the confarreation itself, might alwaysbe done away by rights of a contrary tendency. In the first ages, the father of afamily might sell his children, and his wife was reckoned in the number of hischildren: the domestic judge might pronounce the death of the offender, or hismercy might expel her from his bed and house; but the slavery of the wretchedfemale was hopeless and perpetual, unless he asserted for his own conveniencethe manly prerogative of divorce. The warmest applause has been lavished onthe virtue of the Romans, who abstained from the exercise of this tempting pri­vilege above five hundred years:(6) but the same fact evinces the unequal termsof a connexion in which the slave was unable to renounce her tyrant, and the ty­rant was unwilling to relinquish his slave. When the Roman matrons became theequal and voluntary companions of their lords, a new jurisprudence was intro-
fl) Solon requires three payments per month. By the Misna, a daily debt was imposed on an idle, vigorous:young husband; twice a week on a eitizen; once on a peasant; once in thirty days on a carael-di iver; once insix months on a seaman. But the student or doctor was free from tribute; and no wife, if she received aweekly sustenance, could sue for divorce; for one week a vow of abstinence was allowed. Polygamy divided,without multiplying, the duties of the husband (Selden. Uxor. Ebraica, lib. iii. e. 6. in his works, vol. ii. p.717—HO.)
(2) On the Oppian law we may hear the mitigating speech of Valerias Flacous. and the severe censorial ora­tion of the elder Cato. (Liv. xxxiv. 1—8.) But we shall rather hear the polished historian of the eighth, thanthe rough orators of the sixth, century of Rome. The principles, and even the style, of Cato are more accu­rately preserved by Aulus Gellius (x. 33.)
(3) For the system of Jewish and catholic matrimony, see Selden (Uxor. Ebraica, Opp. vol. ii. p. J»—S60. JBingham (Christian Antiquities, lib. xxii.,) and Chardon. (Hist, des Sacremens, torn, vi.)
(4) The civil laws of marriage are exposed in the Institutes (lib. i. tit. x. J the Pandects (lib. xxni—xxv.,) anilthe Code (lib. v.;) but as the title de ritu nuptiarum is vet imperfect, we are obliged to explore the fragments oftJlpian (tit. ix. p. 590,591.) and the Collalio Legura "Mosaicarum (tit. xvi. p. 790, 791.,) with the notes of Fi-thaeus and Schulting. They find, in the Commentary of Servius (on the first Geoigio and the fourth jEneid,)two curious passages.
(J) According to Plutarch (p. S7.,) Romulus allowed only three grounds of a divorce—drunkenness,adulte­ry, and false keys. Otherwise the husband who abused hu supremacy, forfeited half his goods to the wife,and half to the goddess Ceres, and offered a sacrifice (with the remainder) to the terrestrial deities. This strangelaw was either imaginary or transient.
(0) In the year of Rome 523, Spurius Carvilius Ruga repudiated a fair, a good, but a barren wife (Dionrtia?,Hal, lib. ii. p. 93. Plutarch in ICuma, p.141. Valerius Maximus, lib. ii. c. 1. Aulus Gellius, iv. 3.) He m isquestioned by the censors, and hated by the people; but his divorce stood unimpeached in law.
Vot. III. 18







OCR Output








84 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Chosroes breathed a purer air amidst her groves and fountains; and some idolater*in his train might sacrifice with impunity to the nymphs of that elegant retreat*Eighteen miles below Antioch, the river Orontes falls into the Mediterranean.The haughty Persian visited the term of his conquests: and, after bathing alone inthe sea, he offered a solemn sacrifice of thanksgiving to the sun, or rather to theCreator of the sun, whom the Magi adored. If this act of superstition offendedthe prejudices of the Syrians, they were pleased by the courteous and even eagerattention with which he assisted at the games of the circus; and as Chosroes hadheard that the blue faction was espoused by the emperor, his peremptory com­mand secured the victory of the green charioteer. From the discipline of hiscamp the people derived more solid consolation; and they interceded in vain forthe life of a soldier who had too faithfully copied the rapine of the just Nushirvan.At length, fatigued, though unsatiated, with the spoil ol Syria, he slowly moved tothe Euphrates, formed a temporary bridge in the neighbourhood of Barbalissus,and defined the space of three days for the entire passage of his numerous host.After his return he founded at the distance of one day's journey from the palace ofCtesiphon, a new city, which perpetuated the joint names of Chosroes and of An­tioch. The Syrian captives recognised the form and situation of their native abodes:baths and a stately circus were constructed for" their use; and a colony of musiciansand charioteers revived in Assyria the pleasures of a Greek capital. By the mu­nificence of the royal founder, a liberal allowance was assigned to these fortunateexiles; and they enjoyed the singular privilege of bestowing freedom on the slaveswhom they acknowledged as their kinsmen. Palestine, and the holy wealth ofJerusalem, were the next objects that attracted-the ambition, or rather the avarice,of Chosroes. Constantinople, and the palace of the Caesars, no longer appearedimpregnable or remote; and his aspiring fancy already covered Asia Minor withhis troops, and the Black Sea with the navies, of Persia.
These hopes might have been realized, if the conqueror of Italy had not beepseasonably recalled to the defence of the east.fl) While Chosroes pursued hisambitious designs on the coast of the Euxine, Belisarius, at the head of an armywithout pay or discipline, encamped beyond the Euphrates, within six miles ofNisibis. He meditated, by a skilful operation, to draw the Persians from theirimpregnable citadel, and improving his advantage in the field, either to intercepttheir retreat, or perhaps to enter the gates with the flying barbarians. He ad­vanced one day's journey on the territories of Persia, reduced the fortress of Si-saurane, and sent the governor, with eight hundred chosen horsemen, to serve theemperor in his Italian wars. He detached Arethas and his Arabs, supported bytwelve hundred Romans, to pass the Tigris, and to ravage the harvests of Assyria,a fruitful province, long exempt from the calamities of war. But the plans of Be­lisarius were disconcerted by the untractable spirit of Arethas, who neither re­turned to the camp, nor sent any intelligence of his motions. The Roman gene»ral was fixed in anxious expectation to the same spot; the time of action elapsed,the ardent sun of Mesopotamia inflamed with fevers the blood of his European sol­diers; and the stationary troops and officers of Syria affected to tremble for thesafety of their defenceless cities. Yet this diversion had already succeeded inforcing Chosroes to return with loss and precipitation; and if the skill of Belisariushad been seconded by discipline and valour, his success might have satisfied thesanguine wishes of the public, who required at his hands the conquests of Ctesi­phon and the deliverance of the captives of Antioch. At the end of the campaign,he was recalled to Constantinople by an ungrateful court, but the dangers of theensuing spring restored his confidence and command; and the hero, almost alone,was despatched, with the speed of post-horses, to repel, by his name and presence,the invasion of Syria. He found the Roman generals, among whom was a ne­phew of Justinian, imprisoned by their fears in the fortification of Hierapolis.But instead of listening to their timid counsels, Belisarius commanded them to fol­low him to Europus, where he had resolved to collect his forces, and to executewhatever God should inspire him to achieve against the enemy. His firm atti­tude on the banks of the Euphrates restrained Chosroes from advancing towardsPalestine; and he received with art and dignity, the ambassadors, or rather spies,of the Persian monarch. The plain between Hierapolis and the river, was coveredwith the squadrons of cavalry, six thousand hunters, tall and robust, who pursued
(1) In the public hiitory of Procopius, (Persic, lib. ii. c. 18.18—21. 24—28.) and with tome slight exceptions,we may reasonably shut our ears against the malevolent whisper of the Anecdotes rc. 2, 3. with the notes, asusual, of Alemanus.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, la J


ture of criminal and civil jurisprudence. Our duties to the state are simple anduniform; the law by which he is condemned, is inscribed, not only on brass ormarble, but on the conscience of the offender, and his guilt is commonly provedby the testimony of a single fact. But our relations to each other are various andinfinite: our obligations are created, annulled, and modified, by injuries, benefits,and promises; and the interpretation of voluntary contracts and testaments, whichare often dictated by fraud or ignorance, affords a long and laborious exercise tothe sagacity of the judge. The business of life is multiplied by the extent ofcommerce and dominion, and the residence of the parties in the distant provincesof an empire, is productive of doubt, delay, and inevitable appeals from the localto the supreme magistrate. Justinian, the Greek emperor ot Constantinople andthe east, was the legal successor of the Latian shepherd, who had planted a colo­ny on the banks of the Tiber. In a period of thirteen hundred years, the lawshad reluctantly followed the changes of government and manners: and the lauda­ble desire of conciliating ancient names with recent institutions, destroyed theharmony and swelled the magnitude, of the obscure and irregular system. Thelaws which excuse on any occasions the ignorance of their subjects, confess theirown imperfections; the civil jurisprudence, as it was abridged by Justinian, stillcontinued a mysterious science and a profitable trade, and the innate perplexityof the study was involved in tenfold darkness by the private industry of the prac­titioners. The expense of the pursuit sometimes exceeded the value ot theprize, and the fairest rights were abandoned by the poverty or prudence of theclaimants. Such costly justice might tend to abate the spirit of litigation, but theunequal pressure serves only to increase the influence of the rich, and to aggravatethe misery of the poor. By these dilatory and expensive proceedings, the wealthypleader obtains a more certain advantage than he could hope from the accidentalcorruption of his judge. The experience of an abuse, from which our own ageand country are not perfectly exempt, may sometimes provoke a generous indig­nation, and extort the hasty wish of exchanging our elaborate jurisprudence forthe simple and summary decrees of a Turkish cadhi. Our calmer reflection willsuggest, that such forms and delays are necessary to guard the person and pro­perty of the citizen; that the discretion of the judge is the first engine of tyranny,and that the laws of a free people should foresee and determine every question thatmay probably arise in the exercise of power and the transactions of industry.But the government of Justinian united the evils of liberty and servitude: and theRomans were oppressed at the same time by the multiplicity of their laws, andthe arbitrary will of their master.


CHAPTER XLV.
lieign, of the younger Justin.—Embassy of the .inars.—Their settlement on the Danube.—Conquest of Italy by the Lombards.—.adoption and reign of Tiberius.—Of Mau­rice.—Stale of Italy under the Ijombards and exarchs.—Of Ravenna Distress of
Home.—Character and pontificate of Gregory I.
During the last years of Justinian, his infirm mind was devoted to heavenlycontemplation, and he neglected the business of the lower world. His subjectswere impatient of the long continuance of his life and reign: yet all who were ca­pable of reflection, apprehended the moment of his death, which might involvethe capital in tumult, and the empire in civil war. Seven nephews(l) of thechildish monarch, the sons or grandsons of his brother and sister, had been edu­cated in the splendour of a princely fortune; they had been shown in high com­mands to the provinces and armies; their characters were known, their followerswere zealous, and as the jealousy of age postponed the declaration of a successor,they might expect with equal hopes the inheritance of their uncle. He expiredin his palace after a reign of thirty-eight years; and the decisive opportunity wasembraced by the friends of Justin,' the son"of Vigilantia.(2) At the hour of mid-
(1) See the family of Justin and Justinian in the Fani'illse Bvzantime of Ducaiure. p. 83—101. The devoutcivilians LudewiWio Vil. Justinian, p. 131.) and Heineccius (Hist. Juris. Koman. p. 574.) have since illustratedthe eenealofcy of their favourite prince. . .
(2) In the history of Justin's elevation, I have translated into simple and concise ptojc, the eight hundred
Vol. III. 20







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 43


subdued Sardinia, we have lost Africa. No sooner did Belisarius appear with ahandful of soldiers, than courage and prosperity deserted the cause of the Vandals.Your nephew Gibamund, your brother Ammatas, have been betrayed to death bythe cowardice of their followers. Our horses, our ships, Carthage itself, and allAfrica, are in the power of the enemy. Yet the Vandals still prefer an ignomini­ous repose at the expense of their wives and children, their wealth and liberty.Nothing now remains, except the field of Bulla, and the hope of your valour.—Abandon Sardinia; fly to our relief; restore our empire, or perish by our side." Onthe receipt of this epistle, Zano imparted his grief to the principal Vandals; butthe intelligence was prudently concealed from the natives of the island. Thetroops embarked in one hundred and twenty galleys at the port of Cagliari, castanchor the third day on the confines of Mauritania, and hastily pursued their marchto join the royal standard in the camp of Bulla. Mournful was the interview: thetwo brothers embraced; they wept in silence; no questions were asked of the Sar­dinian victory; no inquiries were made of the African misfortunes: they saw beforetheir eyes the whole extent of their calamities; and the absence of their wives andchildren afforded a melancholy proof, that either death or captivity had been their 'lot. The languid spirit of the Vandals was at length awakened and united by theentreaties of their king, the example of Zano, and the instant danger which threat­ened their monarchy and religion. The military strength of the nation advancedto battle"; and such was the rapid increase, that, before their army reached Trica-meron, about twenty miles from Carthage, they might boast, perhaps with someexaggeration, that they surpassed, in a tenfold proportion, the diminutive powersof the Romans. But these powers were under the command of Belisarius: and, ashe was conscious of their superior merit, he permitted the barbarians to surprisehim at an unseasonable hour. The Romans were instantly under arms: a rivuletcovered their front; the cavalry formed the first line, which Belisarius supportedin the centre, at the head of five hundred guards; the infantry, at some distance,was posted in the second line; and the vigilance of the general watched the sepa- *rate station and ambiguous faith of the Massagetx, who secretly reserved their aidFor the conquerors. The historian has inserted, and the reader may easily supplythe speeches(l) of the commanders, who, by arguments the most apposite to theirsituation, inculcated the importance of victory, and the contempt of life. Zano,with the troops which had followed him to the conquest of Sardinia, was placed inthe centre; and the throne of Genseric might have stood, if the multitude of Van­dals had imitated their intrepid resolution. Casting away their lances and missileweapons, they drew their swords, and expected the charge: the Roman cavalrythrice passed the rivulet; they were thrice repulsed; and the conflict was firmlymaintained till Zano fell, and the standard of Belisarius was displayed. Gelimerretreated to his camp; the Huns joined the pursuit; and the victors despoiled thebodies of the slain. Yet no more than fifty Romans, and eight hundred Vandals,were found on the field of battle; so inconsiderable was the carnage of a day, whichextinguished a nation, and transferred the empire of Africa. In the evening, Be­lisarius led his infantry to the attack of the camp; and the pusillanimous flight ofGelimer exposed the vanity of his recent declarations, that, to the vanquished,death was a relief, like a burden, and infamy the only object of terror. His depar­ture was secret; but as soon as the Vandals discovered that their king had desertedthem, they hastily dispersed, anxious only for their personal safety, and carelessof every object that is dear or valuable to mankind. The Romans entered thecamp without resistance: and the wildest scenes of disorder were veiled in the"darkness and confusion of the night. Every barbarian who met their swords wasinhumanly massacred; their widows and daughters, as rich heirs, or beautiful con­cubines, were embraced by the licentious soldiers; and avarice itself was almostsatiated with the treasures of gold and silver, the accumulated fruits of conquestor economy in a long period of prosperity and peace. In this frantic search, thetroops, even of Belisarius, forgot their caution and respect. Intoxicated with lustand rapine, they explored in small parties, or alone, the adjacent fields, the woods,the rocks, and the caverns, that might might possibly conceal any desirable prize:laden with booty, they deserted their ranks, and wandered, without a guide, onthe high road to Carthage; and if the flying enemies had dared to return, very fewof the conquerors would have escaped. Deeply sensible of the disgrace and dan-


O) These orations always express the sense of the times, and sometimes of the actors. 4 have condensed"that sense, and thrown away declamation.







OCR Output








QF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 223


favourable of the two: and the suspicion is countenanced by the unnatural modera­tion of the Greek clergy, who appear in this quarrel to be conscious of their weak­ness. While the synod debated, a fanatic proposed a more summary decision, byraising a dead man to life: the prelates assisted at the trial, but the acknowledgedfailure may serve to indicate, that the passions and prejudices of the multitudewere not enlisted on the side of the Monothelites. In the next generation, whenthe son of Const an tine was deposed and slain by the disciple of Macarius, theytasted the feast of revenge and dominion: the image or monument of the sixthcouncil was defaced, and the original acts were committed to the flames. But inthe second year, their patron was cast headlong from the throne, the bishops ofthe east were released from their occasional conformity, the Roman faith was morefirmly replanted by the orthodox successors of Bardanes, and the fine problemsof the incarnation were forgotten in the more popular and visible quarrel of theworship of images. (1)
Before the end of the seventh century, the creed of the incarnation, which hadbeen defined at Rome and Constantinople, was uniformly preached in the remoteislands of Britain and Ireland,(2) the same ideas were entertained, or rather thesame words were repeated, by all the Christians whose liturgy was performed inthe Greek or the Latin tongue. Their numbers, and visible splendour, bestowedan imperfect claim to the appellation of catholics: but in the east, they weremarked with the less honourable name of Melchites or royalists;(3) of men whosefaith, instead of resting on the basis of Scripture, reason, or tradition, had beenestablished, and was still maintained, by the arbitrary power of a temperal mo­narch. Their adversaries might allege the words of the fathers of Constanti­nople, who profess themselves the slaves of the king; and they might relate,with malicious joy, how the decrees of Chalcedon had been inspired and re­formed by the emperor Marcian and his virgin bride. The prevailing faction willnaturally inculcate the duty of submission, nor is it less natural that dissentersshould feel and assert the principles of freedom. Under the rod of persecution, theNestorians and Monophysites degenerated into rebels and fugitives; and the mostancient and useful allies of Rome were taught to consider the emperor not as thechief, but as the enemy of the Christians. Language, the leading principle whichunites or separates the tribes of mankind, soon discriminated the sectaries of theeast, by a peculiar and perpetual badge, which abolished the means of intercourseand the hope of reconciliation. The long dominion of the Greeks, their colonies,and, above all, their eloquence, had propagated a language, doubtless the most
Eerfect that has been contrived by the art of man. Yet the body of the people,oth in Syria and Egpyt, still persevered in the use of their national idioms; withthis difference, however, that the Coptic was confined to the rude and illiterate
Seasants of the Nile, while the Syriac,{4) from the mountains of Assyria to theed Sea, was adapted to the higher topics of poetry and argument. Armenia andAbyssinia were infected by the speech or learning of the Greeks; and their bar-


trnn. vii. sp. 1032.) Bat this was a natural and transient emotion; and I much tear that the latter is an anticipArtion of orthodoxy in the good people of Constantinople.
(1) The history of Monothelitisni may be found in the Acts of the Synods of Rome(tora. s-ii. p. 77—395.601—608.) and Constantinople (p. 609—1429.) Baronius extracted some original documents from the Vaticaulibrary: and his chronology is rectified by the diligence of Pagi. Even Dupin (Bibliothcque Eccles. torn. vi.j>. 57—71.) and Basnage (Hist. <le l'Eglise, torn. i. p. 541—555.) affords a tolerable abridgment.
(2) In the Lateran synod of 679, Wilfred, an Anglo-Saxon bishop, subscribed pro omni aquilonali parte Bri­tannia* et Hthernia*. quae ab Anglorum et Britonum, necnon Seotorum et Pictorura gentibus colebantur (Ed-dius, in Vis. St. Wilfrid, c. xxxi. apnd Pagi, Critiea, torn. iii. p. 88.) Theodore (magna; insula Britannia ar-chiepiscopus et philnsophus) was long expected at Rome (Concil. torn. vii. p. 714.;) But he contented himselfwith holding (A. D. 680) his provincial synod of Hatfield, in which he received the decrees of pope Martin, andthe first Lateran council against the Monothelites (Concil. torn. vii. p. 597, &c.) Theodore, a monk of Tarsusin Cilicia, had been named to the primacy of Britain by pope Vitalian (A. D. 608. 'see Baronius and Pagi.)whose esteem for his learning and piety was tainted by some distrust of his national character—ne quid con-trariura veritati fidei, Grsecorum more, in ecclesiam cui prseesset imroduceret. The Cilioian was sent fromRome to Canterbury under the tuition of an African guide (Bedse Hist. Eccles. Anglorum, lib. iv. c. i.) Headhered to the Roman doctrine; aad the same creed of the incarnation has been uniformly transmitted fromTheodore to the modern primates, whose sound understandings are perhaps seldom engaged with that abstrusemystery.
(3) This name, unknown till the tenth century, appears to be of Syriac origin. It was invested by the Ja­cobites, and eagerly adopted by the Nes*orians and Mahometans; but it was accepted^ without shame by thecatholics, and is frequently used in the Annals of Eutychius (Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, torn. ii. p. 597, &c,torn. iii. p. 355. Renaudot, Hist. Patriarch. Alexandria p. 119.) -H/uif JouW* tow Bart*..*,-, was the acclama­tion of the fathers of Constantinople (Concil. torn. vii. p. 765.)
(4) The Syriac, which the natives revere as the primitive language, was divided into ihree dialect!.—1. TheAramaean, a, it was refined at Edessa and the cities of Mesopotamia. 2. The Palestine, which was used inJerusalem, Damascus, and the rest of Syria. 3. The Nabatbsean, the rustic idiom of the mountains of Assy­ria and the villages of Irak (Grcgor. Abulpharag. Hist. Dynnst. p. 11.) On the Syriac,see Ebrd. Jestt, (Asse>•tan. fom. iii. p. 326, ostO whoseprejudicesrlnneconld prefer it to the Arabic.







OCR Output













OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 235


Latins with the names of Arians and Nestorians, and imputed the adoration offour gods to those who separated the two natures of Christ. Fremona, a place ofworship, or rather of exile, was assigned to the Jesuit missionaries. Their skillin the liberal and mechanic arts, their theological learning, and the decency oftheir manners inspired a barren esteem; but they were not endowed with the giftof miracles,(l) and they vainly solicited a re-enforcement of European troops.The patience and dexterity of forty years at length obtained a more favourableaudience, and two emperors of Abyssinia were persuaded that Rome could en­sure the temporal and everlasting happiness of her votaries. The first of theseroyal converts lost his crown and his life; and the rebel army was sanctified by theabuna, who hurled an anathema at the apostate, and absolved his subjects fromtheir oath of fidelity. The fate of Zadenghel was revenged by the courage andfortune of Susneus, who ascended the throne under the name of Segued, and morevigorously prosecuted the pious enterprise of his kinsman. After the amusementof some unequal combats between the Jesuits and his illiterate priests, the em­peror declared himself a proselyte to the synod of Chalcedon, presuming that hisclergy and people would embrace without delay the religion of their prince. Theliberty of choice was succeeded by a law, which imposed, under pain of death, thebelief of the two natures of Christ: the Abyssinians were enjoined to work and toplay on the Sabbath; and Segued, in the face of Europe and Africa, renounced hisconnexion with the Alexandrian church. A Jesuit, Alphonso Mendez, the ca­tholic patriarch of Ethiopia, accepted in the name of Urban VIII. the homageand abjuration of his penitent. "I confess," said the emperor on his knees, " Iconfess that the pope is the vicar of Christ, the successor of St. Peter, and the so­vereign of the world. To him I swear true obedience; and at his feet I offer myperson and kingdom." A similar oath was repeated by his son, his brother, the■Clergy, the nobles, and even the ladies of the court: the Latin patriarch was in­vested with honours and wealth; and his missionaries erected their churches or ci­tadels in the most convenient stations of the empire. The Jesuits themselves de­clare the fatal indiscretion of their chief, who forgot the mildness of the gospeland the policy of his order, to introduce with hasty violence the liturgy of Romeand the inquisition of Portugal. He condemned the ancient practice of circumci­sion, which health rather than superstition had first inventedin the climate of Ethi­opia. (2) A new baptism, a new ordination, was inflicted on the natives; and theytrembled with horror when the most holy of the dead were torn from their graves,when the most illustrious of the living were excommunicated by a foreign priest.In the defence of their religion and liberty, the Abyssinians rose in arms, withdesperate but unsuccessful zeal. Five rebellions were extinguished in the bloodof the insurgents: two abunas were slain in battle, whole legions were slaughteredin the field, or suffocated in their caverns; and neither merit, nor rank, nor sex,could save from an ignominious death the enemies of Rome. But the victoriousmonarch was finally subdued by the constancy of the nation, of his mother, of hisson, and of his most faithful friends. Segued listened to the voice of pity, of rea­son, perhaps of fear; and his edict of liberty of conscience instantly revealed thetyranny and weakness of the Jesuits. On the death of his father, Basilides ex­pelled the Latin patriarch, and restored to the wishes of the nation the faith andthe discipline of Egypt. The Monophysite churches resounded with a song oftriumph, " that the sheep of Ethiopia were now delivered from the hyienas of thewest;" and the gates of that solitary realm were for ever shut against the arts, thescience, and the fanaticism of Europe.(3)
(1) Religio Rdmana .... nec precihus patmm nee miraculis ab ipsis editis sufTulciebatur, is the uncontra­dicted assuranceof thedevout emperor Susneus to his patriarch Mendez; (Ludolph. Comment. No. 126. p. 529.)and such assurances should be preciously kept, as an antidote against any marvellous legends.
(2) Iain aware how tender is the question of circumcision. Yet I will affirm, l. That the Ethiopians havea physical reason for the circumcision of males, and even of females (Recherches Phitosophiques sur lei Ame-ricains, torn, ii.) 2. That it was practised in Ethiopia lone; before the introduction of Judaism or Christianity,(Horodot. lib. ii. c. 104. Marsham, Canon, Chron. p. 72,73.) " Infantes cirenmcidunt ob conoictudinem nonob Judaismnm," says Gregory the Abyssinian priest (apud Fabric Lux Christiana, p. 720.) Yet, in the heatof dispute, the Portuguese were sometimes branded with the name of uncircumcised (La Croze, p. 80. Lu-dolpli. Hist. Comment, lib. iii. e. 1.)
(3) The three Protestant historians, Lndolphus (Hist. Ethiopia, Francofurt, 1681; Commentarius, 1691; Re-latio Nova, Sec. 1693 in folio;) Geddes (Church History of Ethiopia, London, 1696. in octavo,) and La Croze,(Hist, do Christianisme d'&thiopie et d'Armenie. La Hayv, 1739, in duodecimo,) have drawn their principalmaterials from the Jesuits; especially from the General History of Tellez, published in Portuguese at Conim-bra, 1660. We might be surprised at their frankness; but their most flagitious vice, the spirit of persecu­tion, was, in their eyes, the most meritorious virtue. Ludolphua possessed some, though a slight advantage!■from the Ethiopia language, and the personal conversation of Gregory, a free-spirited Abyssinian priest^whom he invited from Rome to the court of Saxe-Gotha. See the Theologia £tliionica of (iregary, in Fa-briciui, Eyangclii, p. 719—734.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


bition was yet unsatisfied; and the conqueror of the Gepidx turned his eyes fromthe Danube to the richer banks of the Po and the Tiber. Fifteen years had notelapsed since his subjects, the confederates of Narses, had visited the pleasantclimate of Italy: the mountains, the rivers, the highways, were familiar to theirmemory; the report of their success, perhaps the view of their spoils, had kin­dled in the rising generation the flame of emulation and enterprise. Their hopeswere encouraged by the spirit and eloquence of Alboin; and it is affirmed, thatbespoke to their senses, by producing, at the royal feast, the fairest and most ex­quisite fruits that grew spontaneously in the garden of the world. No sooner hadhe erected his standard, than the native strength of the Lombards was multipliedby the adventurous youth of Germany and Scythia. The robust peasantry ot No-ricum and Pannonia had resumed the manners of barbarians; and the names ofthe Gepidx, Bulgarians, Sarmatians, and Bavarians, may be distinctly traced inthe provinces of Italy. (1) Of the Saxons, the old allies of the Lombards, twentythousand warriors, with their wives and children, accepted the invitation of Al­boin. Their bravery contributed to his success; but the accession or the absenceof their numbers was not sensibly felt in the magnitude of his host. Every modeof religion was freely practised by its respective votaries. The king of the Lom­bards had been educated in the Arian heresy; but the catholics, in their publicworship, were allowed to pray for his conversion; while the more stubborn bar­barians sacrificed a she-goat, or perhaps a captive, to the gods of their fathers. (2)The Lombards, and their confederates, were united by their common attachmentto a chief, who excelled in all the virtues and vices of a savage hero; and the vi­gilance of Alboin provided an ample magazine of offensive and defensive arms forthe use of the expedition. The portable wealth of the Lombards attended themarch; their lands they cheerfully relinquished to the Avars, on the solemn pro­mise, which was made and accepted without a smile, that if they failed in theconquest of Italy, these voluntary exiles should be reinstated in their former pos­sessions.
They might have failed, if Narses had been the antagonist of the Lombards;and the veteran warriors, the associates of his Gothic victory, would have en­countered with reluctance an enemy whom they dreaded and esteemed. But theweakness of the Byzantine court was subservient to the barbarian cause; and itwas for the ruin of Italy, that the emperor once listened to the complaints of hissubjects. The virtues of Narses were stained with avarice; and in his provin­cial reign of fifteen years he accumulated a treasure of gold and silver which sur­passed the modesty of a private fortune. His government was oppressive or un­popular, and the general discontent was expressed with freedom by the deputiesof Rome. Before the throne of Justin they boldly declared, that their Gothicservitude had been more tolerable than the despotism of a Greek eunuch; andthat, unless their tyrant were instantly removed, they would consult their ownhappiness in the choice of a master. The apprehension of a revolt was urged bythe voice of envy and detraction, which had so recently triumphed over the me­rits of Belisarius. A new exarch, Longinus, was appointed to supersede the con­queror of Italy; and the base motives of his recall were revealed in the insultingmandate of the empress Sophia, " that he should leave to men the exercise ofarms, and return to his proper station among the maidens of the palace, wherea distaff should be again placed in the hand of the eunuch." " I will spin hersuch a thread, as she shall not easily unravel!" is said to have been the replywhich indignation and conscious virtue extorted from the hero. Instead of at­tending, a slave and a victim, at the gate of the Byzantine palace he retired toNaples, from whence (if any credit is due to the belief of the times) Narses in­vited the Lombards to chastise the ingratitude of the prince and people. (3) Butthe passions of the people are furious and changeable; and the Romans soon re-
ntlui et bclla caneliantor scripsit, memoriteqtie mandavit. (Eginard, in Vit. Carol. Magn. c. 29. p. 130, Ml.)The poems which Coldastcommends, (Animadvers. ad Eginard, p. 207.) appear to he recent and contempti­ble romances. ,
(1) The other nations are rehearsed by Paul. lib. ii. c. 6. 23.) Mnratnri (Anticliita Italiane, torn. i. dissert. 1.p. 4.) has discovered tbe village of the Bavarians, three miles from Modcna.
(2) Gregory the Roman (Dialog, lib. apuil. Baron. Annal. Eccles. A. D. 579. No. 10.) soppnses lhat theylikewise adored this she-goat. I know but of one religion in which the god and the victim are the same.
(3) The charge or tbe deacon against Narses (lib. ii. c. v.) may be groundless; but the weak apology of thecardinal (Baron. Annal. Eccles. A. D. J67. No. 8-12.) is rejected by the best critics—Pagi. (torn. ii. p. 639.640.)Mura'ori (Annali'dItalia, torn. v. p. 160—181.) and the last editors, Horatius, Blancns, (Script. Rerum. Italic,torn. i. p. 427,438.) and Philip Argelatui, (Sigon. Opera, torn. ii. p. 11.12.) The Narses who assisted at thecoronation of Justin, (Corippus. lib. iii. 221.) is clearly understood to be a different person.







OCR Output








216 THE DECLINE AND FALL


' The disorders of thirty years at length produced the famous Henoticon(1)of the emperor Zeno, which in his reign, and in that of Anastasius, was signed byall the bishops of the east, under the penalty of degradation and exile, if theyrejected or infringed this salutary and fundamental law. The clergy may smileor groan at the presumption of a layman who defines the articles of faith: yet if hestoops to the humiliating task, his mind is less infected by prejudice or interest,and the authority of the magistrate can only be maintained by the concord of thepeople. It is in ecclesiastical story, that Zeno appears less contemptible; and Iam not able to discern any Manichsan or Eutychian guilt in the generous sayingof Anastasius, that it was unworthy of an emperor to persecute the worshippersof Christ and the citizens of Rome. The Henoticon was most pleasing to theEgyptians; yet the smallest blemish has not been described by the jealous and eventhe jaundiced eyes of our orthodox schoolmen, and it accurately represents the ca­tholic faith of the incarnation, without adopting or disclaiming the peculiar terms ortenets of the hostile sects. A solemn anathema is pronounced against Nestoriusand Eutyches; against all heretics by whom Christ is divided, or confounded, orreduced to a phantom. Without defining the number or the article of the wordnature, the pure system of St. Cyril, the faith of Nice, Constantinople, and Ephe-sus, is respectfully confirmed; but, instead of bowing at the name of the fourthcouncil, the subject is dismissed by the censure of all contrary doctrines, if anysuch have been taught either elsewhere or at Chalcedon, Under this ambiguousexpression, the friends and enemies of the last synod might unite in a silent em­brace. The most reasonable Christians acquiesced in this mode of toleration; buttheir reason was feeble and inconstant, and their obedience was despised as timidand servile by the vehement spirit of their brethren. On a subject which en­grossed the thoughts and discourses of men, it was difficult to preserve an exactneutrality; a book, a sermon, a prayer, rekindled the flame of controversy; andthe bonds of communion were alternately broken and renewed by the private ani­mosity of the bishops. The space between Nestorius and Eutyches was filled by" a thousand shades of language and opinion; the acefihali(2) of Egypt, and the Ro­man pontiffs, of equal valour, though of unequal strength, may be found at twoextremities of the theological scale. The acephali, without a king or a bishop, were .separated above three hundred years from the patriarchs of Alexandria, who hadaccepted the communion of Constantinople, without exacting a formal condemna­tion of the synod of Chalcedon. For accepting the communion of Alexandria, with­out a formal approbation of the same synod, the patriarchs of Constantinople wereanathematized by the popes. Their inflexible despotism involved the most ortho­dox of the Greek churches in this spiritual contagion, denied or doubted the vali­dity of their sacraments,(3) and fomented, thirty-five years, the schism of the eastand west, till they finally abolished the memory of four Byzantine pontiffs,who had dared to oppose the supremacy of St. Peter. (4) Before that period, theprecarious truce of Constantinople and Egypt had been violated by the zeal of therival prelates. Macedonius, who was suspected of the Nestorian heresy, assertedin disgrace and exile, the synod of Chalcedon, while the successor of Cyril wouldhave purchased its overthrow with a bribe of two thousand pounds of gold.
In the fever of the times, the sense, or rather the sound of a syllable, was suffi­cient to disturb the peace of an empire. The Trisagion(5) (thrice holy,) Hoh/t


(1) The Henuticon is transcribed by Evagrius (lib. iii, c. 13.,) and translated by Liberatus (Brev. c. xviii.JPagi (Critical ton. ii. p. 414.0 and Asseman. (Bibliot. Orient, torn. i. p. 343.) are satisfied that h is free From he­resy; but Petavius (Dogmat. Theolog. torn. r. lib. i. c. 13. p. 40.) most unaccountably affirms Chalcedonensemascivit. An adversary would prove that he had never read the Henoticon.
(2) See Renaudot (Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p. 113. 131. 145. 195-247.) They were reconciled by the care ofMark I. (A. D. 799—819.,) he promoted their chiefs to the bishopries of Athribis and Talba, (perhaps Tava; seed'Anville, p. 82.) and supplied the sacraments, which had failed for want of an episcopal ordination.
(3) De his cjuos baptizavit quos ordinavit Acacius, majorum traditione confectam et veram prsecipue rehgi.osse solicitudini coneruam prsebemus sine difficuttate niedicinam. (Galasius, in epist. l. ad Euphemium. Con-cil. torn. v. 286.) The offer of a medicine proves the disease, and numbers must have perished before the ar­rival of the Roman physician. Tillemont himself (Mem. Eccles. torn. xvi. p. 372.042, &c.) is shocked at theproud and uncharitable temper of the popes; they are now glad, says he, to invoke St. Flavian of Antioch.St. Elias of Jerusalem, fee. to whom they refused communion whilst upon earth. But cardinal Baronius isfirm and hard as the rock of St Peter.
(4) Their names were erased from the diptych of the church: ex venerabili diptycho, in qno piae memorisstransitum ad ccelum habentium episcoporum vocabula conlinemur. (Concil. torn. iv. p. 1846.) This ecclesi­astical record was therefore equivalent to the book of life.
(5) Petavius (Dogmat. Theolog. torn. v. lib. v. c. 2-4. p. 217—225.) and Tillemont (Mem. Eccles. torn. ri».p. 713, Sec. 799.) represents the history and doctrine of the Trisagion. In the twelve centuries between Isaiahand St. Proclus's boy, who was taken up into heaven before the bishop and peopleof Constantinople, the sane;was considerably improved. ThebjryhfairitTiean;;elssing".Hol)'Gad! Holy Strong! Holy Immortal!"







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 71


amounted to six hundred and forty-five thousand men: it was reduced, in the timeof Justinian, to one hundred and fifty thousand; and this number, large as it mayseem, was thinly scattered over the sea and land; in Spain and Italy, in Africa andEgypt, on the banks of the Danube, the coast of the Euxine, and the frontiers ofPersia. The citizen was exhausted, yet the soldier was unpaid; his poverty wasmischievously soothed by the privilege of rapine and indolence; and the tardy pay­ments were detained and intercepted by the fraud of those agents who usurp, with­out courage or danger, the emoluments of war. Public and private distress re­cruited the armies of the state; but in the field, and still more in the presence ofthe enemy, their numbers were always defective. The want of national spirit wassupplied by the precarious faith and disorderly service of barbarian mercenaries.Even military honour, which has often survived the loss of virtue and freedom, wasalmost totally extinct. The generals, who were multiplied beyond the example offormer times, laboured only to prevent the success, or to sully the reputation of theircolleagues; and they had been taught by experience, that if merit sometimes pro­voked the jealousy, error, or even guilt, would obtain the indulgence, of a graciousemperor. (1) In such an age the triumphs of Belisarius, and afterward of Narses,shine with incomparable lustre; but they are encompassed with the darkest shadesof disgrace and calamity. While the lieutenant of Justinian subdued the kingdomsof the Goths and Vandals, the emperor, (2) timid, though ambitious, balanced theforces of the barbarians, fomented their divisions by flattery and falsehood, and in­vited by his patience and liberality the repetition of injuries. (3) The keys of Car­thage, Rome, and Ravenna, were presented to their conqueror, while Antiochwas destroyed by the Persians, and Justinian trembled for the safety of Constanti­nople.
Even the Gothic victories of Belisarius were prejudicial to the state, since theyabolished the important barrier of the Upper Danub?, which had been so faithful-


evacuated Pannonia and Noricum, which they left in a peaceful and flourishingcondition: the sovereignty was claimed by the emperor of the Romans: the actual
Possession was abandoned to the boldness of the first invader. On the oppositeanks of the Danube, the plains of Upper Hungary and the Transylvanian hillswere possessed, since the death of Attila, by the tribes of the Gepids, who re­spected the Gothic arms, and despised, not indeed the gold of the Romans, butthe secret motive of their annual subsidies. The vacant fortifications of the riverwere instantly occupied by these barbarians: their standards were planted on thewalls of Sirmium and Belgrade; and the ironical tone of their apology aggravatedthis insult on the majesty of the empire. " So extensive, O Cssar, are your do­minions; so numerous are your cities; that you are continually seeking for nations-to whom, either in peace or war, you may relinquish these useless possessions.The Gepidrc are your brave and faithful allies; and if they have anticipated yourgifts, they have shown a just confidence in your bounty." Their presumption was.excused by the mode of revenge which Justinian embraced. Instead of asserting,the rights of a sovereign for the protection of his subjects, the emperor invited astrange people to invade and possess the Roman provinces between the Danubeand the Alps; and the ambition of the Gepidai was checked by the rising powerand fame of the Lombards. (4) This corrupt appellation has been diffused in the-thirteenth century by the merchants and bankers, the Italian posterity of thesesavage warriors: but the original name of Langobards is expressive only of the pe­culiar length and fashion of their beards. I am not disposed either to question orto justify their Scandinavian origin;(5) nor to pursue the migrations of the Lom-
(1) See tlie third and fourth booki of the Gothic War: the writer of the Anecdotes cannot aggravate theseabnses.
(2) Agathias, lib. v. p. H7,1J8. He confines this weakness of the emperor and the empire to the old age ofJustinian; but, alas! he was never young.
(3) Thin mischievous policy, which Procopius (Anecdot. c. 19.) imputes to the emperor, is revealed in hi*epistles to a Scythian prince, who was capable of understanding it. Ayav wfOftifins x»' ayxwunarwq t saysAgathias (lib. v. p. 170,171.)
(4) Gens Germana feritate ferocior, says Velleius, Paterculus of the Lombards(ii. 106.)_ Langobardos pait-citas nobilitat. Plurimisac valentissimis nationibus cincti non per obseqiiium sed prseliis et periclitando tuti-•tint (Tacit, de Moribus German, c. 40.) See likewise Strabo (lib. vii-p. 448.) The best geographers place thembeyond the Elbe, in the bishopric of Magdeburgh and the middle march of Brandenburgh; and their situation,-win agree with the patriotic remark of the count de Henzburg, that most of the barbarian conquerors issued,from the tame countries, which still produce the.armies of Prussia.
(i) The Scandinavian origin of the Goths anil Lombards, aa stated by Paul Warnefrid, surnamed the dea­con, is attacked by Cluverius (Get-mania Autiq. lib. iii. c. 20. p. 102, tee.) a native of Prussia, and defended byerotius (Prolegom. ad Hist, Goth. p. 25, &c-)the Swedish ambassador.


 


For the defence of Italy, the Goths


-







OCR Output








382 THE DECLINE AND FALL


It is in the fourteenth century, that we may view in the strongest light the state•and contrast of the Roman empire of Germany, which no longer held, except onthe borders of the Rhine and Danube, a single province of Trajan or Constantine.Their unworthy successors were the counts of Hapsburg, of Nassau, of Luxem-burgh, and of Schwartzenburgh: the emperor Henry VIL procured for his son thecrown of Bohemia, and his grandson Charles IV. was born among a people, strangeand barbarous in the estimation of the Germans themselves. (1) After the ex­communication of Lewis of Bavaria, he received the gift or promise of the vacantempire from the Roman pontiffs, who, in the exile and captivity of Avignon, af­fected the dominion of the earth. The death of his competitors united the elec­toral college, and Charles was unanimously saluted king of the Romans, and futureemperor: a title which in the same age was prostituted to the Cssars of Germa­ny and Greece. The German emperor was no more than the elective and impo­tent magistrate of an aristocracy of princes, who had not left him a village thathe might call his own. His best prerogative was the right of presiding and pro­posing in the national senate, which was convened at his summons; and his nativeKingdom of Bohemia, less opulent than the adjacent city of Nuremburg, was thefirmest seat of his power and the richest source of his revenue. The army withwhich he passed the Alps consisted of three hundred horse. In the cathedral ofSt. Ambrose, Charles was crowned with the iron crown, which tradition ascribedto the Lombard monarchy; but he was admitted only with a peaceful train; thegates of the city were shut upon him; and the king of Italy was held a captive bythe arms of the Visconti, whom he confirmed in the sovereignty of Milan. In theVatican he was again crowned with the golden crown of the empire; but, in obe­dience to a secret treaty, the Roman emperor immediately withdrew, without re­posing a single night within the walls of Rome. The eloquent Petrarch,(2) whosefancy revived the visionary glories of the capitol, deplores and upbraids the igno­minious flight of the Bohemian; and even his cotemporaries could observe, thatthe sole exercise of his authority was in the lucrative sale of privileges and titles.The gold of Italy secured the election of his son; but such was the shameful po­verty of the Roman emperor, that his person was arrested by a butcher in thestreets of Worms, and was detained in the public inn, as a pledge or hostage forthe payment of his expenses.
From this humiliating scene, let us turn to the apparent majesty of the sameCharles in the diets of the empire. The golden bull, which fixes the Germanicconstitution, is promulgated in the style of a sovereign and legislator. A hundredprinces bowed before his throne, and exalted their own dignity by the voluntaryhonours which they yielded to their chief or minister. At the royal banquet, thehereditary great officers, the seven electors, who in rank and title were equal tokings, performed their solemn and domestic service of the palace. The seals ofthe triple kingdom were borne in state by the archbishops of Mentz, Cologne, andTreves, the perpetual arch-chancellors of Germany, Italy, and Aries. The greatmarshal, on horseback, exercised his function with a silver measure of oats,which he emptied on the ground, and immediately dismounted to regulate theorder of the guests. The great steward, the count palatine of the Rhine, placedthe dishes on the table. The great chamberlain, the margrave of Brandenburg,
Sresented, after the repast, the golden ewer and basin, to wash. The king of Bo-emia, as great cup-bearer, was represented by the emperor's brother, the dukeof Luxemburg and Brabant; and the procession was closed by the great huntsman,who introduced a boar and a stag, with a loud chorus of horns and hounds. (3)Nor was the supremacy of the emperor confined to Germany alone; the heredi­tary monarchs of Europe confessed the pre-eminence of his rank and dignity; bewas the first of the Christian princes, the temporal head of the great republic of


collects them under tlieir respective heads. To this work, in a less pet-feet state. Dr. Robertson was jrraleful-lyindebted for that masterly sketch which traces even the modern chances of the Germanic bod)*. The Cor­pus Historise Germanicae of Struvius, has been likewise consulted, the more usefully, as that huge compilationis fortified in every page with the original texts.
(1) *yelpersonaUy, Charles IV. must not be considered as a harharian. After his education at Paris, he reco­vered the use of the Bohemian, his native idiom; and the emperor conversed and wrote with equal facility inFrench, Latin, Italian, and Gel-man. (Struvius, p. 615,610.) Petrarch always represents him as a polite andlearned prince. •*
(2) Besides the German and Italian historians, the expedition of Charles IV. is painted in lively and oriet-xial colours in the curious Memoires stir la Vie de Petrarque, torn. iii. p. 370—130. By the Abbe de SadC•chose prolixity has never been blamed by any reader of taste and curiosity.
f3)^ee thewholt- ceremony in Strrrriiis, p. 629.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. i 1


tempted the female sex, though seldom seen in the circus, to espouse the inclina­tion of their lovers, or to contradict the wishes of their husbands. Every law,either human or divine, was trampled under foot, and as long as the party wassuccessful, its deluded followers appeared careless of private distress, or publiccalamity. The license, without the freedom of democracy, was revived at An-tioch and Constantinople, and the support of a faction became necessary to everycandidate for civil or ecclesiastical honours. A secret attachment to the familyor sect of Anastasius was imputed to the greens; the blues were zealously devotedto the cause of orthodoxy and Justinian.(l) and their grateful patron protected,above five years, the disorders of a faction, whose seasonable tumults overawedthe palace, the senate, and the capitals of the east. Insolent with royal favour,the blues affected to strike terror by a peculiar and barbaric dress; the long hairof the Huns, their close sleeves and ample garments, a lofty step, and a sonorousvoice. In the day they concealed their two-edged poniards, but in the nightthey boldly assembled in arms, and in numerous bands, prepared for every act ofviolence and rapine. Their adversaries of the green faction, or even inoffensivecitizens, were stripped and often murdered by these nocturnal robbers, and it be­came dangerous to wear any gold buttons or girdles, or to appear at a late hourin the streets of a peaceful capital. A daring spirit, rising with impunity, pro­ceeded to violate the safeguard of private houses; and fire was employed to faci­litate the attack, or to conceal the crimes of those factious rioters. No placewas safe or sacred from their depredations; to gratify either avarice or revenge,they profusely spilt the blood of the innocent: churches and altars were pollutedby atrocious murders; and it was the boast of the assassins, that their dexteritycouldalways inflict a mortal wound with a single stroke of their dagger. Thedissolute youth of Constantinople adopted the blue livery of disorder; the lawswere silent, and the bonds of society were relaxed; creditors were compelled toresign their obligations; judges to reverse their sentence; masters to enfranchisetheir slaves; fathers to supply the extravagance of their children; noble matronswere prostituted%) the lust of their servants; beautiful boys were torn from thearms of their parettts; and wives, unless they preferred a voluntary death, wereravished in the presence of their husbands. (2) The despair of the greens, whowere persecuted by their enemies, and deserted by the magistrate, assumed theprivilege of defence, perhaps of retaliation: but those who survived the combatwere dragged to execution, and the unhappy fugitives escaping to woods and ca­verns, preyed without mercy on the society from whence they were expelled.Those ministers of justice who had courage to punish the crimes, and to brave the re­sentment of the blues, became the victims of their indiscreet zeal: a prefect of Con­stantinople fled for refuge to the holy sepulchre; a count of the east was ignomi-niously whipped, and a governor of Cilicia was hanged, by the order of Theodora,on the tomb of two assassins whom he had condemned for the murder of hisgroom, and a daring attack upon his own life. (3) An aspiring candidate may betempted to build his greatness on the public confusion, but it is the interest aswell as duty of a sovereign to maintain the authority of the laws. The first edictof Justinian, which was often repeated, and sometimes executed, announced hisfirm resolution to support the innocent, and to chastise the guiltv of every denomi­nation and colour. Yet the balance of justice was still inclined in favour of theblue faction, by the secret affection, the habits, and the fears of the emperor; hisequity, after an apparent straggle, submitted, without reluctance, to the implaca­ble passions of Theodora, and the empress never forgot, or forgave, the injuriesof the comedian. At the accession of the younger Justin, the proclamation ofequal and rigorous justice indirectly condemned the partiality of the former reigns." Ye blues, Justinian is no more! ye greens, he is still alive!"(4)
A sedition, which almost laid Constantinople in ashes, was excited by the mu­tual hatred and momentary reconciliation of the two factions. In the fifth yearof his reign, Justinian celebrated the festival of the ides of January: the games
CO The partiality of Justinian for the blues, (Aneedot. c. 7.) is attested by Evae;rim, (Hist. Eceles. lib. iv. c.32.) John Malala, (torn. ii. p. 138.139.) especially for Antioch; and Theoplianes. (p. 143.)
(2) A wile, (says Procopius) who was seized and almost ravished by a blae coat, threw herself into the Bos-phorus. The bishops of the second Syria, (Aleman. p. 26.) deplore a similar suicide, the guilt or glory of fe­male chastity, and name the heroine.
(3) Ttte doubtful credit of Procopius, (Aneedot. c. xvii.) is supported by the less partial Kvafrrins, who eun-fi rras the fact, and specifies the names. The tragic fate of the prefect of Constantinople, Is related by JohnMalala. (torn. ii. p. 139.)
(4) See John Malala; (tom.ii. p. 147.) yet he owns that Justinian was attached to the blues. The. seemingdiscord of the emperor and Theodora, is perhaps viewed with too macta jealousy and refinement by Proco­pius. (Aneedot. «. i.) See AJernan. Pi acfat. p. 6.







OCR Output








176 THE DECLINE AND FALL


■will of his sovereign, he showed himself to the soldiers in this unworthy disguise:they resented his ignominy and their own: a shout of rebellion ran through theranks, and the general accepted their oaths of fidelity and vows of revenge. Asecond messenger, who had been commanded to bring the rebel in chains, wastrampled under the feet of an elephant, and manifestoes were diligently circula­ted; exhorting the Persians to assert their freedom against an odious and con­temptible tyrant. The defection was rapid and universal: his loyal slaves weresacrificed to the public fury; the troops deserted to the standard of Bahram; andthe provinces again saluted the deliverer of his country. ■As the passes were faithfully guarded, Hormouz could only compute the numberof his enemies by the testimony of a guilty conscience, and the daily defection ofthose who, in the hour of his distress, avenged their wrongs, or forgot their obli­gations. He proudly displayed the ensigns of royalty; but the city and palace ofModain had already escaped from the hand of the tyrant. Among the victims ofhis cruelty, Bindoes, a Sassanian prince, had been cast into a dungeon; his fetterswere broken by the zeal and courage of a brother; and he stood before the king atthe head of those trusty guards who had been chosen as the ministers of his con­finement, and perhaps of his death. Alarmed by the hasty intrusion and bold re-proaces of the captive, Hormouz looked round, but in vain, for advice or assist­ance; discovered that his strength consisted in the obedience of others, and pa­tiently yielded to the single arm of Bindoes, who dragged him from the throne tothe same dungeon in which he himself had been so lately confined. At the firsttumult, Chosroes, the eldest of the sons of Hormouz, escaped from the city; he■was persauded to return by the pressing and friendly invitation of Bindoes, whopromised to seat him on his father's throne, and who expected to reign under thename of an inexperienced youth. In the just assurance, that his accomplicescould neither forgive nor hope to be forgiven, and that every Persian might betrusted as the judge and enemy of the tyrant, he instituted a public trial withouta copy in the annals of the east. The son of Nushirvan, who had requested toplead in his own defence, was introduced as a criminal into the full assembly ofthe nobles and satraps. (1) He was heard with decent attention as long as he ex­patiated on the advantages of order and obedience, the danger of innovation andthe inevitable discord of those who had encouraged each other to trample on theirlawful and hereditary sovereign. By a pathetic appeal to their humanity, he ex­torted that pity which is seldom refused to the fallen fortunes of a king; and whilethey beheld the abject posture and squalid appearance of the prisoner, his tears,his chains, and the marks of ignominious stripes, it was impossible to forget howrecently they had adored the divine splendour of his diadem and purple. But anangry murmur arose in the assembly as soon as he presumed to vindicate his con­duct, and to applaud the victories of his reign. He defined the duties of a king,and the Persian nobles listened with a smile of contempt; they were fired with in­dignation when he dared to vilify the character of Chosroes; and by the indiscreetoffer of resigning the sceptre to the second of his sons, he subscribed his own con­demnation, and sacrificed the life of his innocent favourite. The mangled bodiesof the boy and his mother were exposed to the people: the eyes of Hormouz werepierced with a hot needle; and the punishment of the father was succeeded by thecoronation of his eldest son. Chosroes had ascended the throne without guilt,and his piety strove to alleviate the misery of the abdicated monarch: from thedungeon he removed Hormouz to an apartment of the palace, supplied with liber­ality the consolations of sensual enjoyment, and patiently endured the furious sal­lies of his resentment and despair. He might despise the resentment of a blindand unpopular tyrant, but the tiara was trembling on his head, till he could sub­vert the power, or acquire the friendship, of the great Bahram, who sternly de­nied the justice of a revolution, in which himself and his soldiers, the true repre­sentatives of Persia, had never been consulted. The offer of a general amnesty,and of the'second rank in his kingdom, was answered by an epistle from Bahram,friend of the gods, conqueror of men, and enemy of tyrants, the satrap of satraps,general of the Persian armies, and a prince adorned with the title of eleven vh>tues.(2) He commands Chosroes, the son of Hormouz, to shun the example and
(1) The orientals suppose that Bahrain convened this assembly and proclaimed Chosroes; but Theophylactis, in this instance, moredistinct and credible.
(2) Seethe words of Theophylact, lib. iv.c. 7. Bxpxp *ixo; toi; 0m?, vixataK iTisjatnj;, TupxviMi* ijgfipo;, «■*•opiums juytmnw, t«; nipri*,,- afXm Sm*juw, &c. In this answer, Chosroes styles himself m «vxti v*piZf&n;c fi»T» .... o tin; Amncs (the genii; jRiffeti/Mts;, This is genuine oriental bombast.







OCR Output








218 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Justinian has been already seen in the various lights of a prince, a conqueror,and a law-giver: the theologian(l) still remains, and it afl'ords an unfavourableprejudice, that his theology should form a very prominent feature of his portrait.The sovereign sympathized with his subjects in their superstitious reverence for ,living and departed saints; his code, and more especially his novels, confirm andenlarge the privileges of the clergy; and in every dispute, between a monk, and alayman, the partial judge was inclined to pronounce, that truth, and innocence,and justice, were always on the side of the church. In his public and private de­votions, the emperor was assiduous and exemplary; his prayers, vigils, and fasts,displayed the austere penance of a monk; his fancy was amused by the hope, orbelief, of personal inspiration; he had secured the patronage of the Virgin and St.Michael the archangel: and.his recovery from a dangerous disease was ascribed tothe miraculous succour of the holy martyrs Cosmas and Damian. The capitaland the provinces of the east, were decorated with themonuments of his religion;(2)and, though the far greater part of these costly structures may be attributed to histaste or ostentation, the zeal of the royal architect was probably quickened by agenuine sense of love and gratitude towards his invisible benefactors. Among thetitles of imperial greatness, the name of Pious was most pleasing to his ear; to pro­mote the temporal and spiritual interests of the church, was the serious businessof his life; and the duty of father of his country was often sacrificed to that of de­fender of the faith. The controversies of the times were congenial to his temperand understanding; and the theological professors must inwardly deride the dili­gence of a stranger, who cultivated their art and neglected his own. " What canye fear," said a bold conspirator to his associates, ** from your bigoted tyrant?Sleepless and unarmed he sits whole nights in his closet, debating with reverend gray-beards, and turning over the pages of ecclesiastical volumes. "(3) The fruits of theselucubrations were displayed in many a conference, where Justinian might shine asthe loudest and most subtle of the disputants; in many a sermon, which, under thename of edicts and epistles, proclaimed to the empire the theology of their master.While the barbarians invaded the provinces, while the victorious legions marchedunder the banners of Belisarius and Narses, the successor of Trajan, unknown tothe camp, was content to vanquish at the head of a synod. Had he invited to thesesynods.a disinterested and rational spectator, Justinian might have learned that re­ligious controversy is the offspring of arrogance and folly; that true piety is mostlaudably expressed by silence and submission; that man, ignorant of his own na­ture, should not presume to scrutinize the nature of his God; and that it is suffi­cient for us to know that power and benevolence are the perfect attributes of theDeity.(4)
Toleration was not the virtue of the times, and indulgence to rebels has seldombeen the virtue of princes. But when the prince descends to the narrow andpeevish character of a disputant, he is easily provoked to supply the defect of ar­gument by the plenitude of power, and to chastise without mercy the perverseblindness of those who wilfully shut their eyes against the light of demonstration.The reign of Justinian was a uniform yet various scene of persecution; and he ap­pears to have surpassed his indolent predecessors, both in the contrivance of hislaws and the rigour of their execution. The insufficient term of three monthswas assigned for the conversion or exile of all heretics;(5) and if he still connivedat their precarious stay, they were deprived, under his iron yoke, not only of thebenefits of society, but of the common birth-right of men and Christians. At the
(1) Tlie strain of the Anecdotes of Prooopius, (c. 11.13. 18. 27,28.) with the learned remarks on Aleman-jhi», is confirmed, rather than contradicted, by the Acts of the Councils, the fourth book of Evagrins, and thecomplaints of the Afnean Facundus ia his twelfth book—de tribm eapitnlis, " cum videri doctus an petit im­portune . . . spontaneis questonibus ecclesiam turbat." See Procop. de Bell. Goth. lib. iii. c. 35.
(5) Procop. de Edificiis, lib. i. c. 6,7, &c. passim.
(3) 'Oi Ss xteSifrai wpuXtexTO; att sjrt Xttry^; rtvog sewpi vmcrmi ouoy to*: raiv ttptav yspowfrtv kit^etov avoxvKAlf*r*. XftiTTwm, \oj-.» tjouS,» !XProcop. de Bell. Goth. lib. iii. c. 32. In the life of St. Eutychius, (apudAleman. ad Procop. Arcan. c. 18.) the same character is given with a design to praise Justinian.
(4) For these wise and moderate sentiments, Procopius (de Bell. Goth. lib. i. c. iii.) is scourged in the prefaceof Alemannus, who ranks him among: the political Christians—sed lone* verius hseresium omnium seminal,prorsusque Atheos—abominable Atheists, who preached the imitation of God's mercy to man (ad Hist. Arcan.c. 13.)
(J) This alternative, a precious circumstance, is preserved by John Malala, (torn. ii. p. 63. edit. Venet. 1733,)whodeserves more credit as he draws towards his end. After numbering the heretics, Nestorians, Eutychians,&c. ne expectent, says Justinian, ut dierni venia judicentur: jubemus, enim ut . . . convicti et apertihsere-tici justse et idonse animadversion! subjicjanttir. Earonius copies and applauds this edict of the Code. (A. D,oW. No. 39—40.)







OCR Output








264 THE DECLINE AND FALL


and shared with a smile the abstinence or diet of the camp. No sooner did he re­turn to Constantinople, than he resigned himself to the arts and pleasures of a lifeof luxury: the expense of his dress, his table, and his palace, surpassed the mea­sure of his predecessors, and whole summer days, were idly wasted in the deliciousisles of the Propontis, in the incestuous love of his niece Theodora. The doublecoast of a warlike and dissolute prince, exhausted the revenue, and multipliedthe taxes; and Manuel, in the distress of his last Turkish camp, endured a bitterreproach from the mouth of a desperate soldier. As he quenched his thirst, hecomplained that the water of a fountain was mingled with Christian blood. " It isnot the first time" (exclaimed a voice from the crowd) " that you have drank, Oemperor! the blood of your Christian subjects." Manuel Comnenus was twicemarried; to the virtuous Bertha or Irene of Germany, and to the beauteous Maria,a French or Latin princess of Antioch. The only daughter of his first wife destinedfor Bela, a Hungarian prince, who was educated at Constantinople under the nameof Alexius; and the consummation of their nuptials might have transferred theRoman sceptre to a race of free and warlike barbarians. But as soon as Maria ofAntioch had given a son and heir to the empire, the presumptive rights of Belawere abolished, and he was deprived of his promised bride: but the Hungarianprince resumed his name and the kingdom of his fathers, and displayed such vir­tues as might excite the regret and envy of the Greeks. The son of Maria wasnamed Alexius; and at the age of ten years, he ascended the Byzantine throne,after his father's decease had closed the glories of the Comnenian line.
The fraternal concord of the two sons of the great Alexius, had been sometimesclouded by an opposition of interest and passion. By ambition, Isaac the Sebasto-crator was excited to flight and rebellion, from whence he was reclaimed by thefirmness and clemency of John the Handsome. The errors of Isaac, the father ofthe emperors of Trebizond, were short and venial; but John the elder of his sons,renounced for ever his religion. Provoked by a real or imaginary insult of hisuncle, he escaped from the Roman to the Turkish camp: his apostacy was re­warded with the sultan's daughter, the title of Chelebi, or noble, and the inheri­tance of a princely estate; and in the fifteenth century Mahomet II. boasted of hisimperial descent from the Comnenian family. Andronicus, the younger brother ofJohn, son of Isaac, and grandson of Alexius Comnenus, is one of the most conspi­cuous characters of the age: and his genuine adventures might form the subject ofa very singular romance. To justify the choice of three ladies of royal birth, it isincumbent on me to observe, that their fortunate lover was cast in the best pro­portions of strength and beauty; and that the want of the softer graces was suppliedby a manly countenance, a lofty stature, athletic muscles, and the air and deport­ment of a soldier. The preservation, in his old age, of health and vigour, was thereward of temperance and exercise. A piece of bread and a draught of water wereoften his sole and evening repast; and if he tasted of a wild boar, or a stag, whichhe had roasted with his own hands, it was the well-earned fruit of a laborious chase.Dexterous in arms, he was ignorant of fear: his persuasive eloquence could bend toevery situation and character of life: his style, though not his practice, was fashionedby the example of St. Paul; and, in every deed of mischief, he had a heart to re­solve, a head to contrive, and a hand to execute. In his youth, after the death ofthe emperor John, he followed the retreat of the Roman army; but in the marchthrough Asia Minor, design or accident tempted him to wander into the mountains:the hunter was encompassed by the Turkish huntsmen, and he remained sometime a reluctant or willing captive in the power of the sultan. His virtues andvices recommended him to the favour of his cousin; he shared the perils and thepleasures of Manuel; and while the emperor lived in public incest with his nieceTheodora, the affections of her sister Eudocia were seduced and enjoyed by An­dronicus. Above the decencies, of her sex and rank, she gloried in the name of hisconcubine; and both the palace and the camp could witness that she slept orwatched in the arms of her lover. She accompanied him to his military commandof Cilicia, the first scene of his valour and imprudence. He pressed, with activeardour, the siege of Mopsuestia: the day was employed in the boldest attacks; butthe night was wasted in song and dance; and a band of Greek comedians formedthe choicest part of his retinue. Andronicus was surprised by the sally of a vigi­lant foe: but while his troops fled in disorder, his invincible lance transpierced thethickest ranks of the Armenians. On his return to the imperial camp in Mace­donia, he was received by Manuel with public smiles and a private reproof; butthe duchies of Naissus, Braniscba, and Castoria, were the reward or consolation 01







OCR Output








OF" THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


founded on the slight and suspicious evidence of a child or a servant; the guilt ofthe green faction, of the rich, and of the enemies of Theodora, was presumed bythe judges, and pederasty became the crime of those to whom no crime could beimputed. A French philosopher(l) has dared to remark, that whatever is secretmust be doubtful, and that our natural horror of vice may abused as an engine oftyranny. But the favourable pursuasion of the same writer, that a legislator mayconfide in the taste and reason of mankind, is impeached by the unwelcome disco-very of the antiquity and extent of the disease. (2)
The free citizens of Athens and Rome enjoyed, in all criminal cases, the invaluableprivilege of being tried by their country. (3) 1. The administration of justice is themost ancient office of a prince: it was exercised by the Roman kings, and abusedby Tarquin; who alone, without law or council, pronounced his arbitrary judg­ments. The first consuls succeeded to this regal prerogative; but the sacred rightof appeal soon abolished the jurisdiction of the magistrates, and all public causeswere decided by the supreme tribunal of the people. But a wild democracy, su­perior to the forms, too often disdains the essential principles of justice: the prideof despotism was envenomed by plebeian envy, and the neroes of Athens mightsometimes applaud the happiness of the Persian, whose fate depended on the ca­price of a single tyrant. Some salutary restraints, imposed by the people on theirown passions, were at once the cause and effect of the gravity and temperance ofthe Romans. The right of accusation was confined to the magistrates. A vote of thethirty-five tribes could inflict a fine: but the cognizance of all natural crimes was re­served by a fundamental law to the assembly of the centuries, in which the weight ofinfluence and property was sure to preponderate. Repeated proclamations and ad­journments were interposed, to allow time for prejudice and resentment to subside;the whole proceeding might be annulled by a seasonable omen, or the opposition of atribune; and such popular trials were commonly less formidable to innocence, thanthey were favourable to guilt. But this union of the judicial and legislative powers,left it doubtful whether the accused party was pardoned or acquitted; and in thedefence of- an illustrious client, the orators of Rome and Athens addressed theirarguments to the policy and benevolence, as well as to the justice of their sove­reign. 2. The task of convening the citizens for the trial of each offender becamemore difficult, as the citizens and the offenders continually multiplied; and the rea­dy expedient was adopted of delegating the jurisdiction of the people to the ordi­nary magistrates, or to extraordinary inquisitors. In the first ages these ques­tions were rare and occasional. In the beginning of the seventh century of Romathey were made perpetual; for pretors were annually expowered to sit in judg­ment on the state offences of treason, extortion, peculation, and bribery; and Syl-la added new pretors and new questions for those crimes which more directly in­jure the safety of individuals. By these inquisitors the trial was prepared and di­rected; but they could only pronounce the sentence of the majority of judges, whowith some truth, and more prejudice, have been compared to the English ju­ries. (4) To discharge this important though burdensome office, an annual list ofancient and respectable citizens was formed by the pretor. After many constitu­tional struggles, they were chosen in equal numbers from the senate, the eques­trian order, and the people; four hundred and fifty were appointed for single ques­tions; and the various rolls or decuries of judges must have contained the namesof some-thousand Romans, who represented the judicial authority of the state. Ineach particular cause, a sufficient number was drawn from the urn; their inte­grity was guarded by an oath; the mode of ballot secured their independence; thesuspicion of partiality was removed by the mutual challenges of the accuser and
(1) Montesquieu^ Esprit des Lois, lib. xii. c. 6. That eloquent philosopher conciliates the rights of libertyand of nature, which should- never be placed in opposition to each other.
(2) For the corruption of Palestine, two thousand years before the Christian era, see the history and laws ofMoses. Ancient Gaul is stigmatized by Diodonts Siculus (torn. i. lib. v. p. 356..) China by the Mahometanand Christian travellers (Ancient Relationes of India and China, p. 34. translated by Renaudot,and his bittercritic the Pere Premare, Lettres Edifiantes, torn. six. p. 435.) and native America by the Spanish historians(Garciluuso de la Vega, lib. iii. c. 13. Rycant's translation, and Dictionaire dc Bayle. torn. iii. p. 88.) I believe,and hope, that the negroes, in their own country, were exempt from this moral pestilence.
(3) The important subject of the public questions and judgments at Rome is explained with much learn­ing, and in a classic style, by Charles Sigonius (lib. iii. de Judiciis, in Opp. torn. iii. 679—3fi t..) and a goodabridgment may be found in the Repuhlique Romain*e of Beaufort (torn. ii. lib. v. p. 1—121.) Those who wishfor more abstruse law, may study Noodt (de Jurisdictioue et ImperioLibri duo, torn. p. 93—144..) Heineccius,(ad Pandect, lib. i. et ii. ad Institut. lib. iv. tit. 17. Element, ad Antiquitat.) and Gravina (Opp. 230—251.)
(4) The office, both at Rome and in England, must be considered as an occasional duty, and not a magis­tracy or profession. But the obligation of a unanimous verdict is peculiar to our laws, which condemn tbx.jurymen to undergo the torture from whence they have exempted the criminal,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, 05


boundless, and perhaps chimerical. The king of Austrasia threatened to chas­tise Justinian, and to march to the gates of Constantinople:^) he was overthrownand slain(2) by a wild bull,(3) as he hunted in the Belgic or German forests.
As soon as Belisarius was delivered from his foreign and domestic enemies, heseriously applied his forces to the final reduction of Italy. Jn the siege of Osimo,the general was nearly transpierced with an arrow, if the mortal stroke had notbeen intercepted by one of his guards, who lost, in that pious office, the use of hishand. The Goths of Osimo, four thousand warriors, witn those of Ficsulx and theCottian Alps, were among the last who maintained their independence; and theirgallant resistance, which almost tired the patience, deserved the esteem of theconqueror. His prudence refused to subscribe the safe conduct which they asked,to join their brethren of Ravenna; but they saved, by an honourable capitulation,one moiety at least of their wealth, with the free alternative of retiring peaceablyto their estates, or enlisting to serve the emperor in his Persian wars. The mul­titudes, which yet adhered to the standard of Vitiges, far surpassed the numberof the Roman troops; but neither prayers, nor defiance, nor the extreme dangerof his most faithful subjects, could tempt the Gothic king beyond the fortificationsof Ravenna. These fortifications were, indeed, impregnable to the assaults ofart or violence; and when Belisarius invested the capital, he was soon convincedthat famine only could tame the stubborn spirit of the barbarians. The sea, theland, and the channels of the Po, were guarded by the vigilance of the Romangeneral; and his morality extended the rights of war to the practice of poisoningthe waters,(4) and secretly firing the granaries(S) of a besieged city.(fi) Whilehe pressed the blockade of Ravenna, he was surprised by the arrival of two am­bassadors from Constantinople, with a treaty of peace, which Justinian had im­prudently signed, without deigning to consult the author of his victory. By thisdisgraceful and precarious agreement, Italy and the Gothic treasure were divided,and the provinces beyond the Po were left with the regal title to the successor ofTheodoric. The ambassadors were eager to accomplish their salutary commis­sion; the captive Vitiges accepted, with trausport, the unexpected offer of a crown;honour was less prevalent among the Goths, than the want and appetite of food;and the Roman chiefs, who murmured at the continuance of the war, professedimplicit submission to the commands of the emperor. If Belisarius had possessedonly the courage of a soldier, the laurel would have been snatched from his handby timid and envious counsels; but, in this decisive moment, he resolved, with themagnanimity of a statesman, to sustain alone the danger and merit of generousdisobedience. Each of his officers gave a written opinion, that the siege of Ra­venna was impracticable and hopeless: the general then rejected the treaty ofpartition, and declared his own resolution of leading Vitiges in chains to the feetof Justinian. The Goths retired with doubt and dismay: this peremptory refusaldeprived them of the only signature which they could trust, and filled their minds•with a just apprehension, that a sagacious enemy had discovered the full extentof their deplorable state. They compared the fame and fortune of Belisarius withthe weakness of their ill-fated king; and the comparison suggested an extraordi­nary project, to which Vitiges, with apparent resignation, was compelled to acqui­esce. Partition would ruin the strength, exile would disgrace the honour, of thenation; but they offered their arms, their treasures, and the fortifications of Ra-
(1) Agathias, lib. i. p. ;4,'l5. Could he haw seduced or subdned the Gepidtc or Lombards of Pannonia, theGreek historian is confident that he roust have been destroyed in Thraoe.
(2) The king pointed his spear—the hull overturned a tree on his head—he expired the same day. Such isthe story of Agathias; but the original historians of France (torn. ii. p. 202. *>3. 5S8. t)67.) impute his death to
* (S)'without losing myself in a labyrinth of species and names— the aurochs, urns, bisons,bubalus. bonasus,buffalo, See. (Button Hist. Nat. torn. xi. and Supplement, torn. iii. 6.) it is certain, that in the sixth century alarge wild species of horned cattle was hunted in the great forests of the Vosges in Lorraine, and the Ardenuca(Greg. Turon. torn. ii. lib. x. c. 10. p. 369.) ,, , .
(4) In the siege of Auximum, he first laboured to demolish an old aqueduct, and then cast into the stream,I. dead bodies: 2. miichievious herbs: and. 3. quicklime, which is named (says Procopius, lib. ii. c. 29.) i.t».«;by the ancients: bv the modems wo.;™.. Yet both words are used as synonymous in Galen, Dioscorides,and Lnoian. (Hen. Steph. Thesaur. Ling. Cirxc. torn. iii. p. 748.) ...
(5) The Goths suspected Mathasuintha as an accomplice in the mischief, which perhaps was occasioned byaccidental lightning. . . . J? . „
(ft) In strict philosophy, a limitation nf the rights of war seems to imply nonsense and contradiction. Gro-tins himself is lost in an idle distinction between the jus natnra and the jus gentium, between poison and in­fection. He balances in one scale the passages of Homer, (Odyss. A.239. ctcjsud i lorus (lib. n. c. 20. \n. 7.silt.) and in the oilier, the examples of Solon (Pmiianius, lib. x. e. 37.) and Belisarius. See his great work Delure Belli et Pacis lib. iii. e. 4. s. 15-17., and in Barheyrac's version, torn. li. p. 2S7, fce. Yet I tan understandthe benefit and validity of an agreement, tacit or espress, mutually to abstain Irom ctrla.n lnodts ol htiitili'ytiee the Amphietyomc oa'.h in Kschines dc J-alsa L' gatii ne.
Vol. III. d







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 17$


-Abyssinia beyond the Red Sea; and a native prince of the ancient.Homerites wasrestored to the throne as the vassal or viceroy of the great Nushirvan.^1) Butthe nephew of Justinian declared his resolution to avenge the injuries of.his Chris­tian ally, the prince of Abyssinia, as they suggested a decent pretence to discon­tinue the annual tribute, which was poorly disguised by the name of pension. Thechurches of Persarmenia were oppressed by the intolerant spirit of the Magi; theysecretly invoked the protection of the Christians, and after the pious murder of theirsatraps, the rebels were allowed and supported as the brethren and subjects of theRoman emperor. The complaints of Nushirvan were disregarded by the Byzan­tine court; Justin yielded to the importunities of the Turks, who offered an allianceagainst the common enemy; and the Persian monarchy was threatened at thesame instant by the united forces of Europe, of Ethiopia, and of Scythia. Atthe age of fourscore, the sovereign of the east would perhaps have chosen thepeaceful enjoyment of his glory and greatness; but as soon as war became ine­vitable, he took the field with the alacrity of youth, whilst the aggressor trem­bled in the palace of Constantinople. Nushirvan, or Chosroes, conducted in per­son the siege of Dara; and although that important fortress had been left destituteof troops and magazines, the valour of the inhabitants resisted above five monthsthe archers, the elephants, and the military engines of the great king. In themeanwhile his general Adarman advanced from Babylon, traversed the desert,passed the Euphrates, insulted the suburbs of Antioch, reduced to ashes the city,of Apamea, and laid the spoils of Syria at the feet of his master, whose perseve­rance, in the midst of winter, at length subverted the bulwark of the east. Butthese losses, which astonished the provinces and the court, produced a salutary■effect in the repentance and abdication of the emperor Justin; a new spirit arose inthe Byzantine councils; and a truce of three years was obtained by the prudenceof Tiberius. That seasonable interval was employed in the preparations of war;and the voice of rumour proclaimed to the world, that from the distant countriesof the Alps and the Rhine, from Scythia, Mxsia, Pannonia, Illyricum, and Isau-Tia, the strength of the imperial cavalry was re-enforced with one hundred andfifty thousand soldiers. Yet the king of Persia, without fear, or without faith, re­solved to prevent the attack of the enemy; again passed the Euphrates, and dis­missing the ambassadors of Tiberius, arrogantly commanded them to await his ar­rival at Cxsarea, the metropolis of the Cappadocian provinces. The two armiesencountered each other in the battle of Melitene; the barbarians, who darkenedthe air with a cloud of arrows, prolonged their line, and extended their wingsacross the plain; while the Romans, in deep and solid bodies, expected to prevailin closer action, by the weight of the swords and lances. A Scythian chief, whocommanded their right wing, suddenly turned the flank of the enemy, attackedtheir rear-guard in the presence of Chosroes, penetrated to the midst of the camp,pillaged the royal tent, profaned the eternal fire, loaded a train of camels withthe spoils of Asia, cut his way through the Persian host, and returned with songsof victory to his friends; who had consumed the day in single combats, or inef­fectual skirmishes. The darkness of the night, and the separation of the Romans,afforded the Persian monarch an opportunity of revenge; and one of their campswas swept away by a rapid and impetuous assault. But the review of his loss,and the consciousness of his danger, determined Chosroes to a speedy retreat; heburnt, in his passage, the vacant town of Melitene; and, without consulting thesafety of his troops, boldly swam the Euphrates on the back of an elephant. Afterthis unsuccessful campaign, the want of magazines, and perhaps some inroad ofthe Turks, obliged him to disband or divide his forces; the Romans were left mas­ters of the field, and their general Justinian, advancing to the relief of the Persar-menian rebels, erected his standard on the banks of the Araxes. The great Pom-pey had formerly halted within three days' march of the Caspian :(2) that inlandsea was explored for the first time, by a hostile fleet,(3) and seventy thousand


(1) D'Herbelot, Biblioth. Orient, p. 477. Pocock, Specimen Hiit. Arabum. p. 84,65. Father Pagi (Critics,tout. ii. p. 646.) has proved, that after ten years' peace, the Persian war, which continued twenty years, was re­newed A. D. 571. Mahomet was born A. D. 569; in the year of the elephant, or the defeat of Abrahah (Gag-nier Vie de Mahomet, torn. i. p. 89, 90—98.;) and this account allows two years fur the conquest of Yemen.
(2) He had vanquished the Albanians, who brought into the field twelve thousand horse, and sixty thousandfoot; but he dreaded the multitude of venomous reptiles, whose existence may admit of some doubt, at well asthat of the neighbouring Amazons. Plutarch, in Pompeio, torn. ii. p. 1105,1106.
(3) In the history of the world 1 can only receive two navies on the Caspian.—1. Of the Macedonians, whenPatrocles, the admiral of the kings of Syria, Seleucus and Amiochui, descended most probably the river Oxils,from the confines of India (Plin, Hist. N»tur. vi. 310 2.. Of the Rusiiant, when Peter I- conducted a fleet ana







OCR Output








^ \ HARVARD COLLEGE LIBRARY
FROM THE LIBRARY OFERNEST LEWIS GAYJUNE 15,1927


c







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


&uttered, in the words of Daniel,—"The abomination of desolation i3 in the holyplace. "(1) At the hour of prayer they stood together in the church of the resur­rection; but the caliph refused to perform his devotions, and contented himselfwith praying on the steps of the church of Constantine. To the patriarch he dis­closed his prudent and honourable motive. "Had I yielded," said Omar, "toyour request, the Moslems of a future age would have infringed the treaty, undercolour of imitating my example." By his command the ground of the temple ofSolomon was prepared for the foundation of a mosch;(2) and, during a residence often days, he regulated the present and future state of his Syrian conquests. Me­dina might be jealous, lest the caliph should be detained by the sanctity of Jerusa­lem or the beauty of Damascus; her apprehensions were dispelled by his promptand voluntary return to the tomb of the apostle. (3)
To achieve what yet remained of the Syrian war, the caliph had formed twoseparate armies; a chosen detachment, under Amrou and Vczid, was left in thecamp of Palestine; while the larger division, under the standard of Abu Obeidahand fcaled, marched away to the north against Antioch and Aleppo. The latterof these, the Berxa of the Greeks, was not yet illustrious as the capital of a pro­vince or a kingdom; and the inhabitants, by anticipating their submission, andpleading their povertv, obtained a moderate composition for their lives and reli­gion. But the castle of Aleppo,(4) distinct from the city, stood erect on a loftyartificial mound: the sides were sharpened to a precipice, and faced with free­stone ; and the breadth pf the ditch might be filled with water from the neighbouringsprings. After the loss of three thousand men, the garrison was still equal to thedefence; and Youkinna, their valiant and hereditary chief, had murdered his bro­ther, a holy monk, for daring to pronounce the name of peace. In a siege of fouror five months, the hardest of the Syrian war, great numbers of the Saracenswere killed and wounded: their removal to the distance of a mile could not seducethe vigilance of Youkinna: nor could the Christians be terrified by the executionof three hundred captives, whom they beheaded before the c'astle wall. The si­lence, and at length the complaints, of Abii Obeidah informed the caliph, thattheir hope and patience were consumed arthe foot of this impregnable fortress." 1 am variously affected," replied Omar, "by the difference of your success; butI charge you by no means to raise the siege of the castle. Your retreat would di­minish the reputation of our arms, and encourage the infidels to fall upon you onall sides. Remain before Aleppo till God shall determine the event, and foragewith your horse round the adjacent country." The exhortation of the commanderof the faithful was fortified by a supply of volunteers from all the tribes of Arabia,who arrived in the camp on horses or camels. Among these was Dames, of a.servile birth, but of gigantic size, and intrepid resolution. The forty-seventh dayof his service, he proposed, with only thirty men, to make an attempt on the cas­tle. The experience and testimony of Caled recommended his offer; and AbuObeidah admonished his brethren not to despise the baser origin of Dames, sincehe himself, could he relinquish the publie care, would cheerfully serve under thebanner of the slave. His design was covered by the appearance of a retreat; andthe camp of the Saracens was pitched about a league from Aleppo. The thirtyadventurers lay in ambush at the foot of the hill; and Dames at length succeededin his inquiries, though he was provoked by the ignorance of his Greek captives."God curse these dogs," said the illiterate Arab, "what a strange barbarouslanguage they speak!" At the darkest hour of the night he scaled the most ac­cessible height, which he had diligently surveyed, a place where the stones wereless entire, or the slope less perpendicular, or the guard less vigilant Seven ofthe stoutest Saracens mounted on each other's shoulders, and the weight of the
(1) To &Se\vy/Mt rfc tftuisiriv; to ptiiv Si* AxiwtK reu iti?$>:t5'j iot«? tv ■vvxaxytw Theophan. Chronograpb.p. 281. This prediction, which had already served for Antiochus and the Roman's, was again refitted for the■present nceasion, by the economy of Sophrnnius, one of the deepest theologians of the Monothelite controversy.
(2) According to the accurate survey of d'Anville (Dissertation sur I'ancienne Jerusalem, p. 42—J4.,) themosch of Omar, enlarged and embellished by succeeding caliphs, covered the ground of the ancient temple(;TttXjeiov Tsu uiyxkau vaou JWiJov, says Phocas.) a length of two hundred and fifteen, a breadth of one hundredand seventy-two, loises. The Nubian geographer declares, that this magnificent structure was second only insize and beauty to the great mosch of Cordova (p. 113,) whose present state Mr. Swiburne has so elegantly re­presented (Travels into Spain, p. 29G—302.)
(3) Of the many Arabic tarikhs or chronicles of Jerusalem (d'Herbelot, p. 867.,) Ockley found one among thePococks MSS. of Oxford (vol. i. p. 257.,) which he has used to supply the defective narrative of Al Wakidi.
(4) The Persian historian of Timur (torn. iii. lib. S. c. ixi. p. 300)describes the castle of Aleppo at founded•on a rock one hundred cubits in height; a proof, says the French translator, that he had never visited the place.It is now in the midst of the city, of no strengtb, with a single gate: the circuit is about five or six hundredpaces, and she ditch half full of stagnant water (Voyages de Tavernier, torn. i. p. 149, Pocock, vol. ii. part. 1. y.l so.) The fortresses of theeast are contemptible to a European eye.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 231


Seldom been permitted to enjoy the tranquillity of servitude. 1 From the earliestperiod to the present hour, Armenia has been the theatre of perpetual war; thelands between Taurus and Erivan were dispeopled by the cruel policy of the So­phies; and myriads of Christian families were transplanted to perish or to propa­gate in the distant provinces of Persia. Under the rod of oppression, the zeal ofthe Armenians is fervent and intrepid: they have often preferred the crown ofmartyrdom to the white turban of Mahomet; they devoutly hate the error andidolatry of the Greeks; and their transient union with the Latins is not less devoidof truth, than the thousand bishops whom their patriarch offered at the feet of theRoman pontiff. (1) The catholic or patriarch of the Armenians resides in themonastery of Ekmiasin, three leagues from Erivan. Forty-seven archbishops,each of whom may claim the obedience of four or five suffragans, are consecratedby his hand; but the far greater part are only titular prelates, who dignify withtheir presence and service the simplicity of his court. As soon as they have per­formed the liturgy, they cultivate the garden; and our bishops will hear with sur­prise that the austerity of their life increases in just proportion to the elevation oftheir rank. In the fourscore thousand towns or villages of his spiritual empire, thepatriarch receives a small and voluntary tax from each person above the age of fif­teen; but the annual amount of six hundred thousand crowns is insufficient to sup­ply the incessant demands of charity and tribute. Since the beginning of the lastcentury, the Armenians have obtained a large and lucrative share of the com­merce of the east: in their return from Europe, the caravan usually halts in theneighbourhood of Erivan; the altars are enriched with the fruits of their patientindustry; and the faith of EutycheS is preached in their recent congregations ofBarbary and Poland. (2)
V. In the rest of the Roman empire, the despotism of the prince might eradi­cate or silence the sectaries of an obnoxious creed. But the stubborn temper of theEgyptians maintained their opposition to the synod of Chalcedon, and the policy ofJustinian condescended to expect and to seize the opportunity of discord. The Mo-nophysite church of Alexandria(3) was torn by the disputes of the corrufitibles andincorrufitibles; and on the death of the patriarch, the two factions upheld theirrespective candidates. (4) Gaian was the disciple of Julian, Theodosius had beenthe pupil of Severus: the claims of the former were supported by the consent ofthe monks and senators of the city and the province; the latter depended on thepriority of his ordination, the favour of the empress Theodora, and the arms ofthe eunuch Narses, which might have been used in more honourable warfare.The exile of the popular candidate to Carthage and Sardinia inflamed the fermentof Alexandria; and, after a schism of one hundred and seventy years, the Gaian-ites still revered the memory and doctrine of their founder. The strength of num­bers and of discipline was tried in a desperate and bloody conflict; the streets werefilled with the dead bodies of citizens and soldiers; the pious women ascending theroofs of the houses, showered down every sharp or ponderous utensil on the headsof the enemy; and the final victory of Narses was owing to the flames with whichhe wasted the third capital of the Roman world. But the lieutenant of Justinian, had not conquered in the cause of a heretic; Theodosius himself was speedily,though gently removed; and Paul of Tanis, an orthodox monk, was raised to thethrone of Anastasius. The powers of government were strained in his support;he might appoint or displace the dukes and tribunes of Egypt; the allowance ofbread which Diocletian had granted, was suppressed, the churches were shut, anda nation of schismatics was deprived at once of their spiritual and carnal food. Inhis turn the tyrant was excommunicated by the zeal and revenge of the people;and none except his servile Melchites would salute him as a man, a Christian, ora bishop. Yet such is the blindness of ambition, that when Paul was expelled ona charge of murder, he solicited, with a bribe of seven hundred pounds of gold,his restoration to the same station of hatred and ignominy. His successor Apol-linaris entered the hostile city in military array, alike qualified for prayer or for
(0 See a remarkable (act of the, twelfth century in the History of Nieetni Choniates (p. 253.) Vet three hun­dred years before, Photius (Epislol. 2. p. 49. edit. Montacul) had gloried in the conversion of the Armenians.
(2) The travelling Armenians are in the war of every traveller, and their mother-church is nn the high roadbetween Constantinople and Ispahan: for their present state, see Fabricius, (Lot F.vangelit. Sec. c. 38. p. 40—51.) Olearius. (lib. iv. c. 40.) Chardin. vol. ii. p. 2%?.) Tournefort, flettre 20.) and, above all. Tavemier, (torn. j.p. 28—37.510—518.) that rambling jeweller, who had read nothing, but had seen so much and so well.
(3) The history of the Alexandrian patriarchs from Dioscorus to Benjamin is taken from Renaudot, (p. 114,164.) and the second tome of the Annals of Butycbins.
it) I.iberat. Brer. c. 20—S3. Victor. Citron, p. 329,3301 Procop. Anecrrot. c. 26.27.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 15£


defend our frontiers, and to chastise the barbarians. You offer aid, you threatenhostilities: we despise your enmity, and your aid. The conquerors of the Avarssolicit our alliance; shall we dread their fugitives, and exiles. (1) The bounty ofeur uncle was granted to your misery, to your; humble prayers. From us youshall receive a more important obligation, the knowledge of your own weakness.Retire from our presence; the lives of ambassadors are safe; and if you return toimplore our pardon, perhaps you will taste of our benevolence. "(2) On the re­port of his ambassadors, the chagan was awed by the apparent firmness of a Ro­man emperor, of whose character and resources he was ignorant. Instead ofexecuting his threats against the eastern empire, he marched into the poor andsavage countries of Germany, which were subject to the dominion of the Franks.After the two doubtful battles, he consented to retire: and the Austrasian king re­lieved the distresses of his camp with an immediate supply of corn and cattle. (3)Such repeated disappointments had chilled the spirit ot the Avars; and theirpower would have dissolved away in the Sarmatian desert, if the alliance of Al­boin, king of the Lombards, had not given a new object to their arms, and a last­ing settlement to their wearied fortunes.
While Alboin served under his father's standard, he encountered in battle, andtranspierced with hislance, the rival prince of the Gepidx. The Lombards, whoapplauded such early prowess, requested his father, with unanimous acclamations,that the heroic youth, who had shared the dangers of the field, might be admittedto the feast of victory. " You are not unmindful," replied the inflexible Audoin,"of the wise customs of our ancestors. Whatever may be his merit, aprince is inca­pable of sitting at table with his father, till he has received his arms from a foreignand royal hand." Alboin bowed with reverence to the institutions of his country;selected forty companions, and boldly visited the court of Turisund, king of theGepidx, who embraced and entertained, according to the laws of hospitality) themurderer.of his son. « At the banquet, whilst Alboin occupied the seat of the youthwhom he had slain, a tender remembrance arose in the mind of Turisund. "Howdear is that place—how hateful is that person," were the words that escaped witha sigh, from the indignant father. His grief exasperated the national resent­ment of the Gepidx; and Cunimund, his surviving son, was provoked by wine, orfraternal affection, to the desire of vengeance. " The Lombards," said the rudebarbarian, "resemble, in figure and smell, the mares of our Sarmatian plains."And this insult was a coarse ailusion to the white bands which enveloped their legs." Add another resemblance," replied an audacious Lombard, " you have felt howstrongly they kick. Visit the plain of Asfield, and seek for the bones of thy bro­ther: they are mingled with those of the vilest animals." The Gepidae, a nationof warriors, started from their seats, and the fearless Alboin, with his forty compa­nions, laid their hands on their swords. The tumult was appeased by the venera­ble interposition of Turisund. He saved his own honour and the life of his guest;and, after the solemn rites of investiture, dismissed the stranger in the bloodyarms of his son—the gift of a weeping parent. Alboin returned in triumph; andthe Lombards, who celebrated his matchless intrepidity, were compelled to praisethe virtues of an enemy. (4J In this extraordinary visit he had probably seenthe daughter of Cunimund, who soon after ascended the throne of the Gepidx.Her name was Rosamond, an appellation expressive of female beauty, and whichour own history or romance has consecrated to amorous tales. The king of theLombards (the father of Alboin no longer lived) was contracted to the grand-daugh­ter of Clovis; but the restraints of faith and policy soon yielded to the hope of pos­sessing the fair Rosamond, and of insulting her family and nation. The arts of per­suasion were tried without success: and the impatient lover, by force and strata-


(1) Corippus, lib. iii. 390. The unquestionable sense relates to the Turks, the conquerors of the Aran: birtthe word scultar has no apparent meaning, and the sole MS. of Corippus. from whence the first edition (1581.apod Planlin,) was printed, is no longer visible. The last editor, Feggini of Rome, has inserted the conjectu­ral emendation of soldan: but the proofs of Dueange (Joinville, Dissert, xvi. p. 238—2400 for the early use of1hu> title among the Turks and Persians, are weak or ambiguous. And I must incline to the authority ofd'Herbelot (liihlioihequc Orient, p. 825.) who ascribes thesword to the Arabic and Chaldean tongues, andthe date to the beginning of the eleventh century, when it was bestowed by the kbalif of Bagdad on Mahniud.p rince of Gazna, and conqueror of India.
(2) For these characteristic speeches, compare the verse of Corippus (lib. iii. 251—401.,) with the prose ofMenander, (Eicerpt. Legation, p. 102,103.) Their diversity proves that they did not copy each other; theirresemblance, that they drew from a common original.
(3) For the Austrasian war, see Menander (Excerpt. Legat. p. 110.) Gregory of Tours (Hist. Franc. lib. ir.c. 29.,) and Paul the deacon (Je Ge*t. 1 KMobard. lib. ii.e. 10.)
(4) Paul Waniefrid, the deacon of Friuli, de Gen. Langubarri. lib. i. c. 23. 24. His pictures of nationalm»nnera, though rudely sketched, are more lively and faithful than those of Bedc,or Gregory of Tours.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 121


stood without alteration above two hundred years.(l) From a similar motive ofnational pride, both Livy and Dionysius are willing to believe, that the deputies ofRome visited Athens under the wise and splendid administration of Pericles; andthe laws of Solon were transfused into the twelve tables. If such an embassy hadindeed been received from the barbarians of Hesperia, the Roman name wouldhave been familiar to the Greeks before the reign of Alexander;(2) and the faint­est evidence would have been explored and celebrated by the curiosity of succeed­ing times. But the Athenian monuments are silent; nor will it seem credible thatthe patricians should undertake a long and perilous navigation to copy the purestmodel of a democracy. In the comparison of the tables of Solon with those of thedecemvirs, some casual resemblance may be found; some rules which nature andreason have revealed to every society; some proofs of a common descent fromEgypt or Phoenicia. (3) But in all the great lines of public and private jurispru­dence, the legislators of Rome and Athens appear to be strangers or adverse toeach other.
Whatever might be the origin or the merit of the twelve tables,(4) they ob­tained among the Romans that blind and partial reverence which the lawyers ofevery country delight to bestow on their municipal institutions. The study is re­commended by Cicero(5) as equally pleasant and instructive. " They amuse themind by the remembrance of old words and the portrait of ancient manners; theyinculcate the soundest principles of government and morals; and I am not afraid


 


of civil prudence, and our superiority is the more conspicuous, if we deign to castqur eyes on the rude and almost ridiculous jurisprudence of Draco, of Solon, andof Lycurgus." The twelve tables were committed to the memory of the young,and the meditation of the old; they were transcribed and illustrated with learneddiligence: they had escaped the flames of the Gauls; they subsisted in the age of Jus­tinian, and their subsequent loss has been imperfectly restored by the labour ofmodern critics. (6) But although these venerable monuments were considered asthe rule of right, and the fountain of justice,(7) they were overwhelmed by theweight and variety of new laws, which at the end of five centuries, became a grie­vance more intolerable than the vices of the city. (8) Three thousand brass plates,the acts of the senate and people, were deposited in the capitol:(9) and sorrfe ofthe acts, as the Julian law against extortion, surpassed the number of a ljundredchapters. (10) The decemvirs had neglected to import the sanction of Zaleucus,
na,who,by a strange error of Diodorut Siculus,(tom. i. lib. 12. p.485—493.J is celebrated long afterward asthe author of the policy of Thorium.
(1) Zaleucus, whose existence has been rashly attacked, had the merit and glory of converting* band ofoutlaws (the Locriaus) into the most virtuous and orderly of the Greek republics (See two Memoires of theBaron de St. Croix, sur la Legislation dc la Grande Grece; Mem. de 1'Academie, torn. xiii. p. 276—333.) Bucthe laws of Zaleucus and Charondas, which imposed on Diodorus and Stobieus, are 'he spurious composition*of a Pythagorean sophist, whose fraud has been detected by the critical sagacity of Bentley (p. 33J—377.)
(2) I seize the opportunity of tracing the process of this national intercourse: 1. Herodotus and Tlmey-dides(A. U. C. 330—350.) appear ignorant of the name and existence ofllome (Joseph. Contra Apion. torn. n.lib, i. e. 12. p. 444. edit. Havercamp. 2. Theopompus (A. U. C. 400. Plin. 3.9.) mentions the invasion of theGauls, whirl, is noticed in looser terms by Heraclldes Ponticus (Plutarch in Cainillo, p. 292. edit. H. Stephan.)3. Thereat or fabulous embassy of the Romans to Alexander (A. U. C. 430.) is attested byClitarchus (Plin. 3.9.) by Aristws and Asclepiades (Arian. lib. vii. p. 294,295.) and by Memnon of Heracl* a (apud Phntiuin. cod,224. p. 725.3 though tacitly denied by Livy. 4. Theophrastus (A. U. C. 440.) primus rxtemorura aliqua He Ro-man» dilig-entius scripsit (Plin. 3. 9.) 5. Lyeophron (A. U. C. 4B0—500.) scattered the first seed of a Trojancolony, and the fable of the -£neid, Cassandra, 1226—1280.
A^SsiTs;.
A bold prediction before the end of the first Punic war.
(3) The tenth table, demodo sepulture, was borrowed from Solon (Cicero de Legihns, n. 23—26;) the fertttmper lance in et Ik-turn concept,,m, is derived bv Heincpcius from the manner* of Athens (Antiq-jitat. Rom. fom,li. p. 167—175.) The right of kill'int? a nocturnal thi< f, was declared by Mcset, Solon, and the decemvirs, (Exo­dus, xxii. 3. Demosthenes contra Timocratem, torn. i. p. 736. edit. Heiske. Macro!;. Saturnalia, lib. i. c. 4. Col-latio Legum Mosaicarum et Romananttn, tit. vii. no. 1, p. 218. edit. Caimegicter.)
(4) Rp*xi<»; xxi Kan^n-w;, is the praise of Diodorus (torn. i. lib. xii. p. 49-1.) which may be fairly translated bytheeleganti at que absohita brevitate verborum of Aitlus Gelltus (Voct.) Attic, xxi. 1.)
(5) Listen to Cicero (de Legibui,ii. 23.) and his representative Crassus (de Onitore, I. 43.44.)
(6) See Heineccins (Hist. J. R. no. 29—33.) I have followed the restoration «>f the twelve tables by Gravina(Origines J. C. p. 280—307.) and Terasson (Hist de la Jurisprudence Romnine, p. 94—205.)
(7) Pintssequi juris (Tacit. Annal.iii. 27.) Fonsomnia publiciet privati,juris (T. Liv. iii, 34.)
(8) De principles .|uris,et quibua modis ad banc multitudinem infinitam ae varietatem legum perventumsit altiusdisieram (Tacit. Anna), iii. 25.) This deep disquisition fills only two pages, but they are the pagesof Tacitus. With equal sense, but with less energy, Livy (iii. 34.) had complained, in bac iminenso aliarurasuper alias acervatarum legum cumulo. See.
(9) See Suetonius in V«spa«iauo, c. 8.
(10) Cicero ad Fsunillarts, 8.1.
Vol. III. 1G


f







OCR Output








OF THE KOMAN EMPIRE. 23


of ground, they obtained the most exhorbitant terms from the eager desires andtimorous conscience of the monarch. Anthemius formed the design, and his ge­nius directed the hands of ten thousand workmen, whose payment in pieces of finesilver was never delayed beyond the evening. The emperorhimself clad in a li­nen tunic, surveyed each day their rapid progress, and encouraged their diligenceby his familiarity, his zeal, and his rewards. The new cathedral of St. Sophiawas consecrated by the patriarch, five years, eleven months and ten days from thefirst foundation; and, in the midst of the solemn festival, Justinian exclaimed withdevout vanity, " Glory be to God, who hath thought me worthy to accomplish sogreat a work: I have vanquished thee, O Solomon!"(l) But the pride of the Ro­man Solomon, before twenty years had elapsed, was humbled by an earthquake,•which overthrew the eastern part of the dome. Its splendour was again restoredby the perseverance of the same prince; and, in the thirty-sixth year of his reign,Justinian celebrated the second dedication of a temple, which remains, after twelvecenturies, a stately "monument of his fame. The architecture of St. Sophia,which is now converted into the principal mosch, has been imitated by the Turk­ish sultans, and that venerable pile continues to excite the fond admiration of theGreeks, and the more rational curiosity of European travellers. The eye of thespectator is disappointed by an irregular prospect of half domes and shelvingroofs: the western front, the principal approach, is destitute of simplicity andmagnificence: and the scale of dimensions has been much surpassed by several ofthe Latin cathedrals. But the architect, who first erected an aerial cupola, is en­titled to the praise of bold design and skilful execution. The dome of St. Sophia,illuminated by four and twenty windows, is formed with so small a curve, that thedepth is equal only to one-sixth of its diameter; the measure of that diameter isone hundred and fifteen feet, and the lofty centre, where a crescent has supplant­ed the cross, rises to the perpendicular height of one hundred and eighty feet abovethe pavement. The circle, which encompasses the dome, lightly reposes on fourstrong arches, and their weight is firmly supported by four massy piles, whosestrength is assisted on the northern and southern sides by four columns of Egyp­tian granite. A Greek cross, inscribed in a quadrangle, represents the form ofthe edifice; the exact breadth is two hundred and forty-three feet, and two hun­dred and sixty-nine may be assigned for the extreme length from the sanctuaryin the east to the nine western doors which open in the vestibule, and from thenceinto the narthex, or exterior portico. That portico was the humble station of thepenitents. The nave or body of the church was filled by the congregation of thefaithful; but the two sexes were prudently distinguished, and the upper and lowergalleries were allotted for the more private devotion of the women. Beyond thenorthern and southern piles, a balustrade, terminated on either side by the thrones,of the emperor and the patriarch, divided the nave from the choir: and the space,as far as the, steps of the altar, was occupied by the clergy and singers. The al­tar itself, a name which insensibly became familiar to Christian ears, was placedin the eastern recess, artificially built in the form of a demi-cylinder; and thissanctuary communicated by several doors with the sacristy, the vestry, the bap­tistery, and the contiguous buildings, subservient either to the pomp of worship,or the private use of the ecclesiastical ministers. The memory of past calamities, inspired Justinian with a wise resolution, that no wood, except for the doors,should be admitted into the new edifice; and the choice of the materials was ap­plied to the strength, the lightness, or the splendour of the respective parts.The solid piles, which sustained the cupola, were composed of huge blocks offreestone, hewn into squares and triangles, fortified by circles of iron, and firmlycemented by the infusion of lead and quick lime: but the weight of the cupolawas diminished by the levity of its substance, which consists either of pumice-stone, that floats in the water, or of bricks from the isle of Rhodes, five times lessponderous than the ordinary sort. The whole frame of the edifice was construct­ed of brick; but those base materials were concealed by a crust of marble; andthe inside of St. Sophia, the cupola, the two larger, and the six smaller semi-domes, the walls, the hundred columns, and the pavement, delight even the eyesof barbarians with a rich and variegated picture. A poet,(2) who beheld the
(l) Solomon's temple was surrounded with courts, porticos, &c, but the proper structure of the house ofGod, was no more (if we take the Egyptian or Hebrew cubit at twenty-two inches) than fifty-five feet in,height, thirty-six and two thirds in breadth, and one hundred and ten in length—a small parish church, says,Prideaux; (Connex. vol. i. p. 144, folio) but few sanctuaries could be valued atfour or five millions sterling!
(3) Paul Silentiarius, in dark and poetic language, describes the various stones and marbles that were em-,ployed in the edifice of St. Sophia. P. 2. p. 129.133. &c. Ecc.) 1. The Carytticn—pale, with iron veins. J. The;







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


trade, and the sea-port of Adulis,(l) still decorated with the trophies of a Gre­cian conqueror. Along the African coast, they penetrated to the equator insearch of gold, emeralds, and aromatics, but they wisely declined an unequalcompetition, in which they must be always prevented by the vicinity of the Per­sians to the markets of India; and the emperor submitted to the disappointment,till his wishes were gratified by an unexpected event. The gospel had beenpreached to the Indians: a bishop already governed the Christians of St. Tho­mas on the pepper-coast of Malabar; a church was planted in Ceylon, and themissionaries pursued the footsteps of commerce to the extremities of Asia. (2)Two Persian monks had long resided in China, perhaps in the royal city of Nan­kin, the seat of a monarch addicted to foreign superstitions, and who actually re­ceived an embassy from the isle of Ceylon. Amidst their pious occupations, theyviewed with a curious eye the common dress of the Chinese, the manufactures ofsilk and the myriads of silk-worms, whose education (either on trees or in houses)had once been considered as the labour of queens.(3) They soon discovered thatit was impracticable to transport the short-lived insect, but that in the eggs a nume­rous progeny might be preserved and multiplied in a distant climate. Religion orinterest had more power over the Persian monks than the love of their country:after a long journey, they arrived at Constantinople imparted their project to theemperor, and were liberally encouraged by the gifts and promises of Justinian.To the historians of that prince, a campaign at the foot of Mount Caucasus hasseemed more deserving of a minute relation, than the labours of these missionariesof commerce, who again entered China, deceived a jealous people by concealingthe eggs of the silk-worm in a hollow cane, and returned in triumph with thespoils of the east. Under their direction, the eggs were hatched at the properseason by the artificial heat of dung; the worms were fed with mulberry leaves;they lived and laboured in a foreign climate: a sufficient number of butterflieswere saved to propagate the race, and trees were planted to supply the nourish­ment of the rising generations. Experience and reflection corrected the errors ofa new attempt, and the Sogdoite ambassadors acknowledged in the succeedingreign, that the Romans were not inferior to the natives of China in the educationof the insects and the manufactures of silk, (4) in which both China and Constan­tinople have been surpassed by the industry of modern Europe. I am not insen-ble of the benefits of elegant luxury; yet I reflect with some pain, that if the im­porters of silk had introduced the art of printing, already practised by the Chi­nese, the comedies of Menander, and the entire decads of Livy, would have beenperpetuated in the editions of the sixth century. A larger view of the globemight at least have promoted the improvement of speculative science; but the Chris­tian geography was forcibly extracted from .texts of Scripture, and the study ofnature was the surest symptom of an unbelieving mind. The orthodox faith con­fined the habitable world to one temperate zone, and represented the earthas an oblong surface, four hundred days'journey in length, two hundred in breadth,encompassed by the ocean, and covered by the solid crystal of the firma­ment. (5)
IV. The subjects of Justinian were dissatisfied with the times, and with the go­vernment Europe was overran by the barbarians, and Asia by the monks; thepoverty of the west discouraged the trade and manufactures of the east; the pro­duce of labour was consumed by the unprofitable servants of the church, the state,and the army, and a rapid decrease was felt in the fixed and circulating capitals
(1) See Procopius, Persic, (lib. ii. c. 20.) Cosmas affords some interesting knowledge of the port and in­scription of Adutis (Topograph. Christ, lib. ii. p. 138. 140—143.) and of the traile of the Axumites along theAfrican coast of Barbaria or Zingi (p. 138,139.,) and as far as Taprobane (lib. xi. p. 339.
(2) See the Christian missions in India, in Cosmas (lib. iii. p. 178,179. lib. xi. p. 337.,) and consult Asseman.Bibliot. Orient, (ton*., iv. p. 413—548.)
(3) The invention, manufacture, and general use of silk in China,may be seen in Duhalde (Description Ge­nerate de la Chine, torn. ii. p. 165. 205—223.) The province of Chekian is the most renowned both for quanti­ty and quality.
(4) Procopius, lib. viii. Gothic, iv. c. 17. Theophanes, Byznnt. apud Phot. Cod. lxxxtv. p. 38. Zonaras,torn. ii. lib. xiv. p. 69. Pagi (torn, ii. p. 602.) assigns to the year 552 this memorable importation. Menander(in Excerpt. Legat. p. 107.) mentions the admiration of the Sogdoites : and Theopbylact Simocatta (lib. vii. e.9.) darkly represents the two rival kingdoms in {China,) the country of silk.
(5) Cosmas, surnamed Indicopleustes. or the Indian navigator, performed his voyage about the year 522.andcomposed,at Alexandria,between 535 and 547, Christian Topography, (Montfaucon, Prrefat. c. 1.,) in whichhe refutes the impious opinion, that the earth is a globe: and Pholitis had read this work (Cod, xxxvi. p. 9. 10.,)which displays the prejudices of a monk, with the knowledge of a merchant: the most valuable psrt has beengiven in French, and in Greek, by Melchisedec Thevenot (Relations Curieuses, part 1..) and 'he whole is sincepublished in a splendid edition by the Pere Montfaucon (Nova Col lectio Pairuni, Paris, 1707.2 vols, in fcl. torn,li. p. 113—346.) But the editor, a theologian, might blush at not discovering the Nestopan heresy of Cosmas,which has beentdeteeted by La Croze (Cliristianssme des Indes, torn. i. p. 40—J6.)
Vol. in. 3







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 139-


■stripped of her wealth and ornaments, without excepting the bodkin of her hair:if a man introduced a new bride into his bed, her fortune might be lawfully seizedby the vengeance of his exiled wife. Forfeiture was sometimes commuted to afine; the fine was sometimes aggravated by transportation to an island, or impri­sonment in a monastery: the injured party was released from the bonds of mar­riage; but the offender, during life or a term of years, was disabled from {he re­petition of nuptials. The successor of Justinian yielded to the prayers of hisunhappy subjects, and restored the liberty of divorce by mutual consent: thecivilians were unanimous,(l) the theologians were divided,(2) and the ambiguousword, which contains the precepts of Christ, is flexible to any interpretation thatthe wisdom of a legislator can demand.
The freedom of love and marriage was restrained among the Romans by natu­ral and civil impediments. An instinct, almost innate and universal, appears toprohibit the incestuous commerce(3) of parents and children in the infinite seriesof ascending and descending generations. Concerning the oblique and collateralbranches nature is indifferent, reason mute, and custom various and arbitrary. InEgypt, the marriage of brothers and sisters was admitted without scruple or ex­ception: a Spartan might espouse the daughter of his father, an Athenian that ofhis mother; and the nuptials of an uncle with his niece was applauded at Athensas a happy union of the dearest relations. The profane lawgivers of Rome werenever tempted by interest or superstition to multiply the forbidden degrees: butthey inflexibly condemned the marriage of sisters and brothers, hesitated whetherfirst cousins should be touched by the same interdict: revered the parental cha­racter of aunts and uncles, and treated affinity and adoption as a just imitation ofthe ties of blood. According to the proud maxims of the republic, a legal mar­riage could only be contracted by free citizens; an honourable, at least an ingenu­ous, birth was required for the spouse of a senator: but the blood of kings couldnever mingle in legitimate nuptials with the blood of a Roman; and the name ofStranger degraded Cleopatra and Berenice, (4) to live the concubines of Mark An­tony and Titus. (5) This appellation, indeed, so injurious to the majesty, cannotwithout indulgence be applied to the manners, of these oriental queens. A con­cubine, in the strict sense of the civilians, was a woman of servile or plebeian ex­traction, the sole and faithful companion of a Roman citizen, who continued in astate of celibacy. Her modest station below the honours of a wife, above the in­famy of a prostitute, was acknowledged and approved by the laws: from the ageof Augustus to the tenth century, the use of this secondary marriage prevailedboth in the west and east, and the humble virtues of a concubine were often pre­ferred to the pomp and insolence of a noble matron. In this connexion, the twoAntonines, the best of princes and of men, enjoyed the comforts of domestic love;the example was imitated by many citizens impatient of celibacy, but regardfulof their families. If at any time they desired to legitimate their natural children,the conversion was instantly performed by the celebration of their nuptials with apartner, whose fruitfulness and fidelity they had already tried. By this epithet ofnatural, the offspring of the concubine were distinguished from the spurious bloodof adultery, prostitution, and incest, to whom Justinian reluctantly grants the ne­cessary aliments of life; and these natural children alone were capable of succeed­ing to a sixth part of the inheritance of their reputed father. According to therigour of the law, bastards were entitled only to the name and condition of theirmother, from whom they might derive the character of a slave, a stranger, or a
(1) The Institutes are silent,"but we may_ consult the Codes of Theodosius (lib. iii. tit. rri. with Godefrov*sCommentary, torn. i. p. 310—313.) and Justinian (lib. v. tit. xvii.,) the Pandects (lib. xxiv. tit. ii.,) and the No­vels (22. 117. 127.134.140.) Justinian fluctuated to the last between civil and ecclesiastical law.
(2) In pure Greek, m^nx is not a common word; nor can the proper meaning/, fornication, be strictly ap­plied to matrimonial sin. In a figurative sense, how far, and to what offences, may it be extended ? DitlChrist speak the Rabbinical or Syriac tongue ? Of what original word is vopvsix the translation ? How vari­ously is that Greek word translated in the versions ancient and modern ! There are two (Mark x. 11. Lukexvi. IS.) to one (Matthew xix. 9.) that such ground of divorce was not excepted by Jesus. Some critics havepresumed to think, by an evasive answer, he avoided the giving offence either to the school of Sammai orthat of Hillel (Selden, Uxor. Ebraica, lib. iii. c. IS—22. 23. 31.)
(3) The principles of the Roman jurisprudence are exposed by Justinian (Institut. lib. i. tit. 10.,) and the lawsand manners of the different nations of antiquity concerning forbidden degrees, &e. are copiously explainedby Dr. Taylor in his Elements of civil law (p. 108. 314—330.,) a work of amusing, though various, reading;but which cannot be praised for philosophical precision.
(4) When her father Agrippa died (A. D. 44.,) Berenice was sixteen years of age .(Joseph, torn. i. Antiqnif.Judaic, lib. xix. c. 9. p. 952. edit, Havercamp.) She was therefore above fifty years old when Titus (A. D. 79.)invitus invitam invisir. This date would not have adorned the tragedy or pastoral of the tender Racine.
(5) The iCgyptia conjonx of Virgil (£taeid. 8.688.) seems to be numbered among the monsters ivlio warredwith, Mark Antony against Augustus, the senate, and the gods of Italy.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 387 -


vast enterprise, perhaps of easy execution, must have seemed extravagant to vul­gar minds; and the visionary conqueror was soon reminded of his dependance andservitude. The friends of Farik had effectually stated his services and wrongs: atthe court of Damascus, the proceedings of Musa were blamed, his intentions weresuspected, and his delay in complying with the first invitation was chastised by aharsher and more peremptory summons. An intrepid messenger of the caliphentered his camp at Lugo in Gallicia, and in the presence of the Saracens andChristians arrested the bridle of his horse. His own loyalty, or that of his troops,inculcated the duty of obedience; and his disgrace was alleviated by the recall ofhis rival, and the permission of investing with his two governments his two sons,Abdallah and Abdelaziz. His long triumph, from Ceuta to Damascus, displayedthe spoils of Africa and the treasures of Spain: four hundred Gothic nobles, withgold coronets and girdles, were distinguished in his train; and the number of maleand female captives, selected for their birth or beauty, was computed at eighteen,or even at thirty, thousand persons. As soon as he reached Tiberias in Palestine,he was apprized of the sickness and danger of the caliph, by a private messagefrom Soliman, his brother and presumptive heir; who wished to reserve for hisown reign the spectacle of victory. Had Walid recovered, the delay of Musawould have been criminal: he pursued his march, and found an enemy on thethrone. In his trial before a partial judge, against a popular antagonist, he wasconvicted of vanity and falsehood; and a fine of two hundred thousand pieces ofgold either exhausted his poverty or proved his rapaciousness. The unworthytreatment of Tarik was revenged by a similar indignity, and the veteran com­mander, after a public whipping, stood a whole day in the sun before the palacegate, till he obtained a decent exile, under the pious name of a pilgrimage to Mec­ca. The resentment of the caliph might have been satiated with the ruin ofMusa, but his fears demanded the extirpation of a potent and injured family. Asentence of death was intimated with secrecy and speed to the trusty servants ofthe throne both in Africa and Spain: and the forms, if not the substance, of jus­tice was superseded in this bloody execution. In the mosch or palace of Cordova,Abdelaziz was slain by the swords of the conspirators; they accused their go­vernor of claiming the honours of royalty: and his scandalous marriage with Egi-lona, the widow of Roderic, offended the prejudices both of the Christians andMoslems. By a refinement of cruelty, the head of the son was presented to thefather, with an insulting question, whether he acknowledged the features of therebel ? " I know his features," he exclaimed with indignation: " I assert his inno­cence; and I imprecate the same, a juster, fate against the authors of his death."The age and despair of Musa raised him above the power of kings; and he ex­pired at Mecca of the anguish of a broken heart. His rival was more favourablytreated: his services were forgiven; and Tarik was permitted to mingle with thecrowd of slaves. (1) I am ignorant whether count Julian was rewarded with thedeath which he deserved indeed, though not from the hands of the Saracens; butthe tale of their ingratitude to the sons of Witiza is disproved by the most unques­tionable evidence. The two royal youths were reinstated in the private patri­mony of their father; but on the decease of Elba the elder, his daughter was un­justly despoiled of her portion by the violence of her uncle Sigebut. The Gothicmaid pleaded her cause before the caliph Hasheim, and obtained the restitutionof her inheritance; but she was given in marriage to a noble Arabian; and theirtwo sons, Isaac and Ibrahim, were received in Spain with the consideration thatwas due to their origin and riches.
A province was assimilated to the victorious state by the introduction of stran­gers and the imitative spirit of the natives; and Spain, which had been succes­sively tinctured with Punic, and Roman, and Gothic, blood, imbibed, in a few ge­nerations, the name and manners of the Arabs. The first conquerors, and thetwenty successive lieutenants of the caliphs, were attended by a numerous trainof civil and military followers, who preferred a distant fortune to a narrow home:the private and public interest was promoted by the establishment of faithful colo­nies; and the cities of Spain were proud to commemorate the tribe or country of
and to return home by the north: and all three are perhaps surpassed by the real and successful enterprise ofHannibal.
(1) I much rejrretour lost, or my iarnorance, of two Arabic works of the seventh century, a life of Musa, anda poem on the exploits of Tarik. Of these authentic pieces, the former was composed by a grandson of Musa,who had escaped from the massacre of his kindred; the latter by the vizier of the first Abdalrahman, caliph ofSpain, who might have conversed with tome of the veterans of the conqueror. (Bibliot. Arabico-Hispana,. tom.it. p. M. 139.)







OCR Output








CS-1- THE DECLINE AND FALL


two princes and the archbishop of Toledo occupied the most important post: theirwell-timed defection broke the ranks of the Christians; each warrior was prompt­ed by fear or suspicion to consult his personal safety; and the remains of the Goth­ic army was scattered or destroyed in the flight and pursuit of the three followingdays. Amidst the general disorder, Roderic started from his car, and mountedOrelia, the fleetest of his horses; but he escaped from a soldier's death to perishmore ignobly in the waters of the Bcetis or Guadalquivir. His diadem, his robes,and his courser, were found on the bank; but as the body of the Gothic prince waslost in the waves, the pride and ignorance of the caliph must have been gratifiedwith some meaner head, which was exposed in triumph before the palace of Da­mascus. "And such," continues a valiant historian of the Arabs, **is the fate ofthose kings who withdraw themselves from a field of battle. "(1)
Count Julian had plunged so deep into guilt and infamy, that his only hope wasin the ruin of his country. After the battle of Xeres he recommended the mosteffectual measures to the victorious Saracens. "The king of the Goths is slain;their princes are fled before you, the army is routed, the nation is astonished. Se­cure with sufficient detachments the cities of Boetica; but in person, and withoutdelay, march to the royal city of Toledo, and allow not the distracted Christianseither time or tranquillity for the election of a new monarch." Tarik listened tohis advice. A Roman captive and proselyte, who had been enfranchised by thecaliph himself, assaulted*Cordova with seven hundred horse; he swam the river,surprised the town, and drove the Christians into the great church, where theydefended themselves above three months. Another detachment reduced the seacoast of Boetica, which in the last period of the Moorish power, has comprised ina narrow space the populous kingdom of Grenada. The march of Tarik fromthe Boetus to the Tagus,(2) was directed through the Sierra Morena, that sepa­rates Andalusia and Castille, till he appeared in arms under the walls of Tole-do.(3) The most zealous of the catholics had escaped with the relics of theirsaints; and if the gates were shut, it was only till the victor had subscribed a fairand reasonable capitulation. The voluntary exiles were allowed to depart withtheir effects; seven churches were appropriated to the Christian worship; thearchbishop and his clergy were at liberty to exercise their functions, the monksto practise or neglect their penance; and the Goths and Romans were left in allcivil and criminal cases to the subordinate jurisdiction of their own laws and ma­gistrates. But the justice of Tarik protected the Christians, his gratitude andpolicy rewarded the Jews, to whose secret or open aid he was indebted for hismost important acquisitions. Persecuted by the kings and synods of Spain, whohad often passed the alternative of banishment or baptism, that outcast nationembraced the moment of revenge; the comparison of their past and present statewas the pledge of their fidelity; and the alliance between the disciples of, Mosesand of Mahomet was maintained till the final era of their common expulsion.From the royal seat of Toledo, the Arabian leader spread his conquests to thenorth, over the modern realms of Castille and Leon; but it is needless to enume­rate the cities that yielded on his approach, or again to describe the table of eme­rald,^) transported from the east by the Romans, acquired by the Goths amongthe spoils of Rome, and presented by the Arabs to the throne of Damascus. Be­yond the Asturian mountains, the maritime town of Gijon was the term(5) of thelieutenant of Musa, who had performed, with the speed of a traveller, his victo-
(1) Id sane infortunii regibus pedem ex acie referentibus sape contingit. Ben Hazil of Grenada, in BibHot.Arabicc-Hispana, torn. ii. p. 327. Some credulous Spaniards believe that king Roderic, or Roderigo, escapedto a hermit's cell, and others that he was cast alive into a tub full of serpents, from whence he exclaimed witha lamentable voice, u They devour the part with which I have so grievously sinned." (Don Quixote, part 2.lib. iii. c. 1.)
(2) The direct road from Corduba to Toledo was measured by Mr. Swinburne's roules in seventy-two hoursand a half; but a larger computation must lie adopted for the slow and devious march of an army. The Arabstraversed the province of La Mancha, which the pen of Cervantes has transformed into classic ground to thereader of every nation.
(3) The antiquities of Toledo, t/ro* Parua in the Punic wars, Urbs Regia in the sixth century, are brieflydescribed by Nonius. (Hispania, c. 59. p. 181—186.) He borrows from Roderic the fatalepatatium of Moorishportraits; but modestly insinuates that it was no more than a Roman amphitheatre.
(4) In the Historia Arabum (c. o. p. 17. ad calcem Elmacin,) Roderic of Toledo describes the emerald tobies,and inserts the name of Medinat Almeyda in Arabic words and letters. He appears to be conversant with theMahometan writers; but I cannot agree with M. de Guignes, (Hist, des Huns, torn. i. p. 350.) that he had readand transcribed Novairi; because he was dead a hundred years before Novairi composed his history. This mis­take is founded on a still grosser error. M. de Guides confounds the historian Roderic Ximenes, archbishopof Toledo, in the thirteenth century, with cardinal Ximenes, who governed Spain in the beginning of the six­teenth, and was the subject, not the author, of historical compositions.
. (5) Tarik might have inscribed on the last rock, the boast of Eegnard and his companion in their Laplandjourney,» Hlc tandem stetimus, nobis ubi defuit oi bis."







OCR Output








2h THE DECLINE AND FALL


hardships and accidents of these reiterated journeys. Yet his mind was still inde­pendent and erect; the president of Thebais was awed by his pastoral letters; hesurvived the catholic tyrant of Alexandria, and after sixteen years' banishment,the synod of Chalcedon would perhaps have restored him to the honours, or atleast to the communion of the church. The death of Nestorius prevented his obe­dience to their welcome summons;(l) and his disease might afford some colour tothe scandalous report, that his tongue, the organ of blasphemy, had been eaten bythe worms. He was buried in a city of Upper Egypt, known by the names ofChemnis, or Panapolis, or Akmin;(2) but the immortal malice of the Jacobites haspersevered for ages to cast stones against his sepulchre, and to propagate the fool­ish tradition, that it was never watered by the rain of heaven, which equally de­scends on the righteous and the ungodly. (3) Humanity may drop a tear on thefate of Nestorius; yet justice must observe, that he suffered the persecution whichhe had approved and inflicted. (4)
The death of the Alexandrian primate, after a reign of thirty-two years, aban­doned the catholics to the intemperance of zeal, and the abuse of victory. (5) TheMonofihysite doctrine (one incarnate nature) was rigorously preached in thechurches of Egypt and the monasteries of the east; the primitive creed of Apolli-naris was protected by the sanctity of Cyril; and the name of Eutyches, his venera­ble friend, has been applied to the sect most adverse to the Syrian heresy of Nesto­rius. His rival Eutyches was the abbot, or archimandrite, or superior of three hun­dred monks: but the opinions of a simple and illiterate recluse might have expiredin the cell where he had slept above seventy years, if the resentment or indiscre­tion of Flavian, the Byzantine pontiff, had not exposed the scandal to the eyes ofthe Christian world. His domestic synod was instantly convened, their proceed­ings were sullied with clamour and artifice, and the aged heretic was surprisedinto a seeming confession, that Christ had not derived his body from the substanceof the Virgin Mary. From their partial decree Eutyches appealed to a generalcouncil: and his cause was vigorously asserted by his godson Chrysaphius, thereigning eunuch of the palace, and his accomplice Dioscorus who had succeeded tothe throne, the creed, the talents, and the vices, of the nephew of Theophilus.By the special summons of Theodosius, the second synod of Ephesus was judiciouslycomposed of ton metropolitans and ten bishops from each of the six diocesses of theeastern empire: some exceptions of favour or merit enlarged the number to onehundred and thirty-five; and the Syrian Barsumas, as the chief and representativeof the monks, was invited to sit and vote with the successors of the apostles. Butthe despotism of the Alexandrian patriarch again oppressed the freedom of de­bate: the same spiritual and carnal weapons were again drawn from the arsenalsof Egypt; the Asiatic veterans, a band of archers, served under the orders ofDioscorus: and the more formidable monks, whose minds were inaccessible to rea­son or mercy, besieged the doors of the cathedral. The general, and, as it shouldseem, the unconstrained voice of the fathers, accepted the faith arid even the ana­themas of Cyril; and the heresy of the two natures was formally condemned inthe persons and writings of the most learned orientals. " May those who divideChrist be divided with the sword; may they be hewn in pieces, may they be burntalive!" were the charitable wishes of a Christian synod.(6) The innocence andsanctity of Eutyches were acknowledged without hesitation: but the prelates,


(1) The invitation of Kestorian to the synod of Chalcedon, is related by Zacharius, bishop of Melitene. (Eva-grius, lib. ii. c. 2. Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, torn. ii. p. 55.) and the famous Xenaias or Fhiloxenus, bishop ofHierapolis, (Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, torn. ii. p. 40, Sec.) denied by Evagrius and Asseman, and stoutly main­tained by La Croze. (Thesaur. Epistol. torn. iti. p. 181, &c.) The fact is not improbable! yet it was the inte­rest of the Monophysites to spread the invidious report; and Entychius, torn. ii. p. 12. affirms, that Nestoriusdied after an exile of seven years, and consequently ten years before the synod of Chalcedon.
(2) Consult d'Anville, Memoire sur 1'Egypte, p. 191.) Pocock, (Description of the East, vol. i. p. 76.) Abul-feda, (Descript. Egypt, p. 14.) and his commentator Michaelis, (Not. p. 78 —83.) and the Nubian Geographer,(p. 42.) who mentions, in the twelfth century, the ruins and the sujrat.-canes of Akmin.
(3) Entychius, (Annal. torn. ii. p. 12.) and Gregory Bar-Hebrteus, of Abulpharagius Asseman. tem. ii. p.S16.) represent the credulity of the tenth and thirteenth centuries.
(4) We are obliged to Evagrius (lib. i. c. 7.) for some extracts from the letters of Nestorius; but the livelypicture of his surTerings is treated with insult by the hard and stupid fanatic.
(5) Dili Cyrillum dum viveret, auctoritate sua effecuse, ne Entychianismus et Monophy sitamm error innervum erumperet: idque verum pufo . ,. aliquo . . . honesto modo stzxitoJuw cecinrrat. The learnedbut cautious Jablomki did not always speak the whole truth. Cum Cyrillo lenius omnino egi, quam si tecum■aut CHm aliis rei hujus probe gnaris et acquis rerum aestimatorbus sermones privatos conferrem, Thesaur. Epis­tol. La Crozian, torn, i p. 107,198.) an excellent key to bis dissertations on the Nerftorian controversy!
(6) H «y* cvvooos ttjrtv apov, Kxtxrov EuriStor, ours; £wv xai| owto; ii( Sua j-tvurai w; tfupttrt fafWrSti., . si tic MJr? 1Juo aKtSiaia. At the request of Dioscorus, those who were not able toroar(>3i»i<reii,)stretehed out their bands.At Chalcedon, the orientals disclaimed these acclamations ; but the Egyptians more consistently declaredcwra ui, t»ts ii>r»;«i» KM wv Ufojuv. (Concil.tpm. iv.p. 1012.)







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


rou led the van at the head of nine thousand horse: the bands of the Saracens suc­ceeded each other in formidable review; and the rear was closed by Caled in per­son, with the standard of the black eagle. To the activity of Derar he intrustedthe commission of patroling round the city with two thousand horse, of scouringthe plain, and of intercepting all succour or intelligence. The rest of the Arabianchiefs were fixed in their respective stations before the seven gates of Damascus;and the siege was renewed with fresh vigour and confidence. The art, the labour,the military engines of the Greeks and Romans, are seldom to be found in thesimple, though successful operations of the Saracens: it was sufficient for them toinvest a city with arms, rather than with trenches; to repel the sallied of the be­sieged; to attempt a stratagem or an assault; or to expect the progress of famineand discontent Damascus would have acquiesced in the trial of Aiznadin, as afinal and peremptory sentence between the emperor and the caliph; her couragewas rekindled by the example and the authority of Thomas, a noble Greek, il­lustrious in a private condition by the alliance of Heraclius.(l) The tumult andillumination of the night proclaimed the design of the morning sally; and theChristian hero, who affected to despise the enthusiasm of the Arabs, employedthe general resource of a similar superstition. At the principal gate, in the sightof both armies, a lofty crucifix was erected; the bishop, with his clergy, accom­panied the march, and laid the volume of the New Testament before the imageof Jesus; and the contending parties were scandalized or edified by a prayer, thatthe Son of God would defend his servants and vindicate his truth. The battleraged with incessant fury; and the dexterity of Thomas,(2) an incomparable archer,was fatal to the boldest Saracens, till their death was revenged by a female heroine,the wife of Aban, who had followed him to the holy war, embraced her expiringhusband. " Happy," said she, "happy art thou, my dear: thou art gone to thyLord who first joined us together, and then parted us asunder. I will revenge thydeath, and endeavour to the utmost of my power to come to the place where thouart, because I love thee. Henceforth* shall no man ever touch me more, for I havededicated myself to the service of God." Without a groan, without a tear, shewashed the corpse of her husband, and buried him with the usual rites. Thengrasping the manly weapons, which, in her native land, she was accustomed towield, the intrepid widow of Aban sought the place where his murderer fought inthe thickest of the battle. Her first arrow pierced the hand of his standard-bear­er: her second wounded Thomas in the eye; and the fainting Christians no longerbeheld their ensign or their leader. Yet the generous champion of Damascus re­fused to withdraw to his palace: his wound was dressed on the rampart; the fightwas continued till the evening; and the Syrians rested on their arms. In the si­lence of the night, the signal was given by a stroke on the great bell; the gateswere thrown open, and each gate discharged an impetuous column on the sleepingcamp of the Saracens. Caled was the first in arms; at the head of four hundredhorse he flew to the post of danger, and the tears trickled down his iron cheeks,as he uttered a fervent ejaculation: "O God! who never sleepest, look upon thyservants, and do not deliver them into the hands of their enemies." The valourand victory of Thomas were arrested by the presence of the sword of God; withShe knowledge of the peril, the Moslems recovered their ranks, and charged theassailants in the flank and rear. After the loss of thousands, the Christian generalretreated with a sigh of despair, and the pursuit of the Saracens was checked bythe military engines of the rampart.
After a siege of seventy days, (3) the patience, and perhaps the provisions, ofthe Damascenes were exhausted; and the bravest of their chiefs submitted to thehard dictates of necessity. In the occurrences of peace and war, they had beentaught to dread the fierceness of Caled, and to revere the mild virtues of Abu
(0 Vanity prompted the Arabs to believe, that Thomas was the son-in-law of the emperor. We know thechildren of "Heraclius by his two wives; and his august daughter would not have married in exile at Damascus.(See Ducange, Fam. Byzantine, p. US, 119.) Had he been less religious, I might only suspect the legitimacyof the damsel.
(2) Al Wakidi (Ockley, p. 101.) says M with poisoned arrows;" but this savage invention is w repugnant tothe practice of the Greeks and Romans, that I must suspect, on this occasion, the malevolent credulity of theSaracens.
(3) Abulfeda allows only seventy days for the siege of Damascus (Anna). Moslem, p. 67. vers. Reiske;) hotEtmacin. who mentions this opinion, prolongs the term to six months, and notices the use ol'baliitte by the Sara­cens.' (Hist. Saracen, p. 25. 32.) Even this longer period is insufficient to fill the interval between the battleof Aiznadin (July, A.D. 633.) and the accession of Omar. 24th July, A. D. 634.) to whose reign the conquest ofDamascus is unanimously ascribed. (Al Wakidi, apud Ockley, vol. i. p. 115. Abulpharagius, Dynast, p. lit*vers. Poeock.) Perhaps, as in the Trojan war, the operations were interrupted by excursions and deiaehmf m»itill the last seventy days of the siege.







OCR Output








Sl2 'FHE DECLINE ANB FALL


the Caaba ascends beyond the Christian era: in describing the coast of the Red Sea,the Greek historian Diodorus(l) has remarked, between the Thamudites and theSabsans, a famous temple, whose superior sanctity was revered by all the Arabians:the linen or silken veil, which is annually renewed by the Turkish emperor, wasfirst offered by a pious king of the Homerites, who reigned seven hundred years,before the time of Mahomet. (2) A tent or a cavern might suffice for the worshipof the savages, but an edifice of stone and clay has been erected in its place; andthe art and power of the monarchs of the east have been confined to the simplicityof the original model. (5) A spacious portico encloses the quadrangle of the Caaba:a square chapel, twenty-four cubits long, twenty-three broad, and twenty-sevenhigh; a door and a window admit the light; the double roof is supported by threepillars of wood; a spout (now of gold) discharges the rain-water, and the wellZanzem, is protected by a dome from accidental pollution. The tribe of Koreish,by fraud or force, had acquired the custody of the Caaba; the sacerdotal office de­volved through four lineal descents to the grandfather of Mahomet; and the familyof the Heshemites, from whence he sprung, was the most respectable and sacredin the eyes of their country. (4) The precincts of Mecca enjoyed the rights of sanc­tuary; and, in the last month of each year, the city and the temple were crowdedwith a long train of pilgrims, who presented their vows and offerings in the houseof God. The same rites, which are now accomplished by the faithful Mussulman,were invented and practised by the superstition of the idolaters. -At an awful dis­tance they cast away their garments: seven times, with hasty steps, they encircledthe Caaba, and kissed the black stone: seven times they visited and adored theadjacent mountains; seven times they threw stones into the valley of Mina; andthe pilgrimage was achieved, as at the present hour, by a sacrifice of sheep andcamels, and the burial of their hair and nails in the consecrated ground. Eachtribe either found or introduced in the Caaba their domestic worship: the temple' was adorned, or defiled, with three hundred and sixty idols of men, eagles, lions, andantelopes; and the most conspicuous was the statue of Hebal, of red agate, holdingin his hand seven arrows, without heads or feathers, the instruments and symbolsof profane divination. But this statue was a monument of Syrian arts: the devotionof the ruder ages was content with a pillar or a tablet; and the rocks of the desertwere hewn into gods or altars, in imitation of the black stone(5) of Mecca, whichis deeply tainted with the reproach of an idolatrous origin. From Japan to Peru,the use of sacrifice has universally prevailed; and the votary has expressed hisgratitude or fear by destroying or consuming, in honour of the gods, the dearestand most precious of their gifts. The life of a man(6) is the most precious oblationto deprecate a public calamity: the altars of Phoenicia and Egypt, of Rome andCarthage, have been polluted with human gore: the cruel practice was long pre­served among the Arabs; in the third century, a boy was annually sacrificed bythe tribe of the Dumatians;(7) and a royal captive, was piously slaughtered by the


(1) l£pov eeyicurarcu top-jra* riftm/ievou urrc Tstvrviv ApaiSmy srspiTTOTsp°v. (Diod. Sicul. torn. i. Hb. iii. p. 2.) The cha­racter and position are so correctly apposite, that I am surprised how this curious passage cnuld nave been readwithout notice or application. Yet this famous temple had been overlooked by Agatharcides (de Man Rubro,p. 58. in Hudson, torn, i.) whom Diodorus conies in the rest of the description. Was the Sicilian more knowingthan the Egyptian? Or was the Caaba built between the year of Rome 650 and 746, the dates of their respectivehistories? (Dodwell, in Dissert, ad torn. i. Hudson, p. 72. Fabricins, Bibliot. Greec. torn. ii. p. 770.)
(2) Pocock, Specimen, p. 60,61. From the death of Mahomet we ascend to 68, from his birth to 129, yearsbefore the Christian era. The veil or curtain, which is now of silk and gold, was no more than a piece of Egyp­tian linen. (Abulfeda, in Vit. Mohammed, c. 6. p. 14.)
(3) The original plan of the Caaba (which is servilely copied in Sale, the Universal History, &c.) was a Turk­ish draught, which Ileland (de Religione Mohammedica. p. 113—123.) has corrected and explained from thebest authorities. For the description and legend of the Caaba, consult Pocock, (Specimen, p. 113—122.) the.Bibliotheque Orientate of d'Herbelot, (Caaba, Hagir, Ztmzcm, &c.) and Sale. (Preliminary Discourse, p.114—122.)
(4) Cosa, the fifth ancestor of Mahomet, must have usurped the Caaba A. D. 440. but the story is differentlytold by Jannebi,(Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet, torn. i. p. 65—69.) and by Ahutfeda (in Vit. Moham. c. 6. p. 13.)
(5) In the second century, Maximus of Tyre attributes to the Arabs the worship of a stone— Ap*2
Htv ovTifce Si otix oiSa, t3 Si »yaXfiot e»Jo»; KtGo? w T£Tfx*j-*ivoc, (Dissert. S. ton). 1. p. 142. edit. Reiske) and thereproach is furiously re-echoed by (he Christians. (Clemen^ Alex, in Protn ptieo, p. 40. Arnobius contra Gen-tea. lib.vi. p. 246.) Yet these stones were no other than the &xwxa. of Syria and G< eece, so renowned in sacredand profane antiquity. (Eoseb. Prsep. Evangel, lib. i. p. 37. Marsham. Canon. Chron. p. 54—56.)
(6) The two horrid subjects of AvapoSuo-.» and IIxtSoQutrix, are accurately discussed by the learned Sir JohnMarsham. (Canon. Chron. p. 76—78. 301—304.) Sanchoniatho derives the Phcenician sacrifices from the ex­ample of Chronus: but we are itpiorant whether Chronus lived before or after Abraham, or indeed whether helived at all.
(7) Ko6T* iTog Exoea-To* ttxiSx e5uov, is the reproach of Porphyry: but he likewise imputes to the Roman the samebarbarous custom, which A. U. C. 657. had been finally abolished. Dumtetha, Dnumatal Gendal.is noticed byytolemy fTabul. p. 37. Arabia, p. P—29.) and Abulfeda: (p. 57.) and may be found in d'Anville's maps, in the.mid-desert between Cbaibar and Tadmor,







OCR Output













OCR Output








18 THE DECLINE AND FALL


which constitute the national wealth. The public distress had been alleviated bythe economy of Anastasius, and that prudent emperor accumulated an immensetreasure, while he delivered his people from the most odious or oppressive taxes.Their gratitude universally applauded the abolition of the g old of affliction,, a per­sonal tribute on the industry of the poor;(l) but more tolerable, as it should seem,in the form than in the substance, since the flourishing city of Edessa paid only onehundred and forty pounds of gold, which was collected in four years from ten thou­sand artificers. (2) Yet such was the parsimony, which supported this liberal dis­position, that, in a reign of twenty-seven years, Anastasius saved, from his annualrevenue, the enormous sum of thirteen millions sterling, or three hundred and*twenty thousand pounds of gold. (3) His example was neglected, and his treasurewas abused, by the nephew of Justin. The riches of Justinian were speedily ex­hausted by alms and buildings, by ambitious wars, and ignominious treaties. Hisrevenues were found inadequate to his expenses. Every art was tried to extortfrom the people the gold and silver which he scattered with a lavish hand fromPersia to France ;(4) his reign was marked by the vicissitudes, or rather by thecombat, of rapaciousness and avarice, of splendour and poverty; he lived with thereputation of hidden treasures,(5) and bequeathed to his successor the payment ofhis debts. (6) Such a character has been justly accused by the voice of the peopleand of posterity: but public discontent is credulous; private malice is bold; and alover of truth will peruse with a suspicious eye the instructive anecdotes of Proco-pius. The secret historian represents only the vices of Justinian, and those vicesare darkened by his malevolent pencil. Ambiguous actions are imputed to theworst motives: error is confounded with guilt, accident with design, and laws withabuses: the partial injustice of a moment is dexterously applied as the generalmaxim of a reign of thirty-two years: the emperor alone is made responsible forthe faults of his officers, trie disorders of the times, and the corruption of his sub­jects; and even the calamities of nature, plagues, earthquakes, and inundations,are imputed to the prince of the demons, who had mischievously assumed the formof Justinian. (7)
After this precaution, I shall briefly relate the anecdotes of avarice and rapine*under the following heads.—I. Justinian was so profuse that he could not be libe­ral. The civil and military officers, when they were admitted into the service ofthe palace, obtained an humble rank and a moderate stipend; they ascendedby seniority to a station of affluence and repose; the annual pensions, of whichthe most honourable class was abolished by Justinian, amounted to four hun­dred thousand pounds; and this domestic economy was deplored by the venal orindigent courtiers as the last outrage on the majesty of the empire. The posts,the salaries of physicians, and the nocturnal illuminations, were objects of moregeneral concern; and the cities might justly complain, that he usurped the munici­pal revenues which hud been appropriated to these useful institutions. Even thesoldiers were injured; and such was the decay of military spirit, that they wereinjured with impunity. The emperor refused, at the return of each fifth year,the customary donative of five pieces of gold, reduced his veterans to beg theirbread, and suffered unpaid armies to melt away in the wars of Italy and Persia.II. The humanity of his predecessors had always remitted, in some auspicious cir­cumstance of their reign, the arrears of their public tribute; and they dexterous­ly assumed the merit of resigning those claims, which it was impracticable to en­force. " Justinian, in the space of thirty-two years has never granted a similar
(1) Evagrtni (lib. iii. c. 39, 40.) is minute and grateful, but angry with Zosimus for calumniating; the greatConstAntine. In collecting all the bonds and records of the tax, the humanity of Anastasius was diligent andartful; fathers were sometimes compelled to prostitute their daughters (Zosim. Hist. lib. ii. c. 38. p. 185,16S.LipsUe, 17840 Timotheus of Gaza chose such an event for the subject of a tragedy (Suidas, torn. iii. p. 475.,)which contributed to the abolition of the tax (Cedrenus, p. 31.;) a happy instance (if it be true) of the use ofthe theatre.
(3) See Jmna Stylites, in the Bibliotheca Orientalis of Asseman. (torn, i. p. 268.) This capitation-tax is slight­ly mentioned in the Chroniele of Edessa.
(3) Proeopius (Anecdot. c 19.) fixes this sum from the report of the treasurers themselves. Tiberius hadvice* ter millies; but far different was his empire from that of Anastasius.
(4) Eyagrius (lib. iv. c. 30.,) in the next generation, was moderate and well-informed; and Zonaras (lib. xiv.c. 61.0 ib the twelfth century, had read with care, and thought without prejudice; yet their colours are almostas black as those of the Anecdotes.
(5) Proeopius (Anecdot. c. 30.) relates the idle conjectures or the times. The death of Justinian, says thesecret historian, will expose his wealth or poverty.
(6) See Corippus de Laudibus Justini Aug. lib. ii. 260, &c. 384, &c.
" Pturima sunt vivo nimium ncglecia parenli.Untie tot exhaustus contraxit debita fiscus."Centenaries of gold were brought by strong arms into the hippodrome.—Debita genitoris persolvit, cauta recepit."(?) The Anecdotes (o. xi. 14.18.20. So.) supply many facts and more comploinM.







OCR Output








->4 THE DECLINE AND FALL


primitive lustre of St. Sophia, enumerates the colours, the shades, and the spotsof ten or twelve marbles, jaspers, and porphyries, which nature had profusely di­versified, and which were blended and contrasted as it were by a skilful painter.The triumph of Christ was adorned with the last spoils of Paganism; but thegreater part of these costly stones was extracted from the quarries of Asia Minor,the isles and continent of Greece, Egypt, Africa and Gaul. Eight columns ofporphyry, which Aurelian had placed in the temple of the sun, were offered bythe piety of a Roman matron; eight others of green marble were presented bythe ambitious zeal of the magistrates of Ephesus: both are admirable by theirsize and beauty; but every order of architecture disclaims their fantastic capitals.A variety of ornaments and figures was curiously expressed in mosaic; and theimages of Christ, of the Virgin, of saints, and of angels, which have been defacedby Turkish fanaticism, were dangerously exposed to the superstition of the Greeks.According to the sanctity of each object the precious metals were distributed inthin leaves or in solid masses. The balustrade of the choir, the capitals of thepillars, the ornaments of the doors and galleries, were of gilt bronze; the spec­tator was dazzled by the glittering aspect of the cupola; the sanctuary containedforty thousand pound weight of silver; and the holy vases and vestments of thealtar were of the purest gold, enriched with inestimable gems. Before the struc­ture of the church had risen two cubits above the ground, 45,2001. were alreadyconsumed; and the whole expense amounted to 320,000/.; each reader, accordingto the measure of his belief, may estimate their value either in gold or silver; butthe sum of 1,000,000/. sterling is the result of the lowest computation. A magni­ficent temple is a laudable monument of national taste and religion, and the en­thusiast who entered the dome of St. Sophia, might be tempted to suppose that itwas the residence, or even the workmanship of the Deity. Yet how dull is theartifice, how insignificant is the labour, if it be compared with the formation ofthe vilest insect that crawls upon the surface of the temple!
So minute a description of an edifice which time has respected, may attest thetruth, and excuse the relation of the innumerable works, both in the capital andprovinces, which Justinian constructed on a smaller scale and less durable founda­tions. (1) In Constantinople alone, and the adjacent suburbs, he dedicated twenty-five churches to the honour of Christ, the Virgin, and the saints; most of thesechurches were decorated with marble and gold; and their various situation wasskilfully chosen in a populous square, or a pleasant grove; on the margin of thesea-shore, or on some lofty eminence which overlooked the continents of Europeand Asia. The church of the holy apostles at Constantinople, and that of St. Johnat Ephesus, appear to have been framed on the same model: their domes aspiredto imitate the cupolas of St. Sophia; but the altar was more judiciously placed un­der the centre of the dome, at the junction of four stately porticos, which more ac­curately expressed the figure of the Greek cross. The virgin of Jerusalem mightexult in the temple erected by her imperial votary on a most ungrateful spot, whichafforded neither ground nor materials to the architect. A level was formed, bylaising part of a deep valley to the height of a mountain. The stones of a neigh­bouring quarry were hewn into regular forms; each block was fixed on a peculiarcarriage, drawn by forty of the strongest oxen, and the roads were widened for thepassage of such enormous weights. Lebanon furnished her loftiest cedars for thetimbers of the church; and the seasonable discovery of a vein of red marble, sup­plied its beautiful columns, two of which, the supporters of the exterior portico,were esteemed the largest in the world. The pious munificence of the emperorwas diffused over the holy land: and if reason should condemn the monasteries ofboth sexes which were built or restored by Justinian, yet charity must applaud thewells which he sunk, and the hospitals which he founded, for the relief of the wea­ry pilgrims. The schismatical temper of Egypt was ill entitled to the royal boun­ty; but in Syria and Africa some remedies were applied to the disasters of warsand earthquakes, and both Carthage and Antiocn, emerging from their ruins,
Phrygian—of two sorw, both of a rosy hue; the one with a white shade, the other purple, with silver flowers.3. The Porphyry of Egypt-" with small stars. 4. The green marble of Lac onto. 5. The Carian—from Mountlassii, with oblique veins, white and red. 6. The Lydian—pale, with a red flower. 7. The African or Mauri-tamos— of a gold or saffron hue. 8. The Celtic—black, with white veins. 9. The Bosphoric—white, withblack edges. Besides the Proeannesian, which formed the pavement; the Thessalian, Motossian, &c, whichare less distinctly painted.
(1) The six books of the edifices of Procopins, are thus distributed—The first is confined to Constantino­ple; the second includes Mesopotamia and Svria; the third, Armenia and the Euxinc; the fourth, Eurcpejthe fifth, Asia Minor and Palestine; the sixth, Egypt and Africa. Italy is forgot by the emperor or the histo­rian, who published this work of adulation before the date (A.D. 555) of its final conquest.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


sole evidence of their faith. The natural suspicions of the husband, conscious ofhis own chastity, were dispelled by the assurance fin a dream) that his wife waspregnant of the Holy Ghost; and as this distant and domestic prodigy could not fallunder the personal observation of the historian, he must have listened to the samevoice which dictated to Isaiah, the future conception of a virgin. The son of a,virgin, generated by the ineffable operation of the Holy Spint, was a creaturewithout example or resemblance, superior in every attribute of mind and body tothe children of Adam. Since the introduction of the Greek or Chaldean philo­sophy^ 1) the Jews(2) were persuaded of the pre-existence, transmigration, andimmortality of souls; and Providence was justified by a supposition, that they wereconfined in their earthly prisons to expiate the stains which they had contracted in aformer state. (3) But the degrees of purity and corruption are almost immeasura­ble. It may be fairly presumed, that the most sublime and virtuous of human spi­rits was infused into the offspring of Mary and the Holy Ghost;(4) that his abase­ment was the result of his voluntary choice; and that the object of his mission wasto purify, not his own, but the sins of the world. On his return to his native skies,he received the immense reward of his obedience; the everlasting kingdom of theMessiah, which had been darkly foretold by the prophets, under the carnalimages of peace, of conquest, and of dominion. Omnipotence could enlarge thehuman faculties of Christ to the extent of his celestial office. In the language ofantiquity, the title of God has not been severely confined to the first parent, andhis incomparable minister, his only-begotten Son, might claim without presump­tion the religious, though secondary, worship of a subject world.
II. The seeds of the faith, which had slowly arisen in the rocky and ungratefulsoil of Judea, were transplanted, in full maturity, to the happier climes of theGentiles; and the strangers of Rome or Asia, who never beheld the manhood,were the more readily disposed to embrace the divinity of Christ The Polythe-ist and the philosopher, the Greek and the barbarian, were alike accustomed toconceive a long succession, an infinite chain of angels or demons, or deities, orsons, or emanations, issuing from the throne of light. Nor could it seem strangeor incredible, that the first of these asons, the Logos, or Word*of God, of thesame substance with the Father, should descend upon earth to deliver the humanrace from vice and error, and to conduct them in the paths of life and immortality.But the prevailing doctrine of the eternity and inherent pravity of matter infectedthe primitive churches of the east. Many among the Gentile proselytes refusedto believe that a celestial spirit, an undivided portion of the first essence, had beenpersonally united with a mass of impure and contaminated flesh: and, in their zealfor the divinity, they piously abjured the humanity of Christ. While his blood wasstill recent on mount Calvary,(5) the Docetes, a numerous and learned sect of Asi­atics, invented the fantastic system, which was afterwards propagated by the Mar-cionites, the Manichaians, and the various names of the Gnostic heresy. (6) They de­nied the truth and authenticity of the gospels, as far as they relate the conception of
protectant critics. But this Hebrew Gospel of St. Matthew ii most unaccountably lost; and we may accusethe diligence or fidelity of the primitive charehes, who have preferred the unauthorized version of somenameless Greek. Erasmus and his followers, who respect our Greek text as the original gospel, deprivethemselves of the evidence whiclt declares it to be the work of an apostle. See Simon, Hist. Critique, See.torn. iii. c. 5—9. p. 47—101. and the Prolegomena of Mill and Wetstein to the New Testament.
(J) The metaphysics of the soul are disengaged by Cicero (Tuscalan. lib. 1.) and Maximus of Tyre (Disser-tat* xvi.,) from the intricacies of Dialogue, which sometimes amuse, and often perplex the readers of the Phse-drus, the Phsedon, and the Laws of Plato.
(2) The disciples of Jesus were persuaded that a man might have sinned before lie was born (John, ix. 2.,)and the pharisees held the transmigration of virtuous souls (Joseph, de Bell. JudaicoJih. ii. c. 7.,) and a mo­dern rabbi is modestly assured that Hermes, Pythagoras, Plato, &c. derived their metaphysics from his illus­trious countrymen.
(3) Four different opinions have been entertained concerning the origin of human souls. 3. Thatrheyareeternal and divine. 2. That they were created in a separate state of existence, before their union with thebody. 3. That they have been propagated from the original stock of Adam, who contained in himself themental as well as the corporeal seed of his posterity. 4. That each soul is occasionally created and embodiedin the moment of conception. The last of these sentiments appears to have prevailed among the moderns;and our spiritual history is grown less suhlime, without becoming more intelligible.
(4) Or* q tou yjwnjpat, if tou AS*** ttv—was one of the fifteen heresies imputed to Origen, and deniedby his apologist (Photius, Bibliothec. Cod. 117. p. 296.) Some of the rabbies attribute one and the same soul tuthe persons of Adam, David, and the Messiah. '
(5) Apostolisadhnc in seculo superstitibus,apud Judseam Christ! sanguine recente, Phantasma domini cor­pus asserebatur. Hieronym. advent. Lucifer, c. viii. The epistle of Ignatius to the Smynseans, and eventhe gospel according to St. John, are levelled against the growing error of the Docetes, who had obtained toomuch credit in the world (1 John iv. 1—5.)
(A) About the year 200 of the Christian era, Irenecus and Hippolytus refuted the thirty-two sects, nrc if/.-uJ*-fjuev yvtoTjw; which had multiplied to fourscore in the time of Epiphanius. (Phot. Biblioth. Cod. 120—122.>The five books of Irenseus exist only in barbarous Latin; but the original might perhaps he found in some mo­nastery of Greece.
Vol. III. 26







OCR Output








32 THE DECLINE AND FALL


the price appears to have varied from a mina to a talent; and Isocrates himself,who derides the avarice of th« sophists, required, in his school of rhetoric, aboutthirty pounds from each of his hundred pupils. The wages of industry are justand honourable, yet the same Isocrates shed tears at the first receipt of a stipend;the Stoic might blush when he was hired to preach the contempt of money; and Ishould be sorry to discover, that Aristotle or Plato so far degenerated from the ex­ample of Socrates, as to exchange knowledge for gold. But some property of landsand houses was settled by the permission of the laws, and the legacies of the de­ceased friends, on the philosophic chairs of Athens. Epicurus bequeathed to hisdisciples the gardens which he had purchased for eighty minx, or two hundredand fifty pounds, with a fund sufficient for their frugal subsistence and monthly fes­tivals;^) and the patrimony of Plato afforded an annual rent, which, in eight cen­turies, was gradually increased from three to one thousand pieces of gold. (2) Theschools of Athens were protected by the wisest and most virtuous of the Romanprinces. The library which Hadrian founded, was placed in a portico, adorned withpictures, statues, and a roof of alabaster, and supported by one hundred columns ofPhrygian marble. The public salaries were assigned by the generous spirit of theAntonines; and each professor, of politics, of rhetoric, of the Platonic, the Peripa­tetic, the Stoic, and the Epicurean philosophy, received an annual stipend of tenthousand drachmx, or more than three hundred pounds sterling.(S) After thedeath of Marcus, these liberal donations, and the privileges attached to the thronesof science, were abolished and revived, diminished and enlarged: but some ves­tige of royal bounty may be found under the successors of Constantine; and theirarbitrary choice of an unworthy candidate might tempt the philosophers of Athensto regret the days of independence and poverty. (4) It is remarkable, that theimpartial favour of the Antonines was bestowed on the four adverse sects of philoso­phy, which they considered as equally useful, or at least as equally innocent. So­crates had formerly been the glory and the reproach of his country; and the firstlessons of Epicurus so strangely scandalized the pious ears of the Athenians, thatby his exile, and that of his antagonists, they silenced all vain disputes concerningthe nature of the gods. But, in the ensuing year, they recalled the hasty decree,restored the liberty of the schools, and were convinced, by the experience of ages,that the moral character of philosophers is not affected by the diversity of theirtheological speculations. (5)
The Gothic arms were less fatal to the schools of Athens than the establishmentof a new religion, whose ministers superseded the exercise of reason, resolved eve­ry question by an article of faith, and condemned the infidel or sceptic to eternalflames. In many a volume of laborious controversy, they exposed the weaknessof the understanding and the corruption of the heart, insulted human nature in thesages of antiquity, and proscribed the spirit of philosophical inquiry, so repugnantto the doctrine, or at least to the temper, of an humble believer. The survivingsect of the Platonists, whom Plato would have blushed to acknowledge, extrava­gantly mingled a sublime theory with the practice of superstition and magic; and,as they remained alone in the midst of a Christian world, they indulged a secretrancour against the government of the church and state; whose severity was stillsuspended over their heads. About a century after the reign of Julian, (6) Pro­elus,^) was permitted to teach in the philosophic chair of the academy; and suchwas his industry, that he frequently, in the same day, pronounced five lessons, and
(1) See the testament of Epicurus in Diogen. laert. lib. x. segrn. 15—20. p. 611.512. A single epistle (ad Fa-rmliares, 13.1.) displays the injustice of the Areopagus, the fidelity of the Epicurmns, the dexterous politenessof Cicero, and the mixture of contempt and esteem with which the Roman senators considered the philosophyand philosophers of Greece.
(2) Damascius, in Vit. Isidor. apud Photiura, Cod. 242.'p. 1054.
(3) See Lucian (in Eunech. torn. ii. p. 350—359. edit. Reitz;) Philostratus (in Vit. Sophist, lib. ii. c. 2.,) andDion Cassius, or Xiphilin (lib. Ixxi. p. 1195.,) with their editors Du Soul, Olearius. and Reimar, and, above alt,Satmasius (Ad Hist. August, p. 72.) A judicious philosopher (Smith's Wealth of iiations, vol. ii. p. 344— 374.,)prefers the free contributions of the students to a fixed stipend for the professor.
(4) Bracker, Hist. Crit. Philosoph. torn. ii. p: 310, &c
(5) The birth of Epicurus is fixed to the year 342 before Christ, (Bayle,) Olympiad. 109.3. and he opened hisschool at Athens, Olymp. 118. 3. three hundred and six years before the same era. This intolerant law (Athe-nsens, lib. xiii. p. 010. Diogen. Laertins, lib. v. s. 39. p. 290. Julius Pollux, 9.5.) was enacted in the same, orthe succeeding year, (Sigonius. Opp. torn. v. p. 62. Menagius, ad Diogen. Laert. p. 204. Corsini Fasti Attici,torn. iv. p. 67,68.) Theophrastus, chief of the Peripatetics, and disciple of Aristotle, was involved in the sameexile.
(0) This is no fanciful era; the pagans reckoned their calamities from the reign of their hero. Proelus, whosenativity is marked by his horoscope (A. D. 412. February 8, at C. P. died one hundred and twenty-four years«sro Iou\iavov (3aMriM»(, A. D. 485. (Marin, in Vita Prodi, c. 36.)
(7) The life of Proelus, by Marinus, was published by Fabricius (Hamburgh, 1700, et ad calcem Bibliot. La­tin, Lond. 1703.) See Suidas (torn. iii. p. 185,186.,) Fabricius (Bibliot. Grscc. lib. v. c. 26. p. 449—552.,) andBrucker (Hist. Crit. Philosoph. torn, ii. p. 319—326.)







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


ble. From a motive of private revenge, they enabled their most dangerous enemyto destroy their most valuable ally. A sister of the great Theodoric had beengiven in marriage to Thrasimond, the African king;(l) on this occasion, the for­tress of Lilyb3eum(2) in Sicily was resigned to the Vandals: and the princess Am-alafrida was attended by a martial train of one thousand nobles, and five thousandGothic soldiers, who signalized their valour in the Moorish wars. Their meritwas overrated by themselves, and perhaps neglected by the Vandals: they viewed" - the country with envy, and the conquerors with disdain; but their real or fictitiousconspiracy was prevented by a massacre; the Goths were oppressed, and the cap­tivity of Amalafrida was 60on followed by her secret and suspicious death. Theeloquent pen of Cassrodorus was employed to reproach the Vandal court with thecruel violation of every social and public duty; but the vengeance which he threat­ened, in the name of his sovereign, might be derided with impunity, as long asAfrica was protected by the sea, and the Goths were destitute of a navy. In theblind impotence of grief and indignation, they joyfully saluted the approach of theRomans, entertained the fleet of Belisarius in the ports of Sicily, and were speedi­ly delighted or alarmed by the surprising intelligence, that their revenge was ex­ecuted beyond the measure of their hopes, or perhaps of their wishes. To theirfriendship the emperor was indebted for the kingdom of Africa, and the Gothsmight reasonably think, that they were entitled to resume the possession of a bar­ren rock, so recently separated as a nuptial gift from the island of Sicily. TheyWere soon undeceived by the haughty mandate of Belisarius, which excited theirtardy and unavailing repentance. "The city and promontory of Lilybseum,"said the Roman general, '" belonged to the Vandals, and I claim them by theright of conquest. Your submission may deserve the favour of the, emperor;your obstinacy will provoke his displeasure, and must kindle a war, that canterminate only in your utter ruin. If you compel us to take up arms we shallcontend, not to regain the possession of a single city, but to deprive you ofall the provinces which you unjustly withhold from their lawful sovereign." Anation of two hundred thousand soldiers might have smiled at the vain .me­nace of Justinian and his lieutenant: but a spirit of discord and disaffection pre­vailed in Italy, and the Goths supported) with reluctance, the indignity of a fe­male reign. (3)
The birth of Amalasontha, the regent and queen of Italy, (4) united the twomost illustrious families of the barbarians. Her mother, the sister of Clovis, wasdescended from the long-haired kings of the Merovingian race;(4) and the regalsuccession of the Amali was illustrated in the eleventh generation, by her father,the great Theodoric, whose merit might have ennobled a plebeian origin. Thesex of his daughter excluded her from the Gothic throne; but his vigilant tender­ness for his family and his people discovered the last heir of the royal line, whoseancestors had taken refuge in Spain; and the fortunate Eutharic was suddenly ex­alted to the rank of a consul and a prince. He enjoyed only a short time thecharms of Amalasontha, and the hopes of a succession; and his widow, after thedeath of her husband and father, was left the guardian of her son Athalaric, andthe kingdom of Italy. At the age of about twenty-eight years, the endowmentsof her mind and person had attained their perfect maturity. Her beauty, which,in the apprehension of Theodora herself, might have disputed the conquest of anemperor, was animated by manly sense, activity, and resolution. Education andexperience had cultivated her talents; her philosophic studies were exempt fromvanity} and, though she expressed herself with equal elegance and ease in theGreek, the Latin, and the Gothic tongue, the daughter of Theodoric maintainedin her counsels a discreet and impenetrable silence. By a faithful imitation of thevirtues, she revived the prosperity of his reign: while she strove, with pious care,to expiate the faults, and to obliterate the darker memory of his declining age.The children of Boethius and Symmachus were restored to their paternal inheri-
(1) See th'e marriage and fate of Amalafrida in Procopius, (Vandal, lib. i. c 8,9.) and in Cassiodorus, (Var.ix. 1.) the expostulation of her royal brother. Compare likewise the Chronicle of Victor Tunnunensis.
(2) Lilybseum was built by the Carthaginians, Olymp. 95. 4., and in the first Punic war, a strong situation,and excellent harbour, rentfered that place an important object to both nations.
(3) Compare the different passages of Procopius (Vandal, lib. ii. c. 5. Gothic, lib. i. c. 3.)
(4) ffpr the reign and character of Amalasontha, see Procopius (Gothic, lib. i. c.2—4. and Anecdot. c. 16. withthe notes of Alemannus;) Cassiodorus, Var. 8—11. 1. and Jornandes (de Rebus Geticis, c. 59. and De Succes-sione Rcennrum, in Muratori, torn. i. p. 241.)
(5) Theknarrtage of Theodoric with Audefieda. the sister of CloTis, maybe placed in the year 495, soon af­ter the conquest of Italy (de Buat, Hist, des Peuples, torn. ix. p. 213.) The nuptials of Eutharic and Amaja-sontha were celebrated m(l5. (Cassiodor. in Chrun. p. 453.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAS EMPIRE


insult: the design of enclosing it with wall9 and towers exhausted all that authoritycould command, or charity would supply; and the pious labour of fouryears wasanimated in every season, and at every hour, by the presence of the indefatigablepontiff. The love of fame, a generous but worldly passion, may be detected in thename of the Leonine city, which he bestowed on the Vatican; yet the pride of thededication was tempered with Christian penance and humility. The boundarywas trod by the bishop and his clergy, barefoot, in sackcloth and ashes; the songsof triumph were modulated to psalms and litanies; the walls were besprinkled withholy water; and the ceremony was concluded with a prayer, that under theguardian care of the apostles and the angelic host, both the old and the new Romemight ever be preserved pure, prosperous, and impregnable. (1)
The emperor Theophilus, son of Michael the Stammerer, was one of the mostactive and high-spirited princes who reigned at Constantinople during the middleage. In offensive or defensive war, he marched in person five times against theSaracens, formidable in his attack, esteemed by the enemy in his losses and de­feats. In the last of these expeditions he penetrated into Syria, and beseiged theobscure town of Sozopetra, the casual birth-place of the caliph Motassem, whosefather Harun was attended in peace and war by the most favourite of his wivesand concubines. The revolt of a Persian impostor employed at that moment thearms of the Saracen, and he could only intercede in favour of a place for which hefelt and acknowledged some degree of filial affection. These solicitations deter­mined the emperor to wound his pride in so sensible a part. Sozopetra was le­velled with the ground, the Syrian prisoners were marked or mutilated with ig­nominious cruelty, and a thousand female captives were forced away from the ad­jacent territory. Among these a matron of the house of Abbas invoked, in anagony of despair, the name of Motassem; and the insults of the Greeks engagedthe honour of her kinsman to avenge his indignity, and to answer her appeal. Un­der the reign of the two elder brothers, the inheritance of the youngest had beenconfined to Anatolia, Armenia, Georgia, and Circassia; this frontier station hadexercised his military talents; and among his accidental claims to the name ofOctonary,(2) the most meritorious are the eight battles which he gained or foughtagainst the enemies of the Koran. In this personal quarrel, the troops of Irak,"Syria, and Egypt, were recruited from the tribes ot Arabia, and the Turkishhordes: his cavalry might be numerous, though we should deduct some myriadsfrom the hundred and thirty thousand horses of the royal stables; and the expenseof the armament was computed at four millions sterling, or one hundred thousandpounds of gold. From Tarsus, the place of assembly, the Saracens advanced inthree divisions along the high road of Constantinople: Motassem himself command­ed the centre, and the vanguard was given to his son Abbas, who, in the trial ofthe first adventures, might succeed with the more glory, or fail with the least re­proach. In the revenge of his injury, the caliph prepared to retaliate a similaraffront. The father of Theophilus was a native of Amorium(3) in Phrygia: theoriginal seat of the imperial house had been adorned with privileges and monu­ments; and whatever might be the indifference of the people, Constantinople it­self was scarcely of more value in the eyes of the sovereign and his court. Thename of Armorium was inscribed on the shields of the Saracens; and their three-armies were again united under the walls of the devoted citj'. It had been pro­posed by the wisest counsellors, to evacuate Amorium, to remove the inhabitants,and to abandon the empty structures to the vain resentment of the barbarians.The emperor embraced the more generous i-esolution of defending, in a siege andbattle, the country of his ancestors. When the armies drew near, the front of theMahometan line appeared to a Roman eye more closely planted with spears andjavelins; but the event of the action was not glorious on either side to the nationaltroops. The Arabs were broken, but it was by the swords of thirty thousand
(1) The Arabs and the Greeks are alike silent concerning the invasion of Rome by the Africans. The I.atii»chronicles do not afford much instruction (See the Annals of Barnnius and Vagi.) Our authentic and cotem-pnrarjr scuide for the popes of ibe ninth century is Anastasiiis. librarian of the Roman church. His life of LeoIV. contains twenty-four parses (p. 175—199. edit. Paris;) and if a great part consist of superstitious trifles, wemuist blame or commend his hero, who was much oftener in a church than in a camp.
(2) The same number was applied to the following circu.Fi;staners in thi; life of Motassem: he was the einhtfiof the Abbassides; he reigned eight years, tight months, and eight days; left eight sons, eight daughters, eightthousand slaves, eight millions ofgold.
(3 ) A morittm it seldom mentioned by the old geographers, and totally forgotten in the Roman ItinerariesAlter the sixth centory,it became an episcopal see, and at length the metropolis of the new Galatia (Carol,svto. Paulo, Geograph. Sacra, p. 234.) The city rose again from its rural, if we should read Anftmtrin, not>Jngrxrie, in lire text flf the Nubian geographer (p. 835 )







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 2 05


cona, Crotona, Centumcellss, resisted the assaults of Totila. Sicily was reducedby the zeal of Artaban, and the Gothic navy was defeated near the coast of theHadriatic. The two fleets were almost equal, forty-seven to fifty galleys: the vic­tory was decided by the knowledge and dexterity of the Greeks; but the shipswere so closely grappled, that only twelve of the Goths escaped from this unfortu­nate conflict. They affected to depreciate an element in which they were un­skilled, but their own experience confirmed the truth of a maxim, that the masterof the sea will always acquire the dominion of the land.(l)
After the loss of Germanus, the nations were provoked to smile, by the strangeintelligence, that the command of the Roman armies was given to a eunuch.But the eunuch Narses(2) is ranked among the few who have rescued that hap­py name from the contempt and hatred of mankind. A feeble diminutive bodyconcealed the soul of a statesman and a warrior. His youth had been employ­ed in the management of the loom and distaff, in the cares of the household,and the service of female luxury; but while his hands were busy, he secretly ex­ercised the faculties of a vigorous and discerning mind. A stranger to the schoolsand the camp, he studied in the palace to dissemble, to flatter, and to .persuade;and as soon as he approached the person of the emperor, Justinian listened withsurprise and pleasure to the manly counsels of his cnamberlain and private trea­surer.^) The talents of Narses were tried and improved in frequent embassies;he led an army into Italy, acquired a practical knowledge of the war, and the coun­try, and presumed to strive with the genius of Belisarius. Twelve years after hisreturn, the eunuch was chosen to achieve the conquest which had been left im­perfect by the first of the Roman generals. Instead of being dazzled by vanity oremulation, he seriously declared, that unless he were armed with an adequateforce, he would never consent to risk his own glory, and that of his sovereign.Justinian granted to the favourite, what he might nave denied to the hero; theGothic war was rekindled from its ashes, and the preparations were not unwor­thy of the ancient majesty of the empire. The key of the public treasure was putinto his hand, to collect magazines, to levy soldiers, to purchase arms and horses,to discharge the arrears of pay, and to tempt the fidelity of the fugitives and de­serters. The troops of Germanus were still in arms; they halted at Salona in theexpectation of a new leader; the legions of subjects and allies were created by thewell-known liberality of the eunuch Narses. The king of the Lombards(-t) satis­fied or surpassed the obligations of a treaty, by lending two thousand two hunirtxlof his ibravest warriors, who were followed by three thousand of their martial at­tendants. Three thousand Heruli fought on horseback under Philemuth, theirnative chief; and the noble Aratus, who adopted the manners and discipline ofRome, conducted a band of veterans of the same nation. Dagistheus was releasedfrom prison to command the Huns; and Kobad, the grandson and nephew of thegreat king, was conspicuous by the regal tiara at the head of his faithful Persians,who had devoted themselves to the fortunes of their prince. (5) Absolute in theexercise of his authority, more absolute in the affection of his troops, Narses leda numerous and gallant army from Philippolis to Salona, from whence he coastedthe eastern side of the Hadriatic as far as the confines of Italy. His progress waschecked. The east could n^supply vessels capable of transporting such multi­tudes of men and horses. Tto Franks, who in the general confusion, had usurp­ed the gTeater part of the Venetian province, refused a free passage to the friendsof the Lombards. The station of Verona was occupied by Teias, with the flowerof the Gothic forces; and that skilful commander had overspread the adjacentcountry with the fall of woods and the inundation of waters. (6) In this perplex-
(1) The third book of Procopius is terminated by the death of Germanus (Add. lib. iv. c. 23—26.)
(2) Procopius relates the whole series of the second Gothic war, and the victory of Narses (lib. iv. c. 21. 26-*35.) A splendid scene! Among; the six subjects of epie poetry which Tasso revolved in his mind, he hesitatedbetween the conquests of Italy by Belisarius and by Narses (Hayley's Works, vol. iv. p. 70.)
,(3) The country of Narses is unknown, since he must not be confounded with the Persarmenian. Proen-pius styles him (Goth. lib. ii. c. 13.) Paul Warnefrid (lib. 3* P- 776.) Chartula-
riua: Marcel li mis adds the name of Cubicularius. In an inscription on .he Salarian bridge he is entitled Ex-c/mral, Es-praepositus, Cubiculi Patricius(Mascou,Hist. of the Germans, lib. xiii. c.25.) The law of Theo-dosius against eunuchs was obsolete or abolished (Annotation 20.;) but the foolish prophecy of the Romanssubsided in full vigour (Procop. lib. iv. c. SI.)
_ (4) Paul Warnefrid, the Lombard, records with complacency the succour, service, and honourable dismis­sion of his. countrymen—reipublicjR Romanic adversus xmulos adjutor.'s fnerant (lib. ii. c. i. p. 774. edit. Grot.)lam surprised that Alboin, their martial king-, did not lead his subjects in person.
(5) He was, if not an impostor, the son of the blind Zanies, saved by companion, and educated iu the By­zantine court by the various motiw's of policy, pride, and genealogy (Procop. Persic, lib. i. c. 33.)
In the time of Augustus, and in the niddlc ages, the whole waste horn Aquileia to Uarenna, was ci-
Vol. HI. 14







OCR Output








•040 THE DECLINE AND FALL


their tongue the perfect accomplishment of wickedness and impiety.(l) The>Sonniles, who are supported by the general consent and orthodox tradition of theMussulmans; entertain a more impartial, or at least a more decent, opinion. Theyrespect the memory of Abubeker, Omar, Othman, and Ali, the holy and legiti­mate successors of the prophet. But they assign the last and most humble placeto the husband of Fatima, in the persuasion that the order of succession was de­termined by the degrees of sanctity. (2) An historian who balances the four caliphswith a hand unshaken by superstition, will calmly pronounce, that their mannerswere alike pure and exemplary; that their zeal was fervent, and probably sincere;and that, in the midst of riches and power, their lives were devoted to the prac­tice of moral and religious duties. But the public virtues of Abubeker and Omar,the prudence of the first/the severity of the second, maintained the peace andprosperity of their reigns. The feeble temper and declining age of Othman wereincapable of sustaining the weight of conquest and empire. He chose, and hewas deceived: he trusted, and he was betrayed; the most deserving of the faith­ful became useless or hostile to his government, and his lavish bounty was produc­tive only of ingratitude and discontent. The spirit of discord went forth in theprovinces, their deputies assembled at Medina, and the Charegites, the desperatefanatics who disclaimed the yoke of subordination atid reason, were confoundedamong the free-born Arabs, who demanded the redress of their wrongs and thepunishment of their oppressors. From Cufa, from Bassora, from Egypt, fromthe tribes of the desert, they rose in arms, encamped about a league from Medina,and despatched a haughty mandate to their sovereign, requiring him to executejustice, or to descend from the throne. His repentance began to disarm and dis­perse the insurgents; but their fury was rekindled by the arts of his enemies; andthe forgery of a perfidious secretary was contrived to blast his reputation and pre­cipitate his fall. The caliph had lost the only guard of his predecessors, the es­teem and confidence of the Moslems: during a siege of six weeks his water andprovisions were intercepted, and the feeble gates of the palace were protected onlyby the scruples of the more timorous rebels. Forsaken by those who had abusedhis simplicity, the helpless and venerable caliph expected the approach of death:the brother of Ayesha marched at the head of the assassins; and Othman, withthe Koran in his lap, was pierced with a multitude of wounds. A tumultuous anar­chy of five days was appeased by the inauguration of Ali; his refusal would haveprovoked a general massacre. In this painful situation he supported the becomingpride of the chief of the Hashemites; declared that he had rather serve than reign:rebuked the presumption of the strangers; and required the formal, if not the vo­luntary, assent of the chiefs of the nation. He has never been accused of pro­moting the assassin of Omar; though Persia indiscreetly celebrates the festival ofthat holy martyr. The quarrel between Othman and his subjects was assuagedby the early mediation of Ali; and Hassan, the eldest of his sons, was insultedand wounded in the defence of the caliph. Yet it is doubtful whether the fatherof Hassan was strenuous and sincere in his opposition to the rebels; and it is cer­tain that he enjoyed the benefit of their crime. The temptation was indeed ofsuch magnitude as might stagger and corrupt the most obdurate virtue. The am­bitious candidate no longer aspired to the barren sceptre of Arabia: the Saracenshad been victorious in the east and west; and the wealthy kingdoms of Persia, Sy­ria, and Egypt, were the patrimony of the commander of the faithful.
A life of prayer and contemplation had not chilled the martial activity of Ali:but in a mature age, after a long experience of mankind, he still betrayed in hisconduct the rashness and indiscretion of youth. In the first days of his youth, heneglected to secure, either by gifts or fetters, the doubtful allegiance of Telha andZobier, two of the most powerful of the Arabian chiefs. They escaped from Me­dina to Mecca, and from thence to Bassora; erected the standard of revolt, andusurped the government of Irak, or Assyria, which they had vainly solicited asthe reward of their services. The mask of patriotism is allowed to cover the moglaring inconsistencies: and the enemies, perhaps the assassins, of Othman nidemanded vengeance for his blood. They were accompanied in their flight
(1) Omar ii the name of the devil; his murderer is a saint. When the Persians shoot with the bow, they fre­quently cry,—"May this arrow go to the heart of Omar!" (Voyages deChardin. torn. ii. p. 239,240. 259, &c.)
(2) This gradation of merit is distinctly marked in a creed illustrated by Reland(de Retig. Mohamm. lib. i. p.37.) and a Sonnite argument inserted by Ockley. (Hist, of the Saracens, torn. ii. p. 230.) The practice of curt-tng the memory of Ali was abolished, after forty yean, by the Ommiades themselves (d'Herbelot, p. 0900 aodthere are few among the Turks, who presume to revile bira as an infidel. (Voyages de Chardin, torn. iv. p. 4*.)


 







OCR Output








210 THE DECLINE AND PALL


throne was distant and inaccessible; but they instantly resolved to bestow orr theflock of Ephesus the blessings of a faithful shepherd- By the vigilance of Mem-non, the churches were shut against them, and a strong garrison was thrown intothe cathedral. The troops, under the command of Candidian, advanced to theassault; the outguards were routed and put to the sword, but the place was im­pregnable: the besiegers retired; their retreat was pursued by a vigorous sally;they lost their horses, and many of the soldiers were dangerously wounded withclubs and stones. Ephesus, the city of the Virgin, was defiled with rage andclamour, with sedition and blood; the rival synods darted anathemas and excom­munications from their spiritual engines; and the court of Theodosius was per­plexed by the adverse and contradictory narratives of the Syrian and Egyptianfactions. During a busy period of three months, the emperor tried every method,except the most effectual means of indifference and contempt, to reconcile thistheological quarrel. He attempted to remove or intimidate the leaders by a com­mon sentence of acquittal or condemnation; he invested his representatives atEphesus with ample power and military force; he summoned from either partyeight chosen deputies to a free and candid conference in the neighbourhood of thecapital.far from the contagion of popular frenzy. But the orientals refused toyield, and the catholics, proud of their numbers and of their Latin allies, rejectedall terms of union or toleration. The patience of the meek Theodosius was pro­voked, and he dissolved in anger this episcopal tumult, which at the distance ofthirteen centuries assumes the venerable aspect of the third oecumenical coun-cil.(l) "God is my witness," said the pious prince, " that I am not the authorof this confusion. His providence will discern and punish the guilty. Return toyour provinces, and may your private virtues repair the mischief and scandal ofyour meeting." They returned to their provinces; but the same passions whichhad distracted the synod of Ephesus were diffused over the eastern world. Afterthree obstinate and equal campaigns, John of Antioch and Cyril of Alexandriacondescended to explain and embrace: but their seeming re-union must be im­puted rather to prudence than to reason, to the mutual lassitude rather than to theChristian charity of the patriarchs.
The Byzantine pontiff had instilled into the royal ear a baleful prejudice againstthe character and conduct of his Egyptian rival. An epistle of menace and in­vective, (2) which accompanied the summons, accused him as a busy, insolent,and envious priest, who perplexed the simplicity of the faith, violated the peaceof the church and state, and by his artful and separate addresses to the wife andsister of Theodosius, presumed to suppose, or to scatter, the seeds of discord inthe imperial family. At the stern command of his sovereign, Cyril had repairedto Ephesus, where he was resisted, threatened and confined, by the magistrates inthe interest of Nestorius and the orientals; who assembled the troops of Lydia andIonia to suppress the fanatic and disorderly train of the patriarch. Without ex­pecting the royal license, he escaped from his guards, precipitately embarked,,deserted the imperfect synod, and retired to his episcopal fortress of safety andindependence! But his artful emissaries, both in the court and city, successfullylaboured to appease the resentment, and to conciliate the favour, of the emperor.The feeble son of Arcadius was alternately swayed by his wife and sister, by theeunuchs and women of the palace; superstition and avarice were their ruling pas­sions; and the orthodox chiefs were assiduous in their endeavours to alarm theformer, and to gratify the latter. Constantinople and the suburbs were sanctifiedwith frequent monasteries, and the holy abbots, Dalmatius and Eutyches,(3) haddevoted their zeal and fidelity to the cause of Cyril, the worship of Mary, and theunity of Christ. From the first moment of their monastic life, they had nevermingled with the world, or trod the profane ground of the city. But in this awfulmoment of the danger of the church, their vow was superseded by a more sub­lime and indispensable duty. At the head of a long order of monks and hermits,
were mutually forgotten. The style of declamation most never be confounded with the genuine sense whichrespectable enemies entertain of each other's merit. (Coneil. torn. iii. p. 1244.)
(1) Jte the Acts of the Synod of Ephesus, in the original Greek, and a Latin version almost cotemporary(Conew. torn. iii. p. 991—1339. with the Synodicon adversus Tragsediam Irensei, torn. it. p. 835—497.,) the Ec­clesiastical Histories of Socrates (lib. vii. c. 34.,) and Evagrius (lib. i. e. 3—5.)) the Breviary of Liberatus (inConcil. torn. vi. p. 419—459. c. 5,6.) and the Memoires Eccles. of Tillemont (torn. xir. p. 377—487.)
(2) I should be curious to know how much Nestorius paid for these expressions, so mortifying to his rival.)f3) Eutyches, the heresiaroh Eutyches, is honourably named by Cyril as a friend, a saint, and the strenuous
defender of the faith. His brother, the abbot Dalmatius, is likewise employed to bind the emperor and all hischamberlains ttrribili conjuration?. Synodicon. c. 203. in Concil. torn. ir. p. 467.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


CHAPTER LI.


The conquest of Persia, Syria, Egypt, Africa, and Spain, by the Arabs or Saracens.—-Empire of the caliphs, or successors of Mahomet—State of the Christians, Sic. undertheir government.
The revolution of Arabia had not changed the character of the Arabs; the deathof Mahomet was the signal of independence; and the hasty structure of his_ powerand religion tottered to its foundations. A small and faithful band of his primitivedisciples had listened to his eloquence, and shared his distress; had fled with theapostle from the persecution of Mecca, or had received the fugitive in the walls ofMedina. The increasing myriads, who acknowledged Mahomet as their king andprophet, had been compelled by his arms, or allured by his prosperity. The po-lytheists were confounded by the simple idea of a solitary and invisible God: thepride of the Christians and Jews disdained the yoke of a mortal and cotemporarylegislator. Their habits of faith and obedience were not sufficiently confirmed;and many of the new converts regretted the venerable antiquity of the law of Mo­ses, or the rites and mysteries of the catholic church, or the idols, the sacrifices,the joyous festivals, of their pagan ancestors. The jarring interests and heredi­tary feuds of the Arabian tribes had not yet coalesced in a system of union andsubordination; and the barbarians were impatient of the mildest and most salutarylaws that curbed their passions, or violated their customs. They submitted withreluctance to the religious precepts of the Koran, the abstinence from wine, thefast of the Ramadan, and the daily repetition of five prayers; and the alms andtithes, which were collected for the treasury of Medina, could be distinguishedonly by a name from the payment of a perpetual and ignominious tribute. Theexample of Mahomet had excited a spirit of fanaticism or imposture, and severalof his rivals presumed to imitate the conduct, and defy the authority, of the livingprophet. At the head of the fugitives and auxiliaries, the first caliph was reducedto the cities of Mecca, Medina, and Tayef; and perhaps the Koreish would haverestored the idols of the Caaba, if their levity had not been checked by a seasona­ble reproof. " Ye men of Mecca, will ye be the last to embrace, and the first toabandon the religion of Islam ?" After exhorting the Moslems to confide in the aidof God and his apostle, Abubeker resolved, by a vigorous attack, to prevent thejunction of the rebels. The women and children were safely lodged in the cavi­ties of the mountains: the warriors marching under eleven banners, diffused theterror of their arms; and the appearance of military force revived and confirmedthe loyalty of the faithful. The inconstant tribes accepted, with humble repent­ance, the duties of prayer, and fasting, and alms; and, after some examples ofsuccess and severity, the most daring apostates fell prostrate before the sword ofthe Lord and of Caled. In the fertile province of Yamanah.(l) between the RedSea and the gulf of Persia, in a city not inferior to Medina itself, a powerful chief,his name was Moseilama, had assumed the character of a prophet, and the tribeof Hanifa listened to his voice. A female prophetess was attracted by his reputa­tion: the decencies of words and actions were spurned by these favourites of hea-ven;(2) and they employed several days in mystic and amorous converse. An ob-
fblio pages, the lire of Mahomet and the annals of the caliphs. They en joved the advantage of reading, andsometimes correcting, the Arabic text; yet notwithstanding their high-snu'ntfing boasts, I cannot find, after theconclusion of my work, that they have afforded me much (if any) additional information. The dull mass is notquickened bya spark of philosophy or taste; and the compilers indulge the criticism of acrimonions bigotryagainst Boulainvilliers, Sale, Gagmer, and all who even treated Mahomet with favour, or even justice.
(0 See the description of the city and country of Al Yamanah. in Abulfeda, Descript. Arabise,p.60,6I. Inthe thirteenth century, there were some ruins, and a few palms: but in the present century, the same groundis occupied by the visions and arms of a modern prophet, whose tenets are imperfectly known. (Neibuhr, De­scription de rArabie, p. 396—302.)
(2) Their first salutation may be transcribed, but cannot be translated. It was thus that Moseilama said orsung:— .
Surge tandem itaque strenue permolendfl; nam stratus tibi thorns eat.. Ant tnpronatulo tentorio si velis, aut in abditiore cubieulo si malis;
Aut suspinam te humi exporrcetam fustigabo, si velis, aut si malis manibus pedibusque nixam.Ant si veins ejus (Priafii) gemino triente, aut si malis totus veniam.Into, totus venito, O Apostole Dei clamabat foemina. Id ipsum dicebat.Mosr-ilama mihi qunque suggessit Deus.
The prophetess Segjab, after the fall of her lover, returned to idolatry; but, under the reign of Moawiyab.*"e oecame a Mussulman, and died at Bassora. (Abnlfcda, Anna), vers. Reiske, p. 63.)







OCR Output








m THE DECLINE AND FALL


crown of martyrdom, and ourlmmortal reward will be liberally paid by God andposterity." 1 hese magnanimous sentiments were supported by the vigour of hisactions. He repelled the threefold attack of the Persians, improved the divisionsof their chiefs, and by a well-concerted train of marches, retreats, and successfulactions, finally chased them from the field into the fortified cities of Media andAssyria. In the severity of the winter season, Sabaraza deemed himself securein the walls of Salban; he was surprised by the activity of Heraclius, who dividedhis troops and performed a laborious march in the silence of the night. The flatroofs of the houses were defended with useless valour against the darts and torchesof the Romans: the satraps and nobles of Persia, with their wives and children,and the flower of their martial youth, were either slain or made prisoners. Thegeneral escaped by a precipitate flight, but his golden armour was the prize of theconqueror; and the soldiers of Heraclius enjoyed the wealth and repose whichthey had so nobly deserved. On the return of spring, the emperor traversed inseven days the mountains of Curdistan, and passed without resistance the rapidstream of the Tigris. Oppressed by the weight of their spoils and captives, theRoman army halted under the walls of Amida; and Heraclius informed the senateof Constantinople of his safety and success, which they had already felt by the re­treat of the besiegers. The bridges of the Euphrates were destroyed by the Per­sians; but as soon as the emperor had discovered a ford, they hastily retired to de­fend the banks of the Sarus,(l) in Cilicia. That river, an impetuoas torrent, wasabout three hundred feet broad, the bridge was fortified with strong turrets, andthe banks were lined with barbarian archers. After a bloody conflict, whichcontinued till the evening, the Romans prevailed in the assault, and a Persianof gigantic size was slain and thrown into the Sarus by the hand of the em­peror himself. The enemies were dispersed and dismayed; Heraclius pursuedMs march to Sebaste in Cappadocia; and at the expiration of three years, thesame coast of the Euxine applauded his return from a long and victorious expe­dition. (2)
Instead of skirmishing on the frontier, the two monarchs who disputed the em­pire of the east, aimed their desperate strokes at the heart of their rival. Themilitary force of Persia was wasted by the marches and combats of twenty years,and many of the veterans who had survived the perils of the sword and the cli­mate, were still detained in the fortresses of Egypt and Syria. But the revengeand ambition of Chosroes exhausted his kingdom; and the new levies of subjects,strangers, and slaves, were divided into three formidable bodies. (3) The firstarmy of fifty thousand men, illustrious by the ornament and title or the goldensfiears, was destined to march against Heraclius; the second was stationed to pre­vent his junction with the troops of his brother Theodoras; and the third was com­manded to besiege Constantinople, and to second the operations of the chagan,with whom the Persian king had ratified a treaty of alliance and partition. Sabar,the general of the third army, penetrated through the provinces of Asia to thewell-known camp of Chalcedon, and amused himself with the destruction of thesacred and profane buildings of the Asiatic suburbs, while he impatiently waitedthe arrival of his Scythian friends on the opposite side of the Bosphorus. On the29th of June, thirty thousand barbarians, the vanguard of the Avars, forced thelong wall, and drove into the capital a promiscuous crowd of peasants, oitizens, andsoldiers. Fourscore thousand(4) of his native subjects, and of the vassal tribes ofGepidx, Russians, Bulgarians, and Sclavonians, advanced under the standard ofthe chagan: a month was spent in marches and negotiations, but the whole citywas invested on the 31st of July, from the suburbs of Pera and Galata to theBlachernse and seven towers; and the inhabitants descried with terror the flamingsignals of the European and Asiatic shores. In the meanwhile the magistrates ofConstantinople repeatedly strove to purchase the retreat of the chagan: but theirdeputies were rejected and insulted; and he suffered the patricians to stand before
(1) At ten parasangs from Tarsus the army of the younger Cyrus passed the Sarus three plethra in breadth;the^Pjrramus, a stadium in breadth, ran five parasangs farther to the east (Xenophon, Anabas, lib. i. p.
(2) George of Pisidia, (Bell. Abaricum, 246—28J. p. 49.) celebrates with truth the persevering courage ofthe three campaigns (tp=i< ariptjoo^ow;) against the Persians.
(3) Petavius (Annotationesad Niccphorum, p. 82—84.) discriminates the names and actions of five Persiangenernls who were successively sent against Heraclius.
(4) Thifnumber of eight myriads is specified by George of Pisidia. (Bell. Abar.219.) Thepoet (SO—38.)clearly indicates that the old chagan lived till the reign of Heraclius, and that his son and s


of a foreign mother. Yet Foggini (Annotat. p. iT.) has given another interpretation to this passage.







OCR Output








326 THE DECLINE AND FALL,


city, known under the name of Yathreb, before it was sanctified by the throne ofthe prophet, was divided between the tribes of the Charegites and the Awsites,whose hereditary feud was rekindled by the slightest provocations: two coloniesof Jews, who boasted a sacerdotal race, were their humble allies, and withoutconverting the Arabs, they introduced the taste of science and religion, which dis­tinguished Medina as the city of the book. Some of her noblest citizens, in a pil­grimage to the Caaba, were converted by the preaching of Mahomet; on their re­turn they diffused the belief of God and his prophet, and the new alliance wasratified by their deputies in two secret ano* nocturnal interviews on a hill in thesuburbs of Mecca. In the first, ten Charegites and two Awsites united in faithand love, protested in the name of their wives, their children, and their absentbrethren, that they would for ever profess the creed, and observe the precepts, ofthe Koran. The second was a political association, the first vital spark of the em­pire of the Saracens. (1) Seventy-three men and two women of Medina held asolemn conference with Mahomet, his kinsmen, and his disciples; and pledgedthemselves to each other by a mutual oath of fidelity. They promised in thename of the city, that if he should be banished, they would receive him as a confe­derate, obey him as a leader, and defend him to the last extremity, like theirwives and children. " But if you are recalled by your country," they asked with aflattering anxiety, " will you not abandon your new allies'"—" All things," repliedMahomet with a smile, "are now common between us; your blood is as my blood,your ruin as my ruin. We are bound to each other by the ties of honour and in­terest. I am your friend, and the enemy of your foes."—"But if we are killedin your service, what," exclaimed the deputies of Medina, "will be our reward!"—" Paradise," replied the prophet. " Stretch forth thy hand." He stretched itforth, and they reiterated the oath of allegiance and fidelity. Their treaty wasratified by the people, who unanimously embraced the profession of Islam; theyrejoiced in the exile of the apostle, but they trembled for his safety, and impa­tiently expected his arrival. After a perilous and rapid journey along the sea-coast, he halted at Koba, two miles from the city, and made his public entry intoMedina, sixteen days after his flight from Mecca. Five hundred of the citizensadvanced to meet him: he was hailed with acclamations of loyalty and devotion:Mahomet was mounted on a she-camel, an umbrella shaded his head, and a tur­ban was unfurled before him to supply the deficiency of a standard. His bravestdisciples, who had been scattered by the storm, assembled round his person; andthe equal, though various, merit of the Moslems were distinguished by the namesof Moajrerians and Ansars, the fugitives of Mecca, and the auxiliaries of Medina.To eradicate the seeds of jealousy, Mahomet judiciously coupled his principal fol­lowers with the rights and obligations of brethren; and when AH found himselfwithout a peer, the prophet tenderly declared, that he would be the companionand brother of the noble youth. The expedient was crowned with success; theholy fraternity was respected both in peace and war, and the two parties vied witheach other in a generous emulation of courage and fidelity. Once only the con­cord was slightly ruffled by an accidental quarrel: a patriot of Medina arraignedthe insolence of the strangers, but the hint of their expulsion was heard with ab-liorrence, and his own son most eagerly offered to lay at the apostle's feet the headof his father. ,
From his establishment at Medina, Mahomet assumed the exercise of the regaland sacerdotal office; and it was impious to appeal from a judge whose decreeswere inspired by the divine wisdom. A small portion of ground, the patrimonyof two orphans, was acquired by gift or purchase;(2) on that chosen spot, he builta house and a mosch, more venerable in their rude simplicity than the palaces andtemples of the Assyrian caliphs. His seal of gold, or silver, was inscribed withthe apostolic title: when he prayed and preached in the weekly assembly, heleaned against the trunk of a palm tree; and it was long before he indulged him-


(1) The triple inauguration of Mahomet is described by Abulieda (p. 30. 33. 40. 86.) and Gagnier (torn. i.p. 342, &c 349, &c. lorn. ii. p. 223, &c.)
(2) Prideaux (Life of Mahomet, p. 44.) reviles the wickedness of the-impostor, who despoiled two poor or­phans, the sons ofa carpenter: a reproach which he drew from the Dispuuttio contra Saracenos, composed inArabic before the year 1130; but the honest Gagnier (ad Abttlfed. p. S3.; has shown that they were deceived bythe word Al Nagjar, which signifies, in this place,not an obscure trade, tat a noble tribe of Arab*. The deso­late state of the ground is described by Abulfeda; and his worthy interpreter has proved from Al Bochari, theoffer of aprice;from Al Jannabi, the fair purchase; and from Ahmed Ben Joseph, the payment of Uicmoneyt>y the generous Abubeker. On these grounds the prophet must be honourably acquitted.







OCR Output








382 THE DECLINE AND FALL


rope. A small portion of Mauritania was still wanting to the African conquest;but Musa, in the pride of victory, was repulsed from the walls of Ceuta, by thevigilance and courage of count Julian, the general of the Goths. From his disap­pointment and perplexity, Musa was relieved by an unexpected message of theChristian chief, who offered his place, his person, and his sword, to the successorsof Mahomet, and solicited the disgraceful honour of introducing their arms into theheart of Spain. (1) If we inquire into the cause of his treachery, the Spaniardswill repeat the popular story of his daughter Cava;(2) of a virgin who was se­duced, or ravished, by her sovereign; of a father who sacrificed his religion andcountry to the thirst of revenge. The passions of princes have often been licen­tious and destructive; but this well-known tale, romantic in itself, is indifferentlysupported by external evidence; and the history of Spain will suggest some mo­tives of interest and policy more congenial to the breast of a veteran statesman. (3)After the decease or deposition of Witiza, his two sons were supplanted by theambition of Roderic, a noble Goth, whose father, the duke or governor of a pro­vince, had fallen a victim to the preceding tyranny. The monarchy was stillelective; but the sons of Witiza, educated on the steps of the throne, were impa­tient of a private station. Their resentment was the more dangerous, as it wasvarnished with the dissimulation of courts: their followers were excited by the re­membrance of favours and the promise of a revolution; and their uncle Oppas,archbishop of Toledo and Seville, was the first person in the church, and the se­cond in the state. It was probable that Julian was involved in the disgrace of theunsuccessful faction; that he had little to hope and much to fear from the newreign; and that the imprudent king could not forget or forgive the injuries whichRoderic and his family had sustained. The merit and influence of the count ren­dered him a useful or formidable subject: his estates were ample, his followersbold and numerous, and it was too plainly shown that, by his Andalusian and Mau-ritanian commands, he held in his hands the keys of the Spanish monarchy. Toofeeble, however, to meet his sovereign in arms, he sought the aid of a foreignpower; and his rash invitation of the Moors and Arabs produced the calamities ofeight hundred years. In his epistles, or in a personal interview, he revealed thewealth and nakedness of his country; the weakness of an unpopular prince; thedegeneracy of an effeminate people. The Goths were no longer the victoriousbarbarians who had humbled the pride of Rome, despoiled the queen of nations,and penetrated from the Danube to the Atlantic ocean. Secluded from the worldby the Pyrenean mountains, the successors of Alaric had slumbered in a longpeace; the walls of the cities were mouldered into dust; the youth had abandonedthe exercise of arms; and the presumption of their ancient renown would exposethem in a field of battle to the first assault of the invaders. The ambitious Sara­cen was fired by the ease and importance of the attempt; but the execution wasdelayed till he had consulted the commander of the faithful: and his messengerreturned with the permission of Walid to annex the unknown kingdoms of thewest to the religion and throne of the caliphs. In his residence of Tangier, Musa,with secrecy and caution, continued his correspondence and hastened his prepara­tions. But the remorse of the conspirators was soothed by the fallacious assu­rance, that he should content himself with the glory and spoil, without aspiringto establish the Moslems beyond the sea that separates Africa from Europe. (4)
(1) The fall and resurrection of the Gothic monarchy are related by Mariana, (torn, i. p. 238—260. lib. vi, c19—26. lib. vii. c. 1,2.) That historian has infused into his noble work (Historic de Rebus Hispanise, libii 30.Hagae Comitura 1733, in four volumes in folio, with the Continuation of Miniana) the style and spirit of a Ro­man classic; and after the twelfth century, his knowledge and judgment may be safely trusted. But the Jesuitis not exempt from the prejudices of his order; he adopts and adorns, like his rival Buchanan, the most absurdof the national legends; he is too careless of criticism and chronology, and supplies, from a lively fancy, thechasms of historical evidence. These chasms are large and frequent; Roderic, archbishop of Toledo, the fa­ther of the Spanish history, lived five hundred years after the conquests of the Arabs, ana the more early ac­counts are comprised in some meagre lines of the blind chronicles of Isidore of Badajoz (Pacensis,) and of Al-phonso III. king of Leon, which I have seen only in the Annals of Pagi.
(2) Le viol fsays Voltaire) est aussi difficile a faire qu'a prouver. Des Eveques se seroicnt ils lignes pour unefille? (Hist. Generale, c. 26.) His argument is not logically conclusive.
(3) In the story of Cava-f)Ianana(fib.vi. c. 21. p. 241,242.) seems to vie with the Lucretia of Livy. Like theancients, he seldom qimtes; and The oldest testimony of Baronius, (Anna!. Eccles. A. D. 713, no. 19.) tharofLucas Tudensis, a Gallician deacon of the thirteenth century, only says Cava quam pro concubina mebatur.
. (4) The orientals, Elmacin, Abulpharagius, Abulfeda, pass over the conquest of Spain in silence, or with asingle word. The text of Norairi.and the other Arabian writers, is represented, though with some foreignalloy, by M. de Cardonne, (Hist, de PAf'rique etde l'Espagne sous la Domination des A tabes, Paris. 1765, threevols, in duodecimo, torn. i. p. 55—114.) and more concisely by M. de Guignes. Hist, des Huns, torn. i. p. 347—i • 7"'ie lilirarMul °f the Escurial has not satisfied my hopes: yet he appears to have searched with diligencebis broken materials; and the bistorv of the conquest is illustrated by some valuable fragments of the crnuiDeaazis, (who wrote at Corduba, A. H. 300.) of Ben Hazil, &C. See Bibliot. Arabico-Hitpana, torn, ii. p. 32.10S.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 33


composed seven hundred lines. His sagacious mind explored the deepest questionsof morals, and metaphysics, ami he ventured to urge eighteen arguments againstthe Christian doctrine of the creation of the world. But, in the intervals of study,he fiersonally conversed with Pan, JEsculapius, and Minerva, in whose mysterieshe was secretly initiated, and whose prostrate statues he adored; in the'devoutpersuasion that the philosopher, who is a citizen of the universe, should be thepriest of its various deities. An eclipse of the sun announced his approaching end;and his life, with that of his scholar Isidore,(l) compiled by two o£ their mostlearned disciples, exhibits a deplorable picture of the second childhood of humanreason. Yet the golden chain, as it was fondly styled, of the Platonic succession,continued forty-four years from the death of Proclus, to the edict of Justinian,(2)■which imposed a perpetual silence on the schools of Athens, and excited the griefand indignation of the few remaining votaries of Grecian science and superstition.Seven friends and philosophers, Diogenes and Hermias, Eulalius and Priscian,Damascius, Isidore and Simplicius, who dissented from the religion of their sove­reign, embraced the resolution of seeking in a foreign land the freedom which wasdenied in their native country. They had heard, and they credulously believed,that the republic of Plato was realized in the despotic government of Persia, andthat a patriot king reigned over the happiest and most virtuous of nations. Theywere soon astonished by the natural discovery that Persia resembled the othercountries of the globe; that Chosroes, who affected the name of a philosopher, wasvain, cruel and ambitious; that bigotry, and a spirit of intolerance, prevailed amongthe Magi; that the nobles were haughty, the courtiers servile, and the magistratesunjust; that the guilty sometimes escaped, and that the innocent were often op­pressed. The disappointment of the philosophers, provoked them to overlook thereal virtues of the Persians; and they were scandalized, more deeply perhaps thanbecame their profession, with the plurality'of wives and concubines, the incestuousmarriages, and the custom of exposing dead bodies to the dogs and vultures, in­stead of hiding them in the earth, or consuming them with fire. Their repent­ance was expressed by a precipitate return, and they loudly declared, that theyhad rather die on the borders of the empire, than enjoy the wealth and favour ofthe barbarian. From this journey, however, they derived a benefit which reflectsthe purest lustre on the character of Chosroes. He required, that the seven sages,who had visited the court of Persia, should be exempted from the penal laws whichJustinian enacted against his pagan subjects; and this privilege expressly stipulatedin a treaty of peace, was guarded by the vigilance of a powerful mediator. (3) Sim­plicius and his companions ended their lives in peace and obscurity: and as theyleft no disciples, they terminated the long list of Grecian philosophers, who maybe justly praised, notwithstanding their defects, as the wisest and most virtuous oftheir cotemporaries. The writings of Simplicius are now extant. His physicaland metaphysical commentaries on Aristotle have passed away with the fashionof the times; but his moral interpretation of Epictetus is preserved in the libraryof nations, as a classic book, most excellently adapted to direct the will, to purifythe heart, and confirm the understanding, by a just confidence in the nature bothof God and man.
About the same time that Pythagoras first invented the appellation philosopher,liberty and the consulship were founded at Rome by the elder Brutus. The revo­lutions of the consular office, which may be viewed in the successive lights of asubstance, a shadow, and a name, have been occasionally mentioned in the presenthistory. The first magistrates of the republic had been chosen by the people, toexercise, in the senate, and in the camp, the powers of peace and war, which wereafterwards translated to the emperors. But the tradition of ancient dignity waslong revered by the Romans and barbarians. A Gothic historian applauds theconsulship of Theodoric as the height of all temporal glory and greatness;(4) theking of Italy himself congratulates those annual favourites of fortune, who, with­out the cares, enjoyed the splendour of the throne; and at the end of a thousandyears, two consuls were created by the sovereigns of Rome and Constantinople,
(1) The life of Isidore was composed by Damascius (spud Pholiunt, Cod. 242. p. 1028—1076.) See the lastage of the pagan philosophers in Bracker (torn. ii. p. 341—351.)
(2) The suppression or the schools at Athens is recorded by John Malala (tool. ii. p. 187. lur Decio Cos. Sol.,)anil an anonymous Chronicle in the Vatican library (apud Aleman. p. 106.)
(3) Agathias (lib. ii. p. 69—71,) relates this curions story. Chosroes ascended the throne in the year 531, andmade his first peace with the Romans in the beginning of 533, a date most compatible with bis young fame andold age of Isidore. ( Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, torn. iii. p. 404. Pagi, torn. ii. p. 543. 050.)
(4) Cauiodor. Vanarura Epist. yi. p. 1. Jornandes, civil, p. 690. edit. Grot. Quod sumraum bonuro pri*morna,ue in mundo decus edicitur.
Vol. III. 5







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


self in the use of a chair or pulpit of rough timber. (1) After a reign of six years,fifteen hundred Moslems, in arms and m the field, renewed their oath of allegi­ance; and their chief repeated the assurance of protection till the death of the lastmember, or the final dissolution of the party. It was in the same camp that thedeputy of Mecca was astonished by the attention of the faithful to the words andlooks of the prophet, by the eagerness with which they collected his spittle, ahair that dropped on the ground, the refuse water of his lustrations; as if theyparticipated in some degree of the prophetic virtue. " I have seen (said he) theChosroes of Persia and the Csesar of Rome, but never did I behold a king amonghis subjects like Mahomet among his companions. The devout fervour of en­thusiasm acts with more energy and truth than the cold and formal servility ofcourts.
In the state of nature every man has a right to defend, by force of arms, his per­son and his possessions; to repel, or even to prevent, the violence of his enemies,and to extend his hostilities to a reasonable measure of satisfaction and retaliation.In the free society of the Arabs, the duties of subject and citizen imposed a fee­ble restraint; and Mahomet, in the exercise of a peaceful and benevolent mission,had been despoiled and banished by the injustice of his countrymen. The choiceof an independent people had exalted the fugitive of Mecca to the rank of a so­vereign: and he was invested with the just prerogative of forming alliances, andof waging offensive or defensive war. The imperfection of human rights was sup­plied and armed by the plenitude of divine power: the prophet of Medina assumed,in his new revelations, a fiercer and more sanguinary tone, which proves that hisformer moderation was the effect of weakness:(2) the means of persuasion hadbeen tried, the season of forbearance was elapsed, and he was now commanded topropagate his religion by the (word, to destroy the monuments of idolatry, and,without regarding the sanctity of days or months, to pursue the unbelieving nationsof the earth. The same bloody precepts, so repeatedly inculcated in the Koran,are ascribed by the author to the Pentateuch and the gospel. But the mild tenorof the evangelic style may explain an ambiguous text, that Jesus did not bringpeace on the earth, but a sword: his patient and humble virtues should not be con­founded with the intolerant zeal of princes and bishops, who have disgraced thename of his disciples. In the prosepution of religious war, Mahomet might appealwith more propriety to the example of Moses, of the judges and the kings of Israel.The military laws of the Hebrews are still more rigid than those of the Arabianlegislator. (3) The Lord of hosts marched in person before the Jews; if a city re­sisted their summons, the males, without distinction, were put to the sword: theseven nations of Canaan were devoted to destruction: and neither repentance norconversion could shield them from the inevitable doom, that no creature withintheir precincts should be left alive. The fair option of friendship, or submission,or battle, was proposed to the enemies of Mahomet. If they professed the creedof Islam, they were admitted to all the temporal and spiritual benefits of his pri­mitive disciples, and marched under the same banner to extend the religion whichthey had emhraced. The clemency of the prophet was decided by his interest: yethe seldom trampled on a prostrate enemy: and he seems to promise, that on the pay­ment of a tribute, the least guilty of his unbelieving subjects might be indulged intheir worship, or at least in their imperfect faith. In the first months of his reign,he practised the lessons of holy warfare, and displayed his white banner before thegates of Medina; the martial apostle fought in person at nine battles or sieges;(4) andfifty enterprises of war were achieved in ten years by himself or his lieutenants. TheArab continued to unite the professions of a merchant and a robber; and his petty. excursions for the defence or the attack of a caravan, insensibly prepared his troopsfor the conquest of Arabia. The distribution of the spoil was regulated by a di-


(1) Al .Tannabi (apud Gagnier, torn. ii. p. 246, 321.) describes the seal and pulpit, as two venerable relics ofthe apostle of God; and the portrait of his aourt it taken from Abulfeda. (c 44. p. 85.)
(2) The eighth and ninth chapters of the Koran are the loudest and most vehement; and Maracci (Prodro-mus, part iv. p. 59—64. has inveighed with more justice than discretion against the double dealing of the im­postor.
(3) The tenth and twentieth chapters of Deuteronomy, with the practical comments of Joshua. David, Etc.are read with more awe than satisfaction by the pious Christians of the present age. But the bishops, as wellas the rabbis of former times, have beat the drum-ecclesiastic with pleasure and success. (SRle's PreliminaryDiscourse, p. 142,143.)
(4) Abulfeda, in Vit. Moham. p. 156. The private arsenal of the apostle consisted of nine swords, three lancesseven pikes or half pikes, a quiver and three bows, seven cuirasses, three shields, and two helmets, (Gapnier.torn. iii. p. 328—334.) with a large white standard, a black banner, (p. 335.) twenty horses, (p. 322.) &c. Two ofhis martial sayings are recorded bv tradition. (Gagnier. torn. ii. p. 83. 337.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. Ml


Ayesha, the widow of the prophet, who cherished, to the last hour of her life, animplacable hatred against the husband and the posterity of Fatima. The mostreasonable Moslems were scandalized, that the mother of the faithful should ex­pose in a camp her person and character; but the superstitious -crowd was confi­dent that her presence would sanctify the justice, and assure the success, of theircause. At the head of twenty thousand of his loyal Arabs, and nine thousand va­liant auxiliaries of Cufa, the caliph encountered and defeated the superior num­ber of the rebels under the walls of Bassora. Their leaders, Telha and Zobier,were slain in the first battle that stained with civil blood the arms of the Moslems.After passing through the ranks to animate the troops, Ayesha had taken her postamidst the dangers of the field. In the heat of the action, seventy men, who heldthe bridle of her camel, were successively killed or wounded; and the cage or lit­ter in which she sat, was struck with javelins and darts like the quills of a porcu­pine. The venerable captive sustained with firmness the reproaches of the con­queror, and was speedily dismissed to her proper station, at the tomb of Mahomet,with the respect and tenderness that was still due to the widow of the apostle. Af­ter this victory, which was styled the Day of the Camel, Ali marched against amore formidable adversary; against Moawiyah, the son of Abu Sophian, who hadassumed the title of caliph, and whose claim was supported by the forces of Syriaand the interest of the house of Ommiyah. From the passage of Thapsacus, theplain of Siffin(l) extends along the western banks of the Euphrates. On this spa­cious and level theatre, the two competitors waged a desultory war of one hun­dred and ten days. In the course of ninety actions or skirmishes, the loss of Aliwas estimated at twenty-five, that of Moawiyah at forty-five thousand soldiers;and the list of the slain was dignified with the names of five and twenty veteranswho had fought at Beder under the standard of Mahomet. In this sanguinary con­test, the lawful caliph displayed a superior character of valour and humanity. Histroops were strictly enjoined to await the first onset of the enemy; to spare theirflying brethren, and to respect the bodies of the dead, and the chastity of the fe­male captives. He generously proposed to save the blood of the Moslems by asingle combat; but his trembling rival declined the challenge as a sentence of ine­vitable death. The ranks of the Syrians were broken by the charge of a herowho was mounted on a piebald horse, and wielded with irresistible force his pon­derous and two-edged sword. As often as he smote a rebel, he shouted the AllahAcbar,—" God is victorious;" and in the tumult of a nocturnal battle, he washeard to repeat four hundred times that tremendous exclamation. The prince ofDamascus already meditated his flight, but the certain victory was snatched fromthe grasp of Ali by the disobedience and enthusiasm of his troops. Their con­science was awed by the solemn appeal to the books of the Koran which Moa­wiyah exposed on the foremost lances; and Ali was compelled to yield to a dis­graceful truce and an insidious compromise. He retreated with sorrow and in­dignation to Cufa; his party was discouraged; the distant provinces of Persia, ofYemen, and of Egypt, were subdued or seduced by his crafty rival; and the strokeof fanaticism which was aimed against the three chiefs of the nation, was fatal onlyto the cousin of Mahomet. In the temple of Mecca, three Charegites or enthu­siasts discoursed of the disorders of The church and state; they soon agreed, thatthe deaths of Ali, of Moawiyah, and of his friend Amrou, the viceroy of Egypt,would restore the peace "and unity of religion. Each of the assassins chose hisvictim, poisoned his dagger, devoted his life, and secretly repaired to the scene ofaction. Their resolution was equally desperate: but the first mistook the personof Amrou, and stabbed the deputy who occupied his seat; the prince of Damascuswas dangerously hurt by the second; the lawful caliph, in the mosch of Cufa, re­ceived a mortal wound from the hand of the third. He expired in the sixty-thirdyear of his age, and mercifully recommended to his children, that they would des­patch the murderer by a single stroke. The sepulchre of Ali(2) was concealedfrom the tyrants of the house of Ominiyah,(3) but in the fourth age of the Hegira,


(1) The plan of Siffln is determined by d'Anvillefl'Euphrate et le Tigre, p. 29.) to be the Campus Barbari-cus of Procopius.
(2) Abulfeda, a modern Sonnite, relates the different opinions concerning the burial of Ali, but adopts thesepulchre of Cufa, hodie fama numernque religiose frequemantium celebratum. This number is reckoned byNiebuhr to amount annually to two thousand of the dead, and five thousand of the living, (torn. ii. p. 208,209i)
(3) All the tyrants of Persia, from Adhad el Dowlat, (A. D. 977, d'Herbelot, p. J8, 39.95.) to Nadir Shah, (A-D. 1743, Hist, de Nadir Shah, torn. ii. p. 1J5.) have enriched the lombof Ali with the spoils of the people. TheHome is copper, with a bright and massy gilding, which glitters to the sun at the distance of many a mile.







OCR Output








JtjO THE DECLINE AND FALL


rights of a citiaen. In the general consternation, the Caesar John asserted the in­defeasible right of his three nephews: Constantinople listened to his voice; and theTurkish captive was proclaimed in the capital, and received on the frontier, as anenemy of the republic. Romanus was not more fortunate in domestic than in fo­reign war: the loss of two battles compelled him to yield, on the assurance of fairand honourable treatment; but his enemies were devoid of faith or humanity; and,after the cruel extinction of his sight, his wounds were left to bleed and corrupt,till in a few days.he was relieved from a state of misery. Under the triple reignof the house of Ducas, the two younger brothers were reduced to the vain honoursof the purple; but the eldest, the pusillanimous Michael, was incapable of sustain­ing the Roman sceptre; and his surname of Sdrafiinaces denotes the reproachwhich he shared with an avaricious favourite, who enhanced the price, and di­minished the measure of wheat. In the school of Pselhis, and after the exampleof his mother: the son of Eudocia made some proficiency in philosophy and rheto­ric; but his character was degraded, rather than ennobled, by the virtues of amonk, and the learning o'f a sophist. Strong in the contempt of their sovereignand their own esteem, two generals at the head of the European and Asiatic le­gions assumed the purple at Adrianople and Nice. Their revolt was in the samemonth; they bore the same name of Nicephorus; but the two candidates were dis­tinguished by the surnames of Bryennius and Botaniates; the former in the matu­rity of wisdom and courage, 'the latter conspicuous only by the memory of his pastexploits. While Botaniates advanced with cautious and dilatory steps, his activecompetitor stood in arms before the gates of Constantinople. The name of Bry­ennius was illustrious; his cause was popular; but his licentious troops could not berestrained from burning and pillaging a suburb; and the people, who would havehailed the rebel, rejected and repulsed the incendiary of his country. This changeof the public opinion was favourable to Botaniates, who at length, with an army ofTurks, approached the shores of Chalcedon. A formal invitation, in the name ofthe patriarch, the synod, and the senate, was circulated through the streets ofConstantinople; and the general assembly, in the dome of St. Sophia, debated withorder and calmness, on the choice of their sovereign. The guards of Michaelwould have dispersed this unarmed multitude; but the feeble emperor, applaudinghis own moderation and clemency, resigned the ensigns of royalty, and was re­warded with a monastic habit, and the title of archbishop of Ephesus. He left ason, a Constantine, born and educated in the purple; and a daughter of the houseof Ducas illustrated the blood, and confirmed the succession of the Comneniandynasty.
John Comnerius, the brother of the emperor Isaac, survived in peace and dig­nity his generous refusal of the sceptre. By his wife Anne, a woman of masculinespirit and policy, he left eight children; the three daughters multiplied the Com­nenian alliances with the noblest of the Greeks; of the five sons, Manuel wasstopped by a premature death; Isaac and Alexius restored the imperial greatnessof their house, which was enjoyed without toil or danger by the two younger bre­thren, Adrian and Nicephorus. Alexius, the third and most illustrious of thebrothers, was endowed by nature with the choicest gifts both of mind and body:they were cultivated by a liberal education, and exercised in the school of obedi­ence and adversity. The youth was dismissed from the perils of the Turkishwar, by the paternal care of the emperor Romanus; but the mother of the Com-peni, with her aspiring race, was accused of treason, and banished by the sons ofDucas, to an island in the Propontis. The two brothers soon emerged into favourand action, fought by each other's side against the rebels and barbarians, and ad­hered to the emperor Michael, till he was deserted by the world and by himself.In his first interview with Botaniates, " Prince (said Alexius, with a noble frank­ness,) my duty rendered me your-enemy; the decrees of God and of the peoplehave made me your subject. Judge of my future loyalty by my past opposition."The successor of Michael entertained him with esteem and confidence: his valourwas employed against three rebels, who disturbed the peace of the emperor, or atleast of the emperors, Ursel, Bryennius, and Basilacius, were formidable by theirnumerous forces and military fame: they were successively vanquished in the field,and led in chains to the foot of the throne; and whatever treatment they might re­ceive from a timid and cruel court, they applauded the clemency, as well as thecourage of the conqueror. But the loyalty of the Comneni was soon tainted byfear and suspicion; nor is it easy to settle between a subject and a despot, the debtof gratitude, which tne former is tempted to claim by a revolt, and the latter to







OCR Output








A THE DECLINE AND FALL


distinguished from another emperor of the same family and name, ascended theByzantine throne at the age of sixty-eight years; and, had he been left to his ownguidance, every moment of a nine year's reign must have exposed to his subjectsthe impropriety of their choice. His ignorance was similar to that of Theodoric;and, it is remarkable, that in an age not destitute of learning, two cotemporarymonarchs had never been instructed in the knowledge of the alphabet. But thegenius of Justin was far inferior to that of the Gothic king: the experience of a sol­dier had not qualified him for the government of an empire; and, though person­ally brave, the consciousness of his own weakness was naturally attended withdoubt, distrust, and political apprehension. But the official business of the statewas diligently and faithfully transacted by the questor Proclus;(l) and the agedemperor adopted the talents and ambition of his nephew Justinian, an aspiringyouth, whom his uncle had drawn from the ructic solitude of Dacia, and educatedat Constantinople; as the heir of his private fortune, and at length of the easternempire.
Since the eunuch Amantius had been defrauded of his money, it became ne­cessary to deprive him of his life. The task was easily accomplished by .thecharge of a real or fictitious conspiracy; and the judges were informed, as an ac­cumulation of guilt, that he was secretly addicted to the Manichxan heresy.(2)Amantius lost his head; three of his companions, the first domestics of the palace,were punished either with death or exile; and their unfortunate candidate for thepurple was cast into a deep dungeon, overwhelmed with stones, and ignominiouslythrown, without burial, into the sea. The ruin of Vitalian was a work of more diffi­culty and danger. That Gothic chief had rendered himself popular by the civil warwhich he boldly waged against Anastasius for the defence of tlie orthodox faith, andafter the conclusion of an advantageous treaty, he still remained in the neighbour­hood of Constantinople, at the head of a formidable and victorious army of barba­rians. By the frail security of oaths, he was tempted to relinquish this advantageoussituation, and to trust his person within the walls of a city, whose inhabitants, parti­cularly the blue faction, were artfully incensed against him by the remembranceeven of his pious hostilities. The emperor and his nephew embraced him as thefaithful and worthy champion of the church and state; and gratefully adorned theirfavourite with the titles of consul and general; but in the seventh month of hisconsulship, Vitalian was stabbed with seventeen wounds at the royal banquet;(3)and Justinian, who inherited the spoil, was accused as the assassin of a spiritualbrother, to whom he had recently pledged his faith in the participation of theChristian mysteries. (4) After the fall of his rival, he was promoted, without anyclaim of military service, to the office of master general of the eastern armies,whom it was his duty to lead into the field against the public enemy. But, in thepursuit of fame, Justinian might have lost his present dominion over the age andweakness of his uncle; and instead of acquiring by Scythian or Persian trophiesthe applause of his countrymen,(5) the prudent warrior solicited their favour inthe churches, the circus, and the senate of Constantinople. The catholics wereattached to the nephew of Justin, who, between the Nestorian and Eutvchian he­resies, trod the narrow path of inflexible and intolerant orthodoxy. (6) in the firstdays of the new reign, he prompted and gratified the popular enthusiasm againstthe memory of the deceased emperor. After a schism of thirty-four vears, he re­conciled the proud and angry spirit of the Roman pontiff, and spread among theLatins a favourable report of his pious respect for the apostolic see. The thronesof the east were filled with catholic bishops devoted to his interest, the clergyand the monks were gained by his liberality, and the people were taught to prayfor their future sovereign, the hope and pillar of the true religion. The magnifi-
(1) His virtues are praised by Procopius (Persic, lib. i. c. II.) Tlie questor Proclus was the friend of Justi­nian, and the enemy of every other adoption.
(J) Manichiean signifies Eutychian, Hear tbe furious acclamations of Constantinople and Tyre, tlie far-memo more than six days after the deerae of Anastasius. They produced, the latter ajiplauded the eu­nuch s death (Baromus, A. D. 518. v. 2. No. 15. Fleury, Hi«t. Ecclcs. torn. vii. p. 200. 205. from the councils,torn. v. p. 182.207.) r *
(3) His power, character, and intentions, are perfectly explained by the Count de Buat (torn. ix. p. S4—81.)He was gi-eat-grandson of Aspar.bereditary prince in the Lesser Scythia.and count of the Gothic/oaierati ofThrace. The Bessi, whom be could influence, and tbe minor Goths of Jornandea (c. 51.)
(4) Justinian patnen facuone dicitur interfectus fuisse (Victor Tununensis, Qhron. in Thesaur. Temp. Sca-liger, p. 2.7.) Procopius (Anecdot. c. 7.) styles him a tyrant, but acknowledges the aSiJuMimrrw, which is wellexplained by Alemnnnus.
(5) In his earliest youth (plane adolescens) he had passed some time as a hostage with Theodoric. Fortiuscurious fact, Alcniannui (ad Procon. Anecdot. c. 9. p. 34. of the first edition) quotes a MS. history of Justinianby li" preceptor 1 heophilus. Ludewig (p. 143.) wishes to make him a soldier.
(6) Tbe ecclesiastical history of Justinian will be shown hereafter. See Baronius. A. D.5I8-521. and thecopious article Juattmamsm the index to the seventh volume of his Annals.







OCR Output








62 THE DECLINE AND FALL


prayers and pilgrimage of Datius, bishop of Milan, were not without effect; andhe obtained one thousand Thracians and Isaurians, to assist the revolt of Liguriaagainst her Arian tyrant. At the same time, John the Sanguinary,(1) the nephewof Vitalian, was detached with two thousand chosen horse, first to Alba on theFucine lake, and afterward to the frontiers of Picenum on the Hadriatic sea. " la• that province," said Belisarius, " the Goths have deposited their families and trea­sures without a guard or the suspicion of danger. Doubtless they will violate thetruce; let them feel your presence, before they hear of your motions. Spare theItalians; suffer not any fortified places to remain hostile in your rear; and faithfullyreserve the spoil for an equal and common partition. It would not be reasonable (headded with a laugh,) that whilst we are toiling to the destruction of the drones, ourmore fortunate brethren should rifle and enjoy the honey."
The whole nation of the Ostrogoths had been assembled for the attack, and wasalmost entirely consumed in the siege of Rome. If any credit be due to an intelli­gent spectator, one-third at least of their enormous host was destroyed, in frequentand bloody combats under the walls of the city. The bad fame and perniciousqualities of the summer air, might already be imputed to the decay of agricultureand population; and the evils of famine and pestilence were aggravated by theirown licentiousness, and the unfriendly disposition of the country. While Vitigesstruggled with his fortune; while he hesitated between shame and ruin, his retreatwas hastened by domestic alarms. The king of the Goths was informed by trem­bling messengers, that John the Sanguinary spread the devastations of war fromthe Apennine to the Hadriatic; that the rich spoils and innumerable captives ofPicenum were lodged in the fortifications of Rimini; and that this formidable chiefhad defeated his uncle, insulted his capital, and seduced, by secret correspondence,the fidelity of his wife, the imperious daughter of Amalasontha. Yet, before herretired, Vitiges made a last effort either to storm or to surprise the city. A secretpassage was discovered in one of the aqueducts; two citizens of the Vatican weretempted by bribes to intoxicate the guards of the Aurelian gate; an attack wasmeditated on the walls beyond the Tiber, in a place which was not fortified with,towers; and the barbarians advanced, with torches and scaling-ladders, to the as­sault of the Pincian gate. But every attempt was defeated by the intrepid vigi­lance of Belisarius, and his band of veterans, who, in the most perilous moments,did not regret the absence of their companions; and the Goths, alike destitute ofhope and subsistence, clamorously urged their departure, before the truce shouldexpire, and the Roman cavalry should again be united. One year and nine daysafter the commencement of the siege, an army so lately strong and triumphant,burnt their tents, and tumultuously repassed the Milvian bridge. They repassednot with impunity: their thronging multitudes, oppressed in a narrow passage,were driven headlong into the Tiber by their own fears and the pursuit of the ene­my; and the Roman general, sallying from the Pincian gate, inflicted a severe anddisgraceful wound on their retreat. The slow length of a sickly and despondinghost was heavily dragged along the Flaminian way; from whence the barbarianswere sometimes compelled to deviate, lest they should encounter the hostile garri­sons that guarded the high road to Rimini and Ravenna. Yet so powerful was thisflying army, that Vitiges spared ten thousand men for the defence of the citieswhich he was most solicitous to preserve, and detached his nephew Uraias, withan adequate force, for the chastisement of rebellious Milan. At the head of hisprincipal army, he besieged Rimini, only thirty-three miles distant from the Go­thic capital. A feeble rampart, and a shallow ditch, were maintained by the skilland valour of John the Sanguinary, who shared the danger and fatigue of the mean­est soldier, and emulated, on a theatre less illustrious, the military virtues of hisgreat commander. The towers and battering engines of the barbarians were ren­dered useless; their attacks were repulsed; and the tedious blockade, which re­duced the garrison to the last extremity of hunger, afforded time for the union andmarch of the Roman forces. A fleet which had surprised Ancona, sailed alongthe coast of the Hadriatic, to the relief of the besieged city. The eunuch Narseslanded in Picenum with two thousand Heruli, and five thousand of the bravesttroops of the east. The rock of the Appennine was forced; ten thousand veteransmoved round the foot of the mountains, under the command of Belisarius himself;and a new army, whose encampment blazed with innumerable lights, afifieared^toadvance along the Flaminian way. Overwhelmed with astonishment and despair,
0) Anastasias (p, 49.) has preserved this rpithct of SMieuinaiius, which might do honour to a tiger.







OCR Output








78 THE DECLINE AND FALL


of the Sogdoites; the emperor renounced or seemed to renounce, the fugitive Avars,but he accepted the alliance of the Turks; and the ratification of the treaty wascarried by a Roman minister to the foot of mount Altai. Under the successorsof Justinian, the friendship of the two nations was cultivated by frequent and cor­dial intercourse: the most favoured vassals were permitted to imitate the exampleof the great khan, and one hundred and six Turks, who, on various occasions, hadvisited Constantinople, departed at the same time for their native country. Theduration and length of the journey from the Byzantine court to mount Altai, arenot specified: it might have been difficult to mark a road through the nameless de­serts, the mountains, rivers, and morasses of Tartary; but a curious account hasbeen preserved of the reception of the Roman ambassadors at the royal camp.After they had been purified with fire and incense, according to a rite still prac­tised under the sons of Zingis, they were introduced to the presence of Disabul.In a valley of the Golden Mountain, they found the great khan in his tent, seatedin a chair with wheels, to which a horse might be occasionally harnessed. As soonas they had delivered their presents, which were received by their proper officers,they exposed, in a florid oration, the wishes of the Roman emperor, that victorymight attend the arms of the Turks, that their reign might be long and prosperous,and that a strict alliance, without envy or deceit, might for ever be maintained be­tween the two most powerful nations of the earth. The answer of Disabul cor­responded with these friendly professions, and the ambassadors were seated byhis side, at a banquet which lasted the greatest part of the day: the tent was sur­rounded with silk hangings, and a Tartar liquor was served on the table, whichpossessed at least the intoxicating qualities of wine. The entertainment of thesucceeding day was more sumptuous; the silk hangings of the second tent wereembroidered in various figures; and the royal seat, the cups, and the vases, wereof gold. A third pavilion was supported by columns of gilt wood; a bed of pureand massy gold was raised on four peacocks of the same metal; and before the en­trance of the tent, dishes, basins, and statues of solid silver, and admirable art,were ostentatiously piled in wagons, the monuments of valour rather than of in­dustry. When Disabul led his armies against the frontiers of Persia, his Romanallies followed many days the march of the Turkish camp, nor were they dis­missed till they had enjoyed their precedency over the envoy of the great king,whose loud and intemperate clamours interrupted the silence of the royal banquet.The power and ambition of Chosroes cemented the union of the Turks and Ro­mans, who touched his dominions on either side: but those distant nations, regard­less of each other, consulted the dictates of interest, without recollecting the ob­ligations of oaths and treaties. While the successor of Disabul celebrated his fa­ther's obsequies, he was saluted by the ambassadors of the emperor Tiberius, whoproposed an invasion of Persia, and sustained with firmness, the angry and per­haps the just, reproaches of that haughty barbarian. "You see my ten fingers(said the great khan, and he applied them to his mouth.) You Romans speakwith as many tongues, but they are tongues of deceit and perjury. To me youhold one language, to my subjects another: and the nations are successively de­luded by your perfidious eloquence. You precipitate your allies into war and dan­ger, you enjoy their labours, and you neglect your benefactors. Hasten'your re­turn, inform your master that a Turk is incapable of uttering or forgiving false­hood, and that he shall speedily meet the punishment which he deserves. Whilehe solicits my friendship with flattering and hollow words, he is sunk to a confe­derate of my fugitive Varchonites. If I condescend to march against thosecontemptible slaves, they will tremble at the sound of our whips; they will betrampled, like a nest of ants, under the feet of my innumerable cavalry. I am notignorant of the road which they have followed to invade your empire; nor can Ihe deceived by the vain pretence, that mount Caucasus is the impregnable barrierof the Romans. I know the course of the Niester, the Danube, and the Hebrus,the most warlike nations have yielded to the arms of the Turks; and from therising to the setting sun the earth is my inheritance." Notwithstanding this me­nace, a sense of mutual advantage soon renewed the alliance of the Turks and Ro­mans: but the pride of the great khan survived his resentment: and when he an­nounced an important conquest to his friend the emperor Maurice, he styled him­self the master of the seven races, and the lord of the seven climates of theworld. (1)


CD All the details of these Turkish anil Roman embassies, so curious in the history of human manners, are







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 161


body, but the popular belief that his speech was inspired by the Deity betrays avery humble opinion both of the man and of the times.(l)—"You behold," saidthe emperor, " the ensigns of supreme power. You are about to receive themnot from my hand, but from the hand of God. Honour them, and from them youwill derive honour. Respect the empress your mother; you are now her son; be­fore, you were her servant. Delight not in blood, abstain from revenge, avoidthose actions by which I have incurred the public hatred, and consult the expe­rience rather than the example of your predecessor. As a man, I have sinned;as a sinner, even in this life, I have been severely punished: but these servants,"and he pointed to his ministers, " who have abused my confidence, and inflamedmy passions, will appear with me before the tribunal of Christ. I have been daz­zled by the splendour of the diadem: be thou wise and modest; remember whatyou have been, remember what you are. You see around us your slaves andyour children: with the authority, assume the tenderness, of a parent. Love yourpeople like yourself; cultivate the affections, maintain the discipline of the army:protect the fortunes of the rich, relieve the necessities of the poor. "(2) The as­sembly, in silence, and in tears, applauded the counsels, and sympathized with therepentance, of their prince: the patriarch rehearsed the prayers of the church;Tiberius received the diadem on his knees, and Justin, who in the abdication ap­peared most worthy_ to reign, addressed the new monarch in the following words:"If you consent, I live; if you command, I die: may the God of heaven and earthinfuse into your heart whatever I have neglected or forgotten." The four lastyears of the emperor Justin were passed in tranquil obscurity; his conscience wasno longer tormented by the remembrance of those duties which he was incapableof discharging: and his choice was justified by the filial reverence and gratitude ofTiberius.
Among the virtues of Tiberius,(3) his beauty (he was one of the tallest andmost comely of the Romans) might introduce him to the favour of Sophia; andthe widow of Justin was persuaded that she should preserve her station and in­fluence under the reign of a second and more youthful husband. But if the am­bitious candidate had been tempted to flatter and dissemble, it was no longer inhis power to fulfil her expectations, or his own promise. The factions of the hip­podrome demanded, with some impatience, the name of their new empress; boththe people and Sophia were astonished by the proclamation of Anastasia, the se­cret, though lawful, wife of the emperor Tiberius. Whatever could alleviate thedisappointment of Sophia, imperial honours, a stately palace, a numerous household,was liberally bestowed by the piety of her adopted son; on solemn occasions he at­tended and consulted the widow of hisbenefactor: but her ambition disdained the vainsemblance of royalty, and the respectful appellation of mother served to exaspe­rate, rather than appease, the rage of an injured woman. While she accepted,and repaid with a courtly smile, the fair expressions of regard and confidence, asecret alliance was concluded between the dowager empress and her ancient ene­mies; and Justinian, the son of Germanus, was employed as the instrument of herrevenge. The pride of the reigning house supported with reluctance, the domi­nion of a stranger; the youth was deservedly popular; his name, after the deathof Justin, had been mentioned by a tumultuous faction; and his own submissiveoffer of his head, with a treasure of sixty thousand pounds, might be interpretedas an evidence of guilt, or at least of fear. Justinian received a free pardon, andthe command of the eastern army. The Persian monarch fled before his arms;and the acclamations which accompanied his triumph declared him worthy of thepurple. His artful patroness had chosen the month of the vintage, while the em­peror, in a rural solitude was permitted to enjoy the pleasures of a subject. Onthe first intelligence of her designs he returned to Constantinople, and the con­spiracy was suppressed by his presence and firmness. From the pomp and ho­nours which she had abused, Sophia was reduced to a modest allowance; Ti­berius dismissed her train, intercepted her correspondence, and committed to a
(1) Evagrins (lib. v. c. 13.) hat added the reproach of his ministers. He applies tins speech to the ceremonywhen Tiberius was invested with the rank of Caesar. The loose expression, rather than the positive error, ofTbeophanes, &c. has delayed it to his Augustan investiture immediately before the death of Justin.
(2) Theophylact Simocatta (lib. iii. c. 11.) declares, that lie shall give to posterity the speech of Justin as itwas pronounced, without attempting to correct the imperfections of language or rhetoric. Perhaps the vainsophist would have been incapable of producing such sentiments.
(3) For the character and reiirn of Tiberius, see Evagrius, lib. v. c. 13.; Theophylact. lib. iii. c. 12. &c.Theophanes, in Chron. p. 210—213; Zooaras. torn. ii. lib. 14. p. 7i; Ctdrenus, p.392. Paul Warnefrid, de GeslisLangobard. lib. iii. c. 11,12. The deacon at' Forum Julii appears to hare possessed some curious and authen­tic facts.
Vol. III. 21







OCR Output








204 THE DECLINE AND PALL


source of life and immortality expired jpn mount Calvary. These alarming con»sequences were affirmed with unblushing simplicity by Apollinaris,(l) bishop ofLaodicea, and one of the luminaries of the church. The son of a learned gram­marian, he was skilled in all the sciences of Greece; eloquence, erudition, andphilosophy, conspicuous in the volumes of Apollinaris, were humbly devoted tothe service of religion. The worthy friend of Athanasius, the worthy antagonistof Julian, he bravely wrestled with the Arians and polytheists, and, though he af­fected the rigour of geometrical demonstration, his commentaries revealed the li­teral and allegorical sense of the Scriptures. A mystery, which had long floatedin the looseness of popular belief, was defined by his perverse diligence in a tech­nical form; and he first proclaimed the memorable words,—" One incarnate na­ture of Christ," which are still re-echoed with hostile clamours in the churchesof Asia, Egypt and Ethiopia. He taught that the Godhead was united or mingledwith the body of a man; and that the Logos, the eternal Wisdom, supplied inthe flesh the place and office of a human soul. Yet as the profound doctor hadbeen terrified at his own rashness, Apollinaris was heard to mutter some faint ac­cents of excuse and explanation. He acquiesced in the old distinction of theGreek philosophers, between the rational and sensitive soul of man; that he mightreserve the Logos for intellectual functions, and employ the subordinate humanprinciple in the meaner actions of animal life. With the moderate Docetes, herevered Mary as the spiritual rather than as the carnal, mother of Christ, whosebody either came from heaven, impassable and incorruptible, or was absorbed,and, as it were, transformed, into the essence of the Deity. The system of Apol­linaris was strenuously encountered by the Asiatics and Syrian divines, whoseschools are honoured by the names of Basil, Gregory, and Chrysostom, and taint­ed by those of Diodorus, Theodoric, and Nestorius. But the person of the agedbishop of Laodicea, his character and dignity, remained inviolate, and his rivals,since we may not suspect them of the weakness of toleration, were astonished,perhaps by the novelty of the argument, and diffident of the final sentence of thecatholic church. Her judgment at length inclined in their favour; the heresy ofApollinaris was condemned, and the separate congregations of his disciples wereproscribed by the imperial laws. But his principles were secretly entertained inthe monasteries of Egypt, and his enemies felt the hatred of Theophilus and Cy­ril, the successive patriarchs of Alexandria.
V. The grovelling Ebionite, and the fantastic Docetes, were rejected and for­gotten; the recent zeal against the errors of Apollinaris, reduced the catholics toa seeming agreement with the double nature of Cerinthus. But, instead of a tem­porary and occasional alliance they established, and we still embrace, the substan­tial, indissoluble, and everlasting union of a perfect God with a perfect man, orthe second person of the trinity with a reasonable soul and human flesh. In thebeginning of the fifth century, the unity of the two natures was the prevailingdoctrine of the church. On all sides, it was confessed, that the mode of their co­existence could neither be represented by our ideas, nor expressed by our lan­guage. Yet a secret and incurable discord was cherished between those who weremost apprehensive of confounding, and those who were most fearful of sepa­rating, the divinity and the humanity of Christ. Impelled by religious frenzy,they fled with adverse haste from the error which they mutually deemed mostdestructive of truth and salvation. On either hand they were anxious to guard,they were jealous to defend, the union and the distinction of the two natures,and to invent such forms of speech, such symbols of doctrine, as were leastsusceptible of doubt or ambiguity. The poverty of ideas and language temptedthem to ransack art and nature for every possible comparison, and each com­parison misled their fancy in the explanation of an incomparable mystery. Inthe polemic microscope, an atom is enlarged to a monster, and each party was skil­ful to exaggerate the absurd or impious conclusions that might be extorted fromthe principles of their adversaries. To escape from each other, they wanderedthrough many a dark and devious thicket, till they were astonished by the horridphantoms of Cerinthus and Apollinaris, who guarded the opposite issues of thetheological labyrinth. As soon as they beheld the twilight ot sense and heresy,
(1) t"or Apollinaris and his sect, see Socrates, lib. ii. c. 46. lib. iii. c. 16. Sozomen, lib. v. c. 18. lib. vi. c. 31—27. Theoiforet, lib. v. 3.10,11. Tillemont, Memoires Ecclesiastiquet, tonj. Yij. p. 602—638. Not. p. 788—794.in quarto, Venise, 1732. The cotemporary saints always mention the Bishop ot Laodicea as a friend and bro­ther. The style of the more recent historians is harsh and hostile; yet Philostoreius compares him (lib. viii. c.31-15.)to Basil and Gregory.







OCR Output








CONTENTS OF


THIRD VOLUME.


CHAPTER XL.
Elevation of Justin the Elder—Reign of Justinian—
L The Empress Theodora—H. Factions of llic Cir­
cus, and Sedition of Constantinople—III. Trade and
Manufacture of Silk—IV. Finances and Taxes—V.
Edifices of Justinian—Church of 9L Sophia—For­
tifications and Frontiers of the Eastern Empire—VI.
Abolition of the Schools of Athens, and the Consul­
ship of Rome.
A-D. PAO«
482 or 483 Birth of the emperor Justinian .' 3
518—527 Elevation and reign of his uncle Jus­tin I. .
521—527 Adoption and succession of Justinian
527—5t»5 The reign of Justinian
Character and histories of Procnpius
Division of the reign of Justinian .
Jiirth and vices of the empress Theodora
Her marriage with Justinian
Her tyranny . . ■
Her virtues . .
548 And death ....
The factions of the circus .
At Rome ....
They distract Constantinople and the cast
Justinian favours the Blues
532 Sedition of Constantinople, sumamcd Nika
The distress of Justinian
Firmness of Theodora
The sedition is suppressed . . -
Agriculture and manufactures of the eastern
empire .
The use of silk by the Romans
Importation from China by land and sea
Introduction of silk works into Greece
State of the revenue
Avarice and profusion of Justinian
Pernicious savings
Remittances
Taxes ....
Monopolies
Venality ....
Testaments
The ministers of Justinian .
John of Cappadocia
His edifices and architects . •
Foundation of the church of St. Sophia
Description ....
Marbles . . .
Riches ....
Churches and palaces
Fortifications of Europe
Security of Asia after the conquest of Isau-


ib.
■1
5
III.
(i
lb.
8
II..
[I
II..
10
ib.
11
12
13
lb.
14
15
16
17
IS
I!)
II..
ill.
ib.
20
ib.
21
II..
ib.
22
ih.
2:1
ii..
Ib.
24
il..
ill.


dues the Vandnl Kingdom of Africa—His Triumph
—The Online War—He recovers Sicily, Naples, and
Rome—Sii^jo of ttome by the Goths—Their Retreat
and Losses—Surrender of Ravenna—Glory of llefi-
sarius—His domeslic Shame and Misfortunes.
n TAGS
35
ili.
:«i
ih.:i7
ii..
38
40
41
42
43
44
45
40
47
il..
48


25


Fortifications of the empire, from the Euxine
to the Persian frontier
4S8 Death of Perozes, king of Persia
002—505 The Persian war
Fortifications of Dara
The Caspian or Iberian gates
The schools of Athens . .
They arc suppressed by Justinian
Praclus .
43G-52!) His successors' . . ,
The last of the philosophers
511 The Roman consulship extinguished by Jus­tinian
CHArTER XLI.
Conquests of Justinian in the West—Character andfirst Campaigns of lielisarius—He invades and sub-


533 Justinian resolves to invade Africa523-530 State of the Sandals. Ililderic530-5;« Oclimcr .
Debates on the African icar •Character and choice of lielisarius
520-532 His services in the Persian war
533 Preparations for the African war
Departure of the fleet
lielisarius lands on the coast of Africa .Defeats the Sandals in afirst battleJieductitm of CarthageFinal defeat of Gclimer and the fa minis
534 Conquest of Africa by RclisariusDistress and captivity of GclimerReturn and triumph of lielisarius .
535 His sole consulship
Knd of Gclimer and the Vandals
Manners and defeat of the Moors
Neutrality of the Visigoths
550—0120 Conquests of the Romans in Spain :
534 lielisarius threatens the Ostrogoths of Italy5*22—534 Government and death of Amalasontha,
(%uem nf Holy
535 Her exile and death
lielisarius invades and subdues Sicily534—530 Heign and weakness of Theodatus, the
Got/tic king of Italy)37 lielisarius invades Italy and reduces Naples336—540 Vitiges, king of Italyf>30 lielisarius enters Home . ■
537 Siege of Rome by the Goths
Valour of lielisarius ■
His defence of Home .
Repulses a general assault of the Goths
His sallies . ■
Distress of the city
Kxilc of Pope SylveriusDeliverance of the cityRclisarius recovers many cities of Italy .
538 The Goths raise the siege of Rome .Dose Rimini
Retire to Ravenna
Jealousy of the Roman generals .Death of Constantino . .ITie Kunuch Norses . . .
Firmness and authority of Rclisarius
538—539 Invasion of Italy by the Franks
Destruction of Milan . <
lielisarius besieges Ravenna •
539 Subdues the Gothic kingdom of ItalyCaptivity of Vitiges .
540 Return and glory of Belisarius
Secret history of his wife Antonina
Her lover T/teodosius . '•
Resentment of lielisarius and her son Pho-
sins ....
Persecution of her son
Disgrace and submission of Belisarius


50
ib.
51
52
lb.
53
54
55
50
ib.
57
Ib.
:y,
lb.
ib.
59
00
01
ib.
02
lb.
ib.
ib.
ib.
03
Hi.
04


ib.
06
ib.
m
OS
09
70


CHAPTER XLII.
State of the Barbaric World—Establishment of theLombards on the Danube—Tribes and Inroads ofthe Sclavoiiians— Orijjin, Empire, and Embassies ofthe Turks—The Flight of the Avars—Chosrocs I.or Nushirvan King of Persia—His prosperous Reign







OCR Output








390 THE DECLINE AND FALL.


with this holy and meritorious perjury. (1) But the greatest part of the tem­ples of Persia were ruined by the insensible and general desertion of their vo­taries. It was insensible, since it is not accompanied with any memorial of timeor place, of persecution or resistance. It was general, since the whole realm,from Shiraz to Samarcand, imbibed the faith of the Koran; and the preservationof the native tongue reveals the descent of the Mahometans of Persia. (2) In themountains and deserts, an obstinate race of unbelievers adhered to the superstitionof their fathers; and a faint tradition of the Magian theology is kept alive in theprovince of Kirman, along the banks of the Indus, among the exiles of Surat, andin the colony which, in the last century, was planted by Shaw Abbas at the gatesof Ispahan. The chief pontiff has retired to mount Elbourz, eighteen leagues fromthe city of Yezd; the perpetual fire (if it continue to burn) is inaccessible to theprofane; but his residence is the school, the oracle, and the pilgrimage, of theGhebers, whose hard and uniform features attest the unmingled purity of theirblood. Under the jurisdiction of their elders, eighty thousand families maintain aninnocent and industrious life; their subsistence is derived from some curious manu­factures and mechanic trades; and they cultivate the earth with the fervour of areligious duty. Their ignorance withstood the despotism of Shaw Abbas, who de­manded with threats and tortures the prophetic books of Zoroaster; and this ob­scure remnant of the Magians is spared by the moderation or contempt of theirpresent sovereigns. (3)
The northern coast of Africa is the only land in which the light of the gospel,after a long and perfect establishment, has been totally extinguished. The arts,which had been taught by Carthage and Rome, were involved in a cloud of igno­rance; the doctrine of Cyprian and Augustin was no longer studied. Five hundredepiscopal churches were overturned by the hostile fury of the Donatists, the Van­dals, the Moors. The zeal and numbers of the clergy declined; and the people,without discipline or knowledge, or hope, submissively sunk under the yoke of theArabian prophet. Within fifty years after the expulsion of the Greeks, a lieute­nant of Africa informed the caliph that the tribute of the infidels was abolished bytheir conversion,(4) and, though he sought to disguise his fraud and rebellion, hisspecious pretence was drawn from the rapid and extensive progress of the Maho­metan faith. In the next age, an extraordinary mission of five bishops was de­tached from Alexandria to Cairoan. They were ordained by the Jacobite patriarchto cherish and revive the dying embers of Christianity :(S) but the interposition ofa foreign prelate, a stranger to the Latins, an enemy to the catholics, supposes thedecay and dissolution of the African hierarchy. It was no longer the time whenthe successor of St. Cyprian, at the head of a numerous synod, could maintain anequal contest with the ambition of the Roman pontiff. In the eleventh century,the unfortunate priest who was seated on the ruins of Carthage, implored the armsand the protection of the Vatican; and he bitterly complains that his naked bodyhad been scourged by the Saracens, and that his authority was disputed by thefour suffragans, the tottering pillars of his throne. Two epistles of Gregory VII. (6)are destined to sooth the distress of the catholics and the pride of a Moorishprince. The pope assures the sultan that they both worship the same God, and


parts, was abbreviated in three volumes by his son Kondemir, A. H. 927. A. D. 1520. The two writers, matt.accurately distinguished by Pf tit de la Croix, (Hist, de Genghizcan, p. S37. 538. 544. 545.) are loosely con­founded by d'Herbelot: (p. 358. 410.994,995.) but his numerous extracts, under the improper name of Khnn-demir, belong to the father rather than the son. The historian of Genghizcan refers to a MS. of Mirchond,which he received from the hands of his friend d'Herbelot himself. A curious fragment (the Tahcrian andSoffarian Dynasties) has been lately published in Persic and Latin: (Viennae, 1782, in quarto, cum notis Ber­nard de Jenisch) and the editor allows us to hope for a continuation of Mirchond.
(1) Quo testimonio bonise quidpiam pratitisse opinabantur. Yet Mirchond must have condemned their zeal,since he approved the legal toleration of the Magi, cui (the Are temple) peracto singulis annis censu, ut sacraMohammedis lege cautum, ab omnibus molestiis ac onenbus libero esse licuit.
(2) The last Magian of name and power appears to be Mardavige the Dillemite who, in the beginning of thetenth century, reigned in the northern provinces of Persia, near the Caspian sea. (D'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orient,p 335.) But his soldiers and successors, the Mtrwides, either professed or embraced the Mahometan faith; andunder their dynasty (A. D. 933—1020.) I should place the fall of the religion of Zoroaster.
(3) The present state of the Ghebers in Persia is taken from Sir John Chardin, not indeed the most learned,but the most judicious and inquisitive, ofour modern travellers. (Voyages in Perse, torn. ii. p. 109.179—187. inquarto.) His brethren, Pietro de la Valle, Clearius Thevenot, Tavernier, &c. whom I have fruitlessly searched,bad neither eyes nor attention for this interesting people.
(4) The letter of Abdoulrahman, governor or tyrant of Africa, to the caliph Aboul Abbas, the first of tlieAbbassides, is dated A. H. 132. (Caitlonne, Hist, de I'Afrique et de l'Espagne, torn. i. p. 168.)
(5) Bibliotheque Orientale, p. 66. Renaudot, Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p. 287,288.
(6) Among the Epistles ofthe Popes, see Leo IX. epist. 3. Gregor. VII. lib. epist. 22,23. lib. iii. epist. 19—21.and the criticisms of Fagi, (torn. iv. A. D. 1035. no. 13.) who investigates the name and family of the Moorishprince with whom the proudest ofthe Roman pomifTs so politely corresponds.







OCR Output








OF THE KOMAN EMPIRE. 93


thousand insurgents, assembling in the field of Bulla, elected Stoza for their chief,,a private soldier, who possessed, in a superior degree, the virtues of a rebel. Un­der the mask of freedom, his eloquence could lead, or at least impel, the passionsof his equals. He raised himself to a level with Belisarius, and the nephew of theemperor, by daring to encounter them in the field; and the victorious generalswere compelled to acknowledge, that Stoza deserved a purer cause, and a morelegitimate command. Vanquished in battle, he'dexterously employed the arts ofnegotiation s*a Roman army was seduced from their allegiance, and the chiefs,•who had trusted to his faithless promise, were murdered by his order, in a churchof Numidia. When every resource, either of force or perfidy, was exhausted,Stoza, with some desperate Vandals, retired to the wilds of Mauritania, obtainedthe daughter of a barbarian prince, and eluded the pursuit of his enemies, by thereport of his death. The personal weight of Belisarius, the rank, the spirit, andthe temper, of Germanus, the emperor's nephew, and the vigour and success of thesecond administration of the eunuch Solomon, restored the modesty of the camp,and maintained for awhile, the tranquillity of Africa. But the vices of the By­zantine court, were felt in that distant province; the troops complained that they■were neither paid nor relieved; and as soon as the public disorders were sufficientlymature, Stoza was again alive, in arms, and at the gates of Carthage. He fell ina single combat, but he smiled in the agonies of death, when he was informed thathis own javelin had reached the heart of his antagonist. The example of Stoza,and the assurance that a fortunate soldier had been the first king, encouraged theambition of Gontharis, and he promised by a private treaty, to divide Africa withthe Moors, if, with their dangerous aid, he should ascend the throne of Carthage.The feeble Areobindus, unskilled in the affairs of peace and war, was raised byhis marriage with the niece of Justinian to the office of exarch. He was suddenlyoppressed by a sedition of the guards, and his abject supplications, which pro­voked the contempt, could not move the pity, of the inexorable tyrant. After areign of thirty days, Gontharis himself was stabbed at a banquet, by the hand orArtaban; and it is singular enough, that an Armenian prince, of the royal familyof Arsaces, should re-establish at Carthage the authority of the Roman empire.In the conspiracy which unsheathed the dagger of Brutus against the life of C:esar,every circumstance is curious and important to the eyes of posterity: but the guiltor merit of these loyal or rebellious assassins could interest only the cotemporariesof Procopius, who, by their hopes and fears, their friendship, or resentment, werepersonally engaged jp the revolutions of Africa.(l)
That country was rapidly sinking into the state of barbarism, from whence it hadbeen raised by the Phoenician colonies and Roman laws, and every step of intestine-discord was marked by some deplorable victory of savage man over civilized so­ciety. The Moors,(2) though ignorant of justice, were impatient of oppression:their vagrant life and boundless wilderness disappointed the arms, and eluded thechains of a conqueror; and experience had shown, that neither oaths nor obliga­tions could secure the fidelity of their attachment. The victory of mount Aurashad awed them into momentary submission; but if they respected the characterof Solomon, they hated and despised the pride and luxury of his two nephews,Cyrus and Sergius, on whom their uncle had imprudently bestowed the provincialgovernments of Tripoli and Pentapolis. A Moorish tribe encamped under thewalls of Leptis, to renew their alliance, and receive from the governor the custo­mary gifts. Fourscore of their deputies were introduced as friends into the city;but, on the dark suspicion of a conspiracy, they were massacred at the table ofSergius; and the clamour of arms and revenge was re-echoed through the valleysof mount Atlas, from both the Syrtes to the Atlantic ocean. A personal injury,the unjust execution, or murder of his brother, rendered Antalus the enemy ofthe Romans. The defeat of the Vandals had formerly signalized his valour; therudiments of justice and prudence were still more conspicuous in a Moor; andwhile he laid Adrumetum in ashes, he calmly admonished the emperor that thepeace of Africa might be secured by the recall of Solomon and his unworthy ne­phews. The exarch led forth his troops from Carthage: but at the distance of
(1) Yet I must not refute him the merit of painting, in lively colour), the murder of Gontharis. One ofthe assassins uttered a sentiment not unworthy of a Roman patriot.—" If I fiiil (said Artasiresj in the finestroke, kill me on the spot, lest the rack should extort a discovery of my accomplices."
(2) The Moorish wars are occasionally introduced into the narrative of Procopius: (Vandal, lib. ii. c. 19—23.2J. S7,28. Gothic, lib. iv. c. 17.) and Theophanes adds some prosperous and adverse events in the last years ofJustinian.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. iu9


dismissed in safety; and their grateful zeal at length subdued the obstinacy of theircountrymen.(l)
Before Lucca had surrendered, Italy was overwhelmed by a new deluge of bar­barians. A feeble youth, the grandson of Clovis, reigned over the Austrasians ororiental Franks. The guardians of Theodebald entertained with coldness and re­luctance the magnificent promises of the Gothic ambassadors. But the spirit ofa martial people outstripped the timid counsels of the court: two brothers, Lo-thaire and Buccelin,(2) the dukes of the Alemanni, stood forth as the leaders ofthe Italian war; and seventy-five thousand Germans descended in the autumnfrom the Rhsetian Alps into the plain of Milan. The vanguard of the Romanarmy was stationed near the Po, under the conduct of Fulcaris, a bold Herulian,who rashly conceived, that personal bravery was the sole duty and merit of a com­mander. As he marched without order or precaution along the jf.milian way, anambuscade of Franks suddenly arose from the amphitheatre of Parma: his troopswere surprised and routed; but their leader refused to fly, declaring to the lastmoment that death was less terrible than the angry countenance of Narses. Thedeath of Fulcaris, and the retreat of the surviving chiefs, decided the fluctuatingand rebellious temper of the Goths; they flew to the standard of their deliverers,and admitted them into the cities which still resisted the arms of the Roman ge­neral. The conqueror of Italy opened a free passage to the irresistible torrent ofbarbarians. They passed under the walls of Cesena, and answered by threatsand reproaches the advice of Aligern, that the Gothic treasures could no longerrepay the labour of an invasion. Two thousand Franks were destroyed by theskill and valour of Narses himself, who sallied from Rimini at the head of threehundred horse, to chastise the licentious rapine of their march. On the confinesof Samnium, the two brothers divided their forces. With the right wing, Buc­celin assumed the spoil of Campania, Lucania, and Bruttium: with the left, Lo-thaire accepted the plunder of Apulia and Calabria. They followed the coastof the Mediterranean and the Hadriatic, as far as Rhegium and Otranto, and theextreme lands of Italy were the term of their destructive progress. The Franks,who were Christians and catholics, contented themselves with pillage and occa­sional murder. But the churches, which their piety had spared, were strippedby the sacrilegious hands of the Alemanni, who sacrificed horses' heads to theirnative deities of the woods and rivers;(3) they melted or profaned the consecratedvessels, and the ruins pi shrines and altars were stained with the blood of thefaithful. Buccelin was actuated by ambition; and Lothaire by avarice- Theformer aspired to restore the Gothic kingdom; the latter, after a promise tohis brother of speedy succours, returned by the same road to deposite his trea­sure beyond the Alps. The strength of their army was already wasted by thechange of climate and contagion of disease: the Germans revelled in the vintageof Italy; and their own intemperance avenged, in some degree, the miseries of adefenceless people.
At the entrance of the spring, the imperial troops, who had guarded the cities,assembled to the number of eighteen thousand men, in the neighbourhood ofRome. Their winter hours had not been consumed in idleness. By the command,and after the example of Narses, they repeated each day their military exerciseon foot, and on horse-back, accustomed their ear to obey the sound of the trumpet,and practised the steps and evolutions of the Pyrrhic dance. From the straits ofSicily, Buccelin, with thirty thousand Franks and Alemanni, slowly moved to­wards Capua, occupied with a wooden tower the bridge of Casilinum, covered hisright by the stream of the Vulturnus, and secured the rest of his encampment,by a rampart of sharp stakes, and a circle of wagons, whose wheels were buriedin the earth. He impatiently expected the return of Lothaire; ignorant, alaslthat his brother could never return, and that the chief and his army had beenswept away by a strange disease(4) on the banks of the lake Benacus, between
(1) There inome difficulty in connecting the thirtj-fifth chapter of the fourth book of the Gothic war ofFroeopius with the tint book of the history of Agathias. We must now relinquish a statesman and soldier, toattend the footsteps of a poet and rhetorician (lib. i. p. 11. lib. ii. p. 51. edit. Louvre.)
(2) Among the fabulous exploits of Buccelin, he discomfited and slew Belisarius, subdued Italy and Sicily,&c. See; in the historians of France, Gregory of Tours (torn. ii. lib. iii. c. 32. p. 203.) and Almoin, (torn. hi..lib. 2. de Gestis Francorum, c. xxiii. p. 59.)
(3) Agathias notices their superstition in a philosophic tone (lib. i. p. 18.) At Zug, in Switzerland, idola­try still prevailed in the year 613i St. Cotumban and St. Gall, were the apostles of that rude country; and thelatter founded a hermitage, which has swelled into an ecclesiastical principality, and a populous city, the seatoT freedom and commerce.
(4) See. the death of Lothaire in Agathias (lib. ii. p. 38,,) and Paul Warnefrid, surnamed Diacontti (lib. ii. p.,3.775.) The Greek makes him rave'and tear his floli. He had plundered churches.







OCR Output








288 THE DECLINE AND FALL


noclasts, but they pronounced a more severe censure against the superstition ofthe Greeks, and the decrees of their pretended council, which was long despisedby the barbarians of the west(l) Among them the worship of images advancedwith silent and insensible progress: but a large atonement is made for their hesita­tion and delay, by the gross idolatry of the ages, which precede the reformation,and of the countries, both in Europe and America, which are still immersed in thegloom of superstition.
It was after the Nicene synod, and under the reign of the pious Irene, that thepopes consummated the separation of Rome and Italy by the translation of theempire to the less orthodox Charlemagne. They were compelled to choose be­tween the rival nations; religion was not the sole motive of their choice; and whilethey dissembled the failings of their friends, they beheld, with reluctance and sus-
Sicion, the catholic virtues of their foes. The difference of language and mannersad perpetuated the enmity of the two capitals; and they were alienated fromeach other by the hostile opposition of seventy years. In that schism the Romanshad tasted of freedom, and the popes of sovereignty; their submission would haveexposed them to the revenge of a jealous tyrant; and the revolution of Italy hadbetrayed the impotence, as well as the tyranny, of the Byzantine court. TheGreek emperors had restored the images, but they had not restored the Calabrianestates(S) and the Illyrian diocess(4) which the Iconoclasts had torn away fromthe successors of St. Peter; and pope Hadrian threatens them with a sentence ofexcommunication unless they speedily abjure this practical heresy. The Greekswere now orthodox, but their religion might be tainted by the breath of thereigning monarch: the Franks were now contumacious; but a discerning eye mightdiscern their approaching conversion from the use, to the adoration, of images.The name of Charlemagne was stained by the polemic acrimony of his scribes;but the conqueror himself conformed, with the temper of a statesman, to the va­rious practice of France and Italy. In his four pilgrimages or visits to the Vati­can, he embraced the popes in the communion of friendship and piety; knelt be­fore the tomb, and consequently before the image of the apostle; and joined, with­out scruple, in all the prayers and processions of the Roman liturgy. Wouldprudence or gratitude allow the pontiffs to renounce their benefactor? Had theya right to alienate his gift of the exarchate ? Had they power to abolish his go­vernment of Rome ? The title of patrician was below the merit and greatness ofCharlemagne; and it was only by reviving the western empire that they could paytheir obligations or secure their establishment. By this decisive measure theywould finally eradicate the claims of the Greeks from the debasement of a pro­vincial town: the majesty of Rome would be restored: the Latin Christians wouldbe united under a supreme head, in their ancient metropolis; and the conquerorsof the westrwould receive their crown from the successors of St. Peter. The Ro­man church would acquire a zealous and respectable advocate: and, under theshadow of the Carlovingian power, the bishop might exercise, with honour andsafety, the government of the city. (5)
Before the ruin of paganism in Rome, the competition for a wealthy bishoprichad often been productive of tumult and bloodshed. The people was less nume-


(1) Qui supra sanctissima patres nostii (episcopi et sacerdotes) omnimodis servitium et adorationem imagi-num renuentes contempseruut, atque consentientes condemnaverunt. (Concil. torn. ix. p. 101. canon 2. Frank-fund.) A polemic must he hard-hearted indeed, who does not pity the efforts of Baromus, Fagi, Alexander,Mnimbourg, &c, to etude this unlucky sentence.
(2) Theophanes (p. 343.) specifies tliose of Sicily and Calabria, which yielded an annual rent of three ta­lents and a half of pold. (perhaps seven thousand pounds sterling.) Liutprand more pompously enumeratesthe patrimonies of the Roman church in Greece, Judea, Persia, Mesopotamia, Babylonia, Egypt, and Libya,which were detained by the injustice of the Greek emperor. (Legat. ad Nicephorum, in Script. Rerum Itali-carum. torn. ii. pars i. p. 481.)
(3) The great diocess of the eastern Illyricum, with Apulia, Calabria, and Sicily; (Thoroassin, Discipline del'Eglise.tom. ii. p. 145.) by the confession of the Greeks, the patriarch of Constantinople had detached fromRome the metropolitans of Tliessaloniea, Athens. Corinth, Nieopolis, and Patrse; (Lue. Holsten. Geograph.Sacra, p. 23.) and his spiritual conquests extended to Naples and Amalphi. (Giannone, Istoria Civile di Napo-li,tnm. i. p.517—524. Pagi.A. D. 730, no. 11.)
(4) In hoc ostenditur, quia ex uno capitulo ab errore reversis, in allis duobos, in eodem (was it the same?)permaneant errore . . . . de diocesi S. R. E. sen de patrimoniis interum increpantes commonemiis, ut n earestituere noluerit herelieum eum pro hnjusmodi errore persevantia decernemiifj Enist. Hadrian Pspse ad Ca«rolum Magnum, in Concil. torn. viii. p. 1508.) to which he adds a reason, most directly opposite to his conduct,that he preferred the salvation of so%ls and rule of faith, to the goods of this transitory worid.
(5) Fontanini considers the emperors as no more than the advocates of rhe churcb. (advocatns et defensorS. R. E. See Dueange, Gloss. Lat. torn. i. p. 297.) His antagonist Mnratori reduces the popes to be no morethan the exarchs of the emperor. In the more equitable view of Mosheim, (Institut. Hilt. Ecclea. p. 264,265.) they held Rome under the empire as the most honourable species of fiet or bjenefice—preruuntur nodecaliginosa!







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


lie discovered the necessity of purifying his gold from the mixture of baser alloy.Six years had not elapsed from the publication of the Code, before he condemnedthe imperfect attempt, by a new and more accurate edition of the same work,•which he enriched with two hundred of his own laws, and fifty decisions of thedarkest and more intricate points of jurisprudence. Every year, or, accordingto Procopius, each day of his long reign, was marked by some legal innovation.Many of his acts were rescinded by himself; many were rejected by his successors,many have been obliterated by time; but the number of sixteen edicts, and onehundred and sixty-eight novels,(1) has been admitted into the authentic body ofthe civil jurisprudence. In the opinion of a philosopher, superior to the pre­judices of his profession, these incessant, and for the most part trifling, altera­tions, can be only explained by the venal spirit of a prince, who sold withoutshame his judgments and his laws. (2) The charge of the secret historian isindeed explicit and vehement; but the sole instance, which he produces, may beascribed to the devotion as well as to the avarice of Justinia. A wealthy bigot hadbequeathed his inheritance to the church of Emesa; and its value was enhanced bythe dexterity of an artist, who subscribed confessions of debt and promises of pay­ment with the names of the richest Syrians. They pleaded the established pre­scription of thirty or forty years; but their defence was overruled by a retrospec­tive edict, which extended the claims of the church to the term of a century; anedict so pregnant with injustice and disorder, that after serving this occasional pur­pose, it was prudently abolished in the same reign. (3) If candour will acquit theemperor himself, and transfer the corruption to his wife and favourites, the suspi­cion of so foul a vice must still degrade the majesty of his laws: and the advocatesof Justinian may acknowledge, that such levity, whatsoever be the motive, is un­worthy of a legislator and a man.
Monarchs seldom condescend to become the preceptors of their subjects; andsome praise is due to Justinian, by whose command an ample system was reducedto a short and elementary treatise. Among the various institutes of the Romanlaw, (4) those of Caius(5) were the most popular in the east and west; and theiruse may be considered as an evidence of their merit. They were selected by theimperial delegates, Tribonian, Theophilus, and Dorotheus: and the freedom andpurity of the Antonines was incrusted with the coarser materials of a degenerateage. The same volume which introduced the youth of Rome, Constantinople, andBerytus, to the gradual study of the Code and Pandects, is still precious to thehistorian, the philosopher, and the magistrate. The institutes of Justinian aredivided into four books; they proceed, with no contemptible method, from, I. Per­sons, to II. Things, and from things, to III. Actions; and the article IV. of Pri­vate Wrongs, is terminated by the principles of Criminal Laws.
I. The distinction of ranks and persons, is the firmest basis of a mixed and li­mited government. In France, the remains of liberty are kept alive by the spirit,the honours, and even the prejudices, of fifty thousand nobles. (6) Two hundredfamilies supply, in lineal descent, the second branch of the English legislature,which maintains, between the king and commons, the balance of the constitution.A gradation of patricians and plebeians, of strangers and subjects, has supportedthe aristocracy of Genoa, Venice, and ancient Rome. The perfect equality ofmen is the point in which the extremes of democracy and despotism are con­founded, since the majesty of the prince or people would be offended, if any headswere exalted above the level of their fellow-slaves or fellow-citizens. In the de-
(1) Novella ij a classic adjective, bat a barbarous substantive (Ludewig, p. 245.) Justinian never collectedtbem himself: the nine collations, the legal standard of modern tribunals, consists of ninety-eight novels; butthe number was increased by the diligence of Julian, Haloander, and Comius (Ludewig, p. 249. 258. Aleman.Not. in Anecdot. p. 98.)
(2) Montesquieu, Considerations sur la Grandeur et la Decadence des Remains, c. 20. torn. iii. p. Ml. in 4to.On this occasion he throws aside the gown and cap of a president a Mortier.
(3) Procopius, Anecdotic. 28. A similar privilege was granted to the church of Rome (NoveL 9.) For thegeneral repeal of these mischievous indulgences, see Novel. 111. and edict. 5.
(4) Lactantius, in his Institutes of Christianity, an elegant and specious work, proposes to imitate the titleand method of the civilians. Quidam prudemes et arbitri tequitatis Institufiones Civilis Juris compositas edirderunt (Institut. Divin. lib. i. c. 1.) Such as Ulpian. Paul, Florentius, Mareian.
(5) The emperor Justinian calls him suum, though he died before the end of the second century. His In­stitutes are quoted by Servius. Boethius, Priscian, &c. and the Epitome by Arinn is still extant: (see the pro­legomena and notes to the edition of Schulting, in the Jurisprudentia Ante-Justinianea, Lugd. Bat. 1717.Heineccius, Hist. J. R. No. 313. Ludewig, in Vit. Just. p. 109.)
(6) See the Annates Politiques de l'abbe tie St. Pierre, torn. i. p. 25., who dates in the year 1735. The mostancient families claim the immemorial possession of arms and fiefs. Since the crusades, some, the roost trulyrespectable, have been created by the king, for merit and services. The recent and vulgar crowd is derivedsTrom the multitude of venal offices, without trust or dignity, which continually ennoble the wealthy plebeians.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, 281


Lombards of the injury: the two nations, hostile in their faith, were reconciled ina dangerous and unnatural alliance; the king and the exarch marched to the con­quest of Spoleto and Rome: the storm evaporated without effect, but the policyof Liutprand alarmed Italy with a vexatious alternative of hostility and truce.His successor Astolphus declared himself the equal enemy of the emperor andthe pope; Ravenna was subdued by force or treachery,^) and this final conquestextinguished the series of the exarchs, who had reigned with the subordinate powersince the time of Justinian and the ruin of the Gothic kingdom. Rome was sum­moned to acknowledge the victorious Lombard as her lawful sovereign: the an­nual tribute of a piece of gold was fixed as the ransom of each citizen, and thesword of destruction was unsheathed to exact the penalty of her disobedience.The Romans hesitated; they entreated; they complained; and the threateningbarbarians were checked by arms and negotiations, till the popes had engaged thefriendship of an ally and avenger beyond the Alps. (2)
In his distress, the first Gregory had implored the aid of the hero of the age,of Charles Martel, who governed the French monarchy with the humble title ofmayor or duke; and who, by his signal victory over the Saracens, had saved hiscountry, and perhaps Europe, from the Mahometan yoke. The ambassadors ofthe pope were received by Charles with decent reverence; but the greatness ofhis occupations, and the shortness of his lite, prevented his interference in the af->fairs of Italy, except by a friendly and ineffectual mediation. His son, Pepin, theheir of his power and virtues, assumed the office of champion of the Roman church;and the zeal of the French prince appears to have been prompted by the love ofglory and religion. But the danger was on the banks of the Tiber, the succour onthose of the Seine; and our sympathy is cold to the relation of distant misery.Amidst the tears of the city, Stephen III. embraced the generous resolution of vi>siting in person the courts of Lombardy and France, to deprecate the injustice ofhis enemy, or to excite the pity and indignation of his friend. After soothing thepublic despair by litanies and orations, he undertook this laborious journey withthe ambassadors of the French monarch and the Greek emperor. The king ofthe Lombards was inexorable; but his threats could not silence the complaints,nor retard the speed, of the Roman pontiff, who traversed the Pennine Alps, re­posed in the abbey of St. Maurice, and hastened to grasp the right hand of his pro­tector, a hand which was never lifted in vain, either in war or friendship. Ste-»phen was entertained as the visible successor of the apostle; at the next assembly,the field of March or of May, his injuries were exposed to a devout and warlikenation, and he repassed the Alps, not as a suppliant, but as a conqueror, at thehead of a French army, which was led by the king in person. The Lombards,after a weak resistance, obtained an ignominious peace, and swore to restore the pos­sessions, and to respect the sanctity, of the Roman church. But no sooner wasAstolphus delivered from the presence of the French arms, than he forgot his pro*mise and resented his disgrace. Rome was again encompassed by his arms; andStephen apprehensive of fatiguing the zeal of his Transalpine allies, enforced hiscomplaint and request by an eloquent letter in the name and person of St. Peterhimself.(3) The apostle assures his adoptive sons, the king, the clei'gy, and thenobles, of France, that dead in the flesh, he is still alive in the spirit; that they nowhear, and must obey, the voice of the founder and guardian of the Roman church;that the virgin, the angels, the saints, and the martyrs, and all the host of heaven,unanimously urge the request, and will confess the obligation; that riches, victo­ry, and paradise, will crown their pious enterprise, and that eternal damnationwill be the penalty of their neglect, ifthey suffer his tomb, his temple, and his peopleto fall into the hands of the perfidious Lombards. The second expedition of Pepinwas not less rapid and fortunate than the first: St. P^ter was satisfied, Rome was
tores Rcr. Ital. torn. xii. p. 13 5., have preserved thji epistle of Gregory. The loss snd recovery of Ravenna arementioned by Paulus Diaconus (ile Gest. Langobard, lib. vi. c. M- In Scrip. Ital. torn. i. pan 1. p. S06. SOS.;)bat our chronologists, Pagi, Muratori, Sec cannot ascertain tK date or circumstances. .
(1) The option will depend on ihe Tartans readings of theMSS. of Anaitaiiut—deceperat dtcerpnrat. (Script,Ital. torn. iii. pars i. p. 167.) ., , . . . „
(2) The Codex Carolinui is a collection of the epistle- of the popes to Charles Martel (whom they style Sa-hregulw.) Pepin, and Charlemagne, as far as the rear rt)l» when it was termed by the last of these princes.His original aail authentic MS. (Bibliotherae Cubicniarii) is now in the imperial library of Vienna, and hasbeen puWishedby Lambeeius anil Muratori (Scrip*. Rerum. IlaJ. torn. iii. pars 2, p. 75, gcc.)
(3) Sec this most extraordinary letter in ihe Cudex Carolinus, epist. iii. p. 92. The enemies of the popeshave charged them with fraud and blasphemy, yet they surely meant to persuade rather than deceive. Thisintroduction of the dead, or of immortals, was familiar to the aucient orators, though it is executed on this oc*c^sion in the rude fashion of the age,
Vol. 111. 36







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


CHAPTER XLIV.
Idea of the Roman jurisprudence.—The laws of tlie kings.—The twelve tables of tine de­cemvirs.—The laws of the people.—The decrees of the senate.—The edicts of the magis­trates and emperors.—Authority of the civilians.—Code, pandects, novels, and institutes,of Justinian.—I. Rights of persons.—//. Rights of things.—///. Private injuries andactions IV. Crimes and punishments.
The vain titles of the victories of Justinian are crumbled into dust: but the nameof the legislator is inscribed on a fair and everlasting monument. Under his reign,and by his care, the civil jurisprudence was digested in the immortal works of theCode, the Pandects, and the Institutes;(1) the public reason of the Romanshas been silently or studiously transfused into the domestic institutions of Europe, (2)and the laws of Justinian still command the respect or obedience of independentnations. Wise or fortunate is the prince who connects his own reputation with thehonour and interest of a perpetual order of men. The defence of their founder isthe first cause, which in every age has exercised the zeal and industry of the civi­lians. They piously commemorate his virtues; dissemble or deny his failings; andfiercely chastise the guilt or folly of the rebels who presume to sully the majestyof the purple. The idolatry of love has provoked, as it usually happens, the ran­cour of opposition: the character of Justinian has been exposed to the blindvehemence of flattery and invective, and the injustice of a sect (the Anti- Tri-bonians) has refused all praise and merit to the prince, his ministers, and hislaws. (3) Attached to no party, interested only for the truth and candour of histo­ry, and directed by the most temperate and skilful guides, (4) I enter with just dif­fidence on the subject of civil law, which has exhausted so many learned lives, andclothed the walls of such spacious libraries. In a single, if possible in a short chap­ter, I shall trace the Roman jurisprudence from Romulus to Justinian,(5) appre­ciate the labours of that emperor, and pause to contemplate the principles of ascience so important to the peace and happiness of society. The laws of a nationform the most instructive portion of its history; and, although I have devoted my­self to write the annals of a declining monarchy, I shall embrace the occasion tobreathe the pure and invigorating air of the republic.
The primitive government of Rome(6) was composed, with some political skill,of an electiv e king, a council of nobles, and a general assembly of the people. Warand religion were administered by the supreme magistrate; and he alone proposedthe laws, which were debated in the senate, and finally ratified or rejected by amajority of votes in the thirty curie or parishes of the city. Romulus, Numa, andServius Tullius, are celebrated as the most ancient legislators; and each of themclaims his peculiar part in the threefold division of jurisprudence. (7) The laws
(1) The civilians of the darker ages have established an absurd and incomprehensible mode of quotation,which is supported by authority and custom. In their references to the Code, the Pandects, and the Insti­tutes, they mention the number not of the book, but only of the law, and content themselves with reciting thefirst words of Che title to which it belongs; and of these titles there Hre more than a thousand. Ludewig (Vit.Justiniani, p. 268.) wishes to shake off this pedantic yoke; and I have dared to adopt the simple and rational me­thod of numbering the book, the title, and the law.
(8) Germany. Bohemia, Hungary, Poland, and Scotland, have received them as common law or reason; inFrance, Italy, &c. they possess a direet or indirect influence; and they were respected in England, from Ste­phen to Edward I. our national Justinian (Duck, de TJsu et Auctoritate Juris Civilis, lib. ii. c. 1.8—15. Hein-eccios, Hist. Joris Germanici, c. 3, 4. No. 55—124.,) and the legal historians of each country.
(3) Francis Hottoman, a learned and acute lawyer of the sixteenth century, wished to mortify Cu jacius, anetto please the Chancellor de l'Hopital. His Anti-Tribonianus (which I have never been able to procure) waspublished in French in 1609: and his sect was propagated in Germany (Heineccius, Opp. torn. iii. sylloge 3. p.171—183.)
(4) At the head of these guides I shall respectfully place the learned and perspicuous Heineccius, a Germanprofessor, who died at Halle in the year 1741 (see his Eloge in the Nouvelle Bihliotbeque Germaniqtie, torn. ii.p.51—64.) His ample works have been collected in eight volumes in 4to. Geneva, 1743—1748. Thetreatiseawhich I have separately used are, 1. Historia Juris Honiani et Germanici. Lugd. Batav. 1740, in 8vo. 2. Syn­tagma Antiquitatum Romanarn Jurisprudentiain illustramium, 2 vols, in 8vo. Traject. ad Rhenum. 3. Ele-menta Juris Civilis secundum Ordinem Institutionum, Lugd. Bat. 1751, in 8vo. 4. Elementa J. C. secundumOrdinem Pandectarum, Traject. 1772, in 8vo. 2 vols.
(A) Our original text is a fragment de Origine Juris (Pandect, lib. i. tit 2.) of Pomponius, a Roman lawyer*who lived under the Antonines (Heinec. torn. iii. syll. 3. p. 66—126.) It has been abridged, and probably cor­rupted, by Tribonian, and since restored by Bynkershoek (Opp. torn. i. p. 279—304.)
(6) The constitutional history of the kings of Rome may be studied in the first book of Livy, and more co­piously in Dionysius Halicarnassensis (lib. ii.p. 80—96. 119—130. lib. iv. p. 198—220.,) who sometimes betraysthe character of a rhetorician and a Greek.
(7) This threefold division of the law was applied to the three Roman kings by Justus Liptius (Opp. torn. ir.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, SIX


generosity and valour was the darling theme of their song; and when they pointedtheir keenest satire against a despicable race, they affirmed, in the bitterness ofreproach, that the men knew not how to give, nor the women to deny.(l) Thesame hospitality, which was practised by Abraham and celebrated by Homer, isstill renewed in the camps of the Arabs. The ferocious Bedoweens, the terror ofthe desert, embrace, without inquiry or hesitation, the stranger who dares to con­fide in their honour and to enter their tent. His treatment is kind and respectful;he shares the wealth or the poverty of his host: and, after a needful repose, he isdismissed on his way, with thanks, with blessings, and perhaps with gifts. Theheart and hand are more largely expanded by the wants of a brother or a friendjbut the heroic acts that could deserve the public applause, must have surpassedthe narrow measure of discretion and 'experience. A dispute had arisen, whoamong the citizens of Mecca, was entitled to the prize of generosity, and a suc­cessive application was made to the three who were deemed most worthy of thetrial, Abdallah, the son of Abbas, had undertaken a distant journey, and his footwas in the stirrup when he heard the voice of a suppliant:—"O son of the uncleof the apostle of God, I am a traveller and in distress!" He instantly dismountedto present the pilgrim with his camel, her rich caparison, and a purse of four thou­sand pieces of gold, excepting only the sword, either for its intrinsic value, or asthe gift of an honoured kinsman. The servant of Kais informed the second sup-pliant that his master was asleep; but he immediately added, "Here is a purse ofseven thousand pieces of gold (it is all we have in the house,) and here is an order,that will entitle you to a camel and a slave:" the master, as soon as he awoke,praised and enfranchised his faithful steward, with a gentle reproof, that, by re­specting his slumbers, he had stinted his bounty. The third of these heroes, theblind Arabah, at the hour of prayer, was supporting his steps on the shoulders oftwo slaves. "Alas!" he replied, " my coffers are empty! but these you may sell: ifyou refuse, I renounce them." At these words, pushing away the youths, hegroped along the wall with his staff. The character of Hatem is the perfect modelof Arabian virtue:(2) he was brave and liberal, an eloquent poet and a successfulrobber: forty camels were roasted at his hospitable feast; and at the prayer of asuppliant enemy, he restored both the captives and the spoil. The freedom of hiscountrymen disdained^he laws of justice: thqy proudly indulged the spontaneousimpulse of pity and benevolence.
The religion of the Arabs,(3) as well as of the Indians, consisted in the worshipof the sun, the moon, and the fixed stars, a primitive and specious mode of super­stition. The bright luminaries of the skv display the visible image of a deity: theirnumber and distance convey to a philosophic, or even a vulgar eye, the idea of aboundless space; the character of eternity is marked on these solid globes, thatseem incapable of corruption or decay; the regularity of their motions may bfrascribed to a principle of reason or instinct; and their real or imaginary influenceencourages the vain belief that the earth and its inhabitants are the object of theirpeculiar care. The science of astronomy was cultivated at Babvlon; but the schoolof the Arabs was a clear firmament and a naked plain. In the nocturnal marches,,they steered by the guidance of the stars: their names, and order, and daily station,were familiar to the curiosity and devotion of the Bedoween; and he was taught byexperience to divide in twenty-eight parts, the zodiac of the moon, and to bless-the constellations who refreshed, with salutary rains, the thirst of the desert. Thereign of the heavenly orbs could not be extended beyond the visible sphere; andsome metaphysical powers were necessary to sustain the transmigration of soulsand the resurrection of bodies: a camel was left to perish on the grave, that hemight serve his master in another life; and the invocation of departed spirits im­plies that they were still endowed with consciousness and power. I am ignorant,and I am careless of the blind mythology of the barbarians; of the local deities, ofthe stars, the air, and the earth, of their sex or titles, their attributes or subordi­nation. Each tribe, each family, each independent warrior, created and changedthe rites and the object of his fantastic worship; but the nation, in every age, hasbowed to the religion, as well as to the language, of Mecca. The genuine antiquity of
(1) Sale's Preliminary Discourse, p. 29.30.
(2) D'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orient, p. 458. Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet, torn. iii. p. 118. Caab and Hesnus (Po-cock, Specimen, p. 43. 48. 48.) were likewise conspicuous for their liberality; and the latter is elegantly praisedby an Arabian poet:—" Videbis eum cum accessens t?xultantem, ac si dares illi quod ab illo petis."
(3) Whatever can be known of the idolatry of the ancient Arabians, may be found in Pocock, (Specimen,p.89—136. 153,164.) His profound erudition'is more clearly and concisely interpreted by Sale; (PreliminaryDiscourse, p. 14—24,) and Assemanni (Mibltot. Orient, torn. iv. p. 580 — 598.) has added some valuable remarks







OCR Output








180 THE DECLINE AND FALL


tion, the payment of the arrears, with exorbitant interest, was always made thefirst condition of the new treaty. In the language of a barbarian without guile, 'the prince of the Avars affected to complain of the insincerity of the Greeks,(l)yet he was not inferior to the most civilized nations in the refinements of dissimu­lation and perfidy. As the successor of the Lombards, the chagan asserted hisclaim to the important city of Sirmium, the ancient bulwark of the Illyrian pro­vinces. (2) The plains of the Lower Hungary were covered with the Avar horse,and a fleet of large boats was built in the Hyrcinian wood, to descend the Danube,and to transport into the Save the materials of a bridge. But as the strong garri­son of Singidunum, which commanded the conflux ot the two rivers, might havestopped their passage and baffled his designs, he dispelled their apprehensions bya solemn oath, that his views were not hostile to the empire. He swore by hissword, the symbol of the god of war, that he did not, as the enemy of Rome, con­struct a bridge upon the Save. " If I violate my oath," pursued the intrepidBaian, " may I myself, and the last of my nation, perish by the sword! may the
. heavens and fire, the deity of the heavens, fall upon our heads! may the forestsand mountains bury us in their ruins! and the Save returning, against the laws ofnature, to his source, overwhelm us in his angry waters!" After this barbarousimprecation, he calmly inquired, what oath was the most sacred and venerableamong the Christians, what guilt of perjury it was most dangerous to incur._ Thebishop of Singidunum presented the gospel, which the chagan received with de­vout reverence. " I swear," said he, " by the God who has spoken in this holybook, that I have neither falsehood on my tongue, nor treachery in my heart." As
' soon as he rose from his knees, he accelerated the labour of the bridge, and des­patched an envoy to proclaim what he no longer wished to conceal. " Inform theemperor," said the perfidious Baian, " that Sirmium is invested on every side.Advise his prudence to withdraw the citizens and their effects, and resign a citywhich it is now impossible to relieve or defend." Without the hope of relief, thedefence of Sirmium was prolonged above three years; the walls were still un­touched; but famine was enclosed within the walls, till a merciful capitulation al­lowed the escape of the naked and hungry inhabitants. Singidunum, at the dis­tance of fifty miles, experienced a more cruel fate: the buildings were rased, andthe vanquished people were condemned to servitude and exile. Yet the ruins ofSirmium are no longer visible; the advantageous situation of Singidunum soon at­tracted a new colony of Sclavonians; and the conflux of the Save and Danube isstill guarded by the fortifications of Belgrade, or the White City, so often and soobstinately disputed by the Christian and Turkish arms. (3) From Belgrade tothe walls of Constantinople, a line may be measured of six hundred miles; thatline was marked with flames and with blood; the horses of the Avars were alter­nately bathed in the Euxine and the Adriatic; and the Roman pontiff, alarmed bythe approach of a more savage enemy, (4) was reduced to cherish the Lombardsas the protectors of Italy. The despair of a captive, whom his country refusedto ransom, disclosed to the Avarsthe intention and practice of military engines;(5)but in the first attempts they were rudely framed and awkwardly managed; andthe resistance of Diocletianapolis and Bersea, of Phillippolis and Adrianoplesoon exhausted the skill and patience of the besiegers. The warfare of Baianwas that of a Tartar, yet his mind was susceptible of a humane and generous sen­timent: he spared Anchialus, whose salutary waters had restored the health ofthe best beloved of his wives; and the Romans confess, that their starving armywas fed and dismissed by the liberality of a foe. His empire extended over Hun­gary, Poland, and Prussia, from the mouth of the Danube to that of the Oder;(6)and his new subjects were divided and transplanted by the jealous policy of the
(1) Theophylact, lib. vi. c. 6. lib. vii. c. 15. The Greek historian confesses the truth and jmtice of failreproacb.
(2) Menander(in Eaccrpt. Legat. p. 126—132.174, 175.) describes the perjury of Baian and the surrender ofSirmitiro. We have lost his acoount of the siege, which is commended by Theophylact, lib. i. c. 3. To a* tm>;
(3) See iTAnvitle, In the Memoires de l'Acad. des Inscriptions, torn, xxviii. p, 412—443. The Sclavonicname of Belgrade is mentioned in the tenth century by Constantine Porphyrogenitus: the Latin appellationof Alba Gratca is used by the Franks in the beginning of the ninth, (p. 414.)
(4) Baron. Annal. Ecclcs. A. D. 600. No.!. Paul Warnefrid (lib.iv. c. 38.) relates their irruption into Friuli,and (c. 39.) the captivity of his ancestors, about A. D. 632. The Sclavi traversed the Hadriatic, cum mullitu-dinc navium. and made a descent in the territory of St. Pontnm (c. 47.)
(5) Rr.n the hclepolis,or moveable turret. Theophylact, lit. li. 16,17.
_ (6) The arms and alliances of the chagan reached to the neighbourhood of a western sea, fifteen months'journey from Constantinople. The emperor Maurice convened with some itinerant harpers from that re­mote country, and only seems to have mistaken a trade for a nation. Throphvloct, lib. vi. e. 5.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


prince of the Saracens, the ally and soldier of the emperor of Justinian.(1) A pa­rent who drags his son to the altar, exhibits the most painful and sublime effortof fanaticism: the deed, or the intention, was sanctified by the example of saintsand heroes; and the father of Mahomet himself was devoted by a rash vow, andhardly ransomed for the equivalent of a hundred camels. In the time of ignorance,the Arabs, like the Jews, and Egyptians, abstained from the taste of swine'sflesh;(2) they circumcised(3) their children at the age of puberty: the same cus­toms, without the censure or the precept of the Koran, have been silently trans­mitted to their posterity and proselytes. It has been sagaciously conjectured, thatthe artful legislator indulged the stubborn prejudices of his countrymen. It ismore simple to believe that he adhered to the habits and opinions of his youth,without foreseeing that a practice congenial to the climate of Mecca, might be­come useless or inconvenient on the banks of the Danube or the Volga.
Arabia was free: the adjacent kingdoms were shaken by the storms of conquestand tyranny, and the persecuted sects fled to the happy land where they mightprofess what they thought, and practise what they professed. The religions of theSabians and Magians, of the Jews, and Christians, were disseminated from thePersian gulf to the Red Sea. In a remote period of antiquity, Sabianism was dif­fused over Asia by the science of the Chaldeans(4) and the arms of the Assyrians,From the observations of two thousand years, the priests and astronomers of Ba-bylon(5) deduced the eternal laws of nature and Providence, They adored theseven gods or angels who directed the course of the seven planets, and shed theirirresistible influence on the earth. The attributes of the seven planets, with thetwelve signs of the zodiac, and the twenty-four constellations of the northern andsouthern hemisphere, were represented by images and talismans; the seven daysof the week were dedicated to their respective deities: the Sabians prayed thriceeach day; and the temple of the moon at Haran was the term of their pilgrimage. (6)But the flexible genius of their faith was always ready either to teach or to learn;in the tradition of the creation, the deluge, and the patriarchs, they held a singularagreement with their Jewish captives; they appealed to the secret books of Adam,Seth, and Enoch: and a slight infusion of the gospel has transformed the last rem­nant of the polytheists into the Christians of St. John, in the territory of Bassora. (7)The altars of Babylon were overturned by the Magians; but the injuries of the Sa­bians were revenged by the sword of Alexander; Persia groaned above five hun­dred years under a foreign yoke; and the purest disciples of Zoroaster escaped fromthe contagion of idolatry, and breathed with their adversaries the freedom of thedesert. (8) Seven hundred years before the death of Mahomet, the Jews weresettled in Arabia: and a far greater multitude was expelled from the holy landin the wars of Titus and Hadrian. The industrious exiles aspired to liberty andpower; they erected synagogues in the castles and cities in the wilderness, andtheir gentile converts were confounded with the children of Israel, whom theyresembled in the outward mark of circumcision. The Christian missionaries werestill more active and successful: the catholics asserted their universal reign; the
(1) Procopius, (de Bell. Persico, lib. i. c. 28.)Evagrius, (lib. vi. c. 21.) and Pocock,(Speeimen, p. 72. 86.) attest(he human sacrifices of the Arabs in the sixth century. The danger anil escape of Abdallah, is a tradition ratherthan a fact. (Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet, torn. i. p. 82—84.)
(2) Suillis carnibna abstinent, says Solinus, (Polyhistor, c. 33.) who copies Pliny, lib. viii. c. 68.)in the strangesupposition, tbat hogs cannot live in Arabia. The Egyptians were actuated by a natural and superstitioushorror for that unclean beast, (Marsham, Canon, p. 205.) The old Arabians likewise practised, port coitvm, theright of ablution, (Herodot. Lib. i. c. 8.) which is sanctified by the Mahometan law,(Reland, p. 75, &c.,Chardin,or rather the Mollnh of Shaw Abbas, torn. iv.p. 71, he)
(3) The Mahometan doctors are not fond of the subject: yet they hold circumcision necessary to salvation,and even pretend that Mahomet was miraculously born without a foreskin, (Pocock, Specimen, p. 319,320.Sale's Preliminary Discourse, p. 106. 107.)
(4; Diodorns Siculus, (torn. t. lib. ii. p. 142—145.) has cast on their religion the curious but superficial glanceof a Greek. Their astronomy would be far more valuable: they had looked through the telescope of reason,since they could doubt whether the sun were in the number of the planets or of the fixed stars.
(5) Simplicius,(\vho quotes Porphyry) de Casio, lib. K. com. 46. p. 123. lin. 18. apud Marsham, Canon. Chron.p. 474. who doubts the fact, because it is adverse to his systems. The earliest date of the Chaldean observationsis the year 2234 before Christ. After the conquest of Babylon by Alexander, they were communicated, at therequest of Aristotle, to the astronomer Hipparchus. What a moment in the annals of science!
(6) Pocock (Specimen, p. 138—146.) Hottinger (Hist. Oriental, p. 162—203.) Hyde (de Iteligione Vet. Persa-'um, p. 124. 128, &c.) d'Herbelot (Sabi, p. 725,726.) and Sale (Preliminary Discourse, p. 14, 15.) rather excitethan gratify our curiosity; and the last of these writers confounds Sabianism with the primitive religion of UteArabs.
(7) D'Anville rl'Euphiates de le Tigre, p. 130—147.) will fix the position of these ambiguous Christians: As-semannus (Bibliot. Oriental, lorn. iv. p. 607—614.) may explain their tenets. But it is ft slippery task to ascer­tain the creed of an ignorant people, afraid and ashamed to disclose their si-cret traditions.
(8) The magi were fixed in the province of Bahrein, (Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet, turn. iii. p. 114.) are mingledwill) the old Arabians, (Pocock, Specimen,p. 146—150.)
Voi. III. 40







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


Since the emperor declined the fame and envy of original composition, we can■only require at his hands', method, choice, and fidelity, the humble, though indis­pensable, virtues of a compiler. Among the various combinations of ideas, St isdifficult to assign any reasonable preference; but as the order of Justinian is differ­ent in his three works, it is possible that all may be wrong; and it is certain thattwo cannot be right. In the selection of ancient laws, he seems to have viewedhis predecessors with jealousy, and with equal regard: the series could not ascendabove the reign of Hadrian, and the narrow distinction- of paganism and Christi­anity, introduced by the superstition of Theodosius, had been abolished by theconsent of mankind. But the jurisprudence of the Pandects is circumscribed with­in a period of a hundred years, from the perpetual edict to the death of SeverusAlexander: the civilians who lived under the first Cxsars, are seldom permitted tospeak, and only three names can be attributed to the age of the republic. Thefavourite of Justinian (it has been fiercely urged) was fearful of encountering thelight of freedom and the gravity cf the Roman sages. Tribonian condemned tooblivion the genuine and native wisdom of Cato, the Scssvolas, and Sulpicius; whilehe invoked spirits more congenial to his own, the Syrians, Greeks, and Africanswho flocked to the imperial court to study Latin as a foreign tongue, and jurispru­dence as a lucrative profession. But the ministers of Justinian(l) were instructedto labour, not for the curiosity of antiquarians, but for the immediate benefit of hissubjects. It was their duty to select the useful and practicable parts of the Ro­man law; and the writings of the old republicans, however curious or excellent,were no longer suited to the new system of manners, religion, and government.Perhaps, if the preceptors and friends of Cicero were still alive, our candour wouldacknowledge, that, except in purity of language,(2) their intrinsic merit was ex­celled by the school of Papinian and.Ulpian. Thjp science of the laws is the slowgrowth of time and experience, and the advantage both of method and materialsis naturally assumed by the most recent authors. The civilians of the reign of theAntoniiies had studied the works of their predecessors: their philosophic spirit hadmitigated-the rigour of antiquity, simplified the forms of proceeding, and emergedfrom the jealousy and prejudice of the rival sects. The choice of the authoritiesthat compose the Pandects, depended on the judgment of Tribonian: but the powerof his sovereign could not absolve him from the sacred obligations of truth and fi­delity. As the legislator of the empire, Justinian might repeal the acts of the An-tonines, or condemn, as seditious, the free principles, which were maintained bythe last of the Roman lawyers. (3) But the existence of past facts is placed be­yond the reach of despotism; and the emperor was guilty of fraud and forgery,when he corrupted the integrity of their text, inscribed with their venerable namesthe words and ideas of his servile reign,(4) and suppressed, by the hand of power,the pure and authentic copies of their sentiments. The changes and interpola­tions of Tribonian and his colleagues are excused by the pretence of uniformity :but their cares have been insufficient, and the antinomies, or contradictions of theCode and Pandects, still exercise the patience and subtlety of modern civilians.(5)
A rumour devoid of evidence has been propagated by the enemies of Justinian;that the jurisprudence of ancient Rome was reduced to ashes by the author of thePandects, from the vain persuasion, that it was now either false or superfluous.Without usurping an office so invidious, the emperor might safely commit to igno­rance and time the accomplishment of this destructive wish. Before the inventionof printing and paper, the latibur and the materials of writing could be purchasedonly by the rich; and it may reasonably be computed, that the price of books wasa hundred fold their present value. (6) Copies were slowly multiplied and cau-
(1) An ingenious and learned oration of Schulttngius (Jurisprudent -Ante-Justinianea, p. 883—907.) justi­fies the choice of Tribonian, against the passionate charges of Francis Hottoman and his sectaries.
(2) Strip away the crust of Tribonian, and allow for the use of technical words, and the Latin of the Pan-dectj will be found not unworthy of the silver age. It has been vehemently attacked by Laurentius Valla, ftfastidious grammarian of the fifteenth century, and by his apologist Florid us Sabinus. It has 'been defendedby Alciat and a nameless advocate (most probably James Capellus.) Their various, treatises are collected byDuker. (Opuscula de Latinitate veterura Jurisconsultoi-um, Lugd. Bat. 1721. in 12mn.)
(3) Nomina qniricrvi veteribus <ervavimus, legum au:em veritatem nostram feeimus. Itaque siquid erat inillis seditiosum, multa auttm talia crant ibi reposita, hoc decisum est et definitum, et in perspicuutn finem de-ducta est qusque lex (Cod. Justinian, lib. i. tit. Jtvii. leg. iii. No. 10.) A frank confession I
(4) The number of these emblemata (a polite name for forgeries) is much reduced by Bynkershoelc (in thefour last books of his observations.) who poorly maintains the right of Justinian and the duty of Tribonian.
(5) The antimonies, or opposite laws of the Code and Pandects, are sometinres the cause, and often the ex.«use, of the glorious uncertainty of the civil law, which so often affords what Mnntagne calls " Questionspour i'Ami." See a fine passage of Franciseus Balduinus in Justinian (lib. ii. p. 259, &c. apud Lodewig, p.SOS, 3C6.)
(6) When Fust, or Faustui, sold at Paris his first printed bibles as manuscripts, the price of a parchment







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 411


formerly resisted the powers of Athens and Carthage. They stood above twentydays against the battering-rams and catafiulte, the mines and tortoises of the be­siegers; and the place might have been relieved if the mariners of the imperialfleet had not been detained at Constantinople in building a church to the VirginMary. The deacon Theodosius, with the bishop and clergy, was dragged in chainsfrom the altar to Palermo, cast into a subterraneous dungeon, and exposed to thehourly peril of death or apostacy. His pathetic, and not inelegant complaint, maybe read: as the epitaph of his country.(l) From the Roman conquest to this finalcalamity, Syracuse, now dwindled to the primitive isle of Ortygea, had insensiblydeclined. Yet the relics were still precious; the plate of the cathedral weighedfive thousand pounds ofrsilver; the entire spoil, was computed at one million ofpieces of gold (about four hundred thousand pounds sterling,) and the captivesmust outnumber the seventeen thousand Christians who were transported fromthe sack of Tauromenium into African servitude. In Sicily the religion and lan­guage of the Greeks were eradicated; and such was the docility of the rising gene­ration, that fifteen thousand boys were circumcised and clothed on the same daywith the son of the Fatimite caliph. The Arabian squadrons issued from the har­bours of Palermo, Biserta, and Tunis; a hundred and fifty towns of Calabria andCampania were attacked and pillaged; nor could the suburbs of Rome be defendedby the name of the Cscsars and apostles. Had the Mahometans been united, Italymust have fallen an easy and glorious accession to the empire of the prophet. Butthe caliphs of Bagdad had lost their authority in the west; the Aglabites and Fati-mites usurped the provinces of Africa; their emirs of Sicily aspired to indepen­dence; and the design of conquest and dominion was degraded to a repetition ofpredatory inroads. (2)
In the sufferings of prostrate Italy, the name of Rome awakens a solemn andmournful recollection. A fleet of Saracens from the African coast presumed toenter the mouth of the Tiber, and to approach a city which even yet, in her fallenstate, was revered as the metropolis of the Christian world. The gates and ram­parts were guarded by a trembling people; but the tombs and temples of St. Peterand St. Paul were left exposed in the suburbs of the Vatican and of the Ostianway. Their invisible sanctity had protected them against the Goths, the Vandals,and the Lombards; but the Arabs disdained both the gospel and the legend; andtheir rapacious spirit was approved and animated by the precepts of the Koran.The Christian idols were stripped of their costly offerings; a silver altar was tornaway from the shrine of St. Peter; and if the bodies or the buildings were left en­tire, their deliverance must be imputed to the haste, rather than the scruples, ofthe Saracens. In their course along the Appian way, they pillaged Fundi and be­sieged Gayeta; but they had turned aside from the walls of Rome, and, by theirdivisions, the capitol was saved from the yoke of the prophet of Mecca. The samedanger still impended on the heads of the Roman people; and their domestic forcewas unequal to the assault of an African emir. They claimed the protection oftheir Latin sovereign; but the Carlovingian standard was overthrown by a detach­ment of the barbarians: they meditated the restoration of the Greek emperors;but the attempt was treasonable, and the succour remote and precarious.(3) Theirdistress appeared to receive some aggravation from the death of their spiritualand temporal chief; but the pressing emergency superseded the forms and intriguesof an election; and the unanimous choice of pope Leo the Fourth(4) was the safetyof the church and city. This pontiff was born a Roman; the courage of the firstages of the republic glowed in his breast; and, amidst the ruins of his country, hestood erect, like one of the firm and loftv columns that rear their heads above thefragments of the Roman forum. The first days of his reign were consecrated tothe purification and removal of relics, to prayers and processions, and to all the


(1) The tlarrative or lamentation of Theodosius ii transcribed and illustrated by Pagi. (Gritica, torn* 3. p.719, &c.) Constantine Porphyrogenitus (in Vit. Basil, e. 69,70. p. 100—192.) mentions the loss of Syracuseand the triumph of the. demons.
(a) The extracts from the Arabie histories of Sicily are given in AbuIfeda,(Annal. Moslem, p. 271—2730 andin the first volume of Muratori's Scriptores Rerum Iralicarura. M. de Guignes (Hist, des Huns, torn. i. p. 363,664.) lias added some important facts.
(3) One of the most eminent Romans (Gratianus, magister militnm et Romani palatii sitperista) svas accusedof declaring, Quia Franci nihil novis honi faciunt, neque adjutorium pra;bent, sed mngis tpite nostra sunt rio-lenter tollunt. Quare non adveeamus Onecos.et cum eil foidHs pacis component.es, Francorum vcge met gen-t*m denostro regno et tlominatione cxpellimus? Anastasius in Leone IV. p. 199.
(4) Voltaire (Hist. Generate, torn. 2, c. 33. p. 124.J appears to be remarkably struck with the character off.eo IV. I have borrowed his feirernl expression, but the sight of the forum has furnished me Willi tdwlfhct aiftl TiVPly itntrge.







OCR Output








124 THE DECLINE AND FALL


sometimes granted a personal exemption from the obligation and penalty of parti-ticular statutes; and each indulgence was an act of jurisdiction exercised by the re­public over the first of her citizens. His humble privilege was at length transformedinto the prerogative of a tyrant; and the Latin expression of released from thelait>8,(\) was supposed to exalt the emperor above all human restraints, and toleave his conscience and reason as the sacred measure of his conduct. 2. A simi­lar dependence was implied in the decrees of the senate, which, in every reign,defined the titles and powers of an elective magistrate. But it was not before theideas, and even the language, of the Romans had been corrupted, that a royallaw,(2) and an irrevocable gift of the people, were created by the fancy of Ulpian,or more probably of Tribonian himself :(3) and the origin of imperial power, thoughfalse in fact, and slavish in its consequence, was supported on a principle of free­dom and justice. *' The pleasure of the emperor has the vigour and effect of law,since the Roman people, by the roy:il law, have transferred to their prince the fullextent of their own power and sovereignly."(4) The will of a single man, of achild perhaps, was allowed to prevail over the wisdom of ages and the inclinationsof millions; and the degenerate Greeks were proud to declare, that in his .handsalone the arbitrary exercise of legislation could be safely deposited. " What inte­rest or passion," exclaims Theophilus in the court of Justinian, "can reach thecalm and sublime elevation of the monarch? He is already master of the lives andfortunes of his subjects; and those who have incurred his displeasure, are alreadynumbered with the dead. "(5) Disdaining the language of flattery, the historianmay confess, that in questions of private jurisprudence, the absolute sovereign ofa great empire can seldom be influenced by any personal considerations. Virtue,or even reason, will suggest to his impartial mind, that he is the guardian of peaceand equity, and that the interest of society is inseparably connected with his own.Under the weakest and most vicious reign, the seat of justice was filled by the wis­dom and integrity of Papinian and Ulpian;(6) and the purest materials of the Codeand Pandects are inscribed with the names of Caracalla and his ministers. (7) Thetyrant of Rome was sometimes the benefactor of the provinces. A dagger termi­nated the crimes of Domitian; but the prudence of Nerva confirmed his acts,which, in the joy of their deliverance, had been rescinded by an indignant senate. (8)Vet in the rescri/ils,(9) replies to the consultations of the magistrates, the wisestof princes might be deceived by a partial exposition of the case. And this abuse,which placed their hasty decisions on the same level with mature and deliberateacts of legislation, was ineffectually condemned by the sense and example of Tra­jan. The rescripts of the emperor, his grants and decrees, his edicts and firagma-tic sanctions, were subscribed in purple ink,(10) and transmitted to the provincesas general or special laws, which the magistrates were bound to execute, and thepeople to obey. But as their number continually multiplied, the rule of obediencebecame each day more doubtful and obscure, till the will of the sovereign was fixedand ascertained in the Gregorian, the Hermogenian, and the Theodosian codes.The two first, of which some fragments have escaped, were framed by two private


(1) The constitutional style of I.rgibiu Solutus ii misinterpreted by the art or ignorance of Dion Cnssitn(torn. i. lib. liii. p. 713.) On this occasion, bis editor, Reimar, joins the universal censure which freedom andcriticism have pronounced against that slavish historian.
(2) The woni (lex regia) was still more recent than the thing. The slaves of Commodus or Caracalla wouldhave started at the name of royalty.
(3) See Gravina (Opp. p. 601—512.,) and Beaufort (Repoblique Rnmaine, torn. i. p. S55—274.) He has made« proper use of two dissertations by John Frederick Gronovius and NToodt,both translated, with valuable notes,by Barbeyrac, 2 vols, in 12mo. 1731.
(4) Institnt. lib. i. tit. ii No, 6. Pandect, lib. i. tit. iv. leg. i. Cod. Justinian, lib. i. tit. xvii. leg. i. No. 7. Inhis antiquities and elements. Heineccins has amply treated de constitutionibuspriiicipum, which are illustratedby Gndefroy (Comment, ad Cod. Theodos. lib. i. tit. 1—3.,) and Gravina (p. 87—00.)
(5) Theophilus, rn Paiaphra*. Gi-sse. Institnt. p. 33,34. edit. Reitz. For his person, time, and writings, seethe Theophilus of J. H. Mylins, F.xcurs. iii. p. 1034—1703. .
(6) There is more envy than reason in the complaint of Mncrinus (Jul. Capitolin. c. xiii..)—Nefai esse legesvideri Commodl et Cai-acalla et hnminum impcritnrum vultimntes. Commodus was made a Divus by Several(Dodwell, Pneleci. viii. p. 324,325.) Yet he occurs only twice in the Pandects.
(7) Of Amonius Caracalla alone two hundred constitutions ate extant in the Code, and with his father onehundred and sixty. These two princes are quoted fifty times in the Pandects and eight in the Institutes (Te-rasson, p. 205.)
(8) Plin. Secund. Epistol. x. 66. Sueton. in Domitian. e. xxiii.
(9) It was a maxim of Constamine, contra jus rescriptanon valeant (Cod. Theodos. lib. i. tit. ii. lepr. i.) Theemperors reluctantly allow some scrutiny into the law and the tact, some delay, petition. Sec: but these insuf­ficient remedies are too much in the discretion and at the peril of the judge.
(10) A componnd of vermilion and cinnabar, which marks the imperial diplomas from Leo I, (A. D. 470.) tothe fall of the Greek empire (Bibliotheque Raisonnee de la Diplomatique, torn. i. p. 509—514. Lami,de Eru-•dMane Apostolorum, torn, ii. p. 720—726.)







OCR Output








142 THE DECLINE AND FALL


than the Jewish,(l) the Athenian,(2) or the English institutions.(3) On thedeath of a citizen, all his descendants, unless they were already freed from hispaternal power, were called to the inheritance of his possessions. The insolentprerogative of primogeniture was unknown: the two sexes were placed on a justlevel; all the sons and daughters were entitled to an equal portion of the patrimo­nial estate; and if any of the sons had been intercepted by a premature death, hisperson was represented, and his share was divided by his surviving children. Onthe failure of the direct line, the right of succession must diverge to the collateralbranches. The degrees of kindred(4) are numbered by the civilians, ascendingfrom the last possessor to a common parent, and descending from the common pa­rent to the next heir: my father stands in the first degree, my brother in the se­cond, his children in the third, and the remainder of the series may be conceivedby fancy, or pictured in a genealogical table. In this computation, a distinctionwas made, essential to the laws and even the constitution of Rome; the agnats, orpersons connected by a line of males, were called, as they stood in the nearest de­gree, to an equal partition; but a female was incapable of transmitting any legalclaims; and the cognats of every rank, without excepting the dear relation of amother and a son, were disinherited by the twelve tables, as strangers and aliens. *Among the Romans, a gens or lineage was united by a common name and do­mestic rites: the various cognomens or surnames of Scipio or Marcellus, distin­guished from each other the subordinate branches or families of the Cornelian orClaudian race: the default of the agnats, of the same surname, was supplied bythe larger denomination of Gentiles; and the vigilance of the laws maintained, inthe same name, the perpetual descent of religion and property. A similar prin­ciple dictated the Voconian law, (5) which abolished the right of female inheri­tance. As long as virgins were given or sold in marriage, the adoption of thewife extinguished the hopes of the daughter. But the equal succession of inde­pendent matrons supported their pride and luxury, and might transport into a fo­reign house the riches of their fathers. While the maxims of Cato(6) were re­vered, they tended to perpetuate in each family a just and virtuous mediocrity; tillfemale blandishments insensibly triumphed; and every salutary restraint was lostin. the dissolute greatness of the republic. The rigour of the decemvirs was tem­pered by the equity of the pretors. Their edicts restored emancipated and post­humous children to the rights of nature: and upon the failure of the agnats theypreferred the blood of the cognats to the name of the Gentiles, whose title andcharacter were insensibly covered with oblivion. The reciprocal inheritance ofmothers and sons was established in the Tertullian and Orphitian decrees by thehumanity of the senate. A new and more impartial order was introduced by thenovels of Justinian, who affected to revive the jurisprudence of the twelve tables.The lines of masculine and female kindred were confounded: the descending, as­cending, and collateral series, was accurately denned; and each degree, accordingto the proximity of blood and affection, succeeded to the vacant possessions of aRoman citizen. (7)
The order of succession is regulated by nature, or at least by the general and
Sermanent reason of the law-giver; but this order is frequently violated by the ar-itrary and partial mills which prolong the dominion of the testator beyond thegrave.(8) In the simple state of society, this last use or abuse of the right of pro-
(1) Among the patriarchs, the first born enjoyed a mystic and spiritual primogeniture. (Genesis, 25. si.)In the land of Canaan he was entitled to a double portion of inheritance (Deuteronomy, 21.17. with LeClerc's judicious Commentary.)
(2) At Athens the sons were equal, but the poor daughters were endowed at the discretion of their bro­thers. See the xXjtsucoi pleadings of Isseus (in the seventh volume of the Greek Orators,) illustrated by theversion and comment of Sir William Jones, a scholar, a lawyer, and a man of genius.
(3) In England, the eldest son alone inherits all'the land; a law, says the orthodox judge Blackstone, (Com­mentaries on the Laws of England, vol. 2. p. 215.) unjust only in the opinion of younger brothers. It may beoi tome political use in sharpening their industry.
(4) Blackstone's tables (vol. ii. p. 202.) represent and compare the decrees of the civil with those of the canonand common law. A separate tract of Julius Paulus, de gradibus et afflnibus, is inserted or abridged in thePandects (lib. xxxviii. tit. 10.) In the seventh degrees he computes (No. 18.) one thousand and twenty-foarpersons.
(5) The Voconian law was enacted in the year of Rome 584. The younger Scipio, who was then seventeenyears of age, (Frenshemius, Supplement. Livian. 46. 40.) found an occasion of exercising'his generosity to hismother, sisters. Sec. (Pnlybim, torn. ii. lib. 31. p. 1453—1464. edit. Gronov. a domestic witness.
(6) Legem Voeoniam (Eroesti, Clavis Ciceroniana) magna voce bonis lateribus (at sixty-five years of age)suassissem, says old Cato (de Senectute, c. v.) Aulus Gellius (7. 13. 17. 6.) has saved some passages.
(7) See the law of succession in the Institutes of Caius, (lib. ii. tit. 8. p. 130—144) and Justinian, (lib. iii. tit.1—6. with the Greek version of Theophilus, p. 515.575,588. 600.) the Pandects, (lib. xxxviii. tit. 6.17. the Code(lib. vi. tit. 55.60. and the Novels. (118.)
(8) That succession was the rule, testament the exception, is proved by Taylor, (Elements of Civil Law, p.







OCR Output













OCR Output








392 THE DECLINE AND FALB


in the streets of the baths it is their duty to give way or bow down before themeanest of the people; and their testimony is rejected, if it may tend to the pre­judice of a true believer. The pomp of processions, the sound of bells or of psal­mody, is interdicted in their worship: a decent reverence for the national faith, isimposed on their sermons and conversations; and the sacrilegious attempt to entera mosch, or to seduce a Mussulman, will not be suffered to escape with impunity.In a time, however, of tranquillity and justice, the Christians have never beencompelled to renounce the Gospel or to embrace the Koran: but the punishmentof death is inflicted upon the apostates who have professed and deserted the lawof Mahomet. The martyrs of Cordova provoked the sentence of the cadhi, by thepublic confession of their inconstancy, or their passionate invectives against theperson and religion of the prophet. (1)
At the end of the first century of the Hegira, the caliphs were the most potentand absolute monarchs of the globe. Their prerogative was not circumscribed,either in right or in fact, by the power of the nobles, the freedom of the commons,the privileges of the church, the votes of a senate, or the memory of a free consti­tution. The authority of the companions of Mahomet expired with their lives;and the chiefs or emirs of the Arabian tribes left behind, in the desert, the spiritof equality and independence. The regal and sacerdotal characters were unitedin the successors of Mahomet; and if the Koran was the rule of their actions, theywere th& supreme judges and interpreters of that divine book. They reigned bythe right of conquest over the nations of the east, to whom the name of liberty-was unknown, and who were accustomed to applaud in their tyrants the acts ofviolence and severity that were exercised at their own expense. Under the lastof the Ommiades, the Arabian empire extended two hundred days' journey fromeast to west, from the confines of Tartary and India to the shores of the Atlanticocean. And if we retrench the sleeve of the robe, as it is styled by their writers,the long and narrow province of Africa, the solid and compact dominion fromFargana to Aden, from Tarsus to Surat, will spread on every side to the measureof four or five months of the march of a caravan. (2) We should vainly seek theindissoluble union and easy obedience that pervaded the government of Augustusand the Antonines: but the progress of the Mahometan religion diffused over thisample space a general resemblance of manners and opinions. The language andlaws of the Koran were studied with equal devotion at Samarcand and Seville: theMoor and the Indian embraced as countrymen and brothers in the pilgrimage ofMecca; and the Arabian language was adopted as the popular idiom in all the pro­vinces to the westward of the Tigri*. (3)
CHAPTER LII.
Tlie two sieges of Constantinople by Hie Arabs.—Tlieir invasion of France, and defeat byCharles Martel.—Civil war of the Ommiades and Abassides.—Learning of the Arabs.—Luxury of the caliphs.—Naval enterprises on Crete, Sicily, and Rome Decay and di­vision of the empire of the caliphs.—Defeats and victories of the Greek emperors.
When the Arabs first issued from the desert, they must have been surprised atthe ease and rapidity of their own success. But when they advanced in the careerof victory to the banks of the Indus and the summit of the Pyrenees; when theyhad repeatedly tried the edge of their scimitars and the energy of their faith, theymight be equally astonished that any nation could resist their invincible arms, thatany boundary should confine the dominion of the successors of the prophet. Theconfidence of soldiers and fanatics may indeed be excused, since the calm historian


(1) The martyrs of Cordova, (A. D. 850,Sec.) are commemorated and justified by St. Eologins, who at length£Vkl a victim himself*. A synoi^ convened by the caliph, ambignously censured their rashness. The moderateFleury cannot reconcile ttifir conduct with the discipline of antiquity, toutefois Pautorite de PEgtise, Ifec.(Fleury, Hist. Eccles. torn. x. p. 415—522. particularly p. 451. 508, 5090 Their authentic acts throw a strungthough a transient light on the Spanish church in the ninth century.
(2) See the article E.tlamin/i (as we soy Christendom) in the Bibliothcque Orientale, (p. 325.) Thrs chart ofthe Mahometan world isstiited by the author. Ebn Alwardi, to the year of the Hegira 385. (A. D. 998,) Sincethat time the losses in Spain has'e been overbalanced bytlie conquest in India, Tartary, and the EuropeanTurkey.
(3) The Arabic of the Koran is taught as a dead language in the college of Mecca. By the Danish traveller,this ancient idiom is compared to the Latin; the vulgar tongue of Hejaz and Yemen to the Italian; and theArabian dialects of Syria, Egypt. Africa, &c. to the Provencal. Spanish, and Portuguese. (Xiebuhr, Descrip­tion de I' Arabie, p. 74, etc.;







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 141


rights, the equal inheritance of mankind, are engrossed by the bold and crafty;each field and forest is circumscribed by the landmarks of a jealous master; andit is the peculiar praise of the Roman jurisprudence, that it asserts the claim ofthe first occupant to the wild animals of the earth, the air, and the waters. Inthe progress of primitive equity to final injustice, the steps are silent, the shadesare almost imperceptible, and the absolute monopoly is guarded by positive lawsand artificial reason. The active insatiate principle of self-love can only supplythe arts of life and the wages of industry; and as soon as civil government andexclusive property have been introduced, they became necessary to the existenceof the human race. Except in the singular institutions of Sparta, the wisest le­gislators have disapproved an Agrarian law as a false and dangerous innovation.Among the Romans, the enormous disproportion of wealth surmounted the idealrestraints of a doubtful tradition, and an obsolete statute; a tradition that thepoorest follower of Romulus had been endowed with a perpetual inheritance oftwo jugera:(l) a statute which confined the richest citizen to the measure of fivehundred jugera, or three hundred and twelve acres of land. The original territoryt of Rome consisted only of some miles of wood and meadow along the banks of theTiber; and domestic exchange could add nothing to the national stock. But thegoods of an alien or enemy were lawfully exposed to the first hostile occupier; theCity was enriched by the profitable trade of war; and the blood of her sons wasthe only price that was paid for the Volscian sheep, the slaves of Britain, or thegems and gold of Asiatic kingdoms. In the language of ancient jurisprudence,which was corrupted and forgotten before the age of Justinian, these spoils weredistinguished by the name of manceps or mancifiium, taken with the hand; andwhenever they were sold or em.ancip.ated, the purchaser required some assurancethat they had been the property of an enemy, and not of a fellow citizen. (2) Acitizen could only forfeit his rights by apparent dereliction, and such dereliction of-a valuable interest could not easily be presumed. Yet, according to the twelve ta­bles, a prescription of one year for moveables, and of two years for immoveables,abolished the claim of the ancient master, if the actual possessor had acquiredthem by a fair transaction from the person whom he believed to be the lawful pro­prietor.^) Such conscientious injustice, without any mixture of fraud or force,could seldom injure the members of a small republic: but the various periods ofthree, of ten, or of twenty years, determined by Justinian, are more suitable to thelatitude of a great empire. It is only in the term of prescription that the distinc­tion of real and personal fortune has been remarked by the civilians, and their ge­neral idea of property is that of simple, uniform, and absolute dominion. The su­bordinate exceptions of use, of usufruct,{4) of servitudes,^} imposed for the bene­fit of a neighbour on lands and houses, are abundantly explained by the professors ofjurisprudence. The claims of property, as far as they are altired, by the mixture,the division, or the transformation of substances, are investigated with metaphy­sical subtlety by the same civilians.
The personal title of the first proprietor must be determined by his death: butthe possession, without any appearance of change, is peaceably continued in hischildren, the associates of his toil and the partners of his wealth. This naturalinheritance has been protected by the legislators of every climate and age, and thefather is encouraged to persevere in slow and distant improvements, by the tenderhope, that a long posterity will enjoy the fruits of his labour. The principle ofhereditary succession is universal, but the order has been variously- established byconvenience or caprice, by the spirit of national institutions, or by some partialexample, which was originally decided by fraud or violence. The jurisprudenceof the Romans appears to have deviated from the equality of nature, much less
(1) The heredinra of the first Romaiu is defined by Varro, (de Re Rustics, lib. i. c. 2. p. 141- *• 10. p. 160,161. edit. Getner.) and clouded by Pliny's declamation. (Hist. Natur. 18. S.) A just and learned comment isgiven in the administration des Terres chez les Romaics, (p. 12—66.)
(2) The res mancipe is explained from faint and remote lights by Utpian (Fragment, tit. xviii. p. 618,610.)and Bynkershoek. (Opp. torn. i. p. 306—315.) The definition is somewhat arbitrary: and as none except my­self have assigned a reason, I am diffident of my own.
(3) From this short prescription, Hume, (Essays, vol. i. p. 423.) infers that there could not then be more or­der and settlement in Italy than now amongst the Tartars. By the civilian of his adversary Wallace, he Is re­proached, and not withou t reason, for overlooking the conditions. (Institute], lib. ii. tit. vi.)
(4) See the Institutes, lib. i. tit. 4,5.) and the Fandeets. (lib. viL) Noodt has composed a learned and dis­tinct treatise de Usufructu. (Opp. torn. i. p. 387—478.)
(5) The questions de Servitutibus are discussed in the Institutes, (lib. ii. tit. iii.) and Pandects, (lib. viii.) Ci­cero, (pro Moreno, c. 9.)and Lactantius, (Institut. Divin. lib. i.e. 1.) affect to laugh at the insignificant doc­trine, de aqua pluvia arcenda, Vet it mit-ht he of frequent use among litigious neigh tours, troth in townstnd.-cotintrv.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


of Assyria were open for the first time to the Romans. By a just gradation ofmagnificent scenes, they penetrated to the royal seat of Dastagerd, and thoughmuch of the treasure had been removed, and much had been expended, the re­maining wealth appears to have exceeded their hopes, and even to have satiatedtheir avarice. Whatever could not be easily transported, they consumed with fire,that Chosroes might feel the anguish of those wounds, which he had so often in­flicted on the provinces of the empire: and justice might allow the excuse, if thedesolation had been confined to the works of regal luxury, if national hatred, mi­litary license, and religious zeal, had not wasted with equal rage the habitationsand the temples of the guiltless subject. The recovery of three hundred Romanstandards, and the deliverance of the numerous captives of Edessa and Alexan­dria, reflect a purer glory on the arms of Heraclius. From the palace of Dasta­gerd, he pursued his march within a few miles of Modian or Ctesiphon, till hewas stopped on the banks of the Arba, by the difficulty of the passage, the rigourof the season, and perhaps the fame of an impregnable capital. The return of theemperor is marked by the modern name of the city of Sherhzour; he fortunatelypassed mount Zara, before the snow, which fell incessantly thirty-four days, andthe citizens of Gandzaca, or Tauris, were compelled to entertain his soldiers andtheir horses with a hospitable reception. (1)
When the ambition of Chosroes was reduced to the defence of his hereditarykingdom, the love of glory, or even the sense of shame, should have urged him tomeet his rival in the field. In the battle of Nineveh, his courage might havetaught the Persians to vanquish, or he might have fallen with honour by the lanceof a Roman emperor. The successor «f Cyrus chose rather, at a secure distance,to expect the event, to assemble the relics of the defeat, and to retire by mea­sured steps before the march of Heraclius, till he beheld with a sigh the once-lovedmansions of Dastagerd. Both his friends and enemies were persuaded, that itwas the intention of Chosroes to bury himself under the ruins of the city and pa­lace: and as both might have been equally adverse to his flight, the monarch ofAsia, with Sira, and three concubines, escaped through a hole in the wall ninedays before the arrival of the Romans. The slow and stately procession in whichhe showed himself to the prostrate crowd, was changed to a rapid and secret jour­ney; and the first evening he lodged in the cottage of a peasant, whose humble doorwould scarcely give admittance to the great king. (2) His superstition was sub­dued by fear: on the third day, he entered with joy the fortifications of Ctesiphon;yet he still doubted of his safety till he had opposed the river Tigris to the pursuitof the. Romans. The discovery of his flight agitated with terror and tumult the
Ealace, the city, and the camp, of Dastagerd: the satraps hesitated whether theyad most to fear from their sovereign or the enemy; and the females of the haramwere astonished and pleased by the sight of mankind, till the jealous husband ofthree thousand wives again confined them to a more distant castle. At his com­mand, the army of Dastagerd retreated to a new camp: the front was coveredby the Arba, and a line of two hundred elephants; the troops of the more distantprovinces successively arrived, and the vilest domestics of the king and satraps,were enrolled for the last defence of the throne. It was still in the power of Chos­roes to obtain a reasonable peace; and he was repeatedly pressed by the messen­gers of Heraclius, to spare the blood of his subjects, and to relieve a humane con­queror from the painful duty of carrying fire and sword through the fairest coun­tries of Asia. But the pride of the Persian had not yet sunk to the level of hisfortune; he derived a momentary confidence from the retreat of the emperor: hewept with impotent rage over the ruins of his Assyrian palaces, and disregardedtoo long the rising murmurs of the nation, who complained that their lives andfortunes were sacrificed to the obstinacy of an old man. That unhappy old manwas himself tortured with the sharpest pains both of mind and body; and, in theconsciousness of his approaching end, he resolved to fix the tiara on the head ofMerdaza, the most favoured of his sons. But the will of Chosroes was no longerrevered, and Siroes, who gloried in the rank and merit of his mother Sira, hadconspired with the malcontents to assert and anticipate the rights of primogeni-


(1) In describing this last expedition of Heraclius, the facts, the places, ami the dates of Theophaoes, (p.Sfl5—271.) are so accurate and authentic that he must have followed the original letters of the emperor, ofwhich the Paschal Chronicle has preserved (p. 398—402.) a very curious specimen.
(2) The words of Theophanei are remarkable: tirqhSt Xa<rpot); us oixoi* ytutpyov pyi$<ettnicu /«*van, ou %wpifwictv m toutou 6op», i}k iSmv itryp™ 'Hp*io.s<o; sSxpMrt, (p. 269.) Yotrqg prhicei who discover a propensity to warsjhoqld repeatedly iranrtrib? and translate sirch wfutary teim -







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


and the promised Messiah. Their obstinacy converted his friendship into impla-cable hatred, with which he pursued that unfortunate people to the last momentof his life; and in the double character of an apostle and a conqueror, his perse­cution was extended to both worlds.(l) The Kainoka dwelt at Medina under theprotection of the city: he seized the occasion of an accidental tumult, and sum­moned them to embrace his religion, or contend with him in battle. " Mas!" re­plied the trembling Jews, "we are ignorant of the use of arms, but we perseverein the faith and worship of our fathers; why wilt thou reduce us to the necessityof a just defence?" The unequal conflict was terminated in fifteen days; auditwas with extreme reluctance that Mahomet yielded to the importunity of his al­lies and consented to spare the lives of the captives. But their riches were con­fiscated, their arms became more effectual in the hands of the Mussulmans; anda wretched colony of seven hundred exiles was driven with their wives and chil­dren to implore a refuge on the confines of Syria. The Nadharites were moreguilty, since they conspired in a friendly interview to assassinate the prophet. Hebesieged their castle three miles from Medina, but their resolute defence obtainedan honourable capitulation; and the garrison, sounding their trumpets and beatingtheir drums, was permitted to depart with the honours of war. The Jews hadexcited and joined the war of the Koreish: no sooner had the nations retired fromthe ditch, than Mahomet, without laying aside his armour, marched on the sameday to extirpate the hostile race of the children of Koraidha. After a resistance oftwenty-five days, they surrendered at discretion. They trusted to the intercessionof their old allies, of Medina: they could not be ignorant that fanaticism obliteratesthe feelings of humanity. A venerable elder, to whose judgment they appealed,pronounced the sentence of their death: seven hundred Jews were dragged inchains to the market place of the city: they descended alive into the grave pre­pared for their execution and burial; and the apostle beheld with an inflexible eyethe slaughter of his helpless enemies. Their sheep and camels were inherited bythe Mussulmans: three hundred cuirasses, five hundred pikes, a thousand lances,composed the most useful portion of the spoil. Six days' journey to the north­east of Medina, the ancient and wealthy town of Chaibar was the seat of the Jew­ish power of Arabia; the territory, a fertile spot in the desert, was covered withplantations and cattle, and protected by eight castles, some of which were esteemedof impregnable strength. The forces of Mahomet consisted of two hundred horseand fourteen hundred foot: in the succession of eight regular and painful siegesthey were exposed to danger and fatigue, and hunger; and the most undauntedchiefs despaired of the event. The apostle revived their faith and courage by theexample of Ali, on whom he bestowed the surname of the Lion of God: perhapswe may believe that a Hebrew champion of gigantic size was cloven to the chestby his irresistible scimitar: but we cannot praise the modesty of romance, whichrepresents him as tearing from its hinges the gate of a fortress, and wielding theponderous buckler in his left hand.(2) After the reduction of the castles, the townof Chaibar submitted to the yoke. The chief of the tribe was tortured, in the pre­sence of Mahomet, to force a confession of his hidden treasure: the industry ofthe shepherds and husbandmen was rewarded with a precarious toleration: theywere permitted, so long as it should please the conqueror, to improve their patri­mony, in equal shares, for Ms emolument and their own. Under the reign ofOmar, the Jews of Chaibar were transplanted to Syria; and the caliph allegedthe injunction of his dying master, that one and the true religion should be pro­fessed in his native land of Arabia. (3)
Five times each day the eyes of Mahomet were turned towards Mecca,(4) andhe was urged by the most sacred and powerful motives, to revisit, as a conqueror,the city and temple from whence he had been driven as an exile. The Caabawas present to his waking and sleeping fancy: an idle dream was translated into
(1) The wars of Mahomet against the Jewish tribes, of Kainoka, the Nailhirites, Koraidha. and Chaibar, arerelated by Abulfeda (p. 61. 71. 77. 87, &c) and Gagnier. (torn. ii. 01—65. 107—112. 139—148. 268 294.1
(2) Abu Rafe, the servant of Mahomet, is said to affirm that he himself, and seven other men, afterward*tried, without success, to move the same gate from the ground. (Abulfeda, p. 90.) Abu Rafe was an eye­witness, but who will be witness for A bu Raf>- i
(3) The banishment of the Jews is attested by Elmacin (Hist. Saracen, p. 9.) and the great Al Zaliari. (Gag-tiier, torn. II. p. 285.) Yet Neibuhr (Description de P Arable, p. 324.) believes that the Jewish religion, and Ka-reite sect, nre still professed by the tribe of Chaibar; and that in the plunder of the caravans, the disciples ofMoses are the confederates of those of Mahomet.
(4) The successive steps of the reduction of Mecca are related by Ahulfeda, (p. 84—87. 97—100. 102—111.)and Gagmer, torn. n. p. 209-245.309-322. torn. iii. p. 1-58.) Elmacin, (Hist. Saracen, p. s-io.) Abulpba-ragius. (Dynast, p. 103.) *







OCR Output








136 THE DECLINE AND FALL


almost one thousand years, from the twelve tables to the reign of Justinian, maybe divided into three periods almost equal in duration, and distinguished from eachother by the mode of instruction and the character of civilians, (1) Pride and ig­norance contributed, during the first period, to confine within narrow limits thescience of the Roman law. On the public days of market or assembly, the mastersof the art were seen walking in the forum, ready to impart the needful advice tothe meanest of their fellow citizens, from whose votes, on a future occasion, theymight solicit a grateful return. As their years and honours increased, they seat­ed themselves at home on a chair or throne, to expect with patient gravity thevisits of their clients, who, at the dawn of day, from the town and country, beganto thunder at their door. The duties of social life, and the incidents of judicialproceeding, were the ordinary subject of these consultations, and the verbal orwritten opinion of the jurisconsults was framed according to the rules of prudenceand law. The youths of their own order and family were permitted to listen;their children enjoyed the benefit of more private lessons, and the Mucian racewas long renowned for the hereditary knowledge of the civil law. The second
Seriod, the learned and splendid age of jurisprudence, may be extended from theirth of Cicero to the reign of Severus Alexander. A system was formed, schoolswere instituted, books were composed, and both the living and the dead becamesubservient to the instruction of the student. The tripartite of JElius Pstus, sur-named Catus, or the Cunning, was preserved as the oldest work of jurisprudence.Cato the censor derived some additional fame from his legal studies, and those ofhis son: the kindred appellation of Mucius Scscvola was illustrated by three sagesof the law; but the perfection of the science was ascribed to Servius Sulpicius,their disciple and the friend of Tully; and the long succession, which shone withequal lustre under the republic and under the Ciesars, is finally closed by the re­spectable characters of Papinian, of Paul, and of Ulpian. Their names, and thevarious titles of their productions, have been minutely preserved, and the exam­ple of Labeo may suggest some idea of their diligence and fecundity. That emi­nent lawyer of the Augustan age divided the year between the city and country,between business and composition; and four hundred books are enumerated as thefruit of his retirement. Of the collections of his rival Capito, the two hundredand fifty-ninth book is expressly quoted; and few teachers could deliver theiropinions in less than a century of volumes. In the third period, between thereigns of Alexander and Justinian, the oracles of jurisprudence were almost mute.The measure of curiosity had been filled; the throne was occupied by tyrantsand barbarians; the active spirits were diverted by religious disputes, and the pro­fessors of Rome, Constantinople, and Berytus, were humbly content to repeat thelessons of their more enlightened predecessors. From the slow advances andrapid decay of these legal studies, it may be inferred, that they require a state ofpeace and refinement. From the multitude of voluminous civilians who fill theintermediate space, it is evident, that such studies may be pursued, and suchworks mav be performed, with a common share of judgment, experience, and in­dustry. The genius of Cicero and Virgil was more sensibly felt, as each revolvingage had been found incapable of producing a similar or a second: but the mosteminent teachers of the law were assured of leaving disciples equal or superior tothemselves in merit and reputation.
The jurisprudence which had been grossly adapted to the wants of the first Ro­mans, was polished and improved in the seventh century of the city, by the allianceof Grecian philosophy. The Scxvolas had been taught by use and experience; butServius Sulpicius was the first civilian who established his art on a certain and ge­neral theory. (2) For the discernment of truth and falsehood, he applied, as an


(1) The series of the civil lawyers it deduced by Pomponius fde Origine Juris Pandect, lib. i. tin ii.) Themoderns hare discussed, with learning and criricism, this branch of liiernry history; and among these I havechiefly been raided by Gravina (p. 41—79.,) and Heineccius (Hist. J. R. No. 113—351.) Cicero, more especiallyin his books de Oratoie, de Claris Oratorihos, de Legibus, and the Clavis Ciceroniana of Ernesti (under thenames of Mucius, &e.,) afford much genuine and pleasing information. Horace often alludes to the morninglabours of civilians (Serm. 1.1.10. Epist. 2. 4.103, fee.
Agrtcolam laudat juris legumque peritus aSub galli cantum, consultor ubi ostia pulsat.
Rome dulce diu fuit et solemne, reclusaMane domo vigilare, clienti promere jura.
(2) Craisut, or rather Cicero himself, proposes (de Oratore, 1.41,42.) an idea of the art or science of juris-prudence, which the eloquent, but illiterate, Antonius(l. 58.) affects to deride. It was partly executed by







OCR Output








242 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Chozar, and of whose evasion he was yet ignorant. After an absence of ten years,,the crimes of Justinian were faintly remembered, and the birth and misfortunes oftheir hereditary sovereign excited the pity of the multitude, ever discontentedwith the ruling powers; and by the active diligence of his adherents, he was intro­duced into the city and palace of Constantine.
In rewarding his allies and recalling his wife, Justinian displayed some sense ofhonour and gratitude; and Terbelis retired, after sweeping away a heap of goldcoin, which ne measured with his Scythian whip. But never was vow more reli­giously performed than the sacred oath of revenge which he had sworn amidst thestorms of the Euxine. The two usurpers, for I must reserve the name of tyrantfor the conqueror, were dragged into the hippodrome, the one from his prison, theother from his palace. Before their execution, Leontius and Apsimar were castprostrate in chains beneath the throne of the emperor: and Justinian, planting afoot on each of their necks, contemplated above an hour the chariot race, while, the inconstant people shouted, in the words of the psalmist,—"Thou shalt tram­ple on the asp and basilisk, and on the lion and dragon shalt thou set thy foot!"The universal defection which he had once experienced might provoke him to re­peat the wish of Caligula, that the Roman people had but one head. Yet I shallpresume to observe, that such a wish is unworthy of an ingenious tyrant, since hisrevenge and cruelty would have been extinguished by a single blow, instead of theslow variety of tortures which Justinian inflicted on the victims of his anger. Hispleasures were inexhaustible: neither private virtue nor pujlic service could ex­piate the guilt of active, or even passive, obedience to an established government;and, during the six years of his new reign, he considered the axe, the cord, andthe rack, as the only instruments of royalty. But his most implacable hatred waspointed against the Chersonites, who had insulted his exile, and violated the lawsof hospitality. Their remote situation afforded some means of defence, or atleast of escape; and a grievous tax was imposed on Constantinople, to supply thepreparations of a fleet and army. All are guilty, and all must perish, was themandate of Justinian: arid the bloody execution was intrusted to his favourite Ste-
Ehen, who was recommended by the epithet of the savage. Yet even the savagetephen imperfectly accomplished the intentions of his sovereign. The slownessof his attack allowed the greater part of the inhabitants to withdraw into thecountry; and the minister of vengeance contented himself with reducing the youthof both sexes to a state of servitude, with roasting alive seven of the principalcitizens, with drowning twenty in the sea, and with reserving forty-two in chainsto receive their doom from the mouth of the emperor. In their return the fleetwas driven on the rocky shores of Anatolia; and Justinian applauded the obedienceof the Euxine, which had involved so many of his subjects and enemies in a com­mon shipwreck: but the tyrant was still insatiate of blcod; and a second expeditionwas commanded to extirpate the remains of the proscribed colony. In the shortinterval, the Chersonites had returned to their city, and were prepared to die inarms; the khan of the Chozars had renounced the cause of his odious brother: theexiles of every province were assembled in Tauris; and Bardanes, under thename of Philippicus, was invested with the purple. The imperial troops, unwill­ing and unable to perpetuate the revenge of Justinian, escaped his displeasureby abjuring his allegiance; the fleet under their new sovereign, steered back amore auspicious course to the harbours of Synope and Constantinople: and everytongue was prompt to pronounce, every hand to execute, the death of the tyrant.Destitute of friends, he was deserted by his barbarian guards; and the stroke ofthe assassin was praised as an act of patriotism and Roman virtue. His sonTiberius had taken refuge in a church; his aged grandmother guarded the door;and the innocent youth, suspending round his neck the most formidable relics,embraced with one hand the altar, with the other the wood of the true cross.But the popular fury that dares to trample on superstition, is deaf to the cries ofhumanity; and the race of Heraclius was extinguished after a reign of one hundredyears.
Between the fall of Heraclian and the rise of the Isaurian dynasty, a short in­terval of six years is divided into three reigns. Bardanes, or Philippicus, washailed at Constantinople as a hero who had delivered his country from a tyrant;and he might taste some moments of happiness in the first transports of sincereand universal joy. Justinian had left behind him an ample treasure, the fruit ofcruelty and rapine: but this useful fund was soon and idly dissipated by his succes­sor. On the festival of his birth-day, Philippicus entertained the multitude with.







OCR Output








12 THE DECLINE AND FALL


were incessantly disturbed by the clamorous discontent of the greens; till thetwenty-second race, the emperor maintained his silent gravity; at length yieldingto his impatience, he condescended to hold, in abrupt sentences, and by the voiceof a crier, the most singular dialogue(l) that ever passed between a prince andhis subjects. Their first complaints were respectful and modest; they accused thesubordinate ministers of oppression, and proclaimed their wishes for the long lifeand victory of the emperor. " Be patient and attentive, ye insolent railers!" ex­claimed Justinian, "be mute, ye Jews, Samaritans, and Manich<cans !" Thegreens still attempted to awaken his compassion. " We are poor, we are inno­cent, we are injured, we dare not pass through the streets: a general persecutionis exercised against our name and colour. Let us die, 0 emperor! but let us dieby your command, and for your service!" But the repetition of partial and pas­sionate invectives degraded, in their eyes, the majesty of the purple; they re­nounced allegiance to the prince who refused justice to his people; lamented thatthe father of Justinian had been born; and branded his son with the opprobriousnames of a homicide, an ass, and a perjured tyrant. " Do you despise your lives?"cried the indignant monarch: the blues rose with fury from their seats; their hos­tile clamours thundered in the hippodrome; and their adversaries, deserting theunequal contest, spread terror and despair through the streets of Constantinople.At this dangerous moment, seven notorious assassins of both factions, who hadbeen condemned by the prefect, were carried round the city, and afterwardtransported to the place of execution in the suburb of Pera. Four were imme­diately beheaded; a fifth was hanged: but when the same punishment was in­flicted on the remaining two, the rope broke, they fell alive to the ground, the po­pulace applauded their escape, and the monks of St. Conon, issuing from theneighbouring convent, conveyed them in a boat to the sanctuary of the church. (2)As one of these criminals was of the blue, and the other of the green livery, thetwo factions were equally provoked by the cruelty of their oppressor, or the in­gratitude of their patron; and a short truce was concluded till they had deliveredtheir prisoners, and satisfied their revenge. The palace of the Refect, who with­stood the seditious torrent, was instantly burnt, his officers and guards were mas­sacred, the prisons were forced open, and freedom was restored to those who couldonly use it for the public destruction. A military force, which had been des­patched to the aid of the civil magistrate, was fiercely encountered by an armedmultitude, whose numbers and boldness continually increased; and the Heruli,the wildest barbarians in the service of the empire, overturned the priests andtheir relics, which from a pious motive, had been rashly interposed to separatethe bloody conflict. The tumult was exasperated by this sacrilege, the peoplefought with enthusiasm in the cause of God; the women from the roofs and win­dows showered stones on the heads of the soldiers, who darted firebrands againstthe houses; and the various flames which had been kindled by the hands ot citi­zens and strangers, spread without control over the face of the city. The con­flagration involved the cathedral of St. Sophia, the baths of Zeuxippus, a part ofthe palace from the first entrance to the altar of Mars", and the long portico fromthe palace to the forum of Constantine; a large hospital, with the sick patients,was consumed; many churches and stately edifices were destroyed, and an im­mense treasure of gold and silver was either melted or lost. From such scenesof horror and distress, the wise and wealthy citizens escaped over the Bosphorusto the Asiatic side; and, during five days, Constantinople was abandoned to thefactions, whose watchword, Nika, vanquish! has given a name to this memorablesedition. (3)
As long as the factions were divided, the triumphant blues and despondinggreens, appeared to behold with the same indifference the disorders of the state-.They agreed to censure the corrupt management of justice and the finance; andthe two responsible ministers, the artful Tribonian, and the rapacious John of Cap-padocia, were loudly arraigned as the authors of the public misery. The peace­ful murmurs cf the people would have been disregarded; they were heard withrespect when the city was in flames; the questor, and the prefect, were instantlyremoved, and their offices were filled by two senators of blameless integrity. Af-
(1) This dialogue, which Theophancs has preserved, exhibits the popular language, as well as the mannersof Constantinople, in the seventh century. Their Greek is mingled with many strange and barbarous wordsfor which Ducange cannot always find a meaning or etymology.
(2) See this church and monastery in Ducange C. P. Christians, lib. iv. p. 182.
(5) The history of the Nika sedition is extracted from Marcellinus (in Chron.,) Procopius (Persic, lib. i. c.26.0 John Malala (torn. ii. p. 213. e. us.,) Chron. Paschal, (p. 336—340.,) Theophancs (Chronograph, p. 154 —1J8.,) and ZonoMs (lib. xir. p. 61—63.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. ■ >.>!


vision and prophecy; he unfurled the holy banner; and a rash promise of successtoo hastily dropped from the lips of the apostle. His march from Medina toMecca displayed the peaceful and solemn pomp of a pilgrimage; seventy camels,chosen and bedecked for sacrifice, preceded the van; the sacred territory was re­spected, and the captives were dismissed without ransom to proclaim his clemen­cy and devotion. But no sooner did Mahomet descend into the plain, within aday's journey of the city, than he exclaimed, " they have clothed themselves withthe skins of tigers;" the numbers and resolution of the Koreish opposed his pro­gress; and the roving Arabs of the desert might desert or betray a leader whomthey had followed for the hopes of spoil. The intrepid fanatic sunk into a cooland cautious politician: he waved in the treaty his title of apostle of God, conclu­ded with the Koreish and their allies a truce of ten years, engaged to restore thefugitives of Mecca who should embrace his religion, and stipulated only, for theensuing year, the humble privilege of entering the city as a friend, and of remain­ing three days to accomplish the rites of the pilgrimage. A cloud of shame andsorrow hung on the retreat of the Mussulmans, and their disappointment mightjustly accuse the failure of a prophet who had so often appealed to the evidence ofsuccess. The faith and hope of the pilgrims were rekindled by the prospect ofMecca: their swords were sheathed; seven times in the footsteps of the apostlethey encompassed the Caaba: the Koreish had retired to the hills, and Mahomet,after the customary sacrifice, evacuated the city on the fourth day. The peoplewere edified by his devotion; the hostile chiefs were awed, or divided, or seduced;and both Caled and Amrou, the future conquerors of Syria and Egvpt, most sea­sonably deserted the sinking cause of idolatry. The power of Mahomet was in­creased by the submission of the Arabian tribes: ten thousand soldiers were as­sembled for the conquest of Mecca; and the idolaters, the weaker part, were easi­ly convicted of violating the truce. Enthusiasm and discipline impelled themarch, and preserved the secret, till the blaze of ten thousand fires proclaimedto the astonished Koreish, the design, the approach, and the irresistible force ofthe enemy. The haughty Abu Sophian presented the keys of the city, admiredthe variety of arms and ensigns that passed before him in review; observed thatthe son of Abdallah had acquired a mighty kingdom, and confessed, under thescimitar of Omar, that he was the apostle of the true God. The return of Mariusand Svlla was stained with the blood of the Romans: the revenge of Mahomet wasstimulated by religious zeal, and his injured followers were eager to execute or toprevent the order of a massacre. Instead of indulging their passions and his own,(l)the victorious exile forgave the guilt, and united the factions of Mecca. Histroops, in three divisions, marched into the city; eight and twenty of the inhabi­tants were slain by the sword of Caled: eleven men and six women were pro­scribed by the sentence of Mahomet; but he blamed the cruelty of his lieutenant;and several of the most obnoxious victims were indebted for their lives to his cle­mency or contempt. The chiefs of the Koreish were prostrate at his feet. " Whatmercy can you expect from the man whom you have wronged?—We confide inthe generosity of our kinsman.—And you shall not confide in vain; begone! youare safe, you are free." The people of Mecca deserved their pardon by the pro­fession of Islam; and after an exile of seven years, the fugitive missionary was en­throned as the prince and prophet of his native country.(2) But the three hun­dred and sixty idols of the Caaba were ignominiously broken; the house of Godwas purified and adorned; as an example to future times, the apostle again fulfilledthe duties of a pilgrim: and a perpetual law was enacted, that no unbeliever shoulddare to set his foot on the territory of the holy city. (3)
The conquest of Mecca determined the faith and obedience of the Arab


fl) After thp conquest of Mecca, the Mahomet of Voltaire imagines and perpetratps the most horrid crimes.The poet confesses, that he is not supported by the truth of history, and can only allege, que celui qui fait laguerre a sa patrie au nom de Diett, est capable de tout. (Oeuvres de Voltaire, torn. xv. p. 282.) The maxim isneither charitable nor philosophic; and some reverence is surely due to the fame of heroes and the religion ofnations. I am informed that a Turkish ambassador at Paris was much scandalized at the representation ofthis tragedy.
(2) The Mahometan doctors still dispute, whether Mecca was reduced by lorce or consent (Abulfeda, p. 107.et Gagnier ad locum;) and this verbal controversy is of as much moment as our own about William the Con-Qvtror.
(3) In excluding the Christians from thepeninsula of Arabia, the province of Hejaz, or the navigation of theTied Sea, Chardin (Voyages en Perses, torn. iv. p. 156.) and Reland (Dissert. Misccll. torn. iii. p. 51.) are more rigidthan the Mussulmans themselves. The Christians are received without scruple into the ports of Mocha, andeven of Oedda, and it is only the city and precincts of Mecca that are inaccessible to the profane. (Niebulir,Description de 1'Arabic, p. 308,309, Voyage en Arable, torn. i. p. 205,248. &e.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


unknown to the Asiatics;(l) they are ignorant of the laws of criticism; and oui*monkish chronicles of the same period may be compared to their most popularworks, which are never verified by the spirit of philosophy and freedom, Theoriental library of a Frenchman(2) would instruct the most learned mufti of theeast; and perhaps the Arabs might not find in a single historian, so clear and com­prehensive a narrative of their own exploits, as that which will be deduced in theensuing sheets-
I. In the first year of the first caliph, his lieutenant Caled, the sword of God,and the scourge of the infidels, advanced to the banks of the Euphrates, and re­duced the cities of Anbar and Hira. Westward of the ruins of Babylon, a tribeof sedentary Arabs had fixed themselves on the verge of the desert; and Hira wasthe seat of a race of kings who had embraced the Christian religion, and reignedabove six hundred years under the shadow of the throne of Persia. (3) The lastof the Mondars was defeated and slain by Caled: his son was sent a captive to Me­dina; his nobles bowed before the successor of the prophet: the people weretempted by the example and success of their countrymen; and the caliph acceptedas the first fruits of foreign conquest, an annual tribute of seventy thousand piecesof gold. The conquerors, and even their historians, were astonished by the dawnof their future greatness. "In the same year," says Elmacin, "Caled foughtmany signal battles; an immense multitude of the infidels were slaughtered; andspoils, infinite and innumerable, were acquired by the victorious Moslems. "(4)But the invincible Caled was soon transferred to the Syrian war: the invasion ofthe Persian frontier was conducted by less active or less prudent commanders: theSaracens were repulsed with loss in the passage of the Euphrates; and, thoughthey chastised the insolent pursuit of the Magians, their remaining forces still ho­vered in the desert of Babylon.
The indignation and fears of the Persians suspended for a moment their intes­tine divisions. By the unanimous sentence of the priests and nobles, their queenArzema was deposed; the sixth of the transient usurpers, who had arisen and va­nished in three or four years, since the death of Chosroes and the retreat of He-raclius. Her tiara was placed on the head of Vezdegerd, the grandson of Chos­roes; and the same era, which coincides with an astronomical period,(5) has re­corded the fall of the Sassanian dynasty and the religion of Zoroaster. (6) The youthand inexperience of the prince, he was only fifteen years of age, declined a peri­lous encounter; the royal standard was delivered into the hands of his generalRustam; and a remnant of thirty thousand regular troops was swelled in truth, orin opinion, to one hundred and twenty thousand subjects, or allies of the greatking. The Moslems, whose numbers were re-enforced from twelve to thirtythousand, had pitched their camp in the plains of Cadesia:(7) and their line,
Cregorio Abulpharagio, interprete Edviardo Pocorkio. in quarto. Oxen. 1663; more useful for the literary thanthe civil history of the east. 4. Abulfedce Annates Mosleniki ad Ann, Hegira 406. a Jo. Tor. Rciske, in quarto.Lituia:, 1754; the best of our chronicles, both for the original and version; yet how far below the name ofAbulfeda! We know that he wrote at Hamah, in the fourteenth century. The three former were Christiansof the tenth, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries; the two first, natives of Egypt; a Melchite patriarch, and a Ja­cobite scribe.
(1) M. de Guignes (Hist, des Hum, torn. i. pref. xix. m.) has characterised, with truth and knowledge, thetwo sorts of Arabian historians, the dry annalist, and the tumid and flowery orator.
(2) Bibliolheque Orientate, par M. (THerbelot, in folio, Paris, 1697. For.the character of the respectable au­thor, consult his friend Thevenot (Voyages du Levant, part 1. chap. 50.) His work is an agreeable miscellany,which must gratify every taste; but I never can digest the alphabetical order, and I find him more satisfactoryin toe Persian than the Arabic history. The recent supplement from the papers of M. M. Visdelou and Gaf-lond (in folio, La Haye, 177°) is of a different case, a medley of tales, proverbs, and Chinese antiquities.
(3) Pocock will explain the chronology (Specimen Hist. Arabum. p. 66. 7-1.) and d'Anville the geography'Enphrate et le Tigre, p. 125.,) of the dynasty of the Almondars. The English scholar understood more Ara-ic than the mufti of Aleppo (Ockley, vol. ii. p. 34.:) the French geographer is equally at home in every age
and every climate of the world.
(4) Fecit et Cbaled plurima in hoc ano prcelia, in quibus vicerunt Muslimi, et infldeliam immensa multitu-dine occisa spolia infinita et innumera sunt nacti (Hist. Saracenica, p. 20.) The Chiistian annalist slides intothe national and compendious term of infidels, and 1 often adopt (I hope without scandal) this characteristicmode of ex pression.
(5) A cycle of one hundred and twenty years, the end of which an intercalary month of thirty days, suppliedthe use of our bissextile, and restored the integrity of the solar year. In a great revolution of one thousandfour hundred and forty years, this intercalation was successively removed from the first to the twelfth month;but Hyde and Freret are involved ir, a profound controversy, whether the twelve, or only eight of these changes,were accomplished before the era of Yezdegerd, which is unanimously fixed to the 16th of June, A. D. 632. Howlaboriously does the curious spirit of Europe explore the darkest and most distant antiquities! (Hyde, de Reli.gione Pertarum, c. xiv—xviif. p. 181—211. Freret in the Mem. de l'Academie des Inscriptions, torn. xvi. p.233—267.)
(6) Nine days after the death of Mahomet (7th June, A. D. 632.) we find the era of Yezdegerd (16th June, A.D. 632.;) and his accession cannot be postponed beyond the end of the first year. His predecessors could noctherefore resist the arms of the caliph Omar, and these unquestionable dates overthrow the thoughtless chrono­logy of Abulpharagius. See Ockley's Hist, of the Saracens, vol. i. p. 130.
(7) Cadesia, says the Nubian geographer (p. 121.) is in roargine solitudinis, sixty-one leagues from Bagdad,







OCR Output








' 5F THJ6 ROMAN EMPtRE. ;«99


monarch of his race illustrious in the west, as the ally of Charlemagne, and fami­liar to the most childish readers, as the perpetual hero of the Arabian Tales.His title to the name of Al Rashid (the Just) is sullied by the extirpation of thegenerous, perhaps the innocent, Barmecides; yet he could listen to the complaintof a poor widow who had been pillaged by his troops, and who dared, in a passageof the Koran, to threaten the inattentive despot with the judgment of God andposterity. His court was adorned with luxury and science; but in a reign of three-and-twenty years, Harun repeatedly visited his provinces from Chorasan to Egypt;nine times he performed the pilgrimage of Mecca; eight times he inTaded the ter­ritories of the Romans; and as often as they declined the payment of the tribute,they were taught to feel that a month of depredation was more costly than a yearof submission. But when the unnatural mother of Constantine was deposed andbanished, her successor Nicephorus resolved to obliterate this badge of servitudeand disgrace. The epistle of the emperor to the caliph was pointed with an allu­sion to the game of chess, which had already Bpread from Persia to Greece. " Thequeen," he spoke of Irene, " considered you as a rook and herself a pawn. Thatpusillanimous female submitted to pay a tribute, the double of which she ought tonave evicted from the barbarians. Restore therefore the fruits of your injustice,or abide the determination of the sword." At these words the ambassadors casta bundle of swords before the foot of the throne. The caliph smiled at the menace,and drawing his scimitar, samaamcih, a weapon of historic or fabulous renown, hecut asunder the feeble arms of the Greeks, without turning the edge, or endanger­ing the temper of his blade. He then dictated an epistle of tremendous brevity;"In the name of the most merciful God, Harun al Rashid, commander of the faith­ful, to Nicephorus, the Roman dog. I have read thy letter, O thou son of an unbe­lieving mother. Thou shalt no^hear, thoushalt behold my reply." It was writ­ten in characters of blood and fire on the plains of Phrygia, and the warlike cele­rity of the Arabs could only be checked by the arts of deceit and the show of re­pentance. The triumphant caliph retired, after the fatigues of the campaign, tohis favourite palace of Racca on the Euphrates:(l) but the distance of five hun­dred miles, and the inclemency of the season, encouraged his adversary to violatethe peace. Nicephorus was astonished by the bold and rapid march of the com­mander of the faithful, who repassed, in the depth of winter, the snows of mountTaurus: his stratagems of policy and war were exhausted; and the perfidiousGreek escaped with three wounds from a field of battle overspread with fortythousand of his subjects. Yet the emperor was ashamed of submission, and thecaliph was resolved on victory. One hundred and thirty-five thousand regularsoldiers received pay, and were inscribed in the military roll; and above three hun­dred thousand persons of every denomination marched under the black standardof the Abbassides. They swept the surface of Asia Minor far beyond Tyana andAncyra, and invested the Pontic Heraclea, (2) once a flourishing state, now a pal­try town; at that time capable of sustaining in her antique walls a month's siegeagainst the forces of the east. The ruin was complete, the spoil was ample; butif Harun had been conversant with Grecian story, he would have regretted thestatue of Herculus, whose attributes, the club, the bow, the quiver, and the lion'shide, were sculptured in massy gold. The progress of desolation by sea and land,from the Euxine to the isle of Cyprus, compelled the emperor Nicephorus to re­tract his haughty defiance. In the new treaty the ruins of Heraclea were leftfov ever as a lesson and a trophy; and the coin of the tribute was marked with theimage and superscription of Harun and his three sons. (3) Yet this plurality oflords might contribute to remove the dishonour of the Roman name. After thedeath of their father, the heirs of the ealiph were involved in civil discord and theconqueror, the liberal Almamon, was sufficiently engaged in the restoration of do­mestic peace and the introduction of foreign science.
Under the reign of Almamon at Bagdad, of Michael the Stammerer at Constan­cy For theiitttauon of Racca, the old Nicephorium, consult d'Anvilte (L'Euphrate et le Tigre, p. 24—27.)The Arabian Nights represent Harun al Rashid as almost stationary in Bagdad. He respected the royal scatof the Abbassides, but the vices of the inhabitants had driven htm from the city (Abulfed. Annat. p. 167.)
(2) M. r>. Toumefolt, in his coasting voyage from Constantinople to Tri-bizond, passed a night at Heracleaor Eregri. His eye surveyed the present st;tte, his reading collected the antiquities, of the city (Voyage du Le­vant, torn. iii. lettre 16, p. 23—35.) We have a separate history of Heraclea in the fragments of Memnon, whichlire preserved by Pholtus.
(3) The wars of Harun al Rashid against the Roman empire, are related by Theophanes (394,385. 391.39(>,407,408.,) Zoimras (torn. ii. lib. IS, p. 115.124.,) Ccdrenus (p. 477,478.,) Eutythifis (Antral, torn. ii. p. 407.,)Jilmaciii (Hist. Smacen, p. 13«, 151,152.) ApnlptBragins,(Oynast.j>> 117. Ml.) and Atiultfila, (p. 1S6. la.S-.15S~)
Vot. nr. . .53







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


house, and with a steady look, though a faltering voice, uttered the last broken,
though articulate words: "OGod! .... pardon my sins! Yes, . .'. .
I come, among my fellow-citizens on high; and thus peaceably expired
on a carpet spread upon the floor. An expedition for the conquest of Syria wasstopped by this mournful event; the army halted at the gates of Medina; the chiefswere assembled round their dying master. The city, more especially the houseof the prophet, was a scene of clamorous sorrow, or of silent despair: fanaticismalone could suggest a ray of hope and consolation. " How can he be dead, ourwitness, our intercessor, our mediator with God? " By God, he is not dead; likeMoses and Jesus he is wrapt in a holy trance, and speedily will he return to hisfaithful people." The evidence of sense was disregarded; and Omar unsheathinghis scimitar, threatened to strike off the heads of the infidels, who should dare toaffirm that the prophet was no more. The tumult was appeased by the weightand moderation of Abubeker. " Is it Mahomet," said he to Omar and the multi­tude, " or the God of Mahomet, whom you worship? The God of Mahomet livethfor ever, but the apostle was a mortal like ourselves, and, according to his ownprediction, he has experienced the common fate of mortality." He was piouslyinterred by the hands of his nearest kinsman, on the same spot on which he ex­pired.^) Medina has been sanctified by the death and burial of Mahomet: andthe innumerable pilgrims of Mecca often turn aside from the way, to bow in volun­tary devotion,(2) before the simple tomb of the prophet.(3)
At the conclusion of the life of Mahomet, it may perhaps be expected that Ishould balance his faults and virtues, that I should decide whether the title of en­thusiast or imposter more properly belongs to that extraordinary man. Had Ibeen intimately conversant with the son of Abdallah, the task would still be diffi­cult, and the success uncertain: at the distance of twelve centuries, I darkly con­template his shade through a cloud of religious incense; and could I truly deline­ate the portrait of an hour, the fleeting resemblance would not equally apply tothe solitary of mount Hera, to the preacher of Mecca, and to the conqueror ofArabia. The author of a mighty revolution appears to have been endowed witha pious and contemplative disposition: so soon as marriage had raised him abovethe pressure of want, he avoided the paths of ambition and avarice; and, till theage of forty, he lived with innocence, and would have died without a name. Theunity of God is an idea most congenial to nature and reason; and a slight conver-sation with the Jews and Christians, would teach him to despise and detest theidolatry of Mecca. It was the duty of a man, and a citizen, to impart the doc­trine of salvation, to rescue his country from the dominion of sin and error. Theenergy of a mind incessantly bent on the same object, would convert a general ob­ligation into a particular call; the warm suggestions of the understanding, or thefancy, would be felt as the inspirations of heaven; the labour of thought wouldexpire in rapture and vision; and the inward sensation, the invisible monitor,,would be described with the form and attributes of an angel of God,(4) Fromenthusiasm to imposture, the step is perilous and slippery; the demon of Socra-tes(5) affords a memorable instance, how a wise man may deceive himself, how a
(1) The Greeks and Latins have invented and propagated the vulgar and ridicnlous story that Mahomet's-iron tomb is suspended in the air at Mecca (<r*fix t^rtaft^ftevov : Laonicus Chalcocondyles des Rebus Turcicis*lib. iii. p. 660 by the action of equal and potent loadstones (l)ictionaire de Bayle, Mahomet^ Rem. EE. FF.)Without any philosophical inquiries, it may_ suffice, that. 1. The prophet was not buried at Mecca: and, 2,That his tomb at Medina, which has been visited by millions, is placed on the ground (Reland de Relig. Mo-ham. lib. ii. c. 19. p. 200—211.) Gagnier (Vie de Mahomet, torn. iii. p. 263—268.)
(2) Al Jannahi enumerates (Vie de Mahomet, torn. iii. p. 372—391.) the multifarious duties of a pilgrim whovisited the tomb of the prophet and his companions, and the learned casuist decides, that this act of devotion unearest in obligation and merit to a divine precept. The doctors are divided which, of Mecca and Medina, bethe most excellent, p. 391—394.)
(3) The last sickness, death, and burial, of Mahomet, are described by Abulfeda and GagnierfVit. Mohftm.p. 137—142. Vie de Mahomet, torn. iii. p. 220—271.) The most private and interesting circumstances were ori­ginally veceived from Ayesha, Ali, the sons of Abbas, Sec. and as they dwelt at Medina, and survived the pro­phet many years, they might repeat the pious tale to a second or third generation of pilgrims.
(4) The Christians, rashly enough, have assigned to Mahomet a tame pigeon, that seemed to descend fromheaven and whisper in his ear. As this pi-etended miracle is urged by Grotius (de Veritate Religionis Christiansej his Arabic translator, the learned Pocock, inquired of him the names of his authors; and Grotius con­fessed, that it is unknown to the Mahometans themselves. Lest it should provoke their indignation and laughter,the pious lit is suppressed in the Arabic version; but it has obtained an edifying place in the numerous edi­tions of the Latin text (Pocock, Specimen, Hist. Arabum, p. 186,187. Reland, de Religion. Moham. lib. ii. c.39. p. 2«9-62.)
yrpxmtvj nparpiwii Ss owors (Plato, in Apolog. Socrat. c. xia. p. 121,122. edit. Fischer.) The familiar examples,which Socrates urges in his Dialogue with Theages (Platon. Optra, torn. i. p. 128, 129. edit. Hen. Stcphan.) arebeyontl the reach of human foresight: and the divine inspiration (the Asei^ovtov) of the philosopher, is clearlytaught in the Memorabilia of Xenonhon. The ideas of the most rational Platonists are expressed by Cicero (deDivmat. i. 54.) and in the fourteenth and fifteenth Dissertations of Maxima; of Tyre (p. 153—172. edit. Davis.;







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE*


of the faithful, But in the long and hereditary exercise of power, they assumedthe pride and attributes of royalty; the alternative of peace or war, of reward orpunishment, depended solely on their will; and the revenues of the governmentwere reserved for local services or private magnificence. Instead of a regularsupply of men and money, the successors of the prophet were flattered with theostentatious gift of an elephant, or a cast of hawks, a suit of silk hangings, or somepounds of musk and amber. (1)
After the revolt of Spain, from the temporal and spiritual supremacy of the Ab-bassides, the first symptoms of disobedience broke forth in the province of Africa.Ibrahim, the son of Aglab, the lieutenant of the vigilant and rigid Harun, be­queathed to the dynasty of the ylglabites the inheritance of his name and power,The indolence or policy of the caliphs dissembled the injury and loss, and pursuedonly with poison the founder of the lidrisites,{2) who erected the kingdom andcity of Fez on the shores of the western ocean. (3) In the east, the first dynasty wasthat of the Taheri£es;(4) the posterity of the valiant Taher, who, in the civil warsof the sons of Harun, had served with* too much zeal and success the cause of Alma-mon, the younger hrnther. He was sent into honourable exile, to command on thebanks of the Oxus; and the independence of his successors, who reigned in Cho-rasan till the fourth generation, was palliated by their modest and respectful de­meanour, the happiness of their subjects, and the security of their frontier. Theywere supplanted by one of those adventurers so frequent in the annals of the east,who left his trade of a brazier (from whence the name of Sqffarides) for the profes­sion of a robber. In a nocturnal visit to the treasure of the prince of Sistan, Jacob,the son of Leith, stumbled over a lump of salt, which he unwarily tasted with histongue. Salt, among the orientals, is the symbol of hospitality, and the pious rob­ber immediately retired without spoil or damage. The discovery of this honou­rable behaviour recommended Jacob to pardon and trust; he led an army at firstfor his benefactor, at last for himself, subdued Persia, and threatened the residenceof the Abbassides. On his march towards Bagdad, the conqueror was arrestedby a fever. He gave audience in bed to the ambassador of the caliph; and be­side him on a table were exposed a naked scimitar, a crust of brown bread and abunch of onions. " If I die," said he, " your master is delivered from his fears.If I live, this must determine between us. If I am vanquished, I can return with­out reluctance to the homely fare of my youth." From the height where he stood,the descent would not have been so soft or harmless; a timely death secured hisown repose and that of the caliph, who paid with the most lavish concessions theretreat of his brother Amrou to the palaces of Shiraz and Ispahan. The Abbas­sides were too feeble to contend, too proud to forgive; they invited the powerfuldynasty of the Samanidcs, who passed the Oxus with ten thousand horse, so poor,that their stirrups were of wood; so brave, that they vanquished the Soffarian army,eight times more numerous than their own. The captive Amrou was sent inchains, a grateful offering to the court of Bagdad; and as the victor was content■with the inheritance of Transoxiana and Chorasan, the realms of Persia returnedfor awhile to the allegiance of the caliphs. The provinces of Syria and Egypt■were twice dismembered by their Turkish slaves, of the race of Toulon and Ik-shid. (5) These barbarians, in religion and manners, the countrymen of Mahomet,emerged from the bloody factions of the palace to a provincial command and anindependant throne: their names became famous and formidable in their time; butthe founders of these two potent dynasties confessed, either in words or actions,the vanity of ambition. The first on his death-bed implored the mercy of God to
(1) The dynasties of the Arabian empire may he studied in the Annals of Elmacin, Abnlpharagius, andAbulfeda, under ihe proper years; in the dictionary of d'Herbelot, under the proper names. The tables of M,de Gtiignes (Hist des Huns, torn. i. exhibit a general chronology of the east, interspersed with some historicalanecdotes; but his attachment to national blood has sometimes confounded the order of time and place.
(2) The Agiabitcs and Edrisites are the professed subject of M. de Cardonne. (Hist, de PAfrique et de I'Es-pagne sous la Domination des Arabes, torn. ii. p. 1—63.)
(3) To escape the reproach of error, 1 must criticise The inaccuracies of M. de Guignes (torn. i. p. 329.) con­cerning the Edrisites. l. The dynasty and city of Fez. could not Iw* founded in the year of the Hegira 173,since the founder was a potthwnom child of a descendant of All, who fled from Mecca in the year 168. 2. Thisfounder, Edris, the son of Edris, instead of living to the improbable age of one hundred and twenty years, A.H. 313, died A. H. 214, in the prime of manhood. 3. The dynasty ended A. H. 307, twenty-three y<ars soonerthan it is fixed by the historian of the Huns. See the accurate Annals of Abulfeda, p. 158,159. 185. 238.
(4) The dynasties of the Taherites and SotTurides, with the rise of that of the Sanianides, are described in theoriginal history and Latin version of Mirchond; yet the most interesting facts had already been drained by thediligence of M. d'Herbelot.
(5) M. de Guigncs (Hist, des Huns, torn. iii. p. 124—154.) has exhausted the Toulunides and IksMiIites ofEgrpt, and thrown some light on the Cannathiaus and Hamadanites.
Vol. Iir. 53


 







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 63


tiie Goths abandoned the siege of Rimini, their tents, their standards, and theirleaders; and Vitiges, who gave or followed the example of flight, never halted tillhe found a shelter within the walls and morasses of Ravenna.
To these walls, and to some fortresses destitute of any mutual support, the Go­thic monarchy was now reduced. The provinces of Italy had embraced the partyof the emperor; and his army, gradually recruited to the number of twenty thou­sand men, must have achieved an easy and rapid conquest, if their invinciblepowers had not been weakened by the discord of the Roman chiefs. Before theend of the siege, an act of blood, ambiguous and indiscreet, sullied the fair fame ofBelisarius. Presidius, a loyal Italian, as he fled from Ravenna to Rome, was rude­ly stopped by Constantine, the military governor of Spoleto, and despoiled, evenin a church, of two daggers richly inlaid with gold and precious stones. As soonas the public danger had subsided, Presidius complained of the loss and injury: hiscomplaint was heard, but the order of restitution was disobeyed by the pride andavarice of the offender. Exasperated by the delay, Presidius boldly arrested thegeneral's horse as he passed through the forum; and, with the spirit of a citizen,demanded the common benefit of the Roman laws. The honour of Belisarius wasengaged; he summoned a council; claimed the obedience of his subordinate officer;and was provoked, by an insolent reply, to call hastily for the presence of hisguards. Constantine, viewing their entrance as the signal of death, drew hissword, and rushed on the general, who nimbly eluded the stroke, and was protect­ed by his friends; while the desperate assassin was disarmed, dragged into a neigh­bouring chamber, and executed, or rather murdered, by the guards, at the arbi­trary command of Belisarius. (1) In this hasty act of violence, the guilt of Con­stantine was no longer remembered; the despair and death of that valiant officerwere secretly imputed to the revenge of Antonina; and each of his colleagues, con­scious of the same rapine, was apprehensive of the same fate. The fear of a com­mon enemy suspended the effects of their envy and discontent: but in the confidenceof approaching victory, they instigated a powerful rival to oppose the conqueror•of Rome and Africa. From the domestic service of the palace, and the adminis­tration of the private revenue, Narses the eunuch was suddenly exalted to thehead of an army; and the spirit of a hero, who afterwards equalled the merit and•glory of Belisarius, served only to perplex the operations of the Gothic war. Tohis prudent counsels, the relief of Rimini was ascribed by the leaders of the dis­contented faction, who exhorted Narses to assume an independent and separatecommand. The epistle of Justinian had indeed enjoined his obedience to the gene­ral; but the dangerous exception, as far as may be advantageous to the fiublic ser­vice, reserved some freedom of judgment to the discreet favourite, who had so late­ly departed from the sacred and familiar conversation of his sovereign. In theexercise of this doubtful right, the eunuch perpetually dissented from the opinionsof Belisarius; and, after yielding with reluctance to the siege of Urbino, he desert­ed his colleague in the night, and marched away to the conquest of the JEmilianprovince. The fierce and formidable bands of the Heruli were attached to theperson of Narses;(2) ten thousand Romans and confederates were persuaded tomarch under his banners; every malecontent embraced the fair opportunity of re*vengine; his private or imaginary wrongs; and the remaining troops of Belisariuswere divided and dispersed from the garrisons of Sicily to the shores of the Hadri-atic. His skill and perseverance overcame every obstacle: Urbino was taken, thesieges of Fassulac, Orvieto, and Auximum, were undertaken and vigorously prose­cuted; and the eunuch Narses was at length recalled to the domestic cares of thepalace. All dissensions were healed, and all opposition was subdued, by the tem­perate authority of the Roman general, to whom his enemies could not refuse theiresteem; and Belisarius inculcated the salutary lessons, that the forces of the stateshould compose one body, and be animated by one soul. But, in the interval ofdiscord, the Goths were permitted to breathe; an important season was lost, Milanwas destroyed, and the northern provinces of Italy were afflicted by an inundationof the Franks.
(1) The transaction is related in the public history (Goth. lib. ii. c. 8.) with candour or caution; in the An­ecdotes (c. 7.,) with malevolence or freedom: but Marcellinus, or rather his oontinuator (in Chron.,) casts aHhade of premeditated assassination over the death of Constantine. He had performed good service at Romeand Spoleto (Procop. Goth. lib. i. c. 7.14.;) but Alemaous confounds him with a Constantianus comes sta-balu
(2) They refused to serve after his departure: sold their captives and cattle to the Goths; and swore neverto fight against them. Frooopius introduces a curious digression on the manners and adventures of this wan*«leringnatton,ft part of whom finally emigrated to Tbule or Scandinavia (Goth, lib. ii. c. 14,15.7







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


money. The subjects of Justinian who escaped these partial vexations, were op­pressed by the irregular maintenance of the soldiers whom Alexander defraudedand despised; and their hasty sallies, in quest of wealth or subsistence, provoked "the inhabitants of the country to await or implore their deliverance from the vir­tues of a barbarian. Totila(l) was chaste and temperate; and none were deceived,either friends or enemies, who depended on his faith or his clemency. To thehusbandmen of Italy the Gothic king issued a welcome proclamation, enjoiningthem to pursue their important labours, and to rest assured, that, on the paymentof the ordinary taxes, they should be defended by his valour and discipline fromthe injuries of war. The strong towns he successively attacked; and as soon asthey had yielded to his arms, he demolished the fortifications; to save the peoplefrom the calamities of a future siege, to deprive the Romans of the arts of defence,and to decide the tedious quarrel of the two nations, by an equal and honourableconflict in the field of battle. The Roman captives and deserters were tempted toenlist in the service of a liberal and courteous adversary; the slaves were attractedby the firm and faithful promise, that they should never be delivered to their mas­ters; and from the thousand warriors of Pavia, a new people, under the same ap­pellation of Goths, was insensibly formed in the camp of 1 otila. He sincerely ac­complished the articles of capitulation, without seeking or accepting any sinisteradvantage from ambiguous expressions or unforeseen events: the garrison of Napleshad stipulated, that they should be transported by sea; the obstinacy of the windsprevented their voyage, but they were1 generously supplied with horses, provisions,and a safe conduct to the gates of Rome. The wives of the senators, who hadbeen surprised in the villas of Campania, were restored, without a ransom, to theirhusbands; the violation of female chastity was inexorably chastised with death;and, in the salutary regulation of the diet of the famished Neapolitans, the con­queror assumed the office of a humane and attentive physician. The virtues ofTotila are equally laudable, whether they proceeded from true policy, religiousprinciple, or the instinct of humanity: he often harangued his troops; and it washis constant theme, that national vice and ruin are inseparably connected: that vic­tory is the fruit of moral as well as military virtue; and that the prince, and eventhe people are responsible for the crimes which they neglect to punish.
The return of Belisarius, to save the country which he had subdued, was pressedwith equal vehemence by his friends and enemies; and the Gothic war was im­posed as a trust or an exile on the veteran commander. A hero on the banks ofthe Euphrates, a slave in the palace of Constantinople, he accepted, with reluc­tance, the painful task of supporting his own reputation, and retrieving the faultsof his successors. The sea was open to the Romans: the ships and soldiers wereassembled at Salona, near the palace of Diocletian: he refreshed and reviewed histroops at Pola in Istria, coasted round the head of the Hadriatic, entered the portof Ravenna, and despatched orders rather than supplies to the subordinate cities.His first public oration was addressed to the Goths and Romans in the name of theemperor, who had suspended for awhile the conquest of Persia, and listened to theprayers of his Italian subjects. He gently touched on the causes and the authorsof the recent disasters; striving to remove the fear of punishment for the past, andthe hope of impunity for the future, and labouring, with more zeal than success,to unite all the members of his government in a firm league of affection and obe­dience. _ Justinian, his gracious master, was inclined to pardon and reward; and itwas their interest, as well as duty, to reclaim their deluded brethren, who hadbeen seduced by the arts of the usurper. Not a man was tempted to desert thestandard of the Gothic king. Belisarius soon discovered, that he was sent to re­main the idle and impotent spectator of the glory of a young barbarian; and hisown epistle exhibits a genuine and lively picture of the distress of a noble mind.—"Most excellent prince; we are arrived in Italy, destitute of all the necessary im­plements of war, men, horses, arms, and money. In our late circuit through thevillages of Thrace and Illyrfcum, we have collected, with extreme difficulty, aboutfour thousand recruits, naked, and unskilled in the use of weapons and the exer­cises of the camp. The soldiers already stationed in the province are discontented,fearful, and dismayed; at the sound of an enemy, they dismiss their horses, andcast their arms on the ground. No taxes can be raised, since Italy is in the handsof the barbarians; the failure of payment has deprived us of the right of command,
. (1) Procopins (lib. iii. e. 3.8, &c.) does ample and willing justice to the merit of Totila. The Raman histo­rian!, from Sallustand Tacitui, were happy to forget the rices of their countrymen in the contemplation of







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. .Ml


and silver, the various wardrobes and precious furniture, surpassed (says Abulfe-da) the estimate of fancy or numbers; and another historian defines the untold andalmost infinite mass, by the fabulous computation of three thousands of thousandsof thousands of pieces of gold.(l) Some minute though curious facts representthe contrast of riches and ignorance. From the remote islands of the Indianocean, a large provision of camphire(2) had been imported, which is employedwith a mixture of wax to illuminate the palaces of the east. ' Strangers to thename and properties of that odoriferous gum, the Saracens, mistaking it for salt,mingled the camphire in their bread, and were astonished at the bitterness of thetaste. One of the apartments of the palace was decorated with a carpet of silk,sixty cubits in length, and as many in breadth; a paradise, or garden, was depic­tured on the ground; the flowers, fruits, and shrubs, were imitated by the figuresof the gold embroidery, and the colours of the precious stones; and the amplesquare was encircled by a variegated and verdant border. The Arabian generalpersuaded his soldiers to relinquish their claim, in the reasonable hope that theeyes of the caliph would be delighted with the splendid workmanship of natureand industry. Regardless of the merit of art and the pomp of royalty, the rigidOmar divided the priie among his brethren of Medina: the picture was destroyed;but such was the intrinsic value of the materials, that the share of Ali alone wassold for twenty thousand drachms. A mule that carried away the tiara and cui­rass, the belt and bracelets of Chosroes, was overtaken by the pursuers; the gor­geous trophy was presented to the commander of the faithful, and the gravest ofthe companions condescended, to smile when they beheld the white beard, hairyarms, and uncouth figure, of the veteran, who was invested with the spoils of thegreat king. (3) The sack of Ctesiphon was followed by its desertion and gradualdecay. The Saracens disliked the air and situation of the place, and Omar wasadvised by his general, to remove the seat of government to the western side ofthe Euphrates. In every age the foundation and ruin of the Assyrian cities hasbeen easy and rapid; the country is destitute of stone and timber, and the most so­lid structures(4) are composed of bricks baked in the sun, and joined by a cementof the native bitumen. The name of Cufa(5) describes a habitation of reeds andearth; but the importance of the new capital was supported by the numbers,wealth and spirit, of a colony of veterans; and their licentiousness was indulgedby the wisest caliphs, who were apprehensive of provoking the revolt of a hun­dred thousand swords. "Ye men of Cufa," said Ali, who solicited their aid," you have been always conspicuous by your valour. You conquered the Persianking, and scattered his forces, till you had taken possession of his inheritance."This mighty conquest was achieved by the battles of Jalula and Nehavend. Af­ter the loss of the former, Yezdegerd new from Holwan, and concealed his shameand despair in the mountains of Farsistan, from whence Cyrus had descended withhis equal and valiant companions. The courage of the nation survived that of themonarch; among the hills to the south of Ecbatana or Hamadan, one hundred andfifty thousand Persians made a third and final stand for their religion and country;and the decisive battle of Nehavend was styled by the Arabs the victory of victo­ries. If it be true that the flying general of the Persians was stopped and over­taken in a crowd of mules and camels laden with honey, the incident, howeverslight or singular, will denote the luxurious impediments of an oriental army.(6)The geography of Persia is darkly delineated by the Greeks and Latins; butthe most illustrious of her cities appear to be more ancient than the invasion of theArabs. By the reduction of Hamadan and Ispahan, of Caswin, Tauris, and Rei,they gradually approached the shores of the Caspian sea; and the orators of Mec-
(1) Mentevix potest numerove comprehend! quanta spolla .... nostris cessarinr. Abulfeda, p. 69. YetI still suspect, that the extravagant numbers uf Elmacin may be the error, not of the text, but of the version.The best translators from the Greek, for instance, I find to be very poor arithmeticians.
(2) The camphire trees grow in China and Japan; but many hundred weight of those meaner sorts are ex­changed for a single pound of the more precious gum of Borneo and Sumatra (RaynaT. Hist. Philosoph. torn,j. p. 362—365. Dictionnaire d'Hist. Naturelle par Bomare; Miller's Gardener's Dictionary.) These may he theislands of the first climate from whence the Arabians imported their camphire (Gengrapb. Nub. n. 34, 35.D'Herbelot, p. 232.
f3) See Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet, torn. i. p. 376, 377. I may credit the fact, without believing the prophecy.
(4) The most considerable ruins of Assyria are the tower of Belus at Babylon, and the hall of Chosroes atCtesiphon: they have been visited by that vain and curious traveller, Pietro della Vale (torn. i. p. 713—718.731^735.) '
(5) Consult the article of Coi/fah in the Bibliotheque of d'Herbelot (p. 277, 278. and the second volume ofHockley's History, particularly p. 40. and 153.
(6) See the article Nehavend, in d'Herbelot, p. 667,668. and Voyages en Turqrtie et en Perse, par Otter, torn.i. n. 191.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 38.3


. Before Musa would trust an army of the faithful to the traitors and infidels of aforeign land, he made a less dangerous trial of their strength and veracity. Onehundred Arabs, and four hundred Africans, passed over, in four vessels, fromTangier, or Ceuta; the place of their descent on the opposite shore of the strait, ismarked by the name of Tarif their chief; and the date of this memorable event(l)is fixed to the month of Ramadan, of the ninety-first year of the Hegira, to themonth of July, seven hundred and forty-eight years from the Spanish era ofCa;sar,(2) seven hundred and ten after the birth of Christ. From their first sta­tion they marched eighteen miles through a hilly country to the castle and townof Julian;(3) on which (it is, still called Algezire,) they bestowed the name of theGreen Island, from a verdant cape that advances into the sea. Their hospitableentertainment, the Christians who joined their standard, their inroad into a fertileand unguarded province, the richness of their spoil, and the safety of their return,announced to their brethren the most favourable omens of victory. In the ensu­ing spring, five thousand veterans and volunteers were embarked under the com­mand of Tarik, a dauntless and skilful soldier, who surpassed the expectations ofhis chief; and the necessary transports were provided by the industry of their toofaithful ally. The Saracens landed(4) at the pillar or point of Europe; the cor­rupt and familiar appellation of Gibraltar ( Gebel et Tarik,) describes the moun­tain of Tarik; and the intrenchments of his camp were tthe first outlines of thosefortifications, which, in the hands of our countrymen, Tiave resisted the art andpower of the house of Bourbon. The adjacent governors informed the court ofToledo of the descent and progress of the Arabs; and the defeat of his lieutenantEdeco, who had been commanded to seize and bind the presumptuous strangers,admonished Roderic of the magnitude of the danger. At the royal summons, thedukes, and counts, the bishops and nobles of the Gothic monarchy, assembled atthe head of their followers; and the title of king of the Romans, which is employedby an Arabic-historian, may be excused by the close affinity of language, religion,and manners, between the nations of Spain. His army consisted of ninety or a hun­dred thousand men; a formidable power, if their fidelity and discipline had beenadequate to their numbers. The troops of Tarik had been augmented to twelvethousand Saracens; but the Christian malecontents were attracted by the influenceof Julian, and a crowd of Africans most greedily tasted the temporal blessings ofthe Koran. In the neighbourhood of Cadiz, the town of Xeres(5) has been illus­trated by the encounter which determined the fate of the kingdom; the stream ofthe Guadalete, which falls into the bay, divided the two camps, and marked theadvancing and retreating skirmishes of three successive and bloody days. On thefourth day, the two armies joined a more serious and decisive issue; but Alaricwould have blushed at the sight of his unworthy successor, sustaining on his heada diadem of pearls, encumbered with a flowing robe of gold and silken embroide­ry, and reclining on a litter, or car of ivory, drawn by two white mules. Not­withstanding the valour of the Saracens, they fainted under the weight of multi­tudes, and the plain of Xeres was overspread with sixteen thousand of their deadbodies. " My brethren," said Tarik to his surviving companions, " the enemy isbefore you, the sea is behind; whither would ye fly? Follow your general; I amresolved either to lose my life, or to trample on the prostrate king of the Romans."Besides the resource of despair, he confided in the secret correspondence and noc­turnal interviews of count Julian, with the sons and the brother of Witiza. The
106.182. 252.319—332. On this occasion, the industry of Pagi has been aided by the Arabic learning of hisfriend the abbe de Longuerue, and to their joint labour) I am deeply indebted. * •
(1) A mistake of Roderic of Toleda.in comparing the lunar years of the Hegira with the Julian years of theera, has determined Baronius, Mariana, and the crowd of Spanish historians, to place the first invasion in theyear 713,and the battle of Xeres in Novembrr714. This anachronism of three years has been detected by themore correct industry of modem chronologists, above all. of Pagi. (Critica, torn. iii. p. 169. 171—174.) who harerestored the genuine state of the revolution. At the present time an Arabian scholar, like Cardonne, whoadopts the ancient error, (torn. i. p. 75.) is inexcusably ignorant or careless.
(2) The era of Csesar, which in Spain was in legal and popular use titi the fourteenth century, begins thirty -eight years before the birth of Christ. I would refer the origin to the general peace by sea and land, whichconfi rmed the power and partition of the triumvirs. (Dion. Cassins, lib. 48. p. 547. 553. Appian de Bell. Civil,lib. t. p. 1034. edit, fol.) Spain was a province of Caesar Octavian; and Tarraponn, which raised the first tem­ple to Augustus, (Tacit. Anna!. 1. 78.) might borrow from the orientals this modeof flattery.
(3) The road, the country, the old castle of count Julian, and the superstitious belief of the Spaniards of hid -tlen treasures, &c. are described by Pere Labat (Voyages en Espagne et en Italie, torn. i. p. 207—217.) with hisusual pleasantry.
(4) The Nubian geographer (p. 154.) explains the topography of the war; but it is highly incredible that thelieutenant of Musa should execute the desperate and useless measure of burning his ships.
(5) Xeres (the Roman colony of Asta Regia) is only two leagues from Cadiz. In the sixteenth century itwas a granary of corn; and the wine of Xeres is familiar to the nations of Europe. (Lml. Nonit Hispania. c. 13.1>, SA—56. a work of correct and concise know ledge; d'Anviile, Etats dc PEurope, fee p. 154.)







OCR Output








THE' DECLINE AND FALL-


Solemn offices of religion, -which served at least to heal the imagination, rfnd re­store the hopes, of the multitude. The public defence had been long neglected,not from the presumption of peace, but from the distress and poverty of the times.As far as the scantiness of his means and the shortness of his leisure would allow,the ancient walls were repaired by the command of Leo; fifteen towers, in themost accessible stations, were built or renewed; two of these commanded on eitherside the Tiber; and an iron chain was drawn across the stream to impede the as­cent of a hostile navy. The Romans were assured of a short respite by the wel­come news, that the siege of Gayeta had been raised, and that a part of the enemy,with their sacrilegious plunder, had perished in the waves.
But the storm which had been delayed, soon burst upan them with redoubledViolence. The Aglabite,(l) who reigned in Africa, had inherited from his father atreasure and an army: a fleet of Arabs and Moors, after a short refreshment in theharbours of Sardinia, cast anchor before the mouth of the Tiber, sixteen milesfrom the city; and their discipline and numbers appeared to threaten, not a tran­sient inroad, but a serious design of conquest and dominion. But the vigilance of.Leo had formed an alliance with the vassals of the Greek empire, the free andmaritime states of Gayeta, Naples, and Amalfi; and in the hour of danger, theirgallevs appeared in the port of Ostia, under the command of C«esarius, the son ofthe Neapolitan duke, a noble and valiant youth, who had already vanquished thefleets of the Saracens. With his principal companions, Caesarius was invited tothe Lateran palace, and the dexterous pontiff affected to inquire their errand, andto accept with joy and surprise their providential succour. The city bands, in ,arms, attended their father to Ostia, where he reviewed and blessed his generousdeliverers. They kissed his feet, receive4 the communion with martial devotion,and listened to the prayer of Leo, that the same God who had supported St. Peterand St? Paul on the waves of the sea, would strengthen the hands of his cham­pions against the adversaries of his holy name. After a similar prayer, and withequal resolution, the Moslems advanced to the attack of the Christian galleys,which preserved their advantageous station along the coast. The victory inclinedtoythe side of the allies, when it was less gloriously decided in their favour by asudden tempest, which confounded the skill and courage of the stoutest mariners.The Christians were sheltered in a friendly harbour, while the Africans werescattered and dashed in pieces among the rocks and islands of a hostile shore.Those who escaped from shipwreck and hunger, neither found nor deserved mercyat the hands of their implacable pursuers. The sword and the gibbet reduced thedangerous multitude of captives; and the remainder was more usefully employed,to restore the sacred edifices which they had attempted to subvert. ' The pontiff,at the head of the citizens and allies, paid his grateful devotion at the shrines ofthe apostles; and among the spoils of this naval victory, thirteen Arabian bows ofpure and massy silver were suspended round the altar of the fishermen of Galilee.The reign of Leo the Fourth was employed in the defence and ornament of theRoman state. The churches were renewed and embellished; near four thousandpounds of silver were consecrated to repair the losses of St. Peter; and his sanctu­ary was decorated with a plate of gold the weight of two hundred and sixteenpounds, embossed with the portraits of the pope and emperor, and encircled witha string of pearls. Yet this vain magnificence reflects less glory on the characterof Leo, than the paternal care with which he rebuilt the walls of Horta and Arae-ria; and transported the wandering inhabitants of Centunicella; to his new founda­tion of Leopolis, twelve miles from the sea-shore. (2) By his liberality a colony ofCorsicans, with their wives and children, was planted in the station of Porto at themouth of the Tiber: the falling city was restored for their use, the fields and vine­yards were divided among the new settlers: their first efforts were assisted by agift of horses and cattle; and the hardy exiles, who breathed revenge against theSaracens, swore to live and die under the standard of St. Peter. The nations ofthe west and north who visited the threshold of the apostles, had gradually formedthe large and populous suburb of the Vatican, and their various habitations weredistinguished, in the language of the times, as the schools of the Greeks and Goths,of the Lombards and Saxons. But this venerable spot was still open to sacrilegious
(1) De Guipiei, Hist. Generate des Huns, torn.!. p. 3M,S64. Cardmine, Hist, de l'Afrique el de I'Kipaenc.sons la Domination des Arabes. torn. 2. p. 34, 35. I observe, and cannot reconcile, the difierence of these writersin the succession of the A g.Rhites.
(2) Beretti (Chronographia Italia; Medii ^Evi, p. j,oo. 108.) has illustrated CeuWmcellK, I.eopoUs, CivitarLoonma,and the other p!it«es of the Roman duelif.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


a tomb, a temple, a city, arose near the ruins of Cufa.(l) Many thousands of theSchiites repose in holy ground at the feet of the vicar of God; and the desert isvivified by the numerous and annual visits of the Persians, who esteem their devo­tion not less meritorious than the pilgrimage to Mecca.
The persecutors of Mahomet usurped the inheritance of his children; and thechampions of idolatry became the supreme heads of his religion and empire. Theopposition of Abu Sophian had been fierce and obstinate; his conversion was tar­dy and reluctant; his new faith was fortified by necessity and interest; he served,he fought, perhaps he believed; and the sins of the time of ignorance were expia­ted by the recent merits of the family of Ommiyah. Moawiyah, the son of AbuSophian, and of the cruel Henda, was dignified in his early youth with the title oroffice of secretary of the prophet; the judgment of Omar intrusted him with thegovernment of Syria; and he administered that important province above fortyyears, either in a subordinate or supreme rank. Without renouncing the fame ofvalour and liberality, he affected the reputation of humanity and moderation; agrateful people was attached to their benefactor, and the victorious Moslems wereenriched with the spoils of Cyprus and Rhodes. The sacred duty of pursuing theassassins of Othman was the engine and pretence of his ambition. The bloodyshirt of the martyr was exposed in the mosch of Damascus: the emir deplored thefate of his injured kinsman; and sixty thousand Syrians were engaged in his serviceby an oath of fidelity and revenge. Amrou, the conqueror of Egypt, himself andarmy, was the first who saluted the new monarch, and divulged the dangerous se­cret, that the Arabian caliphs might be created elsewhere more than in the cityof the prophet. (2) The policy of Moawiyah eluded the valour of his rival; and,after the death of Ali, he negotiated the abdication of his son Hassan, whose mindwas either above or below the government of the world, and who retired withouta sigh from the palace of Cufa, to an humble cell near the tomb of his grandfather.The aspiring wishes of the caliph were finally crowned by the important changeof an elective to an hereditary kingdom. Some murmurs of freedom or fanaticismattested the reluctance of the Arabs, and four citizens of Medina refused the oathof fidelity; but the designs of Moawiyah were conducted with vigour and address;and his son Yezid, a feeble and dissolute youth, was proclaimed as the comman­der of the faithful, and the successor of the apostle of God.
A familiar story is related of the benevolence of one of the sons of Ali. Inserving at table, a slave had inadvertently dropped a dish of scalding broth on hismaster: the heedless wretch fell prostrate, to deprecate his punishment, and re­peated a verse of the Koran. " Paradise is for those who command their anger.—I am not angry.—And for those who pardon offences. —I pardon your offence.—And for those who return good for evil—I give you your liberty, and four hun­dred pieces of silver." With an equal measure of piety, Hosein, the youngerbrother of Hassan, inherited a remnant of his father's spirit, and served with ho­nour against the Christians in the siege of Constantinople. The primogeniture ofthe line of Hashem, and the holy character of grandson of the apostle, had cen­tred in his person, and he was at liberty to prosecute his claim against Yezid, thetyrant of Damascus, whose vices he despisei and whose title he had never deignedto acknowledge. A list was secretly transmitted from Cufa to Medina, of onehundred and forty thousand Moslems, who professed their attachment to his cause,and who were eager to draw their swords as soon as he should appear on thebanks of the Euphrates. Against the advice of his wisest friends, he resolved totrust his person and family in the hands of a perfidious people. He traversed thedesert of Arabia with a timorous retinue of women and children; but as he ap­proached the confines of Irak, he was alarmed by the solitary or hostile face ofthe country, and suspected either the defection or ruin of his party. His fearswere just: Obeidollah, the governor of Cufa, had extinguished the first sparks ofan insurrection; and Hosein, in the plain of Kerbela, was encompassed by a bodyof five thousand horse, who intercepted his communication with the city and theriver. He might still have escaped to a fortress in the desert, that had defied thepower of Cicsar and Chosroes, and confided in the fidelity of the tribe of Tai,which would have armed ten thousand warriors in his defence. In a conference
(1) The city of Meshed Ali, five or sis miles from llie ruins of Cufa, and one hundred and twenty to the southof Bagdad, isof thesizeand form of the modern Jerusalem. Meshed Hosein, larger and more populous, is atthe distance of thirty miles.
(2) I borrow, on this occasion, the strong sense and expression of Tacitus, (Hist. i. 4.) Evnlgato imperii ar-eano posse imperatorem alibi rjuam Roma1 fieri.







OCR Output








202 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Mary, the birth of Christ, and the thirty years that preceded the exercise of hi*ministry. He first appeared on the banks of the Jordan in the form of perfectmanhood; but it was a form only, and not a substance; a human figure created bythe hand of Omnipotence, to imitate the faculties and actions of a man, and to im­pose a perpetual illusion on the senses of his friends and enemies. Articulatesounds vibrated on the ears of the disciples; but the image, which was impressedon their optic nerve, eluded the more stubborn evidence of the touch; and theyenjoyed the spiritual, not the corporeal presence of the Son of God. The rageof the Jews was idly wasted against an impassive phantom; and the mystic scenesof the passion and death, and the resurrection of Christ, were represented on thetheatre of Jerusalem for the benefit of mankind. If it were urged, that such idealmimicry, such incessant deception, was unworthy of the God of truth, the Docetesagreed itit\\ too many of their orthodox brethren in the justification of pious false­hood. In the system of the Gnostics, the Jehovah of Israel, the creator of thislower world, was a rebellious, or at least an ignorant spirit. The Son of God de­scended upon earth to abolish his temple and his law: and for the accomplishmentof this salutary end, he dexterously transferred to his own person the hope andpredictiori of a temporal Messiah.
One of the most subtle disputants of the Manichaean school, has pressed thedanger and the indecency of supposing, that the God of the Christians in the stateof a human fetus, emerged at the end of nine months from a female womb. Thepious horror of his antagonists provoked them to disclaim all sensual circumstancesof conception and delivery; to maintain that the divinity passed through Mary likea sun-beam through a plate of glass, and to assert, that the seal of her virginity re­mained unbroken even at the moment when she became the mother, of Christ.But the rashness of these concessions has encouraged a milder sentiment of thoseof the Docetes, who taught, not that Christ was a phantom, but that he was clothedwith an impassable and incorruptible body. Such, indeed, in the more orthodoxsystem, he has acquired since his resurrection, and such he must have always pos­sessed, if it were capable of pervading, without resistance or injury, the densityof intermedials matter. Devoid of its most essential properties, it might be ex­empt from the attributes and infirmities of the flesh. A foetus that could increasefrom an invisible point to its full maturity; a child, that could attain the stature ofperfect manhood, without deriving any nourishment from the ordinary sources,might continue to exist without repairing a daily waste from a daily supply of ex­ternal matter. Jesus might share the repasts of his disciples without being sub­ject to the calls of thirst or hunger; and his virgin purity was never sullied by theinvoluntary stains of sensual concupiscence. Of a body thus singularly constituted,a question would arise, by what means, and of what materials, it was originallyframed; and our sounder theology is startled by an answer which was not peculiarto the Gnostics, that both the form and the substance proceeded from the divineessence. The idea of pure and absolute spirit is a refinement of modern philoso­phy; the incorporeal essence, ascribed by the ancients to human souls, celestialbeings, and even the Deity himself, does not exclude the notion of extended space;and their imagination was satisfied with a subtle nature of air, or fire, or ether, in­comparably more perfect than the grossness of the material world. If we definethe place, we must describe the figure of the Deity. Our experience, perhapsour vanity, represents the power of reason and virtue under a human form. The"anthropomorphithes, who swarmed among the monks of Egypt, and the catho­lics of Africa, could produce the express declaration of Scripture, that man wasmade after the image of his Creator.(l) The venerable Serapian, one of thesaints of the Nitrian desert, relinquished, with many a tear, his darling prejudice,and bewailed, like an infant, his unlucky conversion, which had stolen away hisGod, and left his mind without any visible object of faith or devotion. (2)
(1) The pilgrim Cassian, who visited Egypt in the beginning of the fifth century, observes and lament! thereign of anthropomorphism among the monks, who were not conscious that they embraced the system of Epi-enrus. (Cicero, de Nat. Deorum, 1 18— 34.) Ab oniverso propemodum genere monachorum, qui per totamprovinciam Egyptum morabantur, pro simplieitatis errors suseeptum est, ut e eontrario memoratura pontifi-cem (Theophilus) velut hseresi gravissima df praratum, pars maxima seniorum ab unirerso f raternitatit corporedecerneret destestandnm. (Cassian, Collation, 16.3.) As long as St. Augustin remained a Manicbsean, be wasscandalized by the anthropomorphism of the vulgar catholics.
(2) Tta est inoratione senex im*nteconfuius,eoquod iliam MvSpoHro^op^ow imaginem Deitatis, quam propo-nere sibi in oratione consueverat aboleri de suo corde sentiret, lit in amarissimos fletus, crebmsque singultusrepente prorumpens, in terrain prostratut, cum ejulatu validissimo proclamaret,—" Heu me'misenim!" tulerunta me Deum meum, et quern nunc tencam non habeo, vel quern adorera. aut imerpellera jam nescio. Cassian.Collat. 10.2.







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


the shares of guilt or virtue shall preponderate, the sentence will be pronounced,and all, without distinction, will pass over the sharp and perilous bridge of theabyss: but the innocent, treading in the footsteps of Mahomet, will gloriously enterthe gates of paradise, while the guilty will falUinto the first and mildest of theseven hells. The term of expiation will vary from nine hundred to seven thou­sand years; but the prophet has judiciously promised, that all his disciples, what­ever may be their sins, shall be saved, by their own faith and his intercession, frometernal damnation. It is not surprising that superstition should act most power­fully on the fears of her votaries, since the human fancy can paint with more ener­gy the misery than the bliss of a future life. With the simple elements of dark­ness and fire, we create a sensation of pain, which may be aggravated to an infi­nite degree by the idea of endless duration. But the same idea operates with anopposite effect on the continuity of pleasure; and too much of our present enjoy­ments is obtained from the relief, or the comparison of evil. It is natural enoughthat an Arabian prophet should dwell with rapture on the groves, the.fountains,and the rivers of paradise; but instead of inspiring the blessed inhabitants with aliberal taste for harmony and science, conversation and friendship, he idly cele­brates the pearls and diamonds, the robes of silk, palaces of marble, dishes ofgold, rich wines, artificial dainties, numerous attendants, and the whole train ofsensual and costly luxury, which becomes insipid to the owner, even in the shorteriod of this mortal life. Seventy-two houris, or black-eyed girls, of resplendenteauty, blooming youth, virgin purity, and exquisite sensibility, will be createdfor the use of the meanest believer; a moment of pleasure will be prolonged to athousand years, and his faculties will be increased a hundred-fold, to render himworthy of his felicity. Notwithstanding a vulgar prejudice, the gates of heavenwill be open to both sexes; but Mahomet has not specified the male companions ofthe female elect, lest he should either alarm the jealousy of their former hus­bands, orUisturb their felicity, by the suspicion of an everlasting marriage. Thisimage of a carnal paradise has provoked the indignation, perhaps the envy of themonks: they declaim against the impure religion of Mahomet; and his modestapologists are driven to the poor excuse of figures and allegories. But the sounderand more consistent party adhere, without shame, to the literal interpretation ofthe Koran: useless would be the resurrection of the body, unless it were restoredto the possession and exercise of its worthiest faculties; and the union of sensualand intellectual enjoyment is requisite to complete the happiness of the double ani­mal, the perfect man. Yet the joys of the Mahometan paradise will not be con­fined to the indulgence of luxury and appetite; and the prophet has expressly de­clared, that all meaner happiness will be forgotten and despised by the saints andmartyrs, who shall be admitted to the beatitude of the divine visioh.(l)
The first and most arduous conquests of Mahomet(2) were those of his wife,his servant, his pupil, and his friend;(3) since he presented himself as a prophetto those who were most conversant with his infirmities as a man. Yet Cadijahbelieved the weirds, and cherished the glory, of her husband; the obsequious and


(1) For the day ofjudgment, hell, paradise, Sec. consult the Koran, (c. 2. v. 25. e. 56. 78, &c.) with Maracci'svirulent, but learned, refutation, (mnis notes, and in the Prodromus, part 4. p. 78.-120. 122, &e.)trTleil»e]ot,(Bibliotheque Orientate, p. 308, 37f.) Reland, (p. -47—61.) and Sale, (p. 76—103.) The original ideas of theMagi are darkly and doubtfully explored by their apologist. Dr. Hyde. (Hist. Religicnis Persarum, c. 32. p.■402—412. Oxon. 1716.) Ill the article of Mahomet, Bayle has shown how indifferently wit and philosophy sup­ply the absence of general information.
(2) Before I enter into the history of the prophet, it is incumbent on me to produce my evidence. The La­tin, French and English versions of the Koran, are preceded by historical discourses, ami tin* three translators,Maracci, (torn. i. p. 10—32.) Savary, (torn. i. p. 1—248.) and Sale, (Preliminary Discourse, p. 33—56.) had accu­rately studied the language and character of their author. Two professed lives of Mahomet have been com­posed by Dr. Prideaux (Life of Mahomet, seventh edition, London, 1718, in octavo) and the count de Boulain-villiers (Vie de Mahomet, Londres, 1730, in octavo;) but the adverse wish of finding an impostor, or a hero, hastoo often corrupted the learning of the doctor and the ingenuity of the count. The article in d'Herbelot (Bi-bliot. Orient, p. 598—603.) is chiefly drawn from Novairi and Mircond; but the best and most authentic of ourguides is M. Gagnier, a Frenchman by birth, and professor at Oxford, of the oriental tongues. In two elabo­rate works, (Ismael Abulfeda de Vita et Rebus gestis Mohammetlis, 8tc. Latine vertit, Prtefatione et Notis il-
, lustravit Johannes Gagnier, Oxon. 1723, in folio; La vie de Mahomet traduite et compilee de PAIcoran, drsTraditions authentiques de la Sonna et des meiliears Auteurs A rabes; Amsterdam, 1748.3 vols, in duodecimo)he has interpreted, illustrated, and supplied the Arabic text of Abulfeda and Al Jannabi, the first, and enlight­ened prince, who reigned at Hainan,in Syria, A. D. 1310—1332; (see Gagnier Prsefat. ad Abulfed.) the second,a credulous doctor, who visited Mecca, A. D. 1556. (D. Herbelot, p. 397. Gagnier, torn. iii. p. 209,210.) Theseare my general vouchers, and the inquisitive reader may follow the order of time, and the division of chapters,-yet X must observe, that both Abulfeda and Al Jannabi are modern historians, and that they cannot appeal toany writers of the first century of the Hegira.
(3) After the Greeks, Prideaux (p. 8.) discloses the secret doubts of the wife of Mahomet. As if he had beena privy-counsellor of the prophet, Botilainvilliers (p. 272, &c.) unfolds the sublime and patriotic views ol'Cadi-Jats and the first disciples.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


of a caliph, had signalized his valour in Egypt; and Zobeir(l) was the first whoplanted a scaling-ladder against the walls of Babylon. In the African war he wasdetached from the standard of Abdallah. On the news of the battle, Zobeir, withtwelve companions, cut his way through the camp of the Greeks, and pressed for­ward, without either tastingfood or repose, to partake of the dangers of his brethren.He cast his eyes round the field. " Where," said he, " is our general?—In histent.—Is the tent a station for the general of the Moslems?" Abdallah representedwith a blush the importance of his own life, and the temptation that was held forthby the Roman prefect. " Retort," said Zobeir, "on the infidels their ungenerousattempt Proclaim through the ranks, that the head of Gregory shall be repaidwith his captive daughter, and the equal sum of one hundred thousand pieces ofgold," To the courage and discretion of Zobeir the lieutenant of the caliph in­trusted the execution of his own stratagem, which inclined the long disputed ba­lance in favour of the Saracens. Supplying by activity and artifice the deficiencyof numbers, a part of their forces lay concealed in their tents, while the remainderprolonged an irregular skirmish with the enemy, till the sun was high in the hea­vens. On both sides they retired with fainting steps: their horses were unbridled,their armour was laid aside, and the hostile nations prepared, or seemed to pre­pare, for the refreshment of the evening, and the encounter of the ensuing day.On a sudden the charge was sounded; the Arabian camp poured forth a swarmof fresh and intrepid warriors; and the long line of the Greeks and Africans wassurprised, assaulted, overturned, by new squadrons of the faithful, who, to theeye of fanaticism, might appear as a band of angels descending from the sky.The prefect himself was slain by the hand of Zobeir: his daughter, who soughtrevenge and death, was surrounded and «made prisoner; and the fugitives in­volved in their disaster the town of Sufetula, to which they escaped from thesabres and lances of the Arabs. Sufetula was built one hundred and fifty milesto the south of Carthage; a gentle declivity is watered by a running stream, andshaded by a grove of juniper-trees; and in the ruins of a triumphal arch, a porti­co, and three temples of the Corinthian order, curiosity may yet admire the mag­nificence of the Romans. (2) After the fall of this opulent city, the provincials andbarbarians implored on all sides the mercy of the conqueror. His vanity or hiszeal might be flattered by offers of tribute or professions of faith: but his losses,his fatigues, and the progress of an epidemical disease, prevented a solid establish­ment; and the Saracens, after a campaign of fifteen months, retreated to the con­fines of Egypt, with the captives and the wealth of their African expedition. Thecaliph's fifth was granted to a favourite, on the nominal payment of five hundredthousand pieces of gold;(3) but the state was doubly injured by this fallacioustransaction, if each foot-soldier had shared one thousand, and each horseman threethousand, pieces, in the real division of the plunder. The author of the death ofGregory was expected to have claimed the most precious reward of the victory:from his silence it might be presumed that he had fallen in the battle, till the tearsand exclamations of the prefect's daughter at the sight of Zobeir revealed thevalour and modesty of that gallant soldier. The unfortunate virgin was offered,and almost rejected, as a slave, by her father's murderer, who coolly declared thathis sword was consecrated to the service of religion; and that he laboured for arecompense far above the charms of mortal beauty, or the riches of this transito­ry life. A reward congenial to his temper, was the honourable commission of an­nouncing to the caliph Othman the success of his arms. The companions, thechiefs, and the people, were assembled, in the mosch of Medina, to hear the in­teresting narrative of Zobeh-; and, as the or«tor forgot nothing except the meritof his own counsels and actions, the name of Abdallah was joined by the Arabianswith the heroic names of Caled and Atnrou. (4)
The western conquests of the Saracens were suspended near twenty years, tilltheir dissensions were composed by the establishment of the house of Ommiyah:
(1) See in Ockley (Hist, of the Saracens, vn]. ii. p. 45.) the death of Zobeir, which was honoured with thetears of Ali, against whom he had rebelled. His valour at the siege of Babylon, if indet*] it be the same person,is mentioned by Eutychius. (Annal. torn. ii. p. 303.)
(2) Shaw's Travels,p. 118,119.
(3) Mimiea emptio, says Abulfeda, erat haac, et mira donatio; qtiandoquidem Othman. ejus nomine numnioscx serario prius ablatos aerario prsestabat. (Annal. Moslem, p. 78.) Elmacin (in his cloudy version, p. 39.) seemsto report the same job. When the Arabs besieged the palace of Othman, it stood high in their catalogue ofgrievances.
(4; E5reTTpatT£uTo(p SapaxtjuSi ti)v A?pixjju )t«( rruftfiaXovTig Tte T«p*'.'vui Tp)jyps(a) rcurov Tpssrsueri, lust Tons rrw atmu
KT6ivou<ri,xaM (rroix^vTsg ?°p5u; ^era twv &$?w u,TiTrpi^«v. Theophan. Chronograph, p. 285. edit. Paris. Hischronology is loose and inaccurate.
Vol. III. 4S







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. ray


The succeeding year was illustrated by a triumph of a very different kind, therestitution of the true cross to the holy sepulchre. Heraclius performed in per­son the pilgrimage of Jerusalem, the identity of the relic was verified by the dis­creet patriarchal) and this august ceremony has been commemorated by the an­nual festival of the exaltation of the cross. Before the emperor presumed totread the consecrated ground, he was instructed to strip himself ot the diademand purple, the pomp and vanity of the world: but in the judgment of his clergy,the persecution of the Jews was more easily reconciled with the precepts of thegospel. He again ascended his throne to receive the congratulations of the am­bassadors of France and India: and the fame of Moses, Alexander, and Hercu­les, (2) was eclipsed, in the popular estimation, by the superior merit and glory ofthe great Heraclius. Yet the deliverer of the east was indigent and feeble. Ofthe Persian spoils, the most valuable portion had been expended in the war, dis­tributed to the soldiers, or buried, by an unlucky tempest, in the waves of theEuxine. The conscience of the emperor was oppressed by the obligation of re­storing the wealth of the clergy, which he had borrowed for their own defence: aperpetual fund was required to satisfy these inexorable creditors; the provinces,already wasted by the arms and avarice of the Persians, were compelled to a se­cond payment of the same taxes, and the arrears of a simple citizen, the trea­surer of Damascus, were commuted to a fine of one hundred thousand pieces ofgold. The loss of two hundred thousand soldiers(3) who had fallen by the sword,was of less fatal importance than the decay of arts, agriculture, and population,in this long and destructive war: and although a victorious army had been formedunder the standard of Heraclius, the unnatural effort appears to have exhaustedrather than exercised their strength. While the emperor triumphed at Constan­tinople or Jerusalem, an obscure town on the confines of Syria was pillaged by theSaracens, and they cut in pieces some troops who advanced to its relief: an ordi­nary and trifling occurrence, had it not been the prelude of a mighty revolution.These robbers were the apostles of Mahomet; their fanatic valour had emergedfrom the desert; and in the last eight years of his reign, Heraclius lost to the Arabsthe same provinces which he had rescued from the Persians.


CHAPTER XLVII.
Theological history of the doctrine of the incarnation.—The human and divine natures ofChrist.—Enmity of the patriarchs of Alexandria and Constantinople.—St. Cyril andNestorius.—Third general council of Ephesus.—Heresy of Eutyches.—Fourth generalcouncil of C/ialcedon.—Civil and ecclesiastical discord.—Intolerance of Justinian.—Thethree chapters.—Monothelite controversy.—State of the oriental sects.—The Nestorians.—II. The Jacobites.—m. The Maronites.—lV. The Armenians.—\. The Copts andJlbyssinians.
After the extinction of paganism, the Christians in peace and piety mighthave enjoyed their solitary triumph: but the principle of discord was alive in theirbosom, and they were more solicitous to explore the nature, than to practise thelaws, of their founder. I have already observed, that the disputes of the Trini­ty were succeeded by those of the Incarnation; alike scandalous to the church,alike pernicious to the state, still more minute in their origin, still more durablein their effects. It is my design to comprise, in the present chapter, a religiouswar of two hundred and fifty years, to represent the ecclesiastical and politicalschism of the oriental sects, and to introduce their clamorous or sanguinary con­tests, by a modest inquiry into the doctrines of the primitive church. (4)
is mnch better suited to the present occasion. See his triumph in Theophanes, (p. 872,273.) and Nicephorus,-fp. 15,16.) The life of the mother and tenderness of the son are attested by George of Pisidia, (Bell. Abar.255, gee. p. 49.) The metaphor of the sabbath is used, somewhat profanely, by these Byzantine Christians.
(1) See Baronius, (Anna). Eecles. A. D. 628. No. 1—4.) Eotychius, (Annal. torn. iS. p. 240—248.) Nicephorus,(Brev. p. 15.) The seals of the case had never been broken: and this preservation of the cross is ascribed (un­der God) to the devotion of queen Sira.
(2) George of Pisidia. Acroas. iii. de Expcdit. contra Persas, 415, Sec. and Heraeleid, Across, i. 65—138. Ineglect the meaner parallels of Daniel, Timotheus, &c. Chosroes and the chagan were of course comparedto Belslinzzar, Pharaoh, the old serpent, 8tc.
(3) Suidas (in Excerpt. Hist. Byzant. p. 40.) gives this number; but either the Persian must be read for theIsanrian war, or this passage does not belong to the emperor Heraclius.
(4) By what means shall I authenticate this previous inquiry, which I bare studied to circumscribe ami







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


of Muhomct, was numbered among the ansars, or auxiliaries, of Medina, who shel­tered the head of the flying prophet. In his youth he fought at Beder and Ohud,under the holy standard: in his mature age he was the friend and follower of Ali;and the last remnant of his strength and life was consumed in a distant and dan­gerous war against the enemies ot the Koran. His memory was revered; but theplace of his burial was neglected and unknown, during a period of seven hundredand eighty years, till the conquest of Constantinople by Mahomet the Second. Aseasonable vision (for such are the manufacture of every religion) revealed theholy spot at the foot of the walls and the bottom of the harbour; and the moschof Avub has been deservedly chosen for the simple and martial inauguration of theTurkish sulta-.is.(l)
The event of the siege revived, both in the east and west, the reputation of theRoman arms, and cast a momentary shade over the glories of the Saracens. TheGreek ambassador was favourably received at Damascus, in a general council ofthe emirs or Koreish; a peace, or truce, of thirty years, was ratified between thetwo empires; and the stipulation of an annual tribute of fifty horses of a noble breed,fifty slaves, and three thousand pieces Oi gold, degraded the majesty of the com­mander of the faithful. (2) The aged caliph was desirous of possessing his domi­nions, and ending his days in tranquillity and repose; while the Moors and Indianstrembled at his name, his palace and city of Damascus was insulted by the Mar-daites, or Maronites, of mount Libanus, the firmest barrier of the empire, till theywere disarmed and transplanted by the suspicious policy of the Greeks.(3) Af­ter the revolt of Arabia and Persia, the house of Ommiyah(4) was reduced to thekingdoms of Syria and Egypt; their distress and fear enforced their compliancewith the pressing demands of the Christians; and the tribute was increased to aslave, a horse, and a thousand pieces of gold, for each of the three hundred andsixty-five days of the solar year. But as soon B3 the empire was again united bythe arms and policy of Abdalmalek, he disclaimed a badge of servitude not lessinjurious to his conscience than to his pride; he discontinued the payment of thetribute; and the resentment of the Greeks was disabled from action by the madtyranny of the second Justinian, the just rebellion of his subjects, and the fre­quent change of his antagonists and successors. Till the reign of Abdalma­lek, the Saracens had been content with the free possession of the Persian andRoman treasures, in the coin of Chosroes and Ca:sar. By the command of thatcaliph, a national mint was established, both of silver and gold, and the inscrip­tion of the dinar, though it might be censured by some timorous casuists, pro­claimed the unity of the God of Mahomet.(5) tinder the reign of the caliphWaled, the Greek language and characters were excluded from the accountsof the public revenue.(6) If this change was productive of the invention or fa­miliar use of our present numerals, the Arabic or Indian ciphers, as they arecommonly styled, a regulation of office has promoted the most important disco- 'veriesof arithmetic, algebra, and the mathematical sciences.(7)
Whilst the caliph Waled sat idle on the throne of Damascus, while his lieute-
(1) Demetrius Canfcmh's Hist.of the Othman empire, 105,106. Rycant's State of (lie Ottoman Empire,p.10, 11. Voyages de Thevenot, part. 1. p. 189. The Christians, who suppose that the martyr Abu Ayub is vul­garly confounded with the patriarch Job, betray their own ignorance rather than that of the Turks.
(2) Theophanes, though a Greek, deserves credit for these tributes (Chronograph, p. 295,296. 300,301.) whichare confined, with some variation, by the Arabic History of Abulpharagius (Dynast, p. 128. vers. Poeock.)
(3) The censureof Theophanes is just and pointed, Vu/Miittfv JvvewTii*? ttxpvrwztrx; .... irxvhw*wiTovstv vt P«nwn« us, tvv ApxBw ft=zpt rev me. (Chronograph, p. 302, 303.) The series of these events may tetraced in the Annals of Theophanes, and in the Abridgment of (he patriarch Nieephorot, p. 22—24.
(4) These domestic revolutions are related in a clear and natural style, in the second volume of Oekley's Hii-tory of the Saracens, p. 253—370. Resides our printed authors, he draws his materials from the Arabic MSS.ot"Oxford, which he would have mote deeply searched, had he bern confined to the Bodleian library instead ofthe city jail; a fate how unworthy of the man and of his countn !
(5) Elmacin, who dates the first coinage A. H. 76, A. D. 695, live or *\x years Inter tlian the Greek historians,has compared the weight of the hest or common gold dinar, to the dracham or dirhem of Egypt, (p. 77.) whichmay be equal to two pennies (forty-right grains) of our Troy weight, (Hooper's Inquiry into ancient Mn-sures, p. 24—36.) and equivalent to eight shillings of our sterling money. From the tame Elmaciii and theArabian phyticiam, some dinars, as high as two dirhems, as low as half a dirhem.may be deduced. The pieceof silver was the dirhem,bo(h in value and weight: but an old, though fair coin, struck at Waset, A. H. 88, andpreserved in the Bodlein library, wants fuur grains of the Cairo standard. (See the Modern Univ. History,torn. i. p. J48. of the French Translation.)
tail/ iJ.tjCjJt', tirnSn mSvvxtov Tfj IXltVw* y\o)(r<rii ^cvmJ:*, » <Vweoo<, >) -rpiMrTtf, tj Cum t'U»<ru t) Tptx ypnfivixi.
Theophan. Chronograph, p. 314. This defect, if it really existed, must have stimulated the ingenuity of theArabs to invent or borrow.
(7) According to a new, though probable notion, maintained byM. de Villoison, (Anecdota Green. tom.i;-p. 152—157.) our ciphers are not of Indian or Arabic invention. They were used bv the Greek and Latin arith­metician* long before the age of Boethius. After the extinction of sc'ience in the*west, they were adopted l>vthe Arabic versions from the original MSS. and restored to the Latins about the eleventh centurv.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 129


venerable name. An indulgent edict of the younger Theodosius excused liimfrom the labour of comparing and weighing their arguments. Five civilians, Ca-ius, Papinian, Paul, Ulpian, and Modestinus, were established as the oracles ofjurisprudence: a majority was decisive; but if their opinions were equally divided,a casting vote was ascribed to the superior wisdom of Papinian. (1)
When Justinian ascended the throne, the reformation of the Roman jurispru­dence was an arduous but indispensable task. In the space of ten centuries, theinfinite variety of laws and equal opinions had filled many thousand volumes, whichno fortune could purchase and no capacity could digest. Books could not easilybe found; and the judges, poor in the midst of riches, were reduced to the exerciseof their illiterate discretion. The subjects of the Greek provinces were ignorantof the language that disposed of their lives and properties; and the barbarous dia­lect of the Latins was imperfectly studied in the academies of Berytus and Con­stantinople. As an Illyrian soldier, that idiom was familiar to the infancy of Jus­tinian; his youth had been instructed by the lessons of jurisprudence, and his im­perial choice selected the most learned civilians of the east, to labour with theirsovereign in the work of reformation.(2) The theory of professors was assistedby the practice of advocates, and the experience of magistrates; and the whole un­dertaking was animated by the spirit of Tribonian. (:>) This extraordinary man,the object of so much praise and censure, was a native of Side in Pamphylia; andhis genius, like that of Bacon, embraced, as his own, all the business and know­ledge of the age. Tribonian composed, both in prose and verse, on a strange di­versity of curious and abstruse subjects (4)—a double panegyric of Justinian andthe life of the philosopher Theodotus; the nature of happiness, and the duties ofgovernment; Homer's catalogue and the four-and-twenty sorts of metre; the astro­nomical canon of Ptolemy; the changes of the months; the houses of the planets;and the harmonic system of the world. To the literature of Greece he added theuse of the Latin tongue; the Roman civilians were deposited in his library and inhis mind; and he most assiduously cultivated those arts which opened the road ofwealth and preferment. From the bar of the pretorian prefects, he raised him­self to the honours of questor, of consul, and of master of the offices: the councilof Justinian listened to his eloquence and wisdom, and envy was mitigated by thegentleness and affability of his manners. The reproaches of impiety and avaricehave stained the virtues or the reputation of Tribonian. In a bigoted and persecu­ting court, the principal minister was accused of a secret aversion to the Christianfaith, and was supposed to entertain the sentiments of an atlieist and a pagan,which have been imputed, inconsistently enough, to the last philosophers ofGreece. His avarice was more clearly proved and more sensibly felt. If he wereswayed by gifts in the administration of justice, the example of Bacon will againoccur; nor can the merit of Tribonian atone for his baseness, if he degraded thesanctity of his profession; and if laws were every day enacted, modified, or re­pealed, for the base consideration of his private emolument. In the sedition ofConstantinople, his removal was granted to the clamours, perhaps to the just in­dignation of the people: but the questor was speedily restored, and till the hour ofhis death, he possessed, above twenty years, the favour and confidence of the em­peror. His passive and dutiful submission has been honoured with the praise ofJustinian himself, whose vanity was incapable of discerning how often that sub­mission degenerated into the grossest adulation. Tribonian adored the virtues ofhis gracious master: the earth was unworthy of such a prince; and he affected a
(1) See the Theodosian Code, lib. i. tit. iv. witb Godefroy's Commentary, torn. i. p. 30—35. This decreealight give occasion to.Jesuitical disputes like those in the Lettres Provinciales, whether a judge was obligedto follow the opinion of Papinian, or of a majority, against his judgment, against his conscience, &c. Yet alegislator might give that opinion, however false, the validity, not of truth, but of law.
(2) For the legal labours of Justinian, I have studied the preface to the Institutes; the first, second, and thirdprefaces to the Pandects; the first and second preface to the Code; and the Code itself (lib. i. tit. xvii. de VeterlJure enoeleaudo.) After these original testimonies, I have consulted, among the moderns, Heineccins (Hist.J. R. No. 38S—404,,) Terasson (Hist, de la Jurisprudence Romaine. p. 295—356..) Gravina (Opp. p. 93—100..)and Ludewig, in his life of Justinian (p. 10—123. 318—321., for the Code and Novels, p. 209—261., for the Di­gest or Pandects, p. 262—317.)
(3) For the character of Tribonian, see the testimonies of ProcopUis (Persic, lib. i. c. 23,24. Anecdot. e. 3,20.) and Suidas (torn. iii. p. 501. edit. Kuster.) Ludewig (in Vit. Justinian. 175—209.) works hard, very hard, towhite-wash—the black-a-moor.
(4) I apply the two passages of Suidas to the same man; every circumstance so exactly tallies. Yet the law­yers appear ignorant; and Fabricius is inclined to separate the two characters (Biblior. Grac. torn. i. n. 342, <*.p. 518.3. p. 411.12. p. 346. 353. 474.)
V01. Ill 17







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


the 1ok> and usurpation of the ecclesiastical patrimonies, that they could neithersupport the state of a prince, nor exercise the charity of a priest. (1) The influ­ence of two sister prostitutes, Marozia and Theodora, was founded on their wealthand beauty, their political and amorous intrigues: the most strenuous of theirlovers was rewarded with the Roman mitre, and their reign(2) may have sug­gested to the darker ages(3) the fable(4) of a female pope. (5) The bastard son,the grandson, and the great grandson, of Marozia, a rare genealogy, were seatedin the chair of St. Peter, and it was at the age of nineteen years that the secondof these became the head of the Latin church. His youth and manhood were ofa suitable complexion; and the nations of pilgrims could bear testimony to thecharges that were urged against him in a Roman synod, and in the presence ofOtho the great. As John XII. had renounced the dress and decencies of his pro­fession, the soldier may not perhaps be dishonoured by the wine which he drank,the blood that he spilt, the flames that he kindled, or the licentious pursuits ofgaming and hunting. His open simony might be the consequence of distress; andhis blasphemous invocation of Jupiter and Venus, if it be time, could not possiblybe serious. But we read with some surprise, that the worthy grandson of Marozialived in public adultery with the matrons of Rome; that the Lateran palace wasturned into a school for prostitution, and that his rapes of virgins and widows haddeterred the female pilgrims from visiting the tomb of St. Peter, lest, in the devoutact, they should be violated by his successor. (6) The protestants have dwelt withmalicious pleasure on these characters of antichrist; but to a philosophic eye, thevices of the clergy are far less dangerous than their virtues. After a long seriesof scandal, the apostolic see was reformed and exalted by the austerity and zealof Gregory VII. That ambitious monk devoted his life to the execution of twoprojects. I. To fix in the college of cardinals the freedom and independence ofelection, and for ever to abolish the right or usurpation of the emperors and theRoman people. II. To bestow and resume the western empire as a fief or be­nefice^) of the church, and to extend his temporal dominion over kings and king­doms of the earth. After a contest of fifty years, the first of these designs wasaccomplished by the firm support of the ecclesiastical order, whose liberty wasconnected with that of their chief. But the second attempt, though it wascrowned with some partial and apparent success, has been vigorously resistedby the secular power, and finally extinguished by the improvement of humanreason.
In the revival of the empire of Rome, neither the bishop nor the people couldbestow on Charlemagne, or Otho, the provinces which were lost, as they hadbeen won, by the chance of arms. But the Romans were free to choose a master
(1) T*e oppression and vices of the Roman church in the tenth century arestrongly painted in thehistoryand legation of Liutprand; (see p. 440.450. 471—476. 479, &c.) and it is whimsical enough to observe Murato-ri tempering the invectives of Baronius against the popes. But these popes bad been chosen, not by thecardinals, but by lay-psjtrons.
(2) The time of pope Joan (papissa Joanna) is placed somewhat earlier than Theodora or Marozia; and thetwo years of her imaginary reign are forcibly inserted between Leo IV. and Benedict III. But the cotetnpora-ry Anastasius indissoluhly links the death of Leo and the elevation of Benedict: (illico, mox, p. 247.) and theaccurate chronology of Pagi, Muratori. and Leibnitz, fixes both events to the year 857.
(3) The advocates for pope Joan produce one hundred and fifty witnesses, or rather echoes, of the four­teenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth centuries. They bear testimony against themselves and the legend, by multi­plying the proof that so curious a story must have been repeated by writers of every description to whom itwas known. On those of the ninth and tenth centuries, the recent event would have hashed with a doubleforce. Would Photius have spared such a reproach? Could Liutprand have missed such scandal? It isscarcely worth while to discuss the various readings of Martinus Polonus, Sigebert of Gemblours, or evenMarianm Scotus; but a most palpable forgery is the passage of pope Joan, which has been foisted into someMSS. and editions of the Roman Anastasius.
(4) As false, it deserves that name; but I would not pronounce it incredible. Suppose a famous French che­valier of our own times to have been born in Italy, and educated in the church, instead of the army: her me-rit or fortune might have raised her to St. Peter's chair; her amours would have been natural; her delivery idthe streets unlucky, bat not improbable.
(5) Till the reformation, the tale was repeated and believed without offence; and Joan's female statue longoccupied her place among the popes in the cathedral of Sienna. (Pagi, Critica, torn. iii. p. 621—623.) She hasbeen annihilated by two learned protestants. Blonde) and Bayte; (Dictionnaire Critique, Papesse, Polonus,Jtlondel) but their brethren were scandalized by this equitable and generous criticism. Spaoheitn and Len.fant attempt to save this poor engine of controversy; and even Mosheim condescends to cherish some doubtand suspicion, (p. 289.)
(6) Lateranense pabttium .... prostibulnm meretricum .... Testis omnium gentium, praterquam Ro-manorum, absentia mulierum, qua? sanctorum apostolorum limina orandi gratia timent visere, cum nonnullasante diespancos, nunc audierint conjugata* viduas, virgines vi oppressisse. (Liutprand, Hist. lib. vi. c. 6. p.471. See the whole affair of John XI I. p. 471 —476.)
(7) A new example of the mischief of equivocation it the benrfirium (Ducange, torn. i. p. 617, &c.) whichthe pope conferred on the emperor Frederic I. since the Latin word may signify either a legal fief, or a simplefavour, an obligation, (we want the word bienfalt.) See Schmidt, Hist, des Allemands, torn. iii. p. 398—40G.PfeffeJ, Abrege Chronologique, torn. i. p. 229.296.317.324.420.430. 500. 505. S09. &c.
Vol. Ill 38







OCR Output








170 THE DECLINE AND FALL


and it was the wish of Gregory that he might be unknown in this life, and gloriousonly in the next. Yet this devotion, and it might be sincere, pursued the pathwhich wquld have been chosen by a crafty and ambitious statesman. The talentsof Gregory, and the splendour which accompanied his retreat, rendered him dearand useful to the church; and implicit obedience has been always inculcated as thefirst duty of a monk. As soon as he had received the character of deacon, Grego­ry was sent to reside at the Byzantine court, the nuncio or minister of the apostolicsee; and he boldly assumed, in the name of St. Peter, a tone of independent digni­ty, which would have been criminal and dangerous in the most illustrious laymanof the empire.' He returned to Rome with a just increase of reputation, and aftera short exercise of the monastic virtues, he was dragged from the cloister to thepapal throne, by the unanimous voice of the clergy, the senate, and the people.He alone resisted, or seemed to resist, his own elevation; and his humble petition,that Maurice would be pleased to reject the choice of the Romans, could only serveto exalt his character in the eyes of the emperor and the public. When the fatalmandate was proclaimed, Gregory solicited the aid of some friendly merchants toconvey him in a basket beyond the gates of Rome, and modestly concealed him­self some days among the woods and mountains, till his retreat was discovered, asit is said, by a celestial light.
The pontificate of Gregory the Great, which lasted thirteen years, six months,and ten days, is one of the most edifying periods of the history of the church. Hisvirtues, and even his faults, a singular mixture of simplicity and cunning, of prideand humility, of sense and superstition, were happily suited to his station, and tothe temper of the times. In his rival, the patriarch of Constantinople, he con­demned the antichristian title of universal bishop, which the successor of St. Peterwas too haughty to concede, and too feeble to assume; and the ecclesiastical juris­diction of Gregory was confined to the triple character of bishop of Rome, primateof Italy, and apostle of the west. He frequently ascended the pulpit, and kindled,by his rude, though pathetic eloquence, the congenial passions of his audience: thelanguage of the Jewish prophets was interpreted and applied, and the minds of thepeople, depressed by their present calamities were directed to the hopes and fearsof the invisible wvld. His precepts and example defined the model of the Ro­man liturgy;(l) the distribution of the parishes, the calendar of festivals, the or­der of processions, the service of the priests-and deacons, the variety and changeof sacerdotal garments. Till the last days of his life, he officiated in the canon ofthe mass, which continued above three hours; the Gregorian chant(2) has pre­served the vocal and instrumental music of the theatre, and the rough voices ofthe barbarians attempted to imitate the melody of the Roman school. (3) Experi­ence had shown him the efficacy of these solemn and pompous rites, to sooth thedistress, to confirm the faith, to mitigate the fierceness, and to dispel the dark en­thusiasm of the vulgar; and he readily forgave their tendency to promote the reignof priesthood and superstition. The bishops of Italy and the adjacent islands ac­knowledged the Roman pontiff as their special metropolitan. Even the existence,the union, or the translation of episcopal seats, was decided by his absolute discre­tion: and his successful inroads into the provinces of Greece, of Spain, and of Gaul,might countenance the more lofty pretensions of succeeding popes. He interposedto prevent the abuses of popular elections; his jealous care maintained the purityof faith and discipline, and the apostolic shepherd assiduously watched over thefaith and discipline of the subordinate pastors. Under his reign, the Arians of Ita­ly and Spain were reconciled to the catholic church, and the conquest of Britainreflects less glory on the name of Csesar, than on that of Gregory I. Instead ofsix legions, forty monks were embarked for that distant island, and the pontiff la-
(1) The Lord'* prayer consists of half a dozen lines: the Sacramentarius and Antiphonarius of Gre­gory fill eight hundred and eighty folio pages (torn. iii. p. 1—880.;) yet these only constitute a part of theOrdo Romanus, which Mabillon has illustrated, and Fleuryhas abridged (Hist. Ecclet. torn. viii. p. ISO-IS*.) *
p) I learn from the abbe Dubos (Reflections sur la Poesie et la Peinture, torn. iii. p. 174,175.0 that the sim­plicity of the Ambrosian chant was confined to four modes, while the more perfect harmony of the Gregoriancomprised the eight modes or fifteen chords of the ancient music. He observes (p. 332.) that the connoisseursadmire the preface and many passages of the Gregorian office.
^ (3) John the_ deacon (in Vit. Greg. lib. ii. c. 7.) expresses the early contempt of the Italians for tramontanesinking. Alpina scilicet corpora Tocumtuarura tonitruis altisone perstrepentia, susceptx modulationis du1-eedinem proprie non resultant: quia bibuli gutturis barbara feritas dam inflexionibus et repercussionibus mi-lem nitilur edere cantitenam. naturali quodam fragore quasi plaustra per gradus confuse sonantia rigidas to-cesiactat, &c. In the time of Charlemagne, the Franks, though with some reluctance,admitted the justiceof the reproach. Muraton, Dissert. 85.







OCR Output








172 THE DECLINE AND fc'ALL


as odious and oppressive; whilst he protested against the imperial edicts-, the piouscowardice of the soldiers who deserted a military for a monastic life. If we maycredit his own declarations, it would have been easy for Gregory to exterminatethe Lombards by their domestic factions, without leaving a king, a duke, or acount, to save that unfortunate nation from the vengeance of their foes. As aChristian bishop, he preferred the salutary offices of peace; his mediations ap­peased the tumult of arms; but he was too conscious of the arts of the Greeks,and the passions of the Lombards, to engage his sacred promise for the obser­vance of the truce. Disappointed in the hope of a general and lasting treaty, hepresumed to save his country without the consent of the emperor or the exarch.The sword of the enemy was suspended over Rome; it was averted by the mildeloquence and seasonable gifts of the pontiff, who commanded the respect of he­retics and barbarians. The merits of Gregory were treated by the Byzantinecourt with reproach and insult; but in the attachment of a grateful people, hefound the purest reward of a citizen, and the best right of a sovereign, (1)


CHAPTER XLVI.
Revolutions of Persia after the death of Chosroes or Nushirian.—His son, Hormouz, a ty­rant, is deposed.—Usurpation of Baharam.'—Flight and restoration of Chosroes II.—His gratitude to the Romans.—The chagan of the Avars.—Revolt of the army againstMaurice—His death.—Tyranny of Pluscas.—Elevation of Heraclius.—Tlie Persianwar.—Chosroes subdues Syria, Egypt, and Asia Minor.—Siege of Constantinople bythe Persians and Avars—Persian Expeditions.— Victories and triumph of Heraclius.
Tse conflict of Rome and Persia was prolonged from the death of Crassus tothe reign of Heraclius. An experience of seven hundred years might convincethe rival nations of the impossibility of maintaining their conquests, beyond thefatal limits of the Tigris and Euphrates. Yet the emulation of Trajan and Ju­lian was awakened by the trophies of Alexander, and the sovereigns of Persia in­dulged the ambitious hope of restoring the empire of Cyrus. (2) Such extraordi­nary efforts of power and courage will always Command the attention of posterity;but the events by which the fate of nations is not materially changed, leave a faintimpression on the page of history, and the patience of the reader would be ex­hausted by the repetition of the same hostilities, undertaken without cause, pro­secuted without glory, and terminated without eifect. The arts of negotiation,unknown to the simple greatness of the senate and the Casars, were assiduouslycultivated by the Byzantine princes; and the memorials of their perpetual embas­sies^) repeat, with the same uniform prolixity, the language of falsehood and de­clamation, the insolence of the barbarians, and the servile temper of the tributaryGreeks. Lamenting the barren superfluity of materials, I have studied to com­press the narrative of these uninteresting transactions: but the just Nushirvan isstill applauded as the model of oriental kings, and the ambition of his grandsonChosroes prepared the revolution of the east, which was speedily accomplishedby the arms and the religion of the successors of Mahomet.
In the useless altercations that precede and justify the quarrels of princes, theGreeks and the barbarians accuse each other of violating the peace which hadbeen concluded between the two empires about four years before the death of Jus­tinian. The sovereign of Persia and India aspired to reduce, under his obedience,the province of Yemen, or Arabia Pelix;(4) the distant land of myrrh and fran­kincense, which had escaped, rather than opposed, the conquerors of the east.After the defeat of Abrahah under the walls of Mecca, the discord of his sons andbrothers gave an easy entrance to the Persians: they chased the strangers of
. (1) The temporal reign of Gregory 1. is ably exposed by Sigonius in the first book, de Regno Italia. Seehit works, torn. ii. p. 44—75.
> (2) Missi qui . . . reposeerent .. . veteres Persarum ac Macedonnm terminus, seqne invasurura possessaCvro et post Alexandre, per vanilnquentiam ac minus faciebut. Tacit. Annal. 6. 31. Such was the languageof the Arsacidfe; I have repeatedly marked the lofty claims of tbe Sassanians.
(5) See the embassies of Menander, extracted and preserved in the tenth century by the order of Constan-tine Po-phyrogenitus.
(4) The general independence of the Arabs, which cannot be admitted without many lln. itions, is blindlyasserted in a separate dissertation of the authors of the Universal History, vol. xx. p. 190- A perpetualmiracle is supposed to have guarded the prophecy in tbvour of the posterity of Ishmael; at /hew leasined bi­gots are not afraid to risk the truth or Christianity on this frail and slippery fotradaHion.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 321


According to the tradition of the nocturnal journey, the apostle, in his personalconference with the Deity, was commanded to impose on his disciples the dailyobligation of fifty prayers. By the advice of Moses, he applied for an alleviationof this intolerable burden; the number was gradually reduced to five; without anydispensation of business or pleasure, or time or place, the devotion of the faithfulis repeated at day-break, at noon, in the afternoon, in the evening, and at the firstwatch of the night; and, in the present decay of religious fervour, our travellersare edified by the profound humility and attention of the Turks and Persians.Cleanliness is the key of prayer: the frequent lustration of the hands, the face,and the body, which was practised of old by the Arabs, is solemnly enjoined bythe Koran; and a permission is formally granted to supply with sand the scarcityof water. The words and attitudes of supplication, as it is performed either sit­ting, or standing, or prostrate on the ground, are prescribed by custom or authority,but the prayer is poured forth in short and fervent ejaculations; the measure ofzeal is not exhausted by a tedious liturgy; and each Mussulman, for his own per­son, is invested with the character of a priest. Amongst the theists, who rejectthe use of images, it has been found necessary to restrain the wanderings of thefancy, by directing the eye and the thought towards a kcbla, or visible point of thehorizon. The prophet was at first inclined to gratify the Jews by the choice ofJerusalem; but he soon returned to a more natural partiality; and five times everyday the eyes of the nations of Astracan, at Fez, at Delhi, are devoutly turned tothe holy temple of Mecca. Yet every spot for the service of God is equally pure;the Mahometans indifferently pray in their chamber, or in the street. As a dis­tinction from the Jews and Christians, the Friday in each week is set apart for theuseful institution of public worship: the people are assembled in the mosch; and theiman, some respectable elder, ascends the pulpit, to begin the prayer, and pro­nounce the sermon. But the Mahometan religion is destitute of priesthood orsacrifice; and the independent spirit of fanaticism looks down with contempt onthe ministers and the slaves of superstition. II. The voluntary(l) penance of theascetics, the torment and glory of their lives, was odious to a prophet who cen­sured in his companions a rash vow of abstaining from flesh, and women, and sleep;and firmly declared that he would sutler no monks in his religion.(2) Yet he in­stituted, in each year, a fast of thirty days: and strenuously recommended the ob­servance, as a discipline which purifies the soul and subdues the body, as a salu­tary exercise of obedience to the will of God and his apostle. During the monthof Ramadan, from the rising to the setting of the sun, the Mussulman abstainsfrom eating, and drinking, and women, and baths, and perfumes; from all nourish^ment that can restore his strength, from all pleasure that can gratify his senses.In the revolution of the lunar year, the Ramadan coincides by turns with thewinter cold, and the summer heat; and the patient martyr, without assuaging histhirst with a drop of water, must expect the close of a tedious and sultry day. Theinterdiction of wine, peculiar to some orders of priests or hermits, is converted byMahomet alone into a positive and general law:(3) and a considerable portion ofthe globe has abjured, at his command, the use of that salutary, though dangerousliquor. These painful restraints are, doubtless, infringed by the libertine, andeluded by the hypocrite: but the legislator, by whom they are enacted, cannotsurely be accused of alluring his proselytes by the indulgence of their sensual ap­petites. III. The charity of the Mahometans descends to the animal creation;and the Koran repeatedly inculcates, not as a merit, but as a strict and indispen­sable duty, the relief of the indigent and unfortunate. Mahomet, perhaps, is theonly lawgiver who has defined the precise measure of charity: the standard mayvary with the degree and nature of property, as it consists either in money, in cornor cattle, in fruits or merchandise: but the Mussulman does not accomplish the


Tournefort (Voyage du Levant, torn. ii. p. 325—360, in octavo) describes what he had seen or the religion ofthe Turks.
(1) Mahomet (Sale's Koran, c. ix. p. 157.) reproaches the Christians with taking their priests and monks fortheir lords, besides God. Yet Maracci (Prodromus. part iii. p. 69, 70.) excuses the worship, especially of thepope, and quotes, from the Koran itself, the case of Eblis, or Satan, who was cast from heaven for refusing toadore Adam.
(2) Koran, e. v. p. 94 and Sale's note, which refers to the authority of Jallalodilin and Al Beidawi. D'Herhe-lot declares, that Mahomet condemned la vie rcligietise, and that the first swarms of fakirs, dermises, Sec. did notappear till after the year 300 of the Hecira (Riblioih. Orient, p. 292—718.)
(3) See the double prohibition (Koran, e. ii. p. 25. c. v. p. 94.:) the One in the style of a legislator, the otherin that of a fanatic. The public aird private motives of Mahomet are investigated by Prideaux (Life of Maho­met, p. 62—64.) and Sale (Preliminary Discourse, p. 124.)
Vol. III. . 41







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 385


W3us march of seven hundred miles, from the rock of Gibraltar to the bay ofBiscay. The failure of land compelled him to retreat; and he was recalled toToledo, to excuse his presumption of subduing a kingdom in the absence of hisgeneral. Spain, which, in a more savage and disorderly state, had resisted, twohundred years, the arms of the Romans, was overrun, in a few months, by thoseof the Saracens; and such was the eagerness of submission and treaty, that thegovernor of Cordova is recorded as the only chief who fell, without conditions, aprisoner into their hands. The cause of the Goths had been irrevocably judgedin the field of Xeres; and, in the national dismay, each part of the monarchy de­clined a contest with the antagonist who had vanquished the united strength ofthe whole.(1) That strength had been wasted by two successive seasons of fa­mine and pestilence; and the governors, who were impatient to surrender, mightexaggerate the difficulty of collecting the provisions'of a siege. To disarm theChristians, superstition likewise contributed her terrors; and the subtle Arab en­couraged the report of dreams, omens, and prophecies, and of the portraits ofthe destined conquerors of Spain, that were discovered on breaking open anapartment of the royal palace. Yet a spark of the vital flame was still alive:some invincible fugitives preferred a life of poverty and freedom in the Asturianvalleys; the hardy mountaineer repulsed the slaves of the caliph; and the swordof Pelagius has been transformed into the sceptre of the catholic kings. (2)
On the intelligence of this rapid success, the applause of Musa degenerated intoenvy; and he began not to complain, but to fear, that Tarik would leave him no­thing to subdue. At the head of ten thousand Arabs and eight thousand Africans,he passed^jver in person from Mauritania to Spain: the first of his companionswere the noblest of the Koreish; his eldest son was left in the command of Africa;the three younger brethren were of an age and spirit to second the boldest enter­prises of their father. At his landing in Algezire, he was respectfully entertainedby count Julian, who stifled his inward remorse, and testified, both in words andactions, that the victory of the Arabs had not impaired his attachment to theircause. Some enemies yet remained for the sword of Musa. The tardy repent­ance of the Goths had compared their own numbers and those of the invaders; thecities from which the march of Tarik had declined, considered themselves as im­pregnable; and the bravest patriots defended the fortifications of Seville and Meri-da. They were successively besieged and reduced by the labour of Musa, whotransported his camp from the Bonis to the Anas, from the Gaudalquiver to theGuadiana. When he beheld the works of Roman magnificence, the bridge, theaqueducts, the. triumphal arches, and the theatre, of the ancient metropolis ofLusitania, " I should imagine," said he to his four companions, " that the humanrace must have united their art and power in the foundation of this city; happy isthe man who shall become its master!" He aspired to that happiness, but theJEmerilans sustained on this occasion the honour of their descent from the veteranlegionaries of Augustus. (3) Disdaining the confinement of their walls, they gavebattle to the Arabs on the plain; but an ambuscade rising from the shelter of aquarry, or a ruin, chastised their indiscretion and intercepted their return, Thewooden turrets of assault were rolled forwards to the foot of the rampart; but thedefence of Merida was obstinate and long; and the castle of the martyrs was a per­petual testimony of the losses of the Moslems. The constancy f t the besiegedwas at length subdued by famine and despair; and the prudent victor disguised hisimpatience under the names of clemency and esteem. The alternative of exile,or tribute was allowed; the churches were divided between the two religions; andthe wealth of those who had fallen in the siege, or retired to Gallicia, was confis­cated as the reward of the faithful. In the mid-way between Meridd and Toledo, ■.the lieutenant of Musa saluted the vicegerent of the caliph, and conducted him tothe palace of the Gothic kings.—Their first interview was cold and formal: a rigidaccount was exacted of the treasures of Spain: tin: character of Tarik was exposedto suspicion and obloquy; and the hero was imprisoned, reviled, and ignoniiniously
(0 Such was the argument of the traitor Oppas, anil every chief to whom it was addressed did not answer,with the spirit of Pdagius,—Omnis Hispaniadudum inh uno regiminr Gothorumtoinnis exereitos Hipani?e inuno congregatus Ismaelitarum non valuit suslinere impetuni. Chron. Alphonsi Regis, npud Pagi, torn. iii.p. 177.
(2) The revival of the Gothic kingdom in the Asturias is distinctly, though concisely, noticed by d'Anville(Etats de 1'Europe, p. 159.)
(3) The honourable relics of the Cantabrian war (Dion. Cassiits, lib. liii. p. 720.) wre planted io this metropo­lis of Lusitania, perhaps of Spain. (Submittit coi tota suos Hispauia fasces.) Nonius (Hiepaiia, c. 31. p. 106—no.) enumerates the ancient structures, but concludes with a sigh,—Urhs htec olim nobilissiraa ad magnamitieolarum infrtquentiam delapia est. et praterpriscte claritatis ruinas nihil oitendit.
VOL. III. 49







OCR Output








108 THE DECLINE AND FALL


}'o; and Teias was unanimously chosen to succeed and revenge their departed hero.The new king immediately sent ambassadors to implore, or rather to purchase,the aid of the Franks, and nobly lavished, for the public safety, the riches whichhad been deposited in the palace of Pavia. The residue of the royal treasure wasguarded by his brother Aligern at Cumx in Campania; but the strong castle whichTotila had fortified, was closely besieged by the arms of Narses. From the Alpsto the foot of mount Vesuvius, the Gothic king, by rapid and secret marches, ad­vanced to the relief of his brother, eluded the vigilance of the Roman chiefs, andpitched his camp on the banks of the Sarnus or Draco,{l) which flows from Nu-ceria into the bay of Naples. The river separated the two armies: sixty dayswere consumed in distant and fruitless combats, and Teias maintained this impor­tant post, till he was deserted by his fleet and the hope of subsistence. With re­luctant steps he ascended the Lactarian mount, where the physicians of Rome,since the time of Galen, had sent their patients for the benefit of the air and themilk. (2) But the Goths soon embraced a more'generous resolution; to descendthe hill, to dismiss their horses, and to die in arms, and in the possession of free­dom. The king marched at their head, bearing in his right hand a lance, and anample buckler in his left: with the one he struck dead the foremost of the assail­ants; with the other he received the weapons which every hand was ambitious toaim against his life. After a combat of many hours, his left arm was fatigued bythe weight of twelve javelins which hung from his shield. Without moving fromhis ground, or suspending his blows, the hero called aloud on his attendants for afresh buckler, but in the moment, while his side was uncovered, it was pierced bya mortal dart. He fell: and his head, exalted on a spear, proclaimed to the na­tions, that the Gothic kingdom was no more. But the example of his death servedonly to animate the companions who had sworn to perish with their leader. Theyfought till darkness descended on the earth. They reposed on their arms. Thecombat was renewed with the return of light, and maintained with unabated vigourtill the evening of the second day. The repose of a second night, the want of wa­ter, and the loss of their bravest champions, determined the surviving Goths toaccept the fair capitulation which the prudence of Narses was inclined to propose.They embraced the alternative of residing in Italy as the subjects and soldiers ofJustinian, or departing with a portion of their private wealth, in search of someindependent country. (3) Yet the oath of fidelity or exile was alike rejected by onethousand Goths, who broke away before the treaty was signed, and boldly effect­ed their retreat to the walls of Pavia. The spirit, as well as the situation, of Ali­gern, prompted him to imitate rather than to bewail, his brother; a strong anddexterous archer, he transpierced with a single arrow the armour and breast ofhis antagonist; and his military conduct defended Cuma;(4) above a year againstthe forces of the Romans. Their industry had scooped the Sibyl's cave(5) into aprodigious mine; combustible materials were introduced to consume the temporaryprops: the wall and the gate of Cumic sunk into the cavern, but the ruins formeda deep and inaccessible precipice. On the fragment of a rock, Aligern stood aloneand unshaken, till he calmly surveyed the hopeless condition of his country, andjudged it more honourable to be the friend of Narses than the slave of the Franks.After the death of Teias, the Roman general separated his troops to reduce thecities of Italy; Lucca sustained a long and vigorous siege: and such was the humani­ty or the prudence of Narses, that the repeated perfidy of the inhabitants couldnot prov okc him to exact the forfeit lives of their hostages. These hostages were


(1) Tlie bpx*vv of Prncopius (Goth. lib. iv. e. 35.) is evidently the Samus. The text it accused or alteredby the rash violence of Cldveritis (lib. iv. c. 3. p. 1156.:) but Caraillo Pellegrini of Naples (Discorsi sopra laCampanm, Felice, p. 330.331.) has proved from old records, that as early as the year 822 that river was calledthe Drucontio, or Draconcello.
(2) Galen (de Method. Medendi, lib. v. apud CIsiver. lib. iv. c. 3. p. 1159, 1160.) describes the lofty site, pureair, and rich milk of mount Lactarius, whose medicinal benefits were equally known and sought in the time of'Syrnmnchus (lib. vi. epist. 18, and Cassiodorus Var. xi. 10.) Nothing; is now left except the name of the townof Lettere.
(3) Buat (torn. xi. p. 2, fcc.) conveys to his favourite Pavavia this remnant of Gotht, who by others are bu­ried in the mountains of Uri,or restored to their native isle of Gothland (Mascou, Annot. 21.)
(4) I leave Scaliger (Animadvrrs. in Euseb. p. 59.) and Salmasius (Exercitat. Plinuro, p. 51,52.) to quarrelabout the origin of dims, the oldest of the Greek colonies in Italy. (Strab. lib. v. p. 372. Velleius Paterculaflib. i. c. 4.,) already vacant in .luvenal's time, (Satir. 3.,) and now in ruins.
(5) Arathias (lib. i. c. 21.) settles the Sibyl's cave under the waits of Cumae: he a (Trees with Servius (ad lib. 6./Sneid.:) nor can I perceive why their opinion should be rejected by Hevne. the excellent editor of Virjjil (torn,ii. p. 650,651.) In urbe media secreta religio! But Cunue was not yet built; and the lines (lib. vi. 98, 97.)would become ridiculous, if iEnens were actually in a Greek city.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


king of the Franks and the Lombards asserted the inalienable rights of the em-
J)ire; and, in his life and death, Ravenna,(l) as well as Rome, was numbered in theist of his metropolitan cities. The sovereignty of the exarchate melted away Inthe hands of the popes; they found in the archbishops of Ravenna a dangerousand domestic rival;(2) the nobles and people disdained the yoke of a priest: and, inthe disorders of the times, they could only retain the memory of an ancient claim,which, in a more prosperous age, they have revived and realized.
Fraud is the resource of weakness and cunning; and the strong, though ignorantbarbarian, was often entangled in the net of sacerdotal policy. The Vatican andLateran were an arsenal and manufacture, which, according to the occasion, haveproduced or concealed a various collection of false or genuine, of corrupt or suspi­cious acts, as they tended to promote the interest of the Roman church. Beforethe end of the eighth century, some apostolical scribe, perhaps the notorious Isi­dore, composed the decretals, and the donation of Constantine, the two magic pil­lars of ihe spiritual and temporal monarchy of the popes. This memorable dona­tion was introduced to the world by an epistle of Hadrian I., who exhorts Charle­magne to imitate the liberality, and revive the name of the great Constantine.(3)According to the legend, the first of the Christian emperors was healed of the le­prosy, and purified in the waters of baptism, by St. Silvester, the Roman bishop;and never was physician more gloriously recompensed. His royal proselyte with­drew from his seat and patrimony of St. Peter; declared his resolution of foundinga new capital in the east; and resigned to the popes the free and perpetual sove­reignty of Rome, Italy and the provinces of the west. (4) This fiction was pro­ductive of the most beneficial effects. The Greek princes were convicted of theguilt of usurpation; and the revolt of Gregory was the claim of his lawful inheri­tance. The popes were delivered from their debt of gratitude: and the nominalgifts of the Carlovingians were no more than the just and irrevocable restitution ofa scanty portion of the ecclesiastical state. The sovereignty of Rome no longerdepended on the choice of a fickle people; and the successors of St. Peter and Con­stantine were invested with the purple and prerogatives of the C^sars. So deepwas the ignorance and credulity of the times, that the most absurd of fables wasreceived, with equal reverence, in Greece and in France, and is still enrolledamong the decrees of the canon law. (5) The emperors, and the Romans, wereincapable of discerning a forgery, that subverted their rights and freedom; and theonly opposition proceeded from a Sabine monastery, which, in the beginning ofthe twelfth century, disputed the truth and validity of the donation of Constan­tine. (6) In the revival of letters and liberty this fictitious deed was transpiercedby the pen of Laurentius Valla, the pen of an eloquent critic and a Roman patriot. (7)His cotemporaries of the fifteenth century were astonished at his sacrilegious bold­ness; yet such is the silent and irresistible progress of reason, that before the end
(1) Charlemagne solicited and obtained from the proprietor, Hadrian I., the mosaics of the palace of Raven­na, for the decoration of Aix-la-Chapelle. (Cod. Carotin, epist. 67. p. 223.)
(2) The popes often complain of the usurpation of Leo of Ravenna: (Codex Carolin. epist. 51—23. p. 200—205.) Si Corpus St. Andrea; fratrii germaui St. Pen i hie humasset, nequaqiiam nos Romani pontifices sic sub-jugassent. (Agnellus, Liber PontiGcalis, in Scriptures Rerum Ital. torn. ii. pars 1. p. 107.)
(3) Piissimo Constantino maguo, per ejus largitatem S. R. Ecclesia elevataet exaltataest, et potestatem inhis Hesperiac partibus largiri dignatus est .... Quiaecce novtis Constaminus his temporibus, &c. (CodexCarotin, epist. 49. in torn. iii. para 2* p. 105.) Pagi (Critica, A. D. 324, no. 16.) ascribes them to an impostor ofthe eighth century, who borrowed the name of St, Isidore: his humble title of Peccatar was ignorantly. butmptly, turned into Mercator: his merchandise was indeed profitable, and a few sheets of paper were sold formuch wealth and power.
(4) Fahricius (Bibliot. Grace, torn. vi. p. 4—7.) has enumerated the several editions of this act, in Greek andLatin. The copy which Laurentius Vatla recites and refutes, appears to be taken either from the spurious actsof St. Silvester, or from Gratian's Decree, to which, according to him and others, it has been surreptitiouslytacked.
(5) In the year 1059, it was believed (was it believed?) by pope Leo IX. cardinal Peter Damianns, 5tc. Mu-ratori places (Annali dTtalia, torn. ii. p. 23,24.) the fictitious donations of Lewis the Pious, the Othos, &c. deDonatione Constantini. Bee a Dissertation of Natalis Alexander, secolutn 4. diss. 25. p. 335—350.
(6) See a large account of the controversy (A. D. 1105.) which arose from a private law-suit, in the Chroni-con. Farsene, (Script. Rerum Itaticarum, torn. ii. pars 2. p. 637, &c.) a copious extrnct from the archives ofthat Benedictine abbey. They were formerly accessible to curious foreigners. (Le Blanc and Mabillon,) andwould have enriched the first volume of the Historia Monastica Italia of Qmrini. But they are now impri­soned (Muratori, Scriptures, R. I. torn. ii. pars 2. p. 269.) by the timid policy of the court of Rome: and the fu­ture cardinal yielded to the voice of authority and the whispers of ambition. (Quirini, Comment, pars 2. p.123—136.)
(7) I have read in the collection of Schardius. (de Potestate Imperial Ecclesiastica. p. 734—780.) this ani­mated discourse, which was composed by the author, A. D. 1440, six years after the flight of pope EugeniusIV. It is a most vehement party pamphlet: Valla justifies anil animates the revolt of the Romans, and wonldeven approve the use of a dagger against their sacerdotal tyrant. Such a critic might expeet the persecutionof the clergy; yet he made his peace,and isnuried in the Latent. (Bayle, DictioDnaire Critique, Valla; Vossi-us, de Histsficij Latiun, p. 580.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 167


Autharis received the cup in his turn, and, in restoring it to the princess, he se­cretly touched her hand, and drew his own finger over his face and lips. In theevening, Theudelinda imparted to her nurse the indiscreet familiarity of thestranger; and was comforted by the assurance, that such boldness could proceedonly from the king her husband, who, by his beauty and courage, appeared wor­thy of her love. The ambassadors were dismissed; no sooner did they reach theconfines of Italy, than Autharis, raising himself on his horse, darted his battleaxe against a tree with incomparable strength and dexterity. " Such," said he tothe astonished Bavarians, " such are the strokes of the king of the Lombards."On the approach of a French army, Garibald and his daughter took refuge inthe dominions of their ally; and the marriage was consummated in the pa­lace of Verona. At the end of one year, it was dissolved by the death ofAutharis: but the virtues of Theudelinda(l) had endeared her to the nation, andshe was permitted to bestow, with her hand, the sceptre of the Italian kingdom.
From this fact, as well as from similar events,(2) it is certain that the Lombardspossessed freedom to elect their sovereign, and sense to decline the frequent use ofthat dangerous privilege. The public revenue arose from the produce of land,and the profits of justice. When the independent dukes agreed that Autharisshould ascend the throne of his father, they endowed the regal office with a fairmoiety of their respective domains. The proudest nobles aspired to the honoursof servitude near the person of their prince: he rewarded the fidelity of his vas­sals by the precarious gift of pensions and benefices; and atoned for the injuries ofwar, by the rich foundation of monasteries and churches. In peace a judge, aleader in war, he never usurped the powers of a sole and absolute legislator. Theking of Italy convened the national assemblies in the palace, or more probablyin the fields of Pavia: his great council was composed of the persons most emi­nent by their birth and dignities; but the. validity, as well as the execution, of theirdecrees, depended on the approbation of the faithful people, the fortunate armyof the Lombards. About fourscoreyears after the conquest of Italy, their tradi­tional customs were transcribed in Teutonic Latin, (3) and ratified by the consentof prince and people: some new regulations were introduced, more suitable to theirpresent condition; the example of Rotharis was imitated by the wisest of his suc­cessors, and the laws of the Lombards have been esteemed the least imperfectof the barbaric codes.(4) Secure by their courage in the possession of liberty,these rude and hasty legislators were incapable of balancing the powers of the con­stitution, or of discussing the nice theory of political government. Such crimes as"threatened the life of the sovereign, or the safety of the state, were adjudged wor­thy of death; but their attention was principally confined to the defence of the per­son and property of the subject. According to the strange jurisprudence of thetimes, the guilt of blood might be redeemed by a fine; yet the high price of ninehundred pieces of gold declares a just sense of the value of a simple citizen. Lessatrocious injuries, a wound, a fracture, a blow, an opprobrious word, were mea­sured with scrupulous and almost ridiculous diligence; and the prudence of the le­gislator encouraged the ignoble practice of bartering honour, and revenge for a pe­cuniary compensation. The ignorance of the Lombards, in the state of pagan­ism or Christianity, gave implicit credit to the malice and mischief of witchcraft,but the judges of the seventeenth century might have been instructed and con­founded by the wisdom of Rotharis, who derides the absurd superstition, and pro­tects the wretched victims, of popular or judicial cruelty.(5) The same spiritof a legislator, superior to his age and country, may be ascribed to Luitprand, whocondemns, while he tolerates, the impious and inveterate abuse of duels, (6) obi-
(1) Giannone (Istoria Civile de Napoli, torn. i. p. 263.) has justly censured the impertinence of Boccaccio(Gio. 3. Novel 2.,) who, without right, or truth, or pretence, has given the pious queen Theudelinda to thearms of a muleteer.
(2) Panl, lib. iii. c. 18. The first dissertations of Muratori, and the first volume of Giannooe's history, maybe consulted for the state of the kingdom of Italy.
(3) The most accurate edition of the laws of the Lombards is to lie found in the Scriptores Rerum Italics *mm, torn. i. part 2. p. 1—181. collated from the most ancient MSS.and illustrated by the critical notes ofMuratori. ... .,
(4) Montesquieu, Esprit des Loix, lib. xxviii. e. 1. Les loix des Bourguignons J0nt assei judicieuses: celleade Rotharis et des autres princes Lombards le font encore plus.
(5) See Leges Rotharis, No. 379. p. 47. Sirica is used as the name of a witch. It u of the purest classic sr»gin (Horat. epod. v. 20. Petron. c. 134.;) and, from the words «f Petronius, (que; striges_ comederunt nervostuos?) it may be inferred that the prejudice was of Italian rather than barbaric extraction.
(6) Quia ineerte suraus de j udicio Dei, et multos audivimus per pugnam sine j usta causa suam eausam per*dere. Sed propter consuetudinem gentem nostrain Langohardorum legem impiam vetare non posjumtu. See*p. 74. No. 65. of the Laws of Luitprand, promulgated A. D- 724.







OCR Output








86 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Armenian mountains, and whose maritime coast extends about two hundred miles,from the neighbourhood of Trebizond to Dioscurias and the confines of Circassia.Both the soil and climate are relaxed by excessive moisture: twenty-eight rivers,besides the Phasis and his dependent streams, convey their waters to the sea; andthe hollowness of the ground appears to indicate the subterraneous channels be­tween the Euxine and the Caspian. In the fields where wheat or barley is sown,the earth is too soft to sustain the action of the plough; but the gom, a small grainnot unlike the millet or coriander seed, supplies the ordinary food of the people;and the use of bread is confined to the prince and his nobles. Yet the vintage ismore plentiful than the harvest; and the bulk of the stems, as well as the qualityof the wine, display the unassisted powers of nature. The same powers continu­ally tend to overshadow the face of the country with thick forests; the timber ofthe hills, and the flax of the plains, contribute to the abundance of naval stores;the wild and the tame animals, the horse, the ox, and the hog, are remarkablyrolific, and the name of the pheasant is expressive of his native habitation on theanks of the Phasis. The gold mines to the south of Trebizond, which are stillworked with sufficient profit, were a subject of national dispute between Justinianand Chosroes; and it is not unreasonable to believe, that a vein of precious metalmay be equally diffused through the circle of the hills, although these secret trea­sures are neglected by the laziness, or concealed by the prudence, of the Mingre-lians. The waters, impregnated with particles of gold, are carefully strainedthrough sheep-skins or fleeces; but this expedient, the ground-work perhaps of amarvellous fable, affords a faint image of the wealth extracted from a virgin earthby the power and industry of ancient kings. Their silver palaces and goldenchambers surpass our belief; but the fame of their riches is said to have excitedthe enterprising avarice of the Argonauts. (1) Tradition has affirmed, with somecolour of reason, that Egypt planted on the Phasis a learned and polite colony,(2)which manufactured linen, built navies, and invented geographical maps. Theingenuity of the moderns has peopled, with flourishing cities and nations, the isth­mus between the Euxine and the Caspian;(3) and a lively writer, observing theresemblance of climate, and in his apprehension of trade, has not hesitated to pro­nounce Colchos the Holland of antiquity. (4)
But the riches of Colchos shine only through the darkness of conjecture or tra­dition; and its genuine history presents a uniform scene of rudeness and poverty.If one hundred and thirty languages were spoken in the market of Dioscurias, (5)they were the imperfect idioms of so many savage tribes or families, sequesteredfrom each other in the valleys of Mount Caucasus; and their separation, whichdiminished the importance, must have multiplied the number, of their rustic ca­pitals. In the present state of Mingrelia, a village is an assemblage of huts withina wooden fence; the fortresses are seated in the depths of forests; the princelytown of Cyta, or Cotatis, consists of two hundred houses, and a stone edifice ap­pertains only to the magnificence of kings. Twelve ships from Constantinople,and about sixty barks, laden with the fruits of industry, annually cast anchor onthe coast; and the list of Colchian exports is much increased, since the natives hadonly slaves and hides to offer in exchange for the corn and salt which they pur­chased from the subjects of Justinian. Not a vestige can be found of the art, theknowledge, or the navigation, of the ancient Colchians; few Greeks desired ordared to pursue the footsteps of the Argonauts; and even the marks of an Egyp­tian colony are lost on a nearer approach. The rite of circumcision is practisedonly by the Mahometans of the Euxine; and the curled hair and swarthy com-


"the Pere Arehangeli Lamberti (Relations de Thevenot, part i. p. 31—52. with a map.) who has all the know­ledge and prejudices of a missionary. 2. Of Chardin (Voyages en Perse, tom. i. p. 54. 68—168,:) his observa­tions are judicious; and his own adventures in the country are still more instructive than his observations. 3.Of Peyssonnel (Observations sur les Peuples Barbares, p. 49—51. 58.62. 64,65.71, &c. and a more recent trea­tise, Sur les Commerce de la Mer Noire, torn. ii. p. 1—53.:) he had long resided at CafFa, as consul of France;and his erudition is less valuable than his experience.
_ (1) Pliny, Hist. Natur. lib. sxxiii. 15. The gold and silver mines of Colchos attracted the Argonauts (Strab.lib. i. p. 77.) The sagacious Chardin could find no gold ill mines, rivers, or elsewhere. Yet a Mingrelian lostjus hand ami foot for showing some specimens at Constantinople of native gold.
(2) Heiodot. lib. ii. c. 104,105. p. 150,151. Diodor. Sicul. lib. i. p. 38. edit. Wesseling; Dionys. Ferieget. 689.and Euslath. ad loc. Scholiast, ad Appollonium Argonaut, lib. iv. 282—291.
(3) Montesquieu, Esprit des Loix, lib. xxi. c. 6. L'lsthme . . . convert de villes et nations que ne font plus*
(4) Bougainville, Memoires de l'Acaderuie des Inscriptions, tom.xxvi. p. 33. on the African voyage of Hannoand the commerce of antiquity.
(5) A Greek Historian, Timosthenes, had affirmed, in cam ccc nations dissimilibus linguis descendere; andthe modest Pliny is content to add, et postea a nostris cxm intcrpretibus negotia ibi gesta (6,5.;) but the wordsnunc deserta cover a multitude of past fictions.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AMD FALL


the house of Ommiyah. Before the accession to the throne, he had deserved, byhis Georgian warfare, the honourable epithet of the ass of Mes:>potamia;(l) andhe might have been ranked among the greatest princes, had not, says Abulfeda,the eternal order decreed that moment for the rum of his family; a decree againstwhich all human prudence and fortitude must struggle in vain. The orders of Mer-van were mistaken or disobeyed: the return of his horse, from which he had dis­mounted on a necessary occasion, impressed the belief of his death; and the en­thusiasm of the black squadrons was ably conducted by Abdallah, the uncle of hiscompetitor. After an irretrievable defeat, the caliph escaped to Mosul; but thecolourB of the Abbassides were displayed from the rampart; he suddenly repassedthe Tigri6, cast a melancholy look on his palace of Haran, crossed the Eu­phrates, abandoned the fortifications of Damascus, and, without halting in Pales­tine, pitched his last and fatal camp at Busir on the banks of the Nile. (2) Hisspeed was urged by the incessant diligence of Abdallah, who in every step of thepursuit acquired strength and reputation: the remains of the white faction werefinally vanquished in Egypt; and the lance, which terminated the life and_ anxietyof Mervan, was not less welcome perhaps to the unfortunate than to the victoriouschief. The merciless inquisition of the conqueror eradicated the most distantbranches of the hostile race: their bones were scattered, their memory was ac­cursed, and the martyrdom of Hossein was abundantly revenged cn the posterityof his tyrants. Fourscore of the Ommiades, who had yielded to the faith or cle­mency of their foes, were invited to a banquet at Damascus. The laws of hospi­tality were violated by a promiscuous massacre: the board was spread over theirfallen bodies; and the festivity of the guests was enlivened by the music of theirdying groans. By the event of the civil war the dynasty of the Abbassides wasfirmly established; but the Christians only could triumph in the mutual hatred andcommon loss of the disciples of Mahomet. (3)
Yet the thousands who were swept away by the sword of war might have beenspeedily retrieved in the succeeding generation, if the consequences of the revolutionhad not tended to dissolve the power and unity of the empire of the Saracens. Inthe proscription of the Ommiades, a royal youth of the name of Abdalrahmanalone escaped the rage of his enemies, who hunted the wandering exile from thebrinks of the Euphrates to the valleys of mount Atlas. Hispresence in the neigh­bourhood of Spain revived the zeal of the white faction. The name and cause ofthe Abbassides had been first vindicated by the Persians; the west had. beenpure from civil arms; and the servants of the abdicated family still held, by a pre­carious tenure, the inheritance of their lands and the offices of government.Strongly prompted by gratitude, indignation, and fear, they invited the grandsonof the caliph Hashem to ascend the throne of his ancestors; and, in his desperatecondition, the extremes of rashness and prudence were almost the same. The ac­clamation of the people saluted his landing on the coast of Andalusia; and, after asuccessful struggle, Abdalrahman established the throne of Cordova, and was thefather of the Ommiades of Spain, who reigned above two hundred and fifty yearsfrom the Atlantic to the Pyrenees. (4) He slew in battle a lieutenant of the Ab­bassides, who had invaded his dominions with a fleet and army: the head of Ala,in salt and camphire, was suspended by a daring messenger before the palace ofMecca; and the caliph Almansor rejoiced in his safety, that he was removed by
(1) Al Himan. He had been governor of Mesopotamia, and the Arabic proverb praises the courage of that,warlike breed of asses who never fly from an enemy. The surname of Mervan may justify the comparison ofHomer, (Iliad, K 557, &c.) and both wilt silence the moderns, who consider the ass as a stupid and ignoble em­blem. (D'Herhelot, Dibliot. Orient, p. 458.)
(3) Tour several places, all in Egypt, bore the name of Bwir.or Rttsiris. so famous in Greek fable. The tint,where*Mervan was slain, was to the west of the Nile, in the province of Fium, or Ar<inoe; the second in theDelta, in the Sebennytic nome; the third, near the pyramid-*; the fourth, which was destroyed by Diocletian,in the Thebais. I shall here transcribe a note of the learned and orthodox Michaelis: Vtdentur in pluribns^Sgypti superioris urbibus Busiri Coptoquc anna sumpsisie Christiani, Itbertatemque de religione sentitndtdefendisse; sed sucenbuisse quo in beilo Coptus et Busiris tlirula, et circa Bsnam magna strages rdita. Bellntnriarrant sed Catisam belli ignorant scriptons Byzamhu, alioqtii Coptuin t-t Buisiriin non rebellasse dicturi, srdcaussam Christianorum suscepturi. (Not. 211. p. loo.) For the geography of the four Busirs, see Abulfeda (de-aeript. *gypt. p. 9. vers. Michaelis. Gottingse, 1770, in quarto,) Michaelis. (Not. 132—137. p. 58—«3.) andd'Anville. (Memoire sur l'Egypte, p. 82.147. 205.)
(3) See Abulfeda, (Annal. Moslem, p. 136—145.) Eutychius, (Anna), torn. ii. p. 392. vers. Pocoek.) F.lmacin.(Hist. Saracen, p. 109—121.) Abulpharagius.(Hist. Dynast, p. 134—140.) Rodeilcof Toledo, (Hist. Arahum.c.18. p. 33.) Theophanet, (Chronograph, p. 350,357. who speaks ofthe Abbassides under the names of X *px<rx*>-T*i and Maupae-cjwi,) and the Bihliotheque of d'Herbelot, in the articles of Ommiades, Abbassides, MervanIbrahim, Sa_ffah, Abori Moslem.
(4; For the revolution of Spain, consult Roderic of Toledo, (c 1 J. p. 84, &c) the Biblrothec* Aiabico-ffis-pana. torn. ii. p. 30. 198.) and Cardomjc. (Hilt, de PAfriqoe et de l'Espagne, mm. i. p. 180—197. 20s. S"i







OCR Output








90 THE DECLINE AND FALL


rations, both of the attack and defence, were conducted with skilful obstinacy; andeach party derived useful lessons from the experience of their past faults. A bat­tering ram was invented, of light construction and powerful effect; it was trans­ported and worked by the hands of forty soldiers; and as the stones were loosenedby its repeated strokes, they were torn with long iron hooks from the wall. Fromthose walls, a shower of darts was incessantly poured on the heads of the assailants;but they were most dangerously annoyed by a fiery composition of sulphur and bi­tumen, which in Colehos might, with some propriety, be named the oil of Medea,Of six thousand Romans who mounted the scaling-ladders, their general Bessaswas the first, a gallant veteran of seventy years of age: the courage of their leader,his fall, and extreme danger, animated the irresistible efforts of his troops; andtheir prevailing numbers oppressed the strength, without subduing the spirit, ofthe Persian garrison. The fate of these valiant men deserves to be more distinctlynoticed. Seven hundred had perished in the siege; two thousand three hundredsurvived to defend the breach. One thousand and seventy were destroyed withfire and sword in the last assault; and if seven hundred and thirty were made pri­soners, only eighteen among them were found without the marks of honourablewounds. The remaining five hundred escaped-into the citadel, which they main­tained without any hopes of relief, rejecting the fairest terms of capitulation andservice, till they were lost in the flames. They died in obedience to the commandsof their prince; and such examples of loyalty and valour might excite their coun­trymen to deeds of equal despair and more prosperous event. The instant demo­lition of the works of Petra confessed the astonishment and apprehension of theconqueror.
A Spartan would have praised and pitied the virtue of these heroic slaves; butthe tedious warfare and alternate success of the Roman and Persian arms cannotdetain the attention of posterity at the foot of mount Caucasus. The advantagesobtained by the troops of Justinian were more frequent and splendid; but the forcesof the great king were continually supplied, till they amounted to eight elephantsand seventy thousand men, including twelve thousand Scythian allies, and abovethree thousand Dilemites, who descended by their free choice from the hills ofHyrcania, and were equally formidable in close or in distant combat. The siegeof Archseopolis, a name imposed or corrupted by the Greeks, wasraised with someloss and precipitation; but the Persians occupied the passes of Iberiar Colehos wasenslaved by their forts and garrisons; they devoured the scanty sustenance of thepeople; and the prince of the Lazi fled into the mountains. In the Roman campfaith and discipline were unknown; and the independent leaders, who were invest­ed with equal power, disputed with each other the pre-eminence of vice and cor­ruption. The Persians followed without a murmur the commands of a single chief,who implicitly obeyed the instructions of their supreme lord. Their general wasdistinguished among the heroes of the east by his wisdom in council, and his valourin the field. The advanced age of Mermeroes, and the lameness of both his feet,could not diminish the activity of his mind, or even of his body; and whilst hewas carried in a litter in the front of battle, he inspired terror to the enemy, and ajust confidence to the troops, who, under his banners, were always successful. Af­ter his death, the command devolved to Nacoragan, a proud satrap, who, in con­ference with the inferior chiefs, had presumed to declare that he disposed of victo­ry as absolutely as of the ring on his finger. Such presumption was the naturalcause and forerunner of a shameful defeat. The Romans had been gradually re­pulsed to the edge of the sea-shore; and their last camp, on the ruins of the Gre­cian colony of Phasis, was defended on all sides by strong intrenchments, the river,the Euxine, and a fleet of galleys. Despair united their councils and invigoratedtheir arms; they withstood the assaults of the Persians; and the flight of Nacoraganpreceded or followed the slaughter of ten thousand of his bravest soldiers. He es­caped from the Romans to fall into the hands of an unforgiving master, who severe­ly chastised the error of his own choice; the unfortunate general was flayed alive, andhis skin, stuffed into the human form, was exposed on a mountain; a dreadful warn­ing to those who might hereafter be intrusted with the fame and fortune of Per­sia. (1) Yet the prudence of Chosroes insensibly relinquished the prosecution ofthe Colchian war, in the just persuasion that it is impossible to reduce, or at leastto hold, a distant country against the wishes and efforts of its inhabitants. The
% (l) The punishment of flaying alive pould not be introdnced into Persia by Sapor (BrisondeRegn. Pen. lib.h. p. 578.,) nor coo Id it be copied from the foolish tale of Marsyai, the Phrygian piper, most foolishly quoted a»a precedent by Agatbias, (lib. iy. p. US, 13S.)







OCR Output








122 THE DECLINE AND FALL


which so long maintained the integrity of his republic. A Locrian, who proposedany new law, stood forth in the assembly of the people with a cord round his neck,and if the law was rejected the innovator was instantly strangled.
The decemvirs, had been named, and their tables were approved, bv an assem­bly of the centuries, in which riches preponderated against numbers. To the firstclass of Romans, the proprietors of one hundred thousand pounds of copper,(l)ninety-eight votes were assigned, and only ninety-five were left for the six inferiorclasses, distributed according to their substance by the artful policy of Servius.But the tribunes soon established a more specious and popular maxim, that everycitizen has an equal right to enact the laws which lie is bound to obey. Insteadof the centuries, they convened the tribes, and the patricians, after an importantstruggle, submitted to the decrees of an assembly, in which their votes were con­founded with those of the meanest plebeians. Yet as long as the tribes succes­sively passed over narrow bridges, (2) and gave their voices aloud, the conduct ofeach citizen was exposed to the eyes and ears of his friends and countrymen..The insolvent debtor consulted the wishes of his creditor: the client would haveblushed to oppose the views of his patron: the general was followed by his vete­rans, and the aspect of the grave magistrate was a living lesson to the multitude.A new method of secret ballot abolished the influence of fear and shame, of ho­nour and interest, and the abuse of freedom accelerated the progress of anarchyand despotism-(3) The Romans had aspired to be equal; they were levelled bythe equality of servitude; and the dictates of Augustus were patiently ratified bythe formal consent of the tribes of centuries. Once, and once only, he experi­enced a sincere and strenuous opposition. His subjects had resigned all politicalliberty; they defended the freedom of domestic life. A law which enforced theobligation, and strengthened the bonds of marriage, was clamorously rejected;Propertius, in the arms of Delia, applauded the victory of licentious love; andthe project of reform was suspended till a new and more tractable generation hadarisen in the world. (4) Such an example was not necessary to instruct a prudentusurper, of the mischief of popular assemblies; and their abolition, which Au­gustus had silently prepared, was accomplished without resistance, and almostwithout notice, on the accession of his successor. (5) Sixty thousand plebeian leg­islators, whom numbers made formidable, and poverty secure, were supplantedby six hundred senators, who held their honours, their fortunes and their lives,by the clemency of the emperor. The loss of executive power was alleviated bythe gift of legislative authority; and Ulpian might assert, after the practice of twohundred years, that the decrees of the senate obtained the force and validity oflaws. In the times of freedom, the resolves of the people had often been dittatedby the passion or error of moment; the Cornelian, Pompeian, and Julian laws,were adapted by a single hand to the prevailing disorders: but the senate, underthe reign of the Cxsars, was composed of magistrates and lawyers, and in ques­tions of private jurisprudence, the integrity of their judgment was seldom pervert­ed by fear or interest. (6)
The silence or ambiguity of the laws was supplied by the occasional edicts ofthose magistrates who were invested with the honours of the state. (7) This an.-


fi) Dionysim. with Arbuthuot, and most of the moderns (except Eisentchmidt de Ponderibus, &e. p. 137—340.,) represent the one hundred thousand asses by ten thousand Attic drachmae, or somewhat more than threehundred pounds sterling. But their calculation can apply only to the latter times, when the as was dimi­nished to one-twenty-fourih of its ancient weight; nor can I believe that in the first ages, however destitute ofthe precious metals, a single ounce of silver could hare been exchanged for seventy pounds of copper or brass.A more simple and rational method is, to value the eopper itself according to the present rate, and, after com­paring the mint and the market price, the Roman and avoirdupois weight, the primitive as or Roman poundof copper may be appreciated at one English shilling, and the one hundred thousand asses of the first classamounted to five thousand pounds sterling. It will appear from the same reckoning, that an ox was sold atRome for SI. a sheep for Km-., and a quarter of wheat for It. 10*. (Kestus, p. 330.edit. Daeier. Plin. Hist. Na-tur. xviii. 4..) nor do I se« any reason to reject these consequences, which moderate our ideas of the poverty ofthe first Romans.
(3) Consult the common writers on the Roman Comitia, especially Sigonius and Beaufort. Spanheim (dePrzslantia et Usu Numismatum, torn. li. dissert, x. p. 192,193.) shows, on a curious medal, the Cista, Ponies,Septa, Diribitor. &c.
(3) Cicero (de Legibus, iii. 10—18.) debates this constitutional question, and assigns to his brother Quintuathe most unpopular side.
(4) Prse tumultu recusantium perferre non potui (Sueton. in August, c. xxxiv.) See Propertius, lib. ii. eleg.\i. Heiueccius, in a separate history, has exhausted the whole subject of the Julian and Papian-Poppseanlaws (Opp. torn. vii. P. 1. p. 1—479.)
(5) Tacit. Annul. 1.15. Lipsius, Excursus E. iu Taciturn.
(6) Non ambigitur senatum jus facere posse, is the decision of Ulpian (lib. xvi. ad Edict, in Pandect, lib. i.tit.iii. leg. ix.) Pomponius taxes the eomitia of the people as a turoa hominum (Pandect, lib. i. tit, ii. leg. ix.)
(?) The jus hononrium of the pretort and other magistrates is strictly defined in the Latin text of the to­







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.- 185


to himself. Without assuming the office of a prince, he renounced the professionof a soldier; and the reign of Phocas afflicted Europe with ignominious peace, andAsia with desolating war. His savage temper was inflamed by passion, hardenedby fear, exasperated by resistance or reproach. The flight of Theodosius to thePersian court had been intercepted by a rapid pursuit, or a deceitful message: hewas beheaded at Nice, and the last hours of the young prince were soothed by thecomforts of religion and the consciousness of innocence. Yet his phantom dis­turbed the repose of the usurper: a whisper was circulated through the east, thatthe son of Maurice was still alive: the people expected their avenger, and thewidow and daughter of the late emperor would have adopted as their son andbrother the vilest of mankind. In the massacre of the imperial family,(l) themercy, or rather the discretion, of Phocas, had spared these unhappy females,and they were decently confined to a private house. But the spirit of the empressConstantina, still mindful of her father, her husband, and her sons, aspired tofreedom and revenge. At the dead of the night, she escaped to the sanctuary ofSt. Sophia; but her tears, and the gold of her associate Germanus, were insuffi­cient to provoke an insurrection. Her life was forfeited to revenge, and even tojustice: but the patriarch obtained and pledged an oath for her safety; a monasterywas allotted for her prison, and the widow of Maurice accepted and abused the le­nity of his assassin. The discovery or the suspicion of a second conspiracy, dis­solved the engagements and rekindled the fury of Phocas. A matron who com­manded the respect and pity of mankind, the daughter, wife, and mother of em­perors, was tortured like the vilest malefactor, to force a confession of her designsand associates; and the empress Constantina, with three innocent daughters, wasbeheaded at Chalcedon, on the same ground which had been stained with theblood of her husband and five sons. After such an example, it would be super­fluous to enumerate the names and sufferings of meaner victims. Their condem­nation was seldom preceded by the forms of trial, and their punishment was im-bittered by the refinements of cruelty: their eyes were pierced, their tongues weretorn from the root, their hands and teet were amputated; some expired under thelash, others in the flames, others again were transfixed with arrows; and a simplespeedy death was mercy which they could rarely obtain. The hippodrome, thesacred asylum of the pleasures and the liberty of the Romans, was polluted withheads and limbs and mangled bodies; and the companions of Phocas were the mostsensible, that neither his favour, nor their services, could protect them from atyrant, the worthy rival of the Caligulas and Domitians of the first age of theempire. (2)
A daughter of Phocas, his only child, was given in marriage to the patricianCrispus,(3) and the royal images of the bride and bridegroom were indiscreetlyplaced in the circus by the side of the emperor. The father must desire that hisposterity should inherit the fruit of his crimes, but the monarch was offended bythis premature and popular association: the tribunes of the green faction, who ac­cused the officious error of their sculptors, were condemned to instant death: theirlives were granted to the prayers of the people; but Crispus might reasonablydoubt whether a jealous usurper could forget and pardon his involuntary compe­tition. The green faction was alienated by the ingratitude of Phocas and the lossof their privileges; every province of the empire was ripe for rebellion; and He-raclius, exarch of Africa, persisted above two years in refusing all tribute andobedience to the centurion who disgraced the throne of Constantinople. By thesecret emissaries of Crispus and the senate, the independent exarch was solicitedto save and to govern his country: but his ambition was chilled by age, and he re­signed the dangerous enterprise to his son Heraclius, and to Nicetas, the son ofGregory his friend and lieutenant. The powers of Africa were armed by the twoadventurous youths; they agreed that the one should navigate the fleet from Car­thage to Constantinople, that the other should lead an army through Egypt and
CD The family of Maurice ii represented hy Ducange: (Familial Byzantinoe, p. 106—10B.) his elileit sonTheodosins had been crowned emperor when he wai no more than four years and a half old, and he 11 alwaysjoined with his father in the salutations of Gregory. With the Christian daughters, Anaslasia and Theocteste,I am surprised to find the pagan name of Cleopatra. „„..,-
(2) Some of the cruelties of Phocas are marked by Theophylact, lib. Tin. c. 13—15. George of Pisidia, thepoet of Heraclius, styles him (Bell. Avarieum, p. 46. Rome, 1777.) t»; ™»™.Jo; o SvrxaSix-ns «m iS'Of iofi S**ur.The latter epithet is just—but the corrupter of life was easily vanquished.
(3) In the writers, and in the copies of those writers, there is such hesitation between the names of Priscusand Crispus (Dacange, Fam. Byzant. p. 111.,) that I have been tempted to identify the son-in-law of Phocaswith die hero five times victorious over the Avars.
Vol.. III. 21







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


IV. The conquest of Africa, from the Nile to the Atlantic ocean,(l) was firstattempted by the arms of the caliph Othman. The pious design was approved bythe companions of Mahomet and the chiefs of the tribes; and twenty thousandArabs marched from Medina, with the gifts and the blessings of the commanderof the faithful. They were joined in the camp of Memphis by twenty thousand oftheir countrymen: and the conduct of the war,was intmsted to Abdallah,(2) theson of Said, and the foster-brother of the caliph, who had lately supplanted theconqueror and lieutenant of Egypt. Yet the favour of the prince, and the meritof his favourite, could not obliterate the guilt of his apostacy. The early con­version of Abdallah, and his skilful pen, had recommended him to the importantoffice of transcribing the sheets of the Koran; he betrayed his trust, corrupted thetext, derided the errors which he had made, and fled to Mecca, to escape thejustice, and expose the ignorance, of the apostle. After the conquest of Mecca, hefell prostrate at the feet of Mahomet: his tears, and the entreaties of Othman, ex­torted a reluctant pardon; but the prophet declared that he had so long hesitated,to allow time for some zealous disciple to avenge his injury in the blood of theapostate. With apparent fidelity, and effective merit, he served the religionwhich it was no longer his interest to desert: his birth and talents gave him anhonourable rank among the Koreish; and in a nation of cavalry, Abdallah was re­nowned as the boldest and most dexterous horseman of Arabia. At the head offorty thousand Moslems, he advanced from Egypt into the unknown countries ofthe west. The sands of Barca might be impervious to a Roman legion; but theArabs were attended by their faithful camels; and the natives of the desert beheldwithout terror the familiar aspect of the soil and climate. After a painfulmarch, they pitched their tents before the walls of Tripoli,(3) a maritime city inwhich the name, the wealth, and the inhabitants, of the province had graduallycentred, and which now maintains the third rank among the states of Barbary.A re-enforcement of Greeks was surprised and cut in pieces on the sea-shore; butthe fortifications of Tripoli resisted the first assaults; and the Saracens were tempt­ed, by the approach of the prefect Gregory, (4) to relinquish the labours of thesiege for the perils and the hopes of a decisive action. If his standard was fol­lowed by one hundred and twenty thousand men, the regular bands of the empiremust have been lost in the naked and disorderly crowd of Africans and Moors,who formed the strength, or rather the numbers, of his host. He rejected withindignation the option of the Koran or the tribute; and during several days, thetwo armies were fiercely engaged from the dawn of light to the hour of noon, whentheir fatigue and the excessive heat compelled them to seek shelter and refresh­ment in their respective camps. The daughter of Gregory, a maid of incomparablebeauty and spirit, is said to have fought by his side: from her earliest youth shewas trained to mount on horseback, to draw the bow, and to wield the scimitar:and the richness of her arms and apparel was conspicuous in the foremost ranksof the battle. Her hand, with a hundred thousand pieces of gold, was offered forthe head of the Arabian general, and the youths of Africa were excited by theprospect of the glorious prize. At the pressing solicitation of his brethren, Abdal­lah withdrew his person from the field; but the Saracens were discouraged by theretreat of their leader, and the repetition of these equal or unsuccessful conflicts.
A noble Arabian, who afterwards became the adversary of Ali and the father


knowledge is collected hyAbutfeda, (Descript. Egypt. Arab, et Lat. a. .Toh. David Michaelis, Gcttings, inquarto, 1776.) ami in two recent voyages into Egypt, we are amused by Savary, and instructed by Volney. Iwish the latter could travel over the globe.
(1) My conquest of Africa is drawn from two French interpreters of Arabic literature, Cardonne, (Hist, deI'Afrique et de l'Espagne sous la Domination des Arabes, torn. i. p. 8—55.) and Otter. (Hist, de I'Academie desInscriptions, torn. xxi. p. Ill—125. and 136.) They derive their principal information from Novairi, who com­posed, A. D. 1331, an Encyclopedia in more than twenty volumes. The five general parts successively treat of,1. Phvsics, 2. Man, 3. Animals, 4. Plants, and 5. History: and the A frimn affairs are discussed in the sixth chap­ter of the fifth section of this last part. (Reiske, Prodidagmata ad Hagji Clialifse Tabulas, p. 232—234.) Amongthe older historians who are quoted by Novairi, we may distinguish the original narrative of a soldier who let] thevan of the Moslems.
(2) Seethe history or Abdallah, in Abulfeda (Vit. Mohammed, p. 109.) and Gagnier. Viede Mahomet, torn,iii. p. 45—48.)
(3) The province and city of Tripoli are described by Leo Africanus (in Navigationc et Viaggi di Rammiotorn. i. Venetia, 1550, fol. 76. vrrto) and Marmot. (Description de 1'Afriqne, torn. ii. p. 562.) The first of thesewriters was a Moor, a scholar and a traveller, who composed or translated his African geography in a state ofcaptivity at Rome, where he had assumed ttie n*me and religion of Pope LeoX. In a similar captivity amongthe Moors, the Spaniard Marmol, a soldier of Charles V. compiled his description of Africa, translated by d'Ab-Inncourt into French (Paris, 1667, three vols, in quarto,) Marmol had read and seen, but he is destitute of thecurious and extensive observations which abound in the original work of Leo the African.
(4) Theopbanes, who mentions the defeat, rather than the death, of Gregory. He brands the prefect withthe name of Tupxvmt; he had probably assumed the purple. (Chronograph, p. 285.)







OCR Output








368 THE DECLINE AND FALL


spise a superfluity of fame; and their historians scarcely condescend to mentionthe subordinate conquests which are lost in the splendour and rapidity of theirvictorious career. To the north of Syria, they passed mount Taurus, and reducedto their obedience the province of Cilicia, with its capital Tarsus, the ancient mo­nument of the Assyrian kings. Beyond a second ridge of the same mountains,they spread the flame of war, rather than the light of religion, as far as the shoresof the Euxine and the neighbourhood of Constantinople. To the east they advancedto the banks and sources of the Euphrates and Tigris :(1) the long disputed barrierof Rome and Persia was for ever confounded; the walls of Edessa and Amida, ofDara and Nisibis, which had resisted the arms and engines of Sapor or Nushirvan,■were levelled in the dust: and the holy city of Abgarus might vainly produce theepistle of the image of Christ to an unbelieving conqueror. To the west the Sy­rian kingdom is bounded by the sea; and the ruin of Aradus, a small island or pe­ninsula on the coast, was postponed during ten years. But the hills of Libanusabounded in timber, the trade of Phoenicia was populous in mariners; and a fleetof seventeen hundred barks was equipped and manned by the natives of the desert.The imperial navy of the Romans fled before them from the Pamphylian rocks tothe Hellespont; but the spirit of the emperor, a grandson of Heraclius, had beensubdued before the combat by a dream and a pun. (2) The Saracens rode mas­ters of the sea; and the islands of Cyprus, Rhodes, and the Cyclades, were suc­cessfully exposed to their rapacious visits. Three hundred years before the Chris­tian era, the memorable though fruitless siege of Rhodes,(3) by Demetrius, hadfurnished that maritime republic with the materials and the subject of a trophy.A gigantic statue of Apollo, or the sun, seventy cubits in height, was erected atthe entrance of the harbour, a monument of the freedom and the arts of Greece.After standing fifty-six years, the colossus of Rhodes was overthrown by an earth­quake; but the massy trunk, and huge fragments, lay scattered eight centuries onthe ground, and are often described as one of the wonders of the ancient world.They were collected by the diligence of the Saracens, and sold to a Jewish mer­chant of Edessa, who is said to have laden nine hundred camels with the weightof the brass metal: an enormous weight, though we should include the hundredcolossal figures, (4) and the three thousand statues, which adorned the prosperityof the city of the sun.
II. The conquest of Egypt may be explained by the character of the victorious.Saracen, one ot the first of his nation, in an age when the meanest of the brethrenwas exalted above his nature by the spirit of enthusiasm. The birth of Amrouwas at once base and illustrious: his mother, a notorious prostitute, was unable todecide among five of the Koreish; but the proof of the resemblance adjudged thechild to Aasi, the oldest of her lovers. (5) The youth of Amrou was impelled bythe passions and prejudices of his kindred: his poetic genius was exercised in sati­rical verses against the person and doctrine of Mahomet; his dexterity was em­ployed by the reigning faction to pursue the religious exiles who had taken refugein the court of the Ethiopian king. (6) Yet he returned from this embassy a secretproselyte; his reason or his interest determined him to renounce the worship ofidols; he escaped from Mecca with his friend Caled, and the prophet of Medinaenjoyed at the same moment the satisfaction of embracing the two firmest cham­pions of his cause. The impatience of Amrou to lead the armies of the faithfulwas checked by the reproof of Omar, who advised him not to seek power and do­minion, since he who is a subject to-day, may be a prince to-morrow. Yet his


(1) Al Walkidi had likewise written a history of the conquest of Diarbekir, or Mesopotamia, ("Oekley, at theend of the second vol.) which our interpreters do not appear to have seen. The chronicle of Dionysins of Tel-mar, the Jacobite patriarch, records the taking of Edessa, A. D. 637. and of Dura, A. D. 041. (Asseman. Bibliof.Orient, torn. ii. p. 103.) and the attentive may glean some doubtful information from the Chronography ofTheophanes. (p. 285—287.) Most of the towns of Mesopotamia yielded by surrender. (Abulpharag. p. 113.)
(2) He dreamt that he was at Thessalonica—a harmless and unmeaning vision; but his soothsayer or his cow­ardice understood the sure omen of ailefcat concealed in that inauspicious word, ©*o eexxaj Give toanother the victory. (Theophan. p. 288, Zouras, torn. ii. lib. xiv. p. 88.)
(3) Every passage and everjr fact that relates to the isle, the city, and the colossus of Rhodes, are compiled inthe laborious treatise of Meursius, who has hestow-ed the same diligence on the two larger islands of Crete andCyprus. See in the third volume of his works, the Rhodui of Meursius. (lib. i. e. IS. p. 715—719.) The Byzan­tine writers, Theophanes and Constantine, have ignorantly prolonged the term to one thousand three hnndredand sixty years, and ridiculously divide the weight among thirty thousand camels.
(4) Centum cnlossialium nobilitaturi locum, says Pliny, with his usnal spirit. Hist. Natur. 34.18.
(5) We learn this anecdote from a spirited old woman, who reviled to their faces the caliph and his friend.She was encouraged by the silence of Amrou and the liberality of Moawiyah. (Abulfeda, Annal. Moslem,p. 111.)
(6) Gagnier,Viede Mahomet, torn. ii. p. 46, &c. who quotes the Abyssinian history, or romance or Ahde!B^lcides. Yet the tact o( the embassy and the ambassador may be allowed.







OCR Output








36-t THE DECLINE AND FALL


had once inclined to the profession of Islam; but in the pilgrimage of Mecca, ta~balah was provoked to strike one of his brethren, and fled with amazement fromthe stern and equal justice of the caliph. The victorious Saracens enjoyed at Da­mascus a month of pleasure and repose: the spoil was divided by the discretion ofAbu Obeidah: an equal share was allotted to a soldier and to his horse; and a doubleportion was reserved for the noble coursers of the Arabian breed.
After the battle of Yermuk, the Roman army no longer appeared in the field;and the Saracens might securely choose among the fortified towns of Syria, the firstobject of their attack. They consulted the caliph whether they should march toCxsarea or Jerusalem; and the advice of Ali determined the immediate siege ofthe latter. To a profane eye, Jerusalem was the first or second capital of Pales­tine; but after Mecca and Medina, it was revered and visited by the devout Mos­lems, as the temple of the Holy Land, which had been sanctified by the revela­tion of Moses, of Jesus, and of Mahomet himself. The son of Abu Sophian wassent with five thousand Arabs to try the first experiment of surprise or treaty ; buton the eleventh day, the town was invested by the whole force of Abu Obeidah.He addressed the customary summons to the chief commanders and people ofJElia,(l) " Health and happiness to every one that follows the right way! we re-
?uire of you to testify, that there is but one God, and that Mahomet is his apostle,f you refuse this, consent to pay tribute, and be under us forthwith. OtherwiseI shall bring men against you who love death better than you do the drinking ofwine or eating hog's flesh. Nor will I ever stir from you, if it please God, till Ihave destroyed those that fight for you, and made slaves of your children." Butthe city was defended on every side by deep valleys and steep ascents; since theinvasion of Syria, the walls and towers had been anxiously restored; the bravest ofthe fugitives of Yermuk had stopped in the nearest place of refuge; and in the de­fence of the sepulchre of Christ, the natives and strangers might feel some sparksof the enthusiasm which so fiercely glowed in the bosoms of the Saracens. Thesiege of Jerusalem lasted four months; not a day was lost without some action ofsally or assault; the military engines incessantly played from the ramparts; andthe inclemency of the winter was still more painful and destructive to the Arabs.The Christians yielded at length to the perseverance of the besiegers. The pa­triarch Sophromus appeared on the walls, and by the voice of an interpreter, de­manded a conference. After a vain attempt to dissuade the lieutenant of the caliphfrom his impious enterprise, he proposed, in the name of the people, a fair capitu­lation, with this extraordinary clause, that the articles of security should be ratifiedby the authority and presence of Omar himself. The question was debated in thecouncil of Medina; the sanctity of the place, and the advice of Ali, persuaded thecaliph to gratify the wishes of his soldiers and enemies, and the simplicity of hisjourney is more illustrious than the royal pageants of vanity and oppression. TTieconqueror of Persia and Syria was mounted on a red camel, which carried, besideshis person, a bag of corn, a bag of dates, a wooden dish, and a leather bottle ofwater. Wherever he halted, the company* without distinction, was invited topartake of his homely fare, and the repast was consecrated bv the prayer andexhortation of the commander of the faithful. (2) But in this expedition or pil­grimage, his power was exercised in the administration of justice; he reformed thelicentious polygamy of the Arabs, relieved the tributaries from extortion andicruelty, and chastised the luxury of the Saracens, by despoiling them of their richsilks, and dragging them on their faces in the dirt. When he came within sightof Jerusalem, the caliph cried with a loud voice,—" God is victorious. O Lord,give us an easy conquest!" and pitching his tent of coarse hair, calmly seated him-self on the ground. After signing the capitulation, he entered the city withoutfear or precaution; and courteously discoursed with the patriarch concerning itsreligious antiquities. (3) Sophronius bowed before his new master, and secretly


some panegyrical strains of an Arabian port, to whom the chief or Gassan sent from Constantinople a gift offive hundred pieces of gold by the hands of the ambassadors of Omar.
(1) In the name of the city, the profane prevailed over the sacred; 'Jerusalem was known to the devout Chris­tians (Euseb. de Martyr. Palest, c. il.;) but the legal and popular appellation of Mlin (the colony of .filim Ha-ilnanus) has passed from the Romans to the Arabs (Rcland. Palestin. torn. i. p. 207. torn. ii. p.835 D'HerbelotBibliotheqne Orientale, Cods, p. 269, Ilia, p. 420.) The epithet of At Cods, the Holy, is used as the proper nameof Jerusalem. r
(a) The singular journey and equipage of Omar are described (besides Ockley, vol. L p. 250.) 1st Murutdi(Mcrveiltesdel'Kgvpte.p. 200—202.)
(3) The Arabs boast of an old prophecy preserved at Jerusalem, and describing the name, the religion, andUie person ot Omar, the future conqueror. By such arts the Jews are said to have soothed the pride of tackfirctgn masters, Cyrus and Alexander (Joseph. Am. Jud. lib, xi.Ci M. p. 347. 579-58!.)







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


formidable tumult which lasted three days; they besieged the palace, forced thegates, recalled their mothers, Zoe from her prison, Theodora from her monastery,and condemned the son of Calaphates to the loss of his eyes or of his rife. Forthe first time, the Greeks beheld with surprise the two royal sisters seated on thesame throne, presiding in the senate, and giving audience to the ambassadors ofthe nations. But this singular union subsisted no more than two months: the twosovereigns, their tempers, interests, and adherents, were secretly hostile to eachother; and as Theodora was still averse to marriage, the indefatigable Zoe, atthe age of sixty, consented, for the public good, to sustain the embraces of a thirdhusband, and the censures of the Greek church. His name and number wereConstantine X., and the epithet of Monomachus, the single combatant, must havebeen expressive of his valour and victory in some public or private quarrel. Buthis health was broken by the tortures of the gout, and his dissolute reign was spentin the alternative of sickness and pleasure. A fair and noble widow had accom­panied Constantine in his exile to.the isle of Lesbos, and Sclerena gloried in theappellation of his mistress. After his marriage and elevation, she was investedwith the title and pomp of Augusta, and occupied a contiguous apartment in thepalace. . The lawful consort (such was the delicacy or corruption of Zoe) consent­ed to this strange and scandalous partition; and the emperor appeared in public be­tween his wife and his concubine. He survived them both; but the last measuresof Constantine to change the order of succession were prevented by the more vi­gilant friends of Theodora; and after his decease, she resumed, with the generalconsent, the possession of her inheritance. In her name, and by the influence offour eunuchs, the eastern world was peaceably governed about nineteen months;and as they wished to prolong their dominion, they persuaded tTle aged princess tonominate for her successor Michael VI. The surname of Stratioticus declareshis military profession; but the crazy and decrepit veteran could only see with theeyes, and execute with the hands of his ministers. Whilst he ascended the throne,Theodora sunk into the grave; the last of the Macedonian or Basilian dynasty. Ihave hastily reviewed, and gladly dismiss, this shameful and destructive period oftwenty-eight years, in which the Greeks, degraded below the common level ofservitude, were transferred like a herd of cattle by the choice or caprice of'twoimpotent females.
From this night of slavery, a ray of freedom, or at least of spirit, begins toemerge: the Greeks either preserved or revived the use of surnames, which per­petuate the fame of hereditary virtue; and we now discern the rise, succession,and alliance, of the last dynasties of Constantinople and Trebizond. The Com-Tteni, who upheld for awhile the fate of the sinking empire, assumed the honourof a Roman origin: but the family had been long since transported from Italy toAsia. Their patrimonial estate was situate in the district of Castamona, in theneighbourhood of the Euxine; and one of their chiefs, who had already enteredthe paths of ambition, revisited with affection, perhaps with regret, the mo­dest though honourable dwelling of his fathers. The first of their line was theillustrious Manuel, who, in the reign of the second Basil, contributed by war andtreaty, to appease the troubles of the east: he left, in a tender age, twosons, Isaacand John, whom, with the consciousness of desert, he bequeathed to the gratitudeand favour of his sovereign. The noble youths were carefully trained in the learn­ing of the monastery, the arts of the palace, and the exercises of the camp; andfrom the domestic service of the .guards, they were rapidly promoted to the com­mand of provinces and armies. Their fraternal union doubled the force and re­putation of Comneni, and their ancient nobility was illustrated by the marriage ofthe two brothers with a captive princess of Bulgaria, and the daughter of a patri­cian, who had obtained the name of Charon, from the number of enemies whomhe had sent to the infernal shades. The soldiers had served with reluctant loyal­ty a series of effeminate masters; the elevation of Michael VI. was a personal in­sult to the more deserving generals; and their discontent was inflamed by the par­simony of the emperor and the insolence of the eunuchs. They secretly assem­bled in the sanctuary of St. Sophia, and the votes of the military synod would havebeen unanimous in favour of the old and valiant Catacalon, if the patriotism ormodesty of the veteran had not suggested the importance of birth as well as me­rit in the choice of a sovereign. Isaac Comnenusnvas approved by general con­sent, and the associates separated without delay to meet in the plains of Phrygiaat the head of their respective squadrons and detachments. The cause of "Mi­chael was defended in a sipgle battle by the mercenaries of the imperial guard,who were aliens to the public interest, and animated only by a principle of honour







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. .325


and, holy martyrdom of his disciple Nestorius, whose person and language wereequally unknown to the nations beyond the Tigris. The first indelible lesson ofIbas, bishop of Edessa, taught them to execrate the £gyfitiant, who, in the synodof Ephesus, had impiously confounded the two natures of Christ, The flight ofthe masters and scholars, who were twice expelled from the Athens of Syria, dis­persed a crowd of missionaries, inflamed by the double zeal of religion and revenge.And the rigid unity of the Monophysites, who, under the reigns of Zeno andAnastasius, had invaded the thrones of the east, provoked their antagonists, in aland of freedom, to avow a moral, rather than a physical union of the twO personsof Christ. Since the first preaching of the gospel, the Sassanian kings beheld,with an eye of suspicion, a race of aliens and apostates, who had embraced thereligion, and who might favour the cause, of the hereditary foes of their country.The royal edicts had often prohibited their dangerous correspondence with theSyrian clergy; the progress of the schism was grateful to the jealous pride of Pe-rozes; and he listened to the eloquence of an artful prelate who painted Nestoriusas the friend of Persia, and urged him to secure the fidelity of his Christian sub­jects, by granting a just preference to the victims and enemies of the Roman ty­rant. The Nestorians composed a large majority of the clergy and people: theywere encouraged by the smde, and armed with the sword of despotism; yet manyof their weaker brethren were startled at the thought of breaking loose from thecommunion of the Christian world, and the blood of seven thousand seven hundredMonophysites or catholics, confirmed the uniformity of faith and discipline in thechurches of Persia. (1) Their ecclesiastical institutions are distinguished by aliberal principle of reason, or at least of policy: the austerity of the cloister wasrelaxed and gradually forgotten; houses of charity were endowed for the educa­tion of orphans and foundlings; the law of celibacy, so forcibly recommended tothe Greeks and Latins, was disregarded by the Persian clergy; and the number ofthe elect was multiplied by the public and reiterated nuptials of the priests, thebishops, and even the patriarch himself. To this standard of natural and religiousfreedom, myriads of fugitives resorted from all the provinces of the eastern em­pire: the narrow bigotry of Justinian was punished by the emigration of his mostindustrious subjects; they transported into Persia the arts both of peace and war:and those who deserved the favour, were promoted in the service of a discerningmonarch. The arms of Nushirvan, and his fiercer grandson, were assisted with ad­vice, and money, and troops, by the desperate sectaries who still lurked in theirnative cities of the east: their zeal was rewarded with the gift of the catholicchurches; but when those cities and churches were recovered by Heraclius, theiropen profession of treason and heresy compelled them to seek a refuge in therealm of their foreign ally. But the seeming tranquillity of the Nestorians wasoften endangered, and sometimes overthrown. They were involved in the com­mon evils of oriental despotism: their enmity to Rome could not always atone fortheir attachment to the gospel: and a colony of three hundred thousand Jacobites,the captives of Apamea and Antioch,- was permitted to erect a hostile altar in theface of the catholic, and in the sunshine of the court. In his last treaty, Justinianintroduced some conditions which tended to enlarge and fortify the toleration ofChristianity in Persia. The emperor, ignorant of the rights of conscience, wasincapable of pity or esteem for the heretics who denied the authority of the holysynods: but he flattered himself that they would gradually perceive the temporalbenefits of union with the empire and the church of Rome; and if he failed in ex­citing their gratitude, he might hope to provoke the jealousy of their sovereign.In a later age, the Lutherans have been burnt at Paris, and protected in Germa­ny, by the superstition and policy of the most Christian king.
The desire of gaining souls for God, and subjects for the church, has excited inevery age the diligence of the Christian priests. From the conquest of Persiathey carried their spiritual arms to the north, the east, and the south; and the sim­plicity of the gospel was fashioned and painted with the colours of the Syriac the­ology. In the sixth century, according to the report of a Nestorian traveller, (2)
.(l) A dissertation on the state of the Nestorians has swelled in the hand* of Assemanni to a folio volume ofnine hundred and fifty pa£es,aml his learned researches are digested i'> the most lucid order. Resides (hisfourth volume of the RibliothecaOrier.tftlis,the extracts in the three preceding tomes (torn. i. p. 203. ii. p.331—483. iii. 64~7o. 378—395, &e. 403—408. 580— 589.) may be usefuily consulted.
(3) See the Topoerraphia Chrtstiani of Cosmas, surnamed Indico-pleustes, on the Indian navigator, !ib.-iii. p.178,179. lib. ai. p. 337. The entire work,of which some curious extracts may te found in Photius (Cad. ixxvl.
Vox.. III. -29







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 301


v distress, was granted as the price of a doubtful vote or a voluntary service;vhatever had been granted to one, could not, without injury, be denied to his suc-;essor or equal; and every act of local or temporary possession was insensiblynoulded into the constitution of the Germanic kingdom. In every province, therisible presence of the duke or count was interposed between the throne and thelobles; the subjects of the law became the vassals of a private chief; and the stand­ard, which he received from his sovereign, was often raised against him in thefield. The temporal power of the clergy was cherished and exalted by the super­stition or policy of the Carlovingian and Saxon dynasties, who blindly depended ontheir moderation and fidelity; and the bishoprics of Germany were made equal inextent and privilege, superior in wealth and population, to the most ample statesof the military order. As long as the emperors retained the prerogative of be­stowing on every vacancy these ecclesiastic and secular benefices, their cause wasmaintained by the gratitude or ambition of their friends and favourites. But inthe quarrel of the investitures, they were deprived of their influence over the epis­copal chapters; the freedom of election was restored, and the sovereign was re­duced, by a solemn mockery, to his first prayers, the recommendation, once inhis reign, to a single prebend in each church. The secular governors, instead ofbeing recalled at the will of a superior, could be degraded only by the sentence oftheir peers. In the first age of the monarchy, the appointment of the son to theduchy or county of his father, was solicited as a favour; it was gradually obtainedas a custom, and extorted as a right: the lineal succession was often extended tothe collateral or female branches; the states of the empire (their popular, and at „length their legal appellation) were divided and alienated by testament and sale;and all idea of a public trust was lost in that of a private and perpetual inheritance.The emperor could not even be enriched by the casualties of forfeiture and ex­tinction: within the term of a year, he was obliged to dispose of the vacant fief, andin the choice of the candidate, it was his duty to consult either the general or theprovincial diet.
After the death of Frederic II. Germany was left a monster with a hundredheads. A crowd of princes and prelates disputed the ruins of the empire; thelords of the innumerable castles were less prone to obey, than to imitate, their su­periors; and according to the measure of their strength, their incessant hostilitiesreceived the names of conquest or robbery. Such anarchy was the inevitable con­sequence of the laws and manners of Europe; and the kingdoms of France andItaly were shivered into fragments by the violence of the same tempest. But theItalian cities and the French vassals were divided and destroyed, while the unionof the Germans had produced, under the name of an empire, a great system of afederative republic. In the frequent, and at lastthe perpetual, institution of diets,a national spirit was kept alive, and the powers of a common legislature are stillexercised by the three branches or colleges of the electors, the princes, and thefree and imperial cities of Germany. I. Seven of the most powerful feudatorieswere permitted to assume, with a distinguished name and rank, the exclusive pri­vilege of choosing the Roman emperor; and these electors were the king of Bo­hemia, the duke of Saxony, the margrave of Brandenburg, the count palatine ofthe Rhine, and the three archbishops of Mentz, of Treves, and of Cologne. II.The college of princes and prelates purged themselves of a promiscuous multitude:they reduced to four representative votes, the long series of independent counts,and excluded the nobles or equestrian order; sixtv thousand of whom, as in thePolish diets, had appeared on horseback in the field of election. III. The prideof birth and dominion, of the sword and the mitre, wisely adopted the commonsas the third branch of the legislature, and, in the progress of society, they wereintroduced about the same era into the national assemblies of France, England,and Germany. The Hanseatic league commanded the trade and navigation ofthe north: the confederates of the Rhine secured the peace and intercourse of theinland country: the influence of the cities has been adequate to their wealth andpolicy, and their negative still invalidates the acts of the two superior colleges of■electors and princes. (1)


(1) In the immense labyrinth of the jut puiiUram of Germany, T must either quote one writer or a thou­sand; and I had rather trust to one faithful guide, than transcribe, on credit, a multitude of names and pas­sages. That guide is M. Pfeffel, the author of the best legal and constitutional history that I know of any'country. (NouTel Abrege Chronologique de I'Histoire et du Droit Public d'Atlemagne, Paris, 1770, 2 vols, in4to.) His learning and j udgment have discerned the most interesting facts: his simple brevity comprises themm a narrow space; his chronological order distributes thera under the proper dates; and an elnborate index;







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 267


Ciesar, excited a conspiracy, and at length an insurrection, against her odious step­mother. The provinces were forgotten, the capital was in flames, and a centuryof peace and order was overthrown in the vice and weakness of a few months. Acivil war was kindled in Constantinople; the two factions fought a bloody battle inthe square of the palace, and the rebels sustained a regular siege in the cathedralof St. Sophia. The patriarch laboured with honest zeal to heal the wounds ofthe republic, the most respectable patriots called aloud for a guardian and avenger,and every tongue repeated the praise of the talents and even the virtues of An-dronicus. In his retirement, he affected to revolve the solemn duties of his oath." If the safety or honour of the imperial family be threatened, I will reveal or op­pose the mischief to the utmost in my power." His correspondence with the pa­triarch and patricians was seasoned with apt quotations from the Psalms of Davidand the epistles of St. Paul; and he patiently waited till he was called to her deli­verance by the voice of his country. In his march from Oenoe to Constantinople,his slender train insensibly swelled to a crowd and an army; his professions of re­ligion and loyalty were mistaken for the language of his heart; and the simplicityof a foreign dress, which showed to advantage his majestic stature, displayed alively image of his poverty and exile. All opposition sunk before him; he reached 'the straits of the Thracian Bosphorus; the Byzantine navy sailed from the harbourto receive and transport the saviour of the empire; the torrent was loud and irre­sistible, and the insects, who basked in the sunshine of royal favour, disappearedat the blast of the storm. It was the first care of Andronicus to occupy the pa­lace, to salute the emperor, to confine his mother, to punish her minister, and torestore the public order and tranquillity. He then visited the sepulchre of Ma­nuel: the spectators were ordered to stand aloof, but, as he bowed in the attitudeof prayer, they heard, or thought they heard, a murmur of triumph and revenge.M I no longer fear thee, my old enemy, who hast driven me a vagabond to everyclimate of the earth. Thou art safely deposited under a sevenfold dome, from•whence thou canst never arise till the signal of the last trumpet. It is now myturn, and speedily will I trample on thy ashes and thy posterity." From hissubsequent tyranny we may impute such feelings to the man and the moment.But it is not extremely probable that he gave an articulate sound to his secretthoughts. In the first months of his administration, his designs were veiled bya fair semblance of hypocrisy, which could delude only the eyes of the multi­tude: the coronation of Alexius was performed with due solemnity, and his perfi­dious guardian, holding in his hands the body and blood of Christ, most ferventlydeclared, that he lived, and was ready to die for the service of his beloved pupil.But his numerous adherents were instructed to maintain, that the sinking empiremust perish in the hands of a child: that the Romans could only be saved by a ve­teran prince, bold in arms, skilful in policy, and taught to reign by the long'expe-rience of fortune and mankind; and that it was the duty of every citizen, to forcethe reluctant modesty of Andronicus to undertake the burden of the public care.The young emperor was himself constrained to join his voice to the general accla­mation, and to solicit the association of a colleague, who instantly degraded himfrom the supreme rank, secluded his person, and verified the rash declaration ofthe patriarch, that Alexius might be considered as dead, so soon as he was com­mitted to the custody of his guardian. But his death was preceded by the impri­sonment and the execution of his mother. After blackening her reputation, andinflaming against her the passions of the multitude, the tyrant accused and triedthe empress for a treasonable correspondence with the king of Hungary. His ownson, a youth of honour and humanity, avowed his abhorrence of this flagitious act,and three of the judges bad the merit of preferring their conscience to their safety;but the obsequious tribunal, without requiring any proof, or hearing any defence,condemned the widow of Manuel; and her unfortunate son subscribed the sentenceof her death. Maria was strangled, her corpse was buried in the sea, and hermemory was wounded by the insult most offensive to female vanity, a false andugly representation of her beauteous form. The fate of her son was not long de­ferred: he was strangled with a bow-string, and the tyrant, insensible to pity orremorse, after surveying the body of the innocent youth, struck it rudely with hisfoot:—" Thv father," he cried, " was a knave, thy mother a whore, and thyself afool!"
The Roman sceptre the reward of his crimes, was held by Andronicus about threeyears and a half, as the guardian or sovereign of the empire. His governmentexhibited a singular contrast of vice and virtue. When he listened to his jjaB­







OCR Output








<&> T&E DECLINE AND FALL


luxury and pride offended the patricians, exhausted the revenue, and insulted themisery of the people. Anna is a faithful witness that his happiness was destroyed,and his health was broken, by the cares of a public life: the patience of Constan­tinople was fatigued by the length and severity of his reign; and before Alexiusexpired, he had lost the love and reverence of his subjects. The clergy could notforgive his application of the sacred riches to the defence of the state; but theyapplauded his theological learning and ardent zeal for the orthodox faith, whichhe defended with his tongue, his pen, and his sword. His character was degradedby the superstition of the Greeks; and the same inconsistent principle of humannature enjoined the emperor to found a hospital for the poor and infirm, and todirect the execution of a heretic, who was burnt alive in the square of St. Sophia.Even the sincerity of his moral and religious virtues was suspected by the personswho had passed their lives in his familiar confidence. In his last hours, when he waspressed by his wife Irene to alter the succession, he raised his head, and breatheda pious ejaculation on the vanity of this world. The indignant reply of the em­press may be ascribed as an epitaph on his tomb, You die as you have lived—ahypocrite!
It was the wish of Irene to supplant the eldest of her surviving sons, in favourof her daughter, the princess Anna, whose philosophy would not have refused theweight of a diadem. But the order of male succession was asserted by the friendsof their country; the lawful heir drew the royal signet from the finger of his in­sensible or conscious father, and the empire obeyed the master of the palace. An­na Comnena was stimulated by ambition and revenge to conspire against the lifeof her brother; and when the design was prevented by the fears or scruples of herhusband, she passionately exclaimed, that nature had mistaken the two sexes, andhad endowed Bryennius with the soul of a woman. The two sons of Alexius,John and Isaac, maintained the fraternal concord, the hereditary virtue of theirrace; and the younger brother was content with the title of Sebastocr.ator, whichapproached the dignity, without sharing the power of the emperor. In the sameperson, the claims of primogeniture and merit were fortunately united; his swar­thy complexion, harsh features, and diminutive stature, had suggested the ironi­cal surname of Calo-Johannis, or John the Handsome, which his grateful subjectsmore seriously applied to the beauties of his mind. After the discovery of hertreason, the life and fortune of Anna were justly forfeited to the laws. Her lifewas spared by the clemency of the emperor; but he visited the pomp and treasuresof her palace, and bestowed the rich confiscation on the most deserving of hisfriends. That respectable friend, Axuch, a slave of Turkish extraction, presumedto decline the gift, and to intercede for the criminal; his generous master applaud­ed and imitated the virtue of his favourite, and the reproach or complaint of aninjured brother was the only chastisement of the guilty princess. After this ex­ample of clemency, the remainder of his reign was never disturbed by conspiracyor rebellion; feared by his nobles, beloved by his people, John was never reducedto the painful necessity of punishing, or even pardoning his personal enemies.During his government of twenty-five years, the penalty of death was abolishedin the Roman empire, a law of mercy most delightful to the human theorist, butof which the practice in a large and vicious community, is seldom consistent withthe public safety. Severe to himself, indulgent to others, chaste, frugal, abste-,mious, the philosophic Marcus would have disdained the artless virtues of his suc­cessor, derived from his heart, and not borrowed from the schools. He despisedand moderated the stately magnificence of the Byzantine court, so oppressive tothe people, so contemptible to the eye of reason. Under such a prince, innocencehad nothing to fear, and merit had every thing to hope; and without assuming thetyrannic office of a censor, he introduced a gradual though visible reformation inthe public and private manners of Constantinople. The only defect of this ac­complished character, was the frailty of noble minds—the love of arms and mili­tary glory. Yet the frequent expeditions of John the Handsome may be justified,at least in their principle, bv the necessity of repelling the Turks from the Helles­pont and the Bosphorus. The sultan of Iconhim was confined to his capital, thebarbarians were driven to the mountains, and the maritime provinces of Asia en­joyed the transient blessings of their deliverance. From Constantinople to Antiochand Aleppo, he repeatedly marched at the head of a victorious army, and in thesieges and battles of this holy war, his Latin allies were astonished by the superiorspirit and prowess of a Greek. As he began to indulge the. ambitious hope of re­storing the ancient limits of the empire, as he revolved in his mind, the Euphra-







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. in


TOented the austere duties which forbade him to partake the perils of their spiritualwarfare. In less than two years he could announce to the archbishop of Alexan­dria, that they had baptized the king of Kent with ten thousand of his Anglo-Sax­ons; and that the Roman missionaries, like those of the primitive church, werearmed only with spiritual and supernatural powers. The credulity or the pru­dence of Gregory was always disposed to confirm the truths of religion by the evi­dence ef ghosts, miracles, and resurrectionsj(l) and posterity has paid to his me­mory the same tribute, which he freely granted to the virtue of his own or thepreceding generation. The celestial honours have been liberally bestowed by theauthority of the popes; but Gregory is the last of their own order whom they havepresumed to inscribe in the calendar of saints.
Their temporal power insensibly arose from the calamities of the times: and theRoman bishops, who have deluged Europe and Asia with blood, were compelledto reign as the ministers of charity and peace. I. The church of Rome, as it hasbeen formerly observed, was endowed with ample possessions in Italy, Sicily, andthe more distant provinces; and her agents, who were frequently subdeacons, hadacquired a civil and even criminal jurisdiction over their tenants and husband­men. _ The successor of St. Peter administered his patrimony with the temperof a vigilant and moderate landlord;(2) and the epistles of Gregory are filled withsalutary instructions to abstain from doubtful or vexatious lawsuits; to preservethe integrity of weights and measures; to grant eveiy reasonable delay, and to re­duce the capitation of the slaves of the glebe, who purchased the right of mar­riage by the payment of an arbitrary fine. (3) The rent or the produce of theseestateswas transported to the mouth of the Tiber, at the risk and expense of thepope; in the use of wealth he acted like a faithful steward of the church and thepoor, and liberally applied to their wants the inexhaustible resources of abstinenceand order. The voluminous account of his receipts and disbursements was keptabove three hundred years in the Lateran, as the model of Christian economy.On the four great festivals, he divided their quarterly allowance to the clergy, tohis domestics, to the monasteries, the churches, the places of burial, the alms­houses, and the hospitals of Rome, and the rest of the diocess. On the first dayof every month, he distributed to the poor, according to the season, their statedportion of corn, wine, cheese, vegetables, oil, fish, fresh provisions, clothes, andmoney; and his treasures were continually summoned to satisfy, in his name, theextraordinary demands of indigence and merit. The instant distress of the sickand helpless, of strangers and pilgrims, was relieved by the bounty of each day,and of every hour; nor would the pontiff indulge himself in a frugal repast, till hehad sent the dishes from his own table to some objects deserving of his compas­sion. The misery of the times had reduced the nobles and matrons of Rome toaccept, without ablush, the benevolence of the church: three thousand virginsreceived their food and raiment from the hand of their benefactor; and manybishops of Italy escaped from the barbarians to the hospitable threshold of theVatican. Gregory might justly be styled the father of his country; and such wasthe extreme sensibility of his conscience, that, for the death of a beggar who hadperished in the streets, he interdicted himself during several days from the exer­cise of sacerdotal functions. II. The misfortunes of Rome involved the apostolicpastor in the business of peace and war; and it might be doubtful to himself, whetherpiety or ambition prompted him to supply the place of his absent sovereign.Gregory awakened the emperor from a long slumber, exposed the guilt or inca­pacity of the exarch and his inferior ministers, complained that the veterans werewithdrawn from Rome for the defence of Spoleto, encouraged the Italians toguard their cities and altars, and condescended, in the crisis of danger to name thetribunes, and to direct the operations of the provincial troops. But the martialspirit of the pope was checked by the scruples of humanity and religion; the im­position of tribute, though it was employed in the Italian war, he freely condemned
(0 A French critic (Petrui Gaiianvillinj. Opera, torn. ii. p. 105—118.) has vindicated the right of Gregoryto the entire nonsense of the Dialognes. Diipin (torn. v. p. 138.) does not think that any one will Touch Ibrthe truth of ail theie miracles; I should like to know how many of them he believed himself.
(2) Baronius is unwilling to expatiate on the care of the patrimonies, lest he should betray that they con­sisted not of kingdoms, but farms. The French writers, the Benedictine editors (torn. iv. lib. 3. p. 272, &c.,)and Fleury (tnra. viii. p. 29. &r„) are not afraid of entering into these humble, though useful details; and thehumanity of Fleury dwells on the social virtues of Gregory. , t
(3) I must suspect that this pecuniary fine on the marriages of villains produced the famous, and often fa­bulous right, de cuissage, de raarquette, &e. With the consent of her husband, a handsome bride might com­mute the payment in the arms of a young landlord, and the mutual favour might afford a precedent of localrather than legal tyraanv.







OCR Output








40 THE DECLINE AND FALL


their departure from Constantinople, the men and horses, the arms and militarystores, were safely disembarked, and five soldiers were left as a guard on boardeach of the ships, which were disposed of in the form of a semicircle. The re­mainder of the troops occupied a camp on the sea-shore, which they fortified ac­cording to ancient discipline, with a ditch and rampart; and the discovery of a source_of fresh water, while it allayed the thirst, excited the superstitious confidence ofthe Romans. The next morning, some of the neighbouring gardens were pillaged;and Belisarius, after chastising the offenders, embraced the slight occasion, but thedecisive moment, of inculcating the maxims of justice, moderation, and genuinepolicy.—" When I first accepted the commission of subduing Africa, I dependedmuch less (said the general) on the numbers, or even the bravery, of my troops,than upon the friendly disposition of the natives, and their immortal hatred to theVandals. You alone can deprive me of this hope: if you continue to extort by ra­pine what might be purchased for a little money, such acts of violence will recon­cile these implacable enemies, and unite them in a just and holy league against theinvaders of their country." These exhortations were enforced by a rigid disci­pline, of which the soldiers themselves soon felt and praised the salutary effects.The inhabitants, instead of deserting their houses, or hiding their corn, suppliedthe Romans with a fair and liberal market: the civil officers of the province con­tinued to exercise their functions in the name of Justinian; and the clergy, frommotives of conscience and interest, assiduously laboured to promote the cause of acatholic emperor. The small town of Sullecte,(l) one day's journey from thecamp, had the honour of being foremost to open her gates, and to resume her an­cient allegiance: the larger cities of Leptis and Adrumetum imitated the exampleof loyalty as soon as Belisarius appeared; and he advanced without opposition asfar as Grasse, a palace of the Vandal kings, at the distance of fifty miles from Car­thage. The weary Romans indulged themselves, in the refreshment of shadygroves, cool fountains, and delicious fruits; and the preference which Procopius al­lows to these gardens over any that he had seen, either in the east or west, maybe ascribed either to the taste or the fatigue of the historian. In three generationsprosperity and a warm climate had dissolved the hardy virtue of the Vandals, whoinsensibly became the most luxurious of mankind. In their villas and gardens,which might deserve the Persian name of flaradise,{2) they enjoyed a cool andelegant repose; and, after the daily use of the bath, the barbarians were seated ata table profusely spread with the delicacies of the land and sea. Their silkenrobes, loosely flowing, after the fashion of the Medes, were embroidered with gold:love and hunting were the labours of their life; and their vacant hours, wereamused by pantomimes, chariot-races, and the music and dances of the theatre.
In a march of ten or twelve days, the vigilance of Belisarius was constantlyawake and active against his unseen enemies, by whom, in every place, and at everyhour, he might suddenly be attacked. An officer of confidence and merit, Johnthe Armenian, led the vanguard of three hundred horse; six hundred Massagetaicovered at a certain distance the left flank; and the whole fleet, steering along thecoast seldom lost sight of the army, which moved each day about twelve miles,and lodged in the evening in strong camps or in friendly towns. The near ap­proach of the Romans to Carthage filled the mind of Gelimer with anxiety andterror. He prudently wished to protract the war till his brother, with his vete­ran troops, should return from the conquest of Sardinia, and he now lamented therash policy of his ancestors, who, by destroying the fortifications of Africa, hadleft him only the dangerous resource of risking a battle in the neighbourhood ofhis capital. The Vandal conquerors, from their original number of fifty thousand,were multiplied, without including their women and children, to one hundred andsixty thousand fighting men: and such forces, animated with valour and union,might have crushed, at their first landing, the feeble and exhausted bands of theRoman general. But the friends of the captive king were more inclined to ac­cept the invitations, than to resist the progress, of Belisarius; and many a proudbarbarian disguised his aversion to war under the more specious name of his ha­tred to the usurper. Yet the authority and promises of Gelimer collected a for­midable army, and his plans were concerted with some degree of military skill.
(1) SulWte is perhaps the Turrsi Hannibalis, an old building, now as large as the tower of London. Themarch of Belisarius to Leptis, Adrumetum, fee. is illustrated by the campaign of Caesar, (Hirtius de BellaAfricano, with the Analyse of Goichardt,) and Shaw's Travels, (p. 105—113.) in the same country.
(3) nxpaSfio-os jcxJAktto,' iowkhi-wv wv tj,«si? tTptv. The paradises, a name and fashion adopted from Persia,may be represented by the royal garden of Ispahan. (Voyage d'Oiearius, p. 774.) See, in the Greek ro­mances, their most perfect model. (Longni, Pastoral,lib.it. p.99.101. Achilles Tatius, lib. i: p. 82,25.







OCR Output








238 • THE DECLINE AND FALL


\
Libanus. John Maron, one of the most learned and popular of the monks, as­sumed the character of patriarch of Antiooh; his nephew Abraham, at the headof the Maronites, defended their civil and religious freedom against the tyrants ofthe east. The son of the orthodox Constantino pursued, with pious hatred, apeople of soldiers, who might have stood the bulwark of his empire against thecommon foes of Christ and of Rome. An army of Greeks invaded Syria; themonastery of St. Maron was destroyed with fire; the bravest chieftains were be­trayed and murdered, and twelve thousand of their followers were transplanted tothe distant frontiers of Armenia and Thrace. Yet the humble nation of the Ma­ronites has survived the empire of Constantinople, and they still enjoy under theirTurkish masters, a free religion, and a mitigated servitude. Their domestic go­vernors are chosen among the ancient nobility; the patriarch, in his monastery of( Canobin, still fancies himself on the throne of Antioch; nine bishops compose hissynod, and one hundred and fifty priests, who retain the liberty of marriage, areintrusted with the care of one hundred thousand souls. Their country extendsfrom the ridge of mount Libanus to the shores of Tripoli; and the gradual descentaffords, in a narrow space, each variety of soil and climate, from the Holy Cedars,erect under the weight of snow,(l) to the vine, the mulberry, and the olive treesof the fruitful valley. In the twelfth century, the Maronites, abjuring the Mono-thelite error, were reconciled to the Latin churches of Antioch and Rome, (2)and the same alliance has been frequently renewed by the ambition of the popesand the distress of the Syrians. But it may reasonably be questioned, whethertheir union has ever been perfect or sincere; and the learned Maronites of thecollege of Rome havei vainly laboured to absolve their ancestors from the guilt ofheresy and schism. (3)
IV. Since the age of Constantine, the Armenians(4) had signalized their at­tachment to the religion and empire of the Christian's. The disorders of theircountry, and their ignorance of the Greek tongue, prevented their clergy from as­sisting at the synod of Chalcedon, and they floated eighty-four years,(5) in a stateof indifference or suspense, till their vacant faith was finally occupied by the mis­sionaries of Julian of Halicarnassus,(6) who, in Egypt, their common exile, hadbeen vanquished by the arguments or the influence of his rival Severus, the Mo-nephysite patriarch of Antioch. The Armenians alone are the pure disciples ofEutyches, an unfortunate parent, who has been renounced by the greater part ofhis spiritual progeny. They alone persevere in the opinion, that the manhood ofChrist was created, or existed without creation, of a divine and incorruptible sub­stance. Their adversaries reproach them with the adoration of a phantom; andthey retort the accusation, by deriding or execrating the blasphemy of the Jaco­bites, who impute to the Godhead the vile infirmities of the flesh, even the natu­ral effects of nutrition and digestion. The religion of Armenia could not derivemuch glory from the learning or the power of its inhabitants. The royalty-expired with the origin of their schism; and their Christian kings, who aroseand fell in the thirteenth century on the confines of Cilicia, were the clients of theLatins and the vassals of the Turkish sultan of Iconium. The helpless nation has
(1) In the last century twenty large cedars still remained, (Voyage de la Roque, torn. i. p. 68—76.) at presentthey are reduced to four or five. (Volney, torn. i. p. 264.) These trees so famous in Scripture, were guarded,by excommunication; the wood was sparingly borrowed for small crosses, &c. an annual mass was chanted un­der their shade; and they were endowed by the Syrians with a sensitive power of erecting their branches to re­pel the snow, to which Mount Libanus is less faithful than it is painted by Tacitus; inter ardores opaeum fiduui-que nivibus—a daring metaphor! (Hist. 5,6.)
(2) The evidence of William of Tyre (Hist. iirGestis Dei per Francos, lib. xxii. c. S. p. 1022.) is copied or con­firmed by Jacques de Vitra. (Hist. Hierosolym. lib. ii. c. 77. p. 1093, 1094.) But this unnatural league expiredwith the power of the Fianks;and Abnlpharagius (who died in 12S6) considers the Maronites as a sect of Mo-nothelites. (Bibliot. Orient, torn. ii. p. 292.)
.(3) I find a description and history of the Maronites in the Voyage de la Syrie et du Mont Liban par laRoque. (2 vols, in 12mo. Amsterdam, 1723, particularly torn. i. p. 42—47. p. 174—184. torn. ii. p. 10—120.) Illthe ancient part, he copies the prejudices of the Nairon and the other Maronites at Rome, which Assemannusis afraid to renounce, and ashamed to support. Jablonski, (Instilut. Hist. Christ, tom.iii. p. 186.) Nkhuhr,(Voyage de 1'Arabie, &c. torn. ii. p. 346. 370—381.) and, above all, the judicious Volney, (Voyage en F.gypte eten Syne, torn. ii. p. 8—31. Paris, 17870 may be consulted.
-(4) The religion of the Armenians is briefly described by La Croze. (Hist, du Christ, de 1'Ethiope et deI'Armeme, p. 269—402.) He refers to the great Armenian History of Galanus, 3 vols, in folio, Rome, 1650—1661.) and commends the stale of Armenia in the third volume of the Nouveanx Mcmoires des Missions dnLevant. The work of a Jesuit must have sterling merit when it is praised by La Croze.
(5) The schism of the Armenians is placed eighty-four years after the council of Chalcedon. (Pagi. Critics,ad A. D. 535.) It was consummated at the end of sev«nteen years; and it is from the year of Christ 552 thatwe date the era of the Armenians. (PArt de verifier les Dates, p.35.)
(6) The sentiments and success of Julian of Halicaniassus may be seen in Liberatus, (Brev. c. 19.) Renau-dot, (Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p. 132.-303.) and Aoemannui. (Bibliot. Orient, tott. ii. DJswoat. de Mwrophysiiej,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 233


of marriage, the offices of humanity, were condemned as a deadly sin; the nativesrenounced all allegiance to the emperor; and his orders, at a distance from Alex­andria, were obeyed only under the pressure of military force. A generous ef­fort might have redeemed the religion and liberty of Egypt, and her six hundredmonasteries might have pbured forth their myraids of holy warriors, from whomdeath should have no terrors, since life had no comfort or delight. But experiencehas proved the distinction of active and passive courage; the fanatic who endureswithout a groan the torture of the rack or the stake, would tremble and fly beforethe face of an armed enemy. The pusillanimous temper of the Egyptians couldonly hope for a change of masters; the arms of Chosroes depopulated the land;yet under his reign the Jacobites enjoyed a short and precarious respite. The vic­tory of Heraclius renewed and aggravated the persecution, and the patriarch againescaped from Alexandria to the desert. In his flight, Benjamin was encouragedby a voice, which bade him expect at the end of ten years, the aid of a foreignnation, marked like the Egyptians themselves with the ancient rite of circumci­sion. The character of these deliverers, and the nature of the deliverance, willbe hereafter explained; and I shall step over the interval of eleven centuries toobserve the present misery of the Jacobites of Egypt. The populous city of Cairoaffords a residence or rather a shelter for their indigent patriarch, and a remnantof ten bishops: forty monasteries have survived the inroads of the Arabs; and the
Erogress of servitude and apostacy has reduced the Coptic nation to the despica-le number of twenty-five or thirty thousand families;(l) a race of illiterate beg­gars, whose only consolation is derived from the superior wretchedness of theGreek patriarch and his diminutive congregation. (2)
VI. The Coptic patriarch, a rebel to the Cicsars, or a slave to the khalifs, stillgloried in the filial obedience of the kings of Nubia and Ethiopia. He repaid their ■homage by magnifying their greatness; and it was boldly asserted that they couldbring into the field a hundred thousand horse with an equal number of camels;(3)that their hand could pour out or restrain the waters of the Nile;(4) and the peaceand plenty of Egypt was obtained, even in this world, by the intercession of thepatriarch. In exile at Constantinople, Theodosius recommended to his patronessthe conversion of the black nations of Nubia,(5) from the tropic of Cancer to theconfines of Abyssinia. Her design was suspected and emulated by the more or­thodox emperor. The rival missionaries, a Melchite and a Jacobite, embarkedat the same time; but the empress, from a motive of love or fear, was more effect­ually obeyed; and the catholic priest was detained by the president of Thebais,while the king of Nubia and his court were hastily baptized in the faith of Diosco-rus. The tardy envoy of Justinian was received and dismissed with honour; butwhen he accused the heresy and treason of the Egyptians, the negro convert wasinstructed to reply that he would never abandon his brethren, the true believers,to the persecuting ministers of the synod of Chalcedon.(6) During several ages,the bishops of Nubia were named and consecrated by the Jacobite patriarch ofAlexandria: as late as the twelfth century, Christianity prevailed; and some rites,some ruins, are still visible in the savage towns of Sennaar and Dongola.(7) But
(1) This number is taken from the curious Keeherches snr lei Egyptiens et les Chinnis,(tom. ii. p. 192,193.)and appears more probable than the six hundred thousand ancient, or fifteen thousand modern, Copts of Ge-melli Carreri. Cyril Lucar, the protestant patriarch of Constantinople, laments that those heretics were tenlimes more numerous than his orthodox Greeks, ingeniously applying the jroaAa, xsv Seiche; Ssmizto otvo^cotoof Humer, (Iliad. 2.128.) the most perfect expression of contempt. (Fabric. Lux. Kvangelii, 740.)
(2) The history of the Copts, their religion, manners, &e. may be found in tbe abbe Renaudot's motleywork, neither a translation nor an original; theChronicon Orientate of Peter) a Jacubite; in the two versionsof Abraham Ecchelensis, Paris. 1651, and John Simon Asseman, Venet. 1720. These annals descend no low­er than the tbirteentb century.) The more recent accounts must be searched for in the travellers into Egypt,and the Nouveaux Memoires des Missions du Levant. In the last century, Joseph Abudactins, a native ofCairo, published at Oxford, in thirty pages, a slight Historia Jacobitarum, 147 post 150.
(3) About the year 737. See Renaudot, Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p. 221,222. Elmacia, Hist. Saracen, p. 99.
(4) Ludolph. Hist. Atbiopic. et Co'nment. lib. i. c. viii. Renaudot. Hist. Patriarch. Alex. 480, &c. Thisopinion, introduced into Egypt and Europe by the artifice of the Copts, tbe pride of the Abyssitiians, the fearand ignorance of the Turks and Arahs, lias not even the semblance of truth. The rains of ^Ethiopia do not,in tbe increase of the lfile, consult the will of the monarch. If the river approaches at Napata, within threedays1 journey of the Red Sea (see D*Anville's maps,} a canal that should divert its course would demand, andmost probably surpass the power of the Caesars.
(5) The Abyssimans, who still preserve the features and olive complexion of the Arabs, afford a proof thattwo thousand years are not sufficient to change the colour of the human race. The Nubians, and Africanrace, are pure negroes, as black as t hose of Senegal or Congo, with fiat noses, thick lips, and woolly hair (Buf-fon. Hist. Naturelle, torn. v. p. 117.143, 144. 160. 219. edit. 12mo. Paris, 1769.) The ancients beheld, withoutmuch attention, the extraordinary phenomenon which has exercised the philosophers and theologians of mo­dern times.
(6) Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, torn. i. p. 329.
(7) The Christianity of the Nubians, A, D. 1153. is attested by the sheriff al EJrisi, falsely described muler
Vol. Ill, 30


 







OCR Output








190 THE DECLINE AND FALL


zond,' of the Asiatic coast. After the loss of Egypt, the capital was afflicted byfamine and pestilence; and the emperor, incapable of resistance, and hopeless ofrelief, had resolved to transfer his person and government to the more secure resi­dence of Carthage. His ships were already laden with the treasures of the pa­lace, but his flight was arrested by the patriarch, who armed the powers of reli­gion in the defence of his country, led Heraclius to the altar of St. Sophia, and ex­torted a solemn oath, that he would live and die with the people whom God hadintrusted to his care. The chagan was encamped in the plains of Thrace, but hedissembled his perfidious designs, and solicited an interview with the emperornear the town of Heraclea. Their reconciliation was celebrated with equestriangames; the senate and people in their gayest apparel resorted to the festival ofpeace, and the Avars beheld with envy and desire, the spectacle of Roman luxu­ry. On a sudden the hippodrome was encompassed by the Scythian cavalry, whohad pressed their secret and nocturnal march: the tremendous sound of the cha-gan's whip gave the signal of the assault; and Heraclius wrapping his diademround his arm, was saved, with extreme hazard, by the fleetness of his horse. Sorapid was the pursuit, that the Avars almost entered the golden gate of Constan­tinople with the flying crowds;(l) but the plunder of the suburbs rewarded theiitreason, and they transported beyond the Danube, two hundred and seventy thou­sand captives. On the shore of Chalcedon, the emperor held a safer conferencewith a more honourable foe, who, before Heraclius descended from his galley, sa­luted with reverence and pity the majesty of the purple. The friendly offer ofSain the Persian general, to conduct an embassy to the presence of the great king,was accepted with the warmest gratitude, and the prayer for pardon and peace■was humbly presented by the pretorian prefect, the prefect of the city, and oneof the first ecclesiastics of the patriarchal church. (2) But the lieutenant of Chos-roes had fatally mistaken the intentions of his master. " It was not an embassy(said the tyrant of Asia,) it was the person of Heraclius, bound in chains, that heshould have brought to the foot of my throne. I will never give peace to the_em­peror of Rome till he has abjured his crucified God, and embraced the worship ofthe sun." Sain was flayed alive, according to the inhuman practice of his coun­try; and the separate and rigorous confinement of the ambassadors, violated thelaws of nations and the faith of an express stipulation. Yet the experience ofsix years at length persuaded the Persian monarch to renounce the conquest ofConstantinople, and to specify the annual tribute or ransom of the Roman empire:a thousand talents of gold, a thousand talents of silver, a thousand silk robes, athousand horses, and a thousand virgins. Heraclius subscibed these ignominiousterms, but the time and space which he obtained to collect such treasures fromthe poverty of the east, was industriously employed in the preparations of a boldand desperate attack.
Of the characters conspicuous in history, that of Heraclius is one of the mostextraordinary and inconsistent. In the first and last years of a long reign, theemperor appears to be the slave of sloth, of pleasure, or of superstition, the care­less and impotent spectator of the public calamities. But the languid mists of themorning and evening are separated by the brightness of the meridian sun: the Ar-•cadius of the palace arose the Cxsar of the camp; and the honour of Rome andHeraclius was gloriously retrieved by the exploits and trophies of six adventurous■campaigns. It was the duty of the Byzantine historians to have revealed the causesof his slumber and vigilance. At this distance we can only conjecture, that hewas endowed with more personal courage than political resolution: that he wasdetained by the charms, and perhaps the arts, of his niece Martina, with whom,.after the death of Eudocia, he contracted an incestuous marriage;(3) and that heyielded to the base advice of the counsellors, who urged, as a fundamental law,that the life of the emperor should never be exposed in the field. (4) Perhaps he
(0 The Paschal Chronicle, which sometimes introduces fragments of history into a barren list of names anddates, gives the best account of the treason of the Avars, p. S89,390. The number of captives is added byNicephorus.
(2) Some original pieces, such as the speech or letter of the Roman ambassadors, (p. 386—388.) likewise con­stitute the merit of the Paschal Chronicle, which was composed, perhaps at Alexandria, under the reign ofHeraclius.
(3) Nicephorus (p. 10,11.) who brands this marriage with the names of *fctr/iw and erfs/urev, is happy to ob­serve, that of two sons, its incestuous fruit, the elder was marked by Providence with a stiff neck, the youngerwith the loss of hearing.
(4) George of Pisidia; (Acroas. 1.112—125., p. 5.) who states the opinions, acquits the pusillanimous counsel­lors of any sinister views. Would he have excused the proud and contemptuous admonition of Crispus?







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


again saved, and Astolphus was taught the lessons of justice and sincerity by tfeescourge of a foreign master. After this double chastisement, the Lombards lan­guished about twenty years in a state of langour and decay. But their minds werenot yet humbled to their condition; and instead of affecting the pacific virtues ofthe feeble, they peevishly harassed the Romans with a repetition of claims, eva­sions, and inroads, which they undertook without reflection, and terminated with­out glory. On either side their expiring monarchy was pressed by the zeal andprudence of pope Adrian I. the genius, the fortune, and greatness of Charlemagne,the son of Pepin; these heroes of the church and state, were united in public anddomestic friendship, and while they trampled on the prostrate, they varnishedtheir proceedings with the fairest colours of equity and moderation. (1) The passesof the Alps, and the walls of Pavia, were the only defence of the Lombards; theformer were surprised, the latter were invested, by the son of Pepin; and after ablockade of two years, Desiderius, the last of their native princes, surrenderedhis sceptre and his capital. Under the dominion of a foreign king, but in the pos­session of their national laws, the Lombards became the brethren rather than thesubjects of the Franks; who derived their blood, and manners, and language, fromthe same Germanic origin. (2)
The mutual obligations of the popes and the Carlovingian family form the im­portant link of ancient and modem, of civil and ecclesiastical history. In the con­quest of Italy, the champions of the Roman church obtained a favourable occasion, aspecious title, the wishes of the people, the prayers and intrigues of the clergy.But the most essential gifts of the popes to the Carlovingian race were the digni­ties of the king of France,(3) and of patrician of Rome. I. Under the sacerdotalmonarchy of St. Peter, the nations began to resume the practice of seeking, on thebanks of the Tiber, their kings, their laws, and the oracles of their fate. TheFranks were perplexed between the name and substance of their government. Allthe powers of royalty were exercised by Pepin, mayor of the palace; and nothing,except the regal title, was wanting to his ambition. His enemies were crushed byhis valour; his friends were multiplied by his liberality; his father had been the sa­viour of Christendom; and the claims of personal merit were repeated and ennobledin a descent of four generations. The name and image of royalty were still pre­served in the last descendant of Clovis, the feeble Childeric; but his obsolete rijjrit.could only be used as an instrument of sedition: the nation was desirous of restoringthe simplicity of the constitution; and Pepin, a subject and a prince, was ambitiousto ascertain his own rank and the fortune of his family. The mayor and the no­bles were bound, by an oath of fidelity, to the royal phantom: the blood of Cloviswas pure and sacred in their eyes; and their common ambassadors addressed theRoman pontiff, to dispel their scruples, or to absolve their promise. The interestof pope Zachary, the successors of the two Gregories, prompted him to decide, andto decide in their favour: he pronounced that the nation might lawfully unite, inthe same person, the title and authority of king; and that the unfortunate Childerie,a victim of the public safety, should be degraded, shaved, and confined in a mo­nastery for the remainder of his days. An answer so agreeable to their wishes wasaccepted by \he Franks, as the opinion of a casuist, the sentence of a judge, or theoracle of a prophet: the Merovingian race disappeared from the earth; and Pepinwas exalted on a buckler by the suffrage of a free people, accustomed to obey hislaws and to march \jnder his standard. His coronation was twice performed, withthe sanction of thepoj^s, by their most faithful servant St. Boniface, the apostle ofGermany, and by the grateful hands of Stephen III., who, in the monastery of St.Denys, placed the diadem on the head of his benefactor. The royal unction of thekings of Israel was dexterously applied, (4) the successor of St. Peter assumed the
(1) Except in the divorce of the daughto, of Desiderius, whom Charlemagne repudiated sine aliqno cri-mrae. Pope Stephen IV. hadmost furiously opposed the alliance of a noble Frank-oum perfida, horrida.necdieendafaHcntissimanationeLangobardorum>towborn he imputes the first stain of leprosy. (Cod. Carolm.epist. 45. p. 178,179.) Another reason against t)» marriage was the existence of a first wife. (Muratori, Anna-fi d'ltalia, torn. ri. p. 232, 233.236, 237.) But ChMcmagne indulged himself in the freedom of polygamy urconcubinage. do r so-
(2)..SZ? ?he Annali d'ltalia of Muratori, torn. vi.aw the three first dissertations of his Antiquitates Italia;Medn Mn, torn. 1. ^
(3) Besides the common historians, three French critic, Launoy, (Opera, torn. v. pars ii. lib. vii. epist. ix. p.477-487.) Pagi, (Critic*, A. D. 751. no. 1.6. A. D. 752. no.t_io.) and Natalis Alexander, (Hist. Novi Testa­ment!, dissertat. n. p. 26—107.) have treated this subject of the deposition of Childeric with learning ami at­tention, but with a strong bias to save the independence of the crown. Vet they are hard pressed by the textwhich they produce of Eginhard, Theophanes, and the old annals, Laureshamensis Fuldensis, Loisielani.
(4) Not absolutely tor the first time. On a less conspicuous theatre it had been used, in the smh and se­venth centunesjjjy the provincial bishops of Britain and Spain. The royal unction of Constantinople wsa







OCR Output








138 THE DECLINE AND FALL


djiced, that marriage, like other partnerships, might be dissolved by the abdica^tion of one of the associates. In three centuries of prosperity and corruption, thisprinciple was enlarged to frequent practice and pernicious abuse. Passion, inte­rest, or caprice, suggested daily motives for th« dissolution of marriage; a word,a sigh, a message, a letter, the mandate of afreedman, declared the separation,the most tender of human connexions was degraded to a transient society of profitor pleasure. According to the various conditions of life, both sexes alternatelyfelt the disgrace and injury; an inconstant spouse transferred her wealth to a newfamily, abandoning a numerous, perhaps a spurious, progeny to tha paternal au­thority and care of her late husband; a beautiful virgin might be dismissed to theworld, old, indigent, and friendless; but the reluctance of the Romans, when theywere pressed to marriage by Augustus, sufficiently marks, that the prevailing in­stitutions were least favourable to the males. A specious theory is confuted bythis free and perfect experiment, which demonstrates, that the liberty of divorcedoes not contribute to happiness and virtue. The facility of separation would de­stroy all mutual confidence, and inflame every trifling dispute: the minute differ­ence between a husband and a stranger, which might so easily be removed, mightstill more easily be forgotten; and the matron, who in five years can submit to theembraces of eight husbands, must cease to reverence the chastity of her ownperson.fl)
Insufficient remedies followed, with distant and tardy steps, the rapid progressof the evil. The ancient worship of the Romans afforded a peculiar goddess tohear and reconcile the complaints of a married life; but her epithet of Virijila-ca,(2) the appeaser of husbands, too clearly indicates on which side submissionand repentance were always expected. Every act of a citizen was subject to thejudgment of the censors; the first who used the privilege of divorce assigned, attheir command, the motives of this conduct;(3) and a senator was expelled fordismissing his virgin spouse without the knowledge or advice of his friends.Whenever an action was instituted for the recovery of a marriage portion, thepretor, as the guardian of equity, examined the cause and the characters, andgently inclined the scale in favour of the guiltless and injured party. Augustus,■who united the powers of both magistrates, adopted their different modes of re­pressing or chastising the license of divorce. (4) The presence of seven Romanwitnesses was required for the validity of this solemn and deliberate act; if anyadequate provocation had been given by the husband, instead of the delay of twoyears, he was compelled to refund immediately, or in the space of six months; butif he could arraign the manners of his wife, her guilt or levity was expiated bythe loss of the sixth or eighth part of her marriage portion. The Christianprinces were the first who specified the just causes of a private divorce; their in­stitutions, from Constantine to Justinian, appear to fluctuate between the customof the empire and the wishes of the churcn,(5) and the author of the Novels toofrequently reforms the jurisprudence of the Code and Pandects. In the most ri­gorous laws, a wife was condemned to support a gamester, a drunkard, or a liber­tine, unless he were guilty of homicide, poison, or sacrilege, in which cases themarriage, as it should seem, might have been dissolved by the hand of the execu­tioner. But the sacred right of the husband was invariably maintained to deliverhis name and family from the disgrace of adultery; the list of mortal sins, eithermale or female, was curtailed and enlarged by successive regulations, and the ob­stacles of incurable impotence, long absence, and monastic profession, were al­lowed to rescind the matrimonial obligation. Whoever transgressed the permis­sion of the law, was subject to various and heavy penalties. The woman was


(1) —— sic fiunt octo mariti
Qulnque per autumuos.
Juvenal. Satir. vi. 20.
A rapid iticceission which may yet be credible, as well ai the non coniulam numero, sed maritorum annoasoos coraputant, of Seneca (de Beneficiis, iii. 16.) Jerome saw at Rome a triumphant husband bury his twen-
g-first wife, who had interred twenty-two of his less sturdy predecessors (Opp. torn. i. p. 90. ad Gerontiam.)ut the ten husbands in a month of the poet Martial is an extravagant hyperbole (lib. iv. epigram. 7.)
(2) Sacellum Viriplacse (Valerius Maximus, lib. ii. e. 1.) in the Palatine region appears in the time of Theo-dosius.in the description of Rome by Publius Victor.
(3) Valerius Maximus, lib. ii. c. 9. With some propriety he judges divorce more criminal than celibacy:itlo namque conjugalia sacra gpreta tantum, hoc etiam injuriose tractata.
(4) See the laws of Augustus and his successors, in Heineccitis, ad Legem Papiara Poppseam, c. xix.inOpp.torn. vi. P. 1. p. 323-333.
(s) Alia--sunt leges Cauarurn, alias Christi; aliud Fapintanus, aliud Faulus aoster nracipit (Jerom. torn. i. p.1»2. Selden, Uxor Ebraica, lib. iii. c. 31. p. 847-8M.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 3fi9


merit was not overlooked by the two first successors of Mahomet; they were in­debted to his arms for the conquest of Palestine; and in all the battles and siegesof Syria, he united with the temper of a chief the valour of an adventurous soldier.In a visit to Medina, the caliph expressed a wish to survey the sword which had cutdown so many Christian warriors; the son of Aasi unsheathed a short-and ordina­ry scimitar; and as he perceived the surprise of Omar, "Alas!" said the modest Sa­racen, " the sword itself, without the arm of its master, is neither sharper nor morevveighty than the sword of Pharezdak the poet."(l) After the conquest of Egypthe was recalled by the jealousy of the caliph Othman; but in the subsequent trou­bles, the ambition of a soldier, a statesman, and an orator, emerged from a privatestation. His powerful support, both in council and in the field, established the_throne of the Ommiades; the administration and revenue of Egypt were restored'by the gratitude of Moawiyah to a faithful friend who had raised himself above therank of a subject; and Amrou ended his days in the palace and city which he hadfounded on the banks of the Nile. His dying speech to his children is celebratedby the Arabians as a model of eloquence ant! wisdom: he deplored the errors ofhis youth; but if the penitent was still infected by the vanity of a poet, he mightexaggerate the venom and mischief of his impious compo^tions.(2)
From his camp, in Palestine, Amrou had surprised or anticipated the caliph'sleave for the invasion of Egypt. (3) The magnanimous Omar trusted in his Godand his sword, which had shaken the thrones of Chosroes and Caisar; but whenhe compared the slender force of the Moslems with the greatness of the enter­prise, he condemned his own rashness, and listened to his timid companions. Thepride and the greatness of Pharaoh were familiar to the readers of the Koran;and a tenfold repetition, of prodigies had been scarcely sufficient to effect, not thevictory, but the flight of six hundred thousand of the children of Israel: the citiesof Egypt were many and populous; their architecture was strong and solid; theNile, with its numerous branches, was alone an insuperable barrier; and the gra­nary of the imperial city would be obstinately defended by the Roman powers.In this perplexity, the commander of the faithful resigned himself to the decisionof chance, or, in his opinion, of Providence. At the head of only four thousandArabs, the intrepid Amrou had marched away from his station of Gaza when hewas overtaken by the messenger of Omar. " If you are still in Syria," said theambiguous mandate, "retreat without delay: but if, at the receipt of this epistle,you have already reached the frontiers of Egypt, advance with confidence, anddepend on the succour of God and of your brethren." The experience, per­haps the secret intelligence of Amrou had taught him to suspect the mutability ofcourts; and he continued his march till his tents were unquestionably pitched onEgyptian ground. He there assembled his officers, broke the seal, perused theepistle, gravely inquired the name and situation of the place, and declared hisready obedience to the commands of the caliph. After a siege of thirty days, hetook possession of Farmah or Pelusium, and that key of Egypt, as it has beenjustly named, unlocked the entrance of the country, as far as the ruins of Helio-polis and the neighbourhood of the modern Cairo.
On the western side of the Nile, at a small distance to the east of the pyra­mids, at a small distance to the south of the Delta, Memphis, one hundred andfifty furlongs in circumference, displayed the magnificence of ancient kings. Un­der the reign of the Ptolemies and Csesars, the seat of government was removedto the sea-coast; the ancient capital was eclipsed by the arts and opulence ofAlexandria; the palaces, and at length the temples, were reduced to a desolateand ruinous condition: yet in the age of Augustus, and even in that of Constan-tine, Memphis was still numbered among the greatest and most populous of theprovincial cities.(4) The banks of the Nile, in this place of the breadth of three
(1) This laying is preserved by Poeoek. (Vot. ad Carmen Tograi, p. 184.) and justly applauded by Mr.Harris. (Philosophical Arrangements, p. 350.)
(2) For the life and character of Amrou, see Ockley, (Hist, of the Saracens, vol. i. p. 28. 83.94. 328. 342. 344.and to the end of the volume; vol, li.p. 51. 55. 57. 74. 110—112. 162.) and Otter. (Mem. dp P leademie dts In­scriptions, torn. 21. p. 131.132.) The readers of Tacitus may aptly compare Ve.pasian and Mncianus, withMoawiyah and Amrou. Yet the resemblance is still more in the situation, loan in the characters of the men.
(.1) Al Wakidi had likewise^ composed a separate history of the conquest of Egypt, which Mr. Ockley couldnever procure; and his own inquiries (vol. i. p. 344—302.) have added very little to the original text of Euty-chius (Annal. torn. ii. p. 296—323. vers. Poeock,) the Melchite patriarch of Alexandria, who lived three hun­dred years after the revolution.
(4) Strabo, an accurate and attentive spectator, observes of Heliopolis ; vwt ptv ouv itti nttytpiucoc it woxic;(Geojrraph. lib. xvii. p. 1158.) but of Memphis he declares, woa.ic P iirrt p.ty*w rs xxi irwevfyflc, Stwtp* //;t'AA^vSpsfatv; (p. 1161.) he notices, however, the mixture of inhabitants and the ruins of the palaces. In the
Vol. III. 47







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. iM9


stantinople, leaving an only son, the issue of a plebeian marriage. At the age oftwelve years, the royal birth of Theophobus was revealed, and his merit was notunworthy of his birth. He was educated in the Byzantine palace, a Christian anda soldier; advanced with rapid steps in the career of fortune and glory; receivedthe hand of the emperor's sister; and was promoted to the command of thirty thou­sand Persians, who, like his father, had fled from the Mahometan conquerors.These troops, doubly infected with mercenary and fanatic vices, were desirous ofrevolting against their benefactor, and erecting the standard of their native king:but the royal Theophobus rejected their offers, disconcerted their schemes, andescaped from their hands to the camp or palace of his royal brother. A generousconfidence might have secured a faithful and able guardian for his wife and his in­fant son, to whom Theophilus, in the flower of his age, was compelled to leavethe inheritance of the empire. But his jealousy was exasperated by envy and dis­ease: he feared the dangerous virtues which might either support or oppress theirinfancy and weakness; and theTJying emperor demanded the head of the Persianprince. With savage delight, he recognised the familiar features of his brother:" Thou art no longer Theophobus," he said: and sinking on his couch, he added,with a faltering voice, " Soon, too soon, I shall be no more Theophilus!"
The Russians, who have borrowed from the Greeks the greatest part of theircivil and ecclesiastical policy, preserved, till the last century, a singular institutionin the marriage of the czar. They collected, not the virgins of every rank andof every province, a vain and romantic idea, but the daughters of the principal no­bles, who awaited in the palace the choice of their sovereign. It is affirmed, thata similar method was adopted in the nuptials of Theophilus. With a golden ap­ple in his hand, he slowly walked between two lines of contending beauties: hiseye was detained by the charms of Icasia, and, in the awkwardness of a first de­claration, the prince could only observe, that in this world, women had been thecause of much evil: "And surely, sir," (she pertly replied,) " they have likewisebeen the occasion of much good." This affectation of unseasonable wit displeasedthe imperial lover: he turned aside in disgust; Icasia concealed her mortificationin a convent: and the modest silence of Theodora was rewarded with the goldenle. She deserved the love, but did not escape the severity, of her lord. Frompalace garden he beheld a vessel deeply laden, and steering into the port: onthe discovery that the precious cargo of Syrian luxury was the property of his wife,he condemned the ship to the flames, with a sharp reproach, that her avarice haddegraded the character of an empress into that of a merchant Yet his last chdiceintrusted her with the guardianship of the empire and her son Michael, who wasleft an orphan in the fifth year of his age. The restoration of images, and thefinal extirpation of the Iconoclasts, has endeared her name to the devotion of theGreeks; but in the fervour of religious zeal, Theodora entertained a grateful re­gard for the memory and salvation of her husband. After thirteen years of a pru­dent and frugal administration, she perceived the decline of her influence; but thesecond Irene imitated only the virtues of her predecessor. Instead of conspiringagainst the life or government of her son, she retired, without a struggle, thoughnot without a murmur, to the solitude of private life, deploring the ingratitude,the vices, and the inevitable ruin, of the worthless youth.
Among the successors of Nero and Elagabalus, we have not hitherto found theimitation of their vices, the character of a Roman prince who considered pleasureas the object of life, and virtue as the enemy of pleasure. Whatever might havebeen the maternal care of Theodora in the education of Michael III., her unfor­tunate son was a king before he was a man. If the ambitious mother laboured tocheck the progress of reason, she could not cool the ebullition of passion; andher selfish policy was justly repaid by the contempt and ingratitude of the head­strong youth. At the age of eighteen, he rejected her authority, without feelinghis own incapacity to govern the empire and himself. With 1 heodora, all gra­vity and wisdom retired from the court: and their place was supplied by the al­ternate dominion of vice and folly; and it was impossible, without forfeiting thepublic esteem, to acquire or preserve the favour of the emperor. The millionsof gold and silver which had been accumulated for the service of the state, werelavished on the vilest of men, who flattered his passions and shared his pleasures;and in a reign of thirteen years, the richest of sovereigns was compelled to stripthe palace ahd the Churches of their precious furniture. Like Nero, he delightedin the amusements of the theatre, and sighed to be surpassed in the accomplish­ments in which he should have blushed to excel. Yet the studies of Nero in mu-Vol. III. 32







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 27


and rapine. The most successful princes respected the strength of the mountainsand the despair of the natives; their fierce spirit was sometimes toothed withgifts, and sometimes restrained by terror; and a military count, with three legions,fixed his permanent and ignominious station in the heart of the Roman provinces,(1JBut no sooner was the vigilance of power relaxed or diverted, than the light-armedsquadrons descended from the hills, and invaded the peaceful plenty of Asia. Al­though the Isaurians were not remarkable for stature or bravery, want renderedthem bold, and experience made them skilful in the exercise of predatory war. Theyadvanced with secrecy and speed to the attack of villages and defenceless towns;their flying parties have sometimes touched the Hellespont, the Euxine, and thegates of Tarsus, Antioch, or Damascus;(2) and the spoil was lodged in their inaccessi­ble mountains, before the Roman troops had received their orders, or the distant pro­vince had computed its loss. The guilt of rebellion and robbery excluded them fromthe rights of national enemies; and the magistrates were instructed by an, edict,that the trial or punishment of an Isaurian, even on the festival of Easter, was ameritorious act of justice and piety. (3) If the captives were condemned to domes­tic slavery, they maintained, with their sword or dagger, the private quarrel of theirmasters; and it was found expedient for the public tranquillity, to prohibit the ser­vice of such dangerous retainers. When their countryman I'arcalissseus or Zenoascended the throne, he invited a faithful and formidable band of Isaurians, who in­sulted the court and city, and were rewarded by an annual tribute of five thousandpounds of gold. But the hopes of fortune depopulated the mountains, luxury ener­vated the hardiness of their minds and bodies, and in proportion as they mixed withmankind, they became less qualified for the enjoyment of poor and solitary free­dom. After the death of Zeno, his successor Anastasius suppressed their pensions,exposed their persons to the revenge of the people, banished them from Constanti­nople, and prepared to sustain a war, which left only the alternative of victory orservitude. A brother of the last emperor usurped the title of Augustus; his causewas powerfully supported by the arms, the treasures, and the magazines, collectedby Zeno; and the native Isaurians must have formed the smallest portion of thehundred and fifty thousand barbarians under his standard, which was sanctified, forthe first time, by the presence of a fighting bishop. Their disorderly numberswere vanquished in the plains of Phrygia by the valour and discipline of the Goths;but a war of six years almost exhausted the courage of the emperor. (4) The Isau­rians retired to their mountains; their fortresses were successively besieged andruined; their communication with the sea was intercepted; the bravest of their lead­ers died in arms; the surviving chiefs, before their execution, were dragged inchains through the hippodrome; a colony of their youth was transplanted intoThrace, and the remnant of the people submitted to the Roman government. Yetsome generations elapsed before their minds were reduced to the level of slavery.The populous villages of mount Tauris were filled with horsemen and archers;they resisted the imposition of tributes, but they recruited the armies of Justinian;and his cwilmagistrates, the proconsul of Cappadocia, the count of Isauria, and theprsetor^ of Lycaonia and Pisidia, were invested with military power to restrain thelicentious practice of rapes and assassinations. (5)
If we .extend our view from the tropic to the mouth of the Tanais we may ob­serve on one hand, the precautions of Justinian to curb the savages of Ethiopia, (6)and on the other, the long walls which he constructed in Crimea for the protectionof his friendly Goths, a colony of three thousand shepherds and warriors. (7) From
(1) Trebellius Pollio in Hist. August, p. 107. who tired under Diocletian, or Conslantine. See likewise Pan-cirolus, ad Not. Imp. Orient, c. lis. 141. See Cod. Theodos. lib. xi. tit. 35. leg. 37. with a copious collectiveAnnotation of Godefroy, torn. iii. p. 256.257.
(2) See the full and wide extent of their inroads in Philostorgius (Hist. Eccles. lib. ii. e. 8.,) with Godefroy'slearned Dissertations.
(3) Cod. Justinian, lib. ix. tit. 12. leg. 10. The punishments are severe—a fine of a hundred pounds of gold,degradation, and even death. The public peace might afford a pretence, but Zeno was desirous of monopo­lizing the valour and service of the Isaurians.
(4) The Isaurian war and the triumph of Anastasius are briefly and darkly represented by John Malala [torn,ii. p. 106,107.;) Evagrius (lib. iii. c. 35.;) Theophanes (p. 118—120.;) and the Chronicle of Marcellinus.
(5) Fortes ea regio (says Justinian) viros habel, nec in ullo differt ab Isauria, though Procopius (Persic lib. i.c. 13.^ marks an essential difference between their military character; yet in former times the Lycaonians andPisuham had defended their liberty against the great king (Xenophon, Anabasis, lib. iii. c. 2.) Justinian in­troduces some false and ridiculous erudition of the ancient empire of the Pisidians, and the Lycaonians, who,after visiting Rome (long before iEneas,) gave a name and people to Lycaonia (Novell. 24,25. 27. 30.)
(6) See Procopius, Persic, lib. i. c. 19. The altar of national concord, of annual sacrifice and oaths, whichDiocletian had erected in the isle of Elephantine, was demolished by Justinian with less policy than zeal.
(7) Procopius de Edificiis, lib. iii. c. 7. Hist. lib. viii. c. 3,4. These unambitious Goths had refused to fol­low the standard of Theodoric. As late as the fifteenth and sixteenth century, the name and nation might bediscovered between Cafiaand the straits of Azepli (d'AnvilleMenioiresderAcademie, torn. xxx. p. 240.) Theywell deserved the curiosity of Busbequius (p. 321—326.;) but seem to have vanished in the more recent ae-■ecunt of the Missions du Levant (torn, i.,) Tott Peyssoncl, &c.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 599


tlence of surmounting all opposition either of nature or of man. His first carewas to suppress a domestic rebel, who commanded the most important passes ofthe Pyrenees: Munuza, a Moorish chief, had accepted the alliance of the duke ofAquitain; and Eudes, from a motive of private or public interest, devoted hisbeauteous daughter to the embraces of the African misbeliever. But the strong­est fortresses of Cerdagne were invested by a superior force: the rebel was over­taken and slain in the mountains; and his widow was sent a captive to Damascus,to gratify the desires, or more probably the vanity of the commander of the faith­ful. From the Pyrenees, Abderame preceeded without delay to the passage ofthe Rhone and the siege of Aries. An army of Christians attempted the reliefof the city: the tombs of their leaders were yet visible in the thirteenth century;and many thousands of their dead bodies were carried down the rapid streaminto the Mediterranean sea. The arms of Abderame were not less successful onthe side of the ocean. He passed without opposition the Garonne and Dordogne,which unite their waters in the gulf of Bordeaux; but he found, beyond thoserivers, the camp of the intrepid Eudes, who had formed a second army, and sus­tained a second defeat, so fatal to the Christians, that, according to their sad con­fession, God alone could reckon the number of the slain. The victorious Saracenoverran the provinces of Aquitain, whose Gallic names are disguised, rather thanlost, in the modern appellations of Perigord, Saintogne, and Poitou: his standardswere planted on the walls, or at least before the gates of Tours and of Sens; and hisdetachments overspread the kingdom of Burgundy as far as the well-known citiesof Lyons and Besaneon. The memory of these devastations, for Abderame didnot spare the country or the people, was long preserved by tradition; and the in­vasion of France by the Moors, or Mahometans, affords the ground-work of thosefables, which have been so wildly disfigured in the romance of chivalry, and soelegantly adorned by the Italian muse. In the decline of society and art, the de­serted cities could supply a slender booty to the Saracens; their richest spoil wasfound in the churches and monasteries, which they stripped of their ornamentsand delivered to the flames: and the tutelar saints, both Hilary of Poitiers andMartin of Tours, forgot their miraculous powers in the defence of their own se­pulchres.(1) A victorious line of march had been prolonged above a thousandmiles from the rock of Gibraltar to the banks of the Loire; the repetition of anequal space would have carried the Saracens to the confines of Poland and theHighlands of Scotland: the Rhine is not more impassable than the Nile or Eu­phrates, and the Arabian fleet might have sailed without a naval combat into themouth of the Thames. Perhaps the interpretation of the Koran would now betaught in the schools of Oxford, and her pulpits might demonstrate to a circum­cised people the sanctity and truth of the revelation of Mahomet. (2)
From such calamities was Christendom delivered by the genius and fortune ofone man. Charles, the illegitimate son of the elder Pepin, was content with the titleof mayor or duke of the Franks, but he deserved to become the father of a line ofkings. In a laborious administration of twenty-four years he restored and support­ed the dignity of the throne, and the rebels of Germany and Gaul were successive­ly crushed by the activity of a warrior, who, in the same campaign, could displayIris banner on the Elbe, the Rhone, and the shores of the ocean. In the public dan­ger, he was summoned by the voice of his country; and his rival, the duke of Aqui­tain, was reduced to appear among the fugitives and suppliants. " Alas! "exclaimedthe Franks, " what a misfortune! what an indignity! We have long heard of thename and conquests of the Arabs: we were apprehensive of their attack from theeast; thev have now conquered Spain, and invade our country, on the side of thewest. Yet their numbers, and,"since they have no buckler, "their arms, areinferior to our own. If you follow my advice," replied the prudent mayor of thepalace, " you will not interrupt their march, nor precipitate your attack. Theyare like a torrent, which it is dangerous to stem in its career. The thirst of riches,and the consciousness of success, redouble their valour, and valour is of more avail
(1) With regard tothe sanctuary of St. Martin of Tours, Roderie Ximenes accuses the Saracens of theota/.Turonis civitatem.ecclesiam et palatia vastatione et incendio simili diruit ft consumpsif. The continuator ofKredegarius imputes to them no more than the intention. Ad domum beafissimi Martini cvertendam (lestinanr.At Carolus, ccc. The French annalist was more jealous of the honour of the saint.
(2) Yet I sincerely doubt whether the Oxford mosch would hare produced a volume of controversy so elegantand ingenious as the sermons lately preached by Mr. White, the Arabic professor, at Mr. Bampton's lecture.I lis observations on the character and religion of Mahomet are always adapted to his argument, and generallyfouatted in truth and reason. He sustains the part of a lively anil eloquent advocate, and sometimes rises fcrthe merit of an historian ami philosopher.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAK EMPIRE; 50J


the west:f 1) to his person the title of majesty was long appropriated; and he dis­puted with the pope the sublime prerogative of creating kings and assemblingcouncils. The oracle of the civil law, the learned Bartolus, was a pensioner ofCharles IV. and his school resounded with the doctrine, that the Roman emperorwasthe rightful sovereign of the earth, from the rising to the setting sun. Thecontrary opinion was condemned, not as an error, but as a heresy; since even thegospel had pronounced, " And there went forth a decree from Csesar Augustusthat all the world should be taxed. "(2)
If we annihilate the interval of time and space between Augustus and Charles,strong and striking will be the contrast between the two Caesars; the Bohemian,who concealed his weakness under the mask of ostentation, and the Roman, whodisguised his strength under the semblance of modesty. At the head of his victo­rious legions, in his reign over the sea and land, from the Nile and Euphrates tothe Atlantic ocean, Augustus professed himself the servant of the state and theequal of his fellow-citizens. The conqueror of Rome and her provinces assumedthe popular and legal forms of a censor, a consul, and a tribune. His will wasthe law of mankind, but in the declaration of his laws he borrowed the voice ofthe senate and people; and, from their decrees, their master accepted and renewedhis temporary commission to administer to the republic. In his dress, his domes­tics, (3) his titles, in all the offices of social life, Augustus maintained the characterof a private Roman: and his most artful flatterers respected the secret of his ab­solute and perpetual monarchy.


CHAPTER L.
Description of Arabia and its inhabitants.—Birth, character, and doctrine, of Mahomet.—Hepreaches at Mecca.—Flies to Medina.—Propagates his religion by the sword.—Vo­luntary or reluctant submission of the Arabs.—His death and successors.—The claimsand fortunes of Ali and his descendants.
After pursuing above six hundred years the fleeting Caesars of Constantinopleand Germany, I now descend, in the reign of Heraclius, on the eastern borders ofthe Greek monarchy. While the state was exhausted by the Persian war, andthe church was distracted by the Nestorian and Monophysite sects, Mahomet,with the sword in one hand and the Koran in the other, erected his throne on theruins of Christianity and of Rome. The genius of the Arabian prophet, the man­ners of his nation, and the spirit of his religion, involve the causes of the declineand fall of the eastern empire; and our eyes are curiously intent on one of the mostmemorable revolutions which have impressed a new and lasting character on thenations of the globe. (4)
In the vacant space between Persia, Syria, Egypt, and Ethiopia, the Arabianpeninsula,(5) may be conceived as a triangle of spacious but irregular dimensions,
(1) The republic of Europe, with the pope and emperor at its heads, was never represented with more dig­nity than in the council of Constance. See Lenfant's History of that assembly.
(2) Gravina, Origines Juris Civilis, p. 108.
(3) Six thousand ums have been discovered of the slaves and freednten of Augustus and Livia. So minutewas the division of office, that one slave was appointed to weigh the wool which was spnn by the empress'smaids, another for the care of her lap dog, &c (Camere Sepoichrale, &o. by Bianchini. Extract of his work,in the Bibliotheque Italique, torn. iv. p. 175. His Eloge, by Fontenelle, torn. vi. p. 356.)- But these servants.wers>of the same rank, and possibly not more numerous than those of Follio or Lentulus. They only provethe general riches of the city.
(4) As in this and the following chapter I shall display much Arabic learning. 1 must profess my total igno­rance of the oriental tongues, and my gratitude to the learned interpreters, who have transfused their scienceinto the Latin, French, and English languages. Their collections, versions, and histories, I shall occasionallynotice.
(5) The geographers of Arabia may be divided into three classes.—1. The Greeks and Latins, whose pro­gressive knowledge may be traced in Agathareides, (di Mari Rubro. in Hudson. Geograph. Minor, torn, i.) Di-odorus Siculus, (torn. i. lib. ii. p. 159—167. lib. iii. p. 211—216. edit. Wesseling) Strabo, (lib. xvi. p. 1112—1114.from Eratosthenes, p. 1122—1132. from Artemidoras) Dionysius, (Periegesis, 927—960.) Pliny, (Hist. Natnr. 5,12.6.32.) and Ptolemy. (Descript. et Tabulae Urbium, in Hudson, torn. Mi.) 2. The Arabic writers, who havetreated the subject with the zeal of patriotism or devotion: the extracts of Pocock (Specimen Hist. Arabura,p. 125—128.) from the Geography or the Sherif al Edrissi, render us still more dissatisfied with the version orabridgment (p. 24—27.44—56. 108, 8cc. 119, &c) which the Maronttes have published under the absurd title ofGcographia Nubiensis; (Paris, 1619.) but the Latin and French translators, Graves, (in Hudson, torn, iii.) andGallant], (Voyage de la Palestine par la Roque, p. 265—346.) have opened to us the Arabic of Abulfeda, themost copious and correct account of the peninsula, which may be enriched, however, from the BibliothequeOrientate of D'Herbelot, p. 120. et alibi passim. S. The European travellers, among whom Shaw (p. 438—455.)and Niebuhr, (Description, 1773, Voyages, torn. i. 1776.) deserve an honourable distinction: Busching (Geo.graphie par Bcringer, torn. viii. p. 416-^510.) has eompilcd wi(h judgment; and d'AnvillCs Maps (Ortm Vete.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 815


vered! Anathema to the Nestorians! Let them depart from the synodf Let themrepair to RomeThe legates threatened; the emperor was absolute, and acommittee of eighteen bishops prepared a new decree, which was imposed on thereluctant assembly. In the name of the fourth general council, the Christ in oneperson, but in two natures, was announced to the catholic world; an invisible linewas drawn between the heresy of Apollinaris and the faith of St. Cyril; and theroad to paradise, a bridge as sharp as a razor, was suspended over the abyss bythe master-hand of the theological artist. During ten centuries of blindness andservitude, Europe received her religious opinions from the oracle of the Vatican;and the same doctrine, already varnished with the rust of antiquity, was admittedwithout dispute into the creed of the reformers, who disclaimed the supremacy ofthe Roman pontiff. The synod of Chalcedon still triumphs in the protestantchurches; but the ferment of controversy has subsided, and the most pious Chris­tians of the present day are ignorant or careless of their own belief concerning themystery of the incarnation.
Far different was the temper of the Greeks and Egyptians under the orthodoxreigns of Leo and Marcian. Those pious emperors enforced with arms and edictsthe symbol of their faith ;(2) and it was declared by the conscience or honour offive hundred bishops, that the decrees of the synod of Chalcedon might be law­fully supported, even with blood. The catholics observed with satisfaction, thatthe same synod was odious both to the Nestorians and the Monophysites;(3) butthe Nestorians were less angry, or less powerful, and the east was distracted bythe obstinate and sanguinary zeal of the Monophysites. Jerusalem was occupiedby an army of monks; in the name of the one incarnate nature, they pillaged,they burnt, they murdered; the sepulchre of Christ was defiled with blood; andthe gates of the city were guarded in tumultuous rebellion against the troops ofthe emperor. After the disgrace and exile of Dioscorus, the Egyptians still re­gretted their spiritual father; and detested the usurpation of his successor,who was introduced by the fathers of Chalcedon. The throne of Proterius wassupported by a guard of two thousand soldiers; he waged a five years' war againstthe people of Alexandria; and on the first intelligence of the death of Marcian,he became the victim of their zeal. On the third day before the festival of Easter,the patriarch was besieged in the cathedral, and murdered in the baptistery.The remains of his mangled corpse were delivered to the flames, and his ashesto the wind: and the deed was inspired by the vision of a pretended angel: anambitious monk, who, under the name of Timothy the Cat,(4) succeeded to theplace and opinions of Dioscorus. This deadly superstition was inflamed, on eitherside, by the principle and the practice of retaliation: in the pursuit of a meta­physical quarrel, many thousands(5) were slain, and the Christians of every de­gree were deprived of the substantial enjoyments of social life, and of the invi­sible gifts of baptism and the holy communion. Perhaps an extravagant fableof the times may conceal an allegorical picture of these fanatics, who torturedeach other, and themselves. " Under the consulship of Venantius and Celer,"says a grave bishop, '* the people of Alexandria, and all Egypt were seized with astrange and diabolical frenzy: great and small, slaves and freemen, monks andclergy, the natives of the land, who opposed the synod of Chalcedon, lost theirspeech and reason, barked like dogs, and tore with their own teeth, the flesh fromtheir hands and arms. "(6)


(1; Edoita-Nv * a xpgrurw ?, Krtpzfiftt$x .... 01 ttvrri.tyWTi; Qwpu >-£vajvr*i, 01 ai/TiXiycuT,; thrruunftlmrif, 01 BmAiyom,- eis Von*v »wbxSow<v. (Coocil. torn. iv. p. 1441.) Evagrius and Liberatus present only theplacid faee of the synod, and discreetly slide orer these embers supposiios cinere dotoso.. (2) See in the Appendix to the Acts of Chalcedon, the confirmation of the synod by Marcian (Concil. torn,sv.p. 1781. 1783.,) his letters to the monks of Alexandria (p. 1791.,) of Mount Sinai (p. 1793.,) of Jerusalemand Palestine (p. 1798.,) his laws against the Entychians (p. 1809. 1811. 1831.,) the correspondence of Leo withthe provincial synods on the revolution of Alexandria fp. 1835. 1930.)
(3) Photius (or rather the Eulogius of Alexandria) confesses, in a fine passage, the specious colour of thisdouble charge against Pope Leo and his synod of Chalcedon. fBibliot. Cod. 225. p. 768.) He waged a doublewar against the enemies of the church, and wounded either foe with the darts of his adversary—xhtxkkkKoi;BtKttri roue aurtTntKn; rrarparxj. Against Nestorius he seemed to introduce the mxwi: of the Monophy­sites: against Eutyches he appeared to countenance the asmsrim Slatpopa of the Nestorians. The apologistclaims a charitable interpretation for the saints; if the same had been extended to the heretics, the sound ofthe controversy would have been lost in the air.
(4) AMsvasc, from bis nocturnal expeditions. In darkness and disguise he crept round the cells of the monas­tery, and whispered the revelation to his slumbering brethren (Theodor. Lector, lib. i.)
(5) S>9voy; ti TOAjWjSswi /aupiov; suparw :rA.S)flii fti\vv$>lvxi ft* poiicr tkv y*i xKKx loci stvrav TOV *.<;)*. Such is the hy­perbolic language of the Henotocon.
torn'S p* 32F Cnronicle of victor Tunnensis, in the Lectiones Antitrua? of Canulus, republished by Basnet,







OCR Output








Ot THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 69


hiid threatened her life. Photius was more resolved to punish, and less promptto pardon: he flew to Ephesus; extorted from a trusty eunuch of his mother thefull confession of her guilt; arrested Theodosius and his treasures in the church ofSt. John the apostle, and concealed his captives, whose execution was only de­layed, in a secure and sequestered fortress of Cilicia. Such a daring outrage againstpublic justice could not pass with impunity; and the cause of Antonina was espousedby the empress, whose favour she had deserved by the recent services of the dis­grace of a prefect, and the exile and murder of a pope. At the end of the cam­paign, Belisarius was recalled; he complied, as usual, with the imperial mandate.His mind was not prepared for rebellion; his obedience, however adverse to the dic­tates of honour, was consonant to the wishes of his heart; and when he embraced his■wife, at the command, and perhaps in the presence, of the empress, the tender hus­band was disposed to forgive, or to be forgiven. The bounty of Theodora reservedfor her companion a more precious favour. " I have found (she said,) my dearestpatrician, a pearl of inestimable value; it has not yet been viewed by any mortaleye; but the sight and the possession of this jewel are destined for my friend." Assoon as the curiosity and impatience of Antonina were kindled, the door of a bed­chamber was thrown open, and she beheld her lover, whom the diligence of theeunuchs had discovered in his secret prison. Her silent wonder burst into pas­sionate exclamations of gratitude and joy, and she named Theodora her queen, herbenefactress, and her saviour. The monk of Ephesus was nourished in the pa­lace with luxury and ambition; but, instead of assuming, as he was promised, thecommand of the Roman armies, Theodosius expired in the first fatigues of an amo­rous interview. The grief of Antonina could only be assuaged by the sufferings ofher son. A youth of consular rank, and sickly constitution, was punished, withouta trial, like a malefactor and a slave: yet such was the constancy of his mind, thatPhotius sustained the tortures of the scourge and the rack, without violating thefaith which he had sworn to Belisarius. After this fruitless cruelty, the son of An­tonina, while his mother feasted with the empress, was buried in her subterraneousprisons, which admitted not the distinction of night and day. He twice escapedto the venerable sanctuaries of Constantinople, the churches of St. Sophia and ofthe Virgin: but his tyrants were as insensible of religion as of pity; and the helplessyouth, amidst the clamours of the clergy and people, was twice dragged from thealtar to the dungeon. His third attempt was more successful. At the end of threeyears, the prophet Zacharia, or some mortal friend, indicated the means of an es­cape; he eluded the spies and guards of the empress, reached the holy sepulchreof Jerusalem, embraced the profession of a monk; and the abbot Photius was em­ployed, after the death of Justinian, to reconcile and regulate the churches of Egypt.The son of Antonina suffered all that an enemy can inflict: her patient husbandimposed on himself the more exquisite misery of violating his promise and desert­ing his friend.
In the succeeding campaign, Belisarius was again sent against the Persians; hesaved the east, but he oftended Theodora, and perhaps the emperor himself. Themalady of Justinian had countenanced the rumour of his death: and the Roman ge^-neral, on the supposition of that probable event, spoke the free language of a citizenand a soldier. His colleague Buzes, who concurred in the same sentiments, lost his/rank, his liberty, and his health, by the persecution of the empress: but the dis­grace o? Belisarius was alleviated by the dignity of his own character, and the in--Huence of his wife, who might wish to humble, but could not desire to ruin, thepartner of her fortunes. Even this removal was coloured by the assurance, thatthe sinking state of Italy would be retrieved by the single presence of the conquer­or. Bjit no sooner had he returned, alone and defenceless, than a hostile commis--sion was sent to the east, to seize his treasures and criminate his actions: the guardsand veterans, who followed his private banner, were distributed among the chiefsof the army, and even the eunuchs presumed to cast lots for the partition of hismartial domestics. When he passed with a small and sordid retinue through thestreets of Constantinople, his forlorn appearance extited the amazement and com­passion of the people. Justinian and Theodora received him with cold ingratitude;the servile crowd, with insolence and contempt; and in the evening he retired withtrembling steps to his deserted palace. An indisposition, feigned or real, had con^fined Antonina to her apartment; and she walked disdainfully silent in the adjacentportico, while Belisarius threw himself on his bed, and expected, in an agony ofgrief and terror, the death which he had so often braved under the walls of Rome.Long after sunset a messenger was announced from the empress; he opened with







OCR Output








ire THE DECLINE AND FALL


ings of the keys of his cities and the heads of his enemies. As soon as Modair*was freed from the presence of the usurper, the loyal inhabitants obeyed the firstsummons of Mebodes at the head of only two thousand horse, and Chosroes ac­cepted the sacred and precious ornaments of the palace as the pledge of theirtruth, and a presage of his approaching success. After the junction of the impe­rial troops, which Bahram vainly struggled to prevent, the contest was decidedby two battles on the banks of the Zab, and the confines of Media. The Romans,with the faithful subjects of Persia, amounted to sixty thousand, while the wholeforce of the usurper did not exceed forty thousand men: the two generals signa­lized their valour and ability, but the victory was finally determined by the pre­valence of numbers and discipline. With the remnant of a broken army, Bah­ram fled towards the eastern provinces of the Oxus: the enmity of Persia recon­ciled him to the Turks; but his days were shortened by poison, perhaps the mostincurable of poisons; the stings of remorse and despair, and the bitter remembranceof lost glory. Yet the modern Persians still commemorate the exploits of Bahram;and some excellent laws have prolonged the duration of his troubled and ti'ansi-tory reign.
The restoration of Chosroes was celebrated with feasts and executions; and themusic of the royal banquet was often disturbed by the groans of dying or mutilatedcriminals. A general pardon might have diffused comfort and tranquillity througha country which had been shaken by the late revolutions; yet, before the sangui­nary temper of Chosroes is blamed, we should learn whether the Persians had notbeen accustomed either to dread the rigour, or to despise the weakness, of theirsovereign. The revolt of Bahram, and the conspiracy of the satraps, were impar­tially punished by the revenge or justice of the conqueror; the merits of Bindoeshimself could not purify his hand from the guilt of royal blood; and the son of Hor-mouz was desirous to assert his own innocence, and to vindicate the sanctity ofkings. During the vigour of the Roman power, several princes were seated on thethrone of Persia by the arms and the authority of the first Cassars. But their newsubjects were soon disgusted with the vices or virtues which they had imbibed ina foreign land; the instability of their dominion gave birth to a vulgar observation,that the choice of Rome was solicited and rejected with equal ardour by the capri-eious levity of oriental slaves. £1) But the glory of Maurice was conspicuous in thelong and fortunate reign of his son and his ally. A band of a thousand Romans,who continued to guard the person of Chosroes, proclaimed its confidence in thefidelity of the strangers; his growing strength enabled him to dismiss his unpopularaid, but he steadily professed the same gratitude and reverence to bis adopted fa­ther; and till the death of Maurice, the peace and alliance of the two empires werefaithfully maintained. Yet the mercenary friendship of the Roman prince hadbeen purchased with costly and important gifts: the strong cities of Martyropolisand Dara were restored, and the Persarmenians became the willing subjects of anempire, whose eastern limit was extended, beyond the example of her formertimes, as far as the banks of the Araxes and the neighbourhood of the Caspian.A pious hope was indulged, that the church, as well as the state, might triumphin this revolution; but if Chosroes had sincerely listened to the Christian bishops,the impression was erased by the zeal and eloquence of the Magi; if he was armedwith philosophic indifference, he accommodated his belief, or rather his profes­sions, to the various circumstances of an exile and a sovereign. The imaginaryconversion of the king of Persia was.reduced to a local and superstitious venerationfor Sergius,(2) one of the saints of Antioch, who heard his prayers and appearedto him in dreams; he enriched his shrine with offerings of gold and silver, and as­cribed to his invincible patron, the success of his arms, and the pregnancy of Sira,a devout Christian, and the best beloved of his wives. (3) The beauty of Sira or
0) Experiment!! cogniturn est barharos malle Roma netere- reges quam habere. These experiments areadmirably represented in the invitation, and expulsion of Vonones,(Annal. ii. 1—3.) Tiridates, (Annal. vii.32—44.) and Meherdates, (Annal. xi. 10.12.10—14.) The eye of Tacitus seems to have transpierced the camp*of the Parthians and the walls of the haram.
(2) Sergius aad his companion Bacchus, who are said to have suffered in the persecution of Maximian, ob­tained divine honour in France, Italy Constantinople, and the east. Their tomb at Rasaphe was famous formiracles, and that Syrian town acquired the more honourable name of Sergiopolis. Tiileinont, Mem. Eccles.torn. v. p. 491—496. Butler's Saints, vol. 10. p. 155.
(3) Evagrius, (lib. vi. c. SI J and Theophylacr. lib. v. c. 13,14.) have preserved the original letters of Chos­roes, written in Greek, signed with bis own hand, and afterward inscribed on crosses and tables of gold,which were deposited in the church of Sergiopolis. They had been sent to the bishop of Amiocb, as primate







OCR Output








S94 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Christian tyrant to their brethren of the north; the ocean and Mediterranean werecovered with their piratical fleets; and Charlemagne beheld with a sigh the de­structive progress of the Normans, who, in less than seventy years, precipitatedthe fall of his race and monarchy.
Had the pope and the Romans revived the primitive constitution, the titles ofemperor and Augustus were conferred on Charlemagne for the term of his life;and his successors, on each vacancy, must have ascended the throne by a formalor tacit election. But the association of his son Lewis the Pious asserts the inde-
{>endent right of monarchy and conquest, and the emperor seems on this occasion tolave foreseen and prevented the latent claims of the clergy. The royal youth wascommanded to take the crown from the altar, and with his own hands to place iton his head, as a gift which he held from God, his father, and the nation. (1) Thesame ceremony was repeated, though with less energy, in the subsequent associa­tions of Lothaire and Lewis II.; the Carlovingian sceptre was transmitted fromfather to son in a lineal descent of four generations; and the ambition of the popeswas reduced to the empty honour of crowning and anointing these hereditaryprinces who were already invested with the power and dominion. The piousLewis survived his brothers, and embraced the whole empire of Charlemagne;but the nations and the nobles, his bishops and his children, quickly discerned thatthis mighty mass was no longer inspired by the same soul; and the foundations wereundermined to the centre, while the external surface was yet fair and entire. Af­ter a war or battle, which consumed one hundred thousand Franks, the empirewas divided by treaty between his three sons, who had violated every filial andfraternal duty. The kingdoms of Germany and France were for ever separated;the provinces of Gaul, between the Rhone and the Alps: the Meuse and the Rhine,were assigned, with Italy, to the imperial dignity of Lothaire. In the partition ofhis share, Loraine and Aries, two recent and transitory kingdoms, were bestowedon the younger children; and Lewis II. his eldest son, was content with the realmof Italy, the proper and sufficient patrimony of a Roman emperor. On his deathwithout any male issue, the vacant throne was disputed by his uncles and cousins,and the popes most dexterously seized the occasion of judging the claims and me­rits of the candidates, and of bestowing on the most obsequious, or most liberal,the imperial office of advocate of the Roman church. The dregs of the Carlo­vingian race no longer exhibited any symptoms of virtue or power, and the ridi­culous epithets of the bald, the stammerer, the fat, and the simfile, distinguishedthe tame and uniform features of a crowd of kings alike deserving of oblivion. Bythe failure of the-collateral branches, the whole inheritance devolved to Charlesthe Fat, the last emperor of his family; his insanity authorized the desertion ofGermany, Italy, and France: he was deposed in a diet, and solicited his daily breadfrom the rebels by whose contempt his life and liberty had been spared. Accord­ing to the measure of their force, the governors, the bishops, and the lords, usurpedthe fragments of the falling empire; and some preference was shown to the femaleor illegitimate blood of Charlemagne. Of the greater part, the title and possessionwere alike doubtful, and the merit was adequate to the contracted scale of theirdominions. Those who could appear with an army at the gates of Rome werecrowned emperors in the Vatican, but their modesty was more frequently satisfiedwith the appellation of kings of Italy; and the whole term of seventy-four yearsmay be deemed a vacancy, from the abdication of Charles the Fat to the establish­ment of Otho I.
Otho(2) was of the noble race of the dukes of Saxony; and, if he truly descendedfrom Wittikind, the adversary and proselyte of Charlemagne, the posterity ofa vanquished people was exalted to reign over their conquerors. His father Hen­ry the Fowler was elected, by the suffrage of the nation, to save and institute thekingdom of Germany. Its limits(3) were enlarged on every side by his son, the


(1) Thegan. the biographer of Lewis, relates this coronation; and Bsronius has honestly transcribed if, (A.D. 813. no. 13, 8ce. see Gaitlard, torn. it. p. 506—508.) howsoever adverseto the claims of the popes. For the se­ries of the Carlovingian*, see the historians of France, Italy, and Germany; Pfeffel, Schmidt, Velly, Murato-ri, and even Voltaire, whose pictures are sometimes just, and always pleasing.
(2) He was the son of Otho, the son of Ludolph, in whose favour the duchy of Saxony had been instituted.A. D. 858. Ruotgerus, the biographer of a St. Bruno, (Bibliot. Brunanianse Catalog, torn. iii. vol. ii. p. 679.;gives a splendid character of his family. Atavorum atavi usque ad hominum mcmoriflm omnes nobilissimt;nullis in eorum stirpe ignotus, nullis degener facile reperitur. (apud Strnvinm, Corp. Hist. German, p. 216.)Yet Gnndling (in Henrico Aucupe) is not satisfied of his descent from Wittikind.
(3) See the treatise of Coringius; (de Finibus Imperii Germanici, Francofurt. 1680, in quarto) be rejects theextravagant and improper scale of the Roman and Carlovingian empires, and discusses with moderation the"igrtt* of Germany* fcef>vsjssat9,and her neighbours.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


tribes;(l) who, according to the vicissitudes of fortune, had obeyed or disregardedthe eloquence or the arms of the prophet. Indifference for rites and opinions stillmarks the character of the Bedoweens; and they might accept, as loosely as theyhold the doctrine of the Koran. Yet an obstinate remnant still adhered tp the re­ligion and liberty of their ancestors; and the war of Honain derived a proper ap­pellation from the idols, whom Mahomet had vowed to destroy, and whom the con­federates of Tayef had sworn to defend. (2) Four thousand pagans advancedwith secrecy and speed to surprise the conqueror; they pitied and despised the su­pine negligence of the Koreish, but they depended on the wishes, and perhaps theaid, of a people who had so lately renounced their gods, and bowed beneath theyoke of their enemy. The banners of Medina and Mecca were displayed by theprophet; a crowd of Bedoweens increased the strength or numbers of the army,and twelve thousand Mussulmans entertained a rash and sinful presumption oftheir invincible strength. They descended without precaution into the valley ofHonain; the heights had been occupied by the archers and slingers of the confede­rates; their numbers were oppressed, their discipline was confounded, their cou­rage was appalled, and the Koreish smiled at their impending destruction. Theprophet, on his white mule, was encompassed by the enemies; he attempted torush against their spears in search of a glorious death: ten of his faithful compa­nions interposed their weapons and their breasts; three of these fell dead at hisfeet. "O my brethren," he repeatedly cried with sorrow and indignation, "Iam the son of Abdallah, I am the apostle of truth! O man, stand fast jn the faith!O God, send down thy succour!" His uncle Abbas, who like the heroes of Ho­mer, excelled in the loudness of his voice, made the valley resound with the re­cital of the gifts and promises of God: the flying Moslems returned from all sidesto the holy standard; and Mahomet observed with pleasure, that the furnace wasagain rekindled: his conduct and example restored the battle; and he animated hisvictorious troops to inflict a merciless revenge on the authors of their shame.From the field of Honain, he marched without delay to the siege of Tayef, sixtymiles to the south-east of Mecca, a fortress of strength, whose fertile lands pro­duce the fruits of Syria in the midst of the Arabian desert. A friendly tribe, in­structed (I know not how) in the art of sieges, supplied him with a train of bat­tering rams and military engines, with a body of five hundred artificers. But itwas in vain that he offered freedom to the slaves of Tayef; that he violated hisown laws by the extirpation of the fruit trees: that the ground was opened by theminers; that the breach was assaulted by the troops. After a siege of twentydays, the prophet sounded a retreat; but he retreated with a song of devout tri­umph, and affected to pray for the repentance of the unbelieving city. The spoilof this fortunate expedition amounted to six thousand captives, twenty-four thou­sand camels, forty thousand sheep, and four thousand ounces of silver: a tribe whohad fought at Honain, redeemed their prisoners by the sacrifice of their idols; butMahomet compensated the loss, by resigning to the soldiers his fifth of the plun­der, and wished, for their sake, that he possessed as many head of cattle as therewere trees in the province of Tehama. Instead of chastising the disaffection ofthe Koreish, he endeavoured to cut out their tongues, (his own expression,) and tosecure their attachment by a superior measure of liberality: Abu Sophian alonewas presented with three hundred camels and twenty ounces of silver; and Meccawas sincerely converted to the profitable religion of the Koran.
The fugitives and auxiliaries complained, that they who had borne the burdenwere neglected in the season of victory. " Alas," replied their ai-tful leader," suffer me to conciliate these recent enemies, these doubtful proselytes, by thegift of some perishable goods. To your guard I intrust my life and fortunes. Youare the companions of my exile, of my kingdom, of my paradise." He was fol­lowed by the deputies of Tayef, who dreaded the repetition of a siege. " Grantns, O apostle of God, a truce of three years, with the toleration of our ancientworship."—"Not a month, not an hour."—"Excuse us at least from the obliga­tion of prayer."—" Without prayer religion is of no avail." They submitted insilence; their temples were demolished, and the same sentence of destruction wasexecuted on all the idols of Arabia. His lieutenants, on the shores of the Red


(1) Abulfeda, p. 112—115. Gagnier, torn. iii. p. 67—88. D'Herbelot, Mohammed....(») The siege of Tayef, dirision of the spoil, &e. are related by Abulfeda (p. 117—123.) and Gagnier, (torn.VI"J?" 88—111.) It is Al Jannabi who mentions the engines and engineers of the tribe of Daws. The fertile spot■oi Tayef was supposed to be a piece of the land of Syria detached and dropped in the general deluge.







OCR Output








140 THE DECLINE AND FALL


citizen. The outcasts of every family were adopted without reproach as the chil­dren of the state. (1)
The relation of guardian and ward, or, in Roman words, of tutor and ftufiil,which cover so many titles of the Institutes and Pandects,(2) is of a very simpleand uniform nature". The person and property of an orphan must always betrusted to the custody of some discreet friend. If the deceased rather hadnot signified his choice, the agnats, or paternal kindred of the nearest degree,were compelled to act as the natural guardians: the Athenians were apprehensiveof exposing the infant to the power of those most interested in his death; but anaxiom of Roman jurisprudence has pronounced, that the charge of tutelage shouldconstantly attend the emolument of succession. If the choice of the father, andthe line of consanguinity, afforded no efficient guardian, the failure was Suppliedby the nomination of the pretor of the city, or the president of the province. Butthe person whom they named to this fiub/ic office might be legally excused by in­sanity or blindness, by ignorance or inability, by previous enmity or adverse inte­rest, by the number of children or guardianships with which he was already bur­dened, and by the immunities which were granted to the useful labours of magis­trates, lawyers, physicians and professors. Till the infant could speak and think,he was represented by the tutor, whose authority was finally determined by theage of puberty. Without his consent, no act of the pupil could bind himself to hisown prejudice, though it might oblige others for his personal benefit. It is need­less to observe, that the tutor often gave security, and always rendered an account;and that the want of diligence or integrity exposed him to a civil and almost cri­minal action for the violation of his sacred trust. The age of puberty had beenrashly fixed by the civilians at fourteen; but as the faculties of the mind ripenmore slowly than those of the body, a curator was interposed to guard the fortunesof the Roman youth from his own inexperience and headstrong passions. Such atrustee had been first instituted by the pretor, to save a family from the blind ha­voc of-a prodigal or a madman: and the minor was compelled by the laws, to so­licit the same protection, to give validity to his acts till he accomplished the fullperiod of twenty-five years. Women were condemmed to the perpetual tutelageof parents, husbands, or guardians; a sex created to please and obey was neversupposed to have attained the age of reason and experience. Such at least wasthe stern and haughty spirit of the ancient law, which had been insensibly molli­fied before the time of Justinian.
II. The original right of property can only be justified by the accident or meritof prior occupancy; and on this foundation it is wisely established by the philoso­phy of the civilians. (3) The savage who hollows a tree, inserts a sharp stone infoa wooden handle, or applies a string to an elastic branch, becomes in a state of na­ture the just proprietor of the canoe, the bow or the hatchet. The materials werecommon to all; the new form, the produce of his time and simple industry, be­longs solely to himself. His hungry brethren cannot, without a sense of their owninjustice, extort from the hunter the game of the forest overtaken or slain by hispersonal strength and dexterity. If his provident care preserves and multipliesthe tame animals, whose nature is tractable to the arts of education, he acquires aperpetual title to the use and service of their numerous progeny, which derives itsexistence from him alone. If he encloses and cultivates a field for their sustenanceand his own, a barren waste is converted into a fertile soil; the seed, the manure,the labour, create a new value, and the rewards of harvest are painfully earnedby the fatigues of the revolving year. In the successive states of society, the hun­ter, the shepherd, the husbandman, may defend their possessions by two reasonswhich forcibly appeal to the feelings of the human mind—that whatever they en­joy is the fruit of their own industry; and that every man who envies their felici­ty, may purchase similar acquisitions by the exercise of similar diligence. Such,in truth, may be the freedom and plenty of a small colony cast on a fruitful island.But the colony multiplies, while the space still continues the same: the common
(1) The bumble but legal rights of concubines and natural children, are stated in the Institute! (Kb. i. tit.10..) the Pandects (Hb. i.tit. 7.,) the Code (lib. t. tit. 25.,) and theNorels (libJxxri. 89.) The researches ofHein-ecci'is and Giannome (ad Legem Juliam et Papiam-Poppseain, c it. p. 164—175. Opere Posthume, p. 108—158. Jitlustrate this interesting and domestic subject. ■
(2) See the article of guardians and wards in the Institutes (lib. i. tit. 13—26.,) the Pandects (lib. xxvi. xxrii.,)and the Code (lib. v. tit. 28—70.)
(3) Institm. lib. ii. tit. 1,2. Compare the pure and precise reasoning of Caius and Heineccius (lib. ii. tit i.
?. e»—91.) with the loose prolixity of Theophilus, (p. 207-265.) The opinions of Ulnian are presented in theandecti, (hh. i. tit. 8. leg. xli. No. 1.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


tiute edicts, for the correction of abuses, the reformation of manners, the economyof his farms, the care of his poultry, and even the sale of his eggs. He wishedto improve the laws and character of the Franks; and his attempts, however fee­ble and imperfect, are deserving of praise: the inveterate evils of the times weresuspended or mollified by his governmental) but in his institutions I can seldomdiscover the general views and the immortal spirit of a legislator, who surviveshimself for the benefit of posterity. The union and stability of his empire de­pended on the life of a single man; he imitated the dangerous practice of dividinghis kingdoms among his sons; and, after his numerous diets, the whole constitutionwas left to fluctuate between the disorders of anarchy and despotism. His esteemfor the piety and knowledge of the clergy tempted him to intrust that aspiringorder with temporal dominion and civil jurisdiction; and his son Lewis, when hewas stripped and degraded by the bishops, might accuse, in some measure, theimprudence of his father. His laws enforced the imposition of tithes, because thedemons had proclaimed in the air that the default of payment had been the causeof the last scarcity. (2) The literary merits of Charlemagne are attested by thefoundation of schools, the introduction of arts, the works which were published inhis name, and his familiar connexion with the subjects and strangers whom he in­vited to his court to educate both the prince and people. His own studies weretardy, laborious, and imperfect; if he spoke Latin, and understood Greek, he de­rived the rudiments of knowledge from conversation, rather than from books; andin his mature age, the emperor strove to acquire the practice of writing, whichevery peasant now leams in his infancy.(3) The grammar and logic, the musicand astronomy, of the times, were only cultivated as the handmaids of supersti­tion: but the curiosity of the human mind must ultimately tend to its improve­ment, and the encouragement of learning reflects the purest and most pleasinglustre on the character of Charlemagne. (4) The dignity of his person,(5) thelength of his reign, the prosperity of his arms, the vigour of his governmept, andthe reverence of distant nations, distinguish him from the royal crowd; and Eu­rope dates a new era from his restoration of the western empire.
That empire was not unworthy of its title;(6) and of some of the fairest king­doms of Europe were the patrimony or conquest of a prince, who reigned at thesame time in France, Spain, Italy, Germany, and Hungary. (7) I. The Romanprovince of Gaul, had been transformed into the name and monarchy of France;but, in the decay of the Merovingian line, its limits were contracted by the inde­pendence of the Britons and the revolt of Aquitain. Charlemagne pursued, andconfined, the Britons on the shores of the ocean; and that ferocious tribe, whoseorigin and language are so different from the French, was chastised by the impo­sition of tribute, hostages, and peace. After a long and evasive conquest, the re­bellion of the dukes of Aquitain was punished by the forfeiture of their province,their liberty, and their lives. Harsh and rigorous would have been such treatmentof ambitious governors, who had too faithfully copied the mayors of the palace.But a recent discovery(8) has proved that these unhappy princes were the last and
(1) Yet Schmidt, from the best authorities, represent! the interior disordersiml oppression of his reign.tHist.ties A Demands, torn. ii. p. 45—49.)
(2) Omnis homo ex sua proprietate legitimam decimam ad ecclesiam conferat. Experimento enim didici-mus, in anno, quo ilia valida tames irrepsit, ebullire vacuas annonas a demonibus devoratas, et voces exproba-tionis audita*. Such is the decree and assertion of the great council of Frankfort, (canon 25. torn. ix. p. 105.)Both Selden (Hist, of Tithes; Works, vol. iii. part 2. p. 1146.) and Montesquieu (Esprit des Loix, lib. xxxi. c.13.) represents Charlemagne as the first legal author of tithes. Such obligations have country gentlemen tohis memory!
(3) Eginhard (e. 25. p. 119.) clearly affirms, tentabat et scribere . .. . sed parum proipere successit laltorprsepostenis et sero inchoatus. The moderns have perverted and corrected this obvious meaning, and the ti­tle of M. Gaillard's Dissertation, (torn. iii. p. 247—260.) betrays his partiality.
(4) See Gaillard, turn. Hi. p. 138—176. and Schmidt, torn. ii. p. 121—129.
(5) M. Gaillard (torn. iii. p. 372.) fixes the true stature of Charlemagne (see a Dissertation of Marquard Fer-her ad calcem Eginhard. p. 220, 8cc.) at five feet nine inches of French, about six feet one inch and a fourthEnglish measure. The romance writers have increased it to eight feet, and the giant was endowed withmatchless strength and appetite: at a tingle stroke of his good sword Jtn/ei:te* he cut asunder a horseman andhis horse; at a single repast he devoured :» goose, two fowls, a quarter of mutton, &c.
(6) See the concise, but correct and original work of d'Anville, (Etats formes en Europe apres la Chute deTEmpire Romain en Occident. Paris, 1771, in quarto,) whose map includes the empire of Charlemagne: thedifferent parts are illustrated, by Vali-sius, (Notitia Gall:arum) for France, Beretti (Dissertatio Chorographi-ca) for Italy, de Marca (Marca Hispanica) for Spain. For the middle geography of Germany, I confess my-aelf poor and destitute.
(7) After a brief relation of his wars and conquests, (Vit. Carol, c. 5—14.) Eginhard recapitulates, in a few_words, (e. 15.) the countries subject to his empire. Struvius (Corpus Hist. German, p. 118—149.) has insertedin hit Notes the texts of the old Chronicles.
(8) Of a charter granted to the monastery of Alaon, (A. D. 845.) by Charles the Bald, which deduces thisroyal pedigree. I doubt whether some subsequent links of the ninth and tenth centuries are equally firm;*m the whole is approved and defended by M. Gaillard, (torn. ii. p. 64—81. 203—206.1 w ho affirms that the fa­







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 3f5


mise of the flowers and fruits of a plentiful increase. Their hope is seldom de­ceived; but the riches which they extract from the wheat, the barley, and therice, the legumes, the fruit trees, and the cattle, are unequally shared betweenthose who labour and those who possess- According to the vicissitudes of the sea­sons, the face of the country is adorned with a silver wave, a verdant emerald,and the deep yellow of a golden harvest. "(1) Yet this beneficial order is some­times interrupted; and the long delay and sudden swell of the river in the firstyear of the conquest might afford some colour to an edifving fable. It is said, thatthe annual sacrifice of a virgin,(2) had been interdicted by the piety of Omar; andthat the Nile lay sullen and inactive in his shallow bed, till the mandate of the ca­liph was cast into the obedient stream, which rose in a single night to the height ofsixteen cubits. The admiration of the Arabs for their new conquest encouraged thelicense of their romantic spirit. We may read, in the gravest authors, that Egyptwas crowded with twenty thousand cities or villages,(3) that exclusive of theGreeks and Arabs, the Copts alone were found on the assessment, six millions oftributary subjects,(4) or twenty millions of either sex, and of every age: that threehundred millions of gold or silver were annually paid to the treasury of the ca­liph. (5) Our reason must be startled by these extravagant assertions; and theywill become more palpable, if we assume the compass and measure to the extentof habitable ground; a valley from the tropic to Memphis, seldom broader thantwelve miles, and the triangle of the Delta, a flat surface of two thousand one hun­dred square leagues, compose a twelfth part of the magnitude of France. (6) Amore accurate research will justify a more reasonable estimate. The three hun­dred millions, created by the error of a scribe, are reduced to the decent revenueof four millions three hundred thousand pieces of gold, of which nine hundred thou­sand were consumed by the pay of the soldiers. (7) Two authentic lists, of thepresent and of the twelfth century, are circumscribed within the respectable num­ber of two thousand seven hundred villages and towns. (8) After a long residenceat Cairo, a French consul has ventured to assign about four millions of Mahome­tans, Christians, and Jews, for the ample, though not incredible, scope of the po­pulation of Egypt (9)
(1) In a twenty years* residence at Cairo, the consul Maillet had contemplated that varying scene, the Nile(lettre 2. p. 70. 75,;) particularly the fertility of the land (lettre 9.) From a college at Cambridge, the poeticeye of Gray had teen the same objects with a keener glance:—
What wonder in the sultry climes that spread,
Where Nile, redundant o'er his summer bed, '
From his broad borom life and verdure flings,
And broods o'er Egypt with his wat'ry wings;
If with advent'roiis oar, and ready sail,
The dusky people drive before the gale:
Or on frail floats to neighbouring cities ride,
That rise and glitter o'er the ambient tide.
(Mason's Works, and Memoirs of Gray, p. 199,200.)
(2) See Murtadi, p. 164—167. The reader will not easily credit a human sacrifice under the Christian em*peron, or a miracle of the successors of Mahomet.
(3) Maillet, description de 1'Egypte, p. 22. He mentions this number as the common opinion; and adds, thatthe generality of these villages contain two or three thousand persons, and that many of them are more popu­lous than onr large cities.
(4) Kutvch. Annal. torn. ii. p. 308.311. The twenty millions are computed from the following data: one*twelfth of mankind above sixty, one-third below sixteen, the proportion of men to women as seventeen to six­teen. (Recbercbes sur la Population de la France, p. H} 72.) The president Gogaet (Origin des Arts, &c.torn. iii. p. 20, Sec.) bestows twenty-seven millions on ancient Egypt, because the seventeen hundred compa­nions of Sesostris were born on the same day.
(5) El niacin, Hist. Saracen, p. 218. and this gross lump is swallowed without scruple by d'Herbelot, (Bibliot.Orient, p. 1031.) Arbuthnot, (Tablfsof Ancient Coins, p. 262.) and de Guigne*. (Hist, det Huns, torn. iii. p.135.) They might allege the not less extravagant liberality of Appian in favour of the Ptolemies (in prsef.) of/seventv-four myriads, seven hundred and forty thousand talents, an annual income of a hundred and eighty-five, or near three hundred millions of pounds sterling, according as we reckon by the Egyptian or the Alexan­drian talent. (Bernard de Ponderibus Antiq. p. 186.)
(6) See the measurement of d'Anville. (Mem. sur 1'Egypte, p. 23, Sec.) After some peevish cavils, M. Pauw(Recherche* sur les Egyptiens, torn. i. p. 118—121.) can only enlarge his reckoning to two thousand two hun­dred and fifty square leagues.
(7) Renauaot, Hist. Patriarch. Alexand. p. 334. who calls the common reading or version of Elmacin, errorlibrarii* His own emendation of four million three hundred thousand pieces, in the ninth century, maintains aprobable medium between the three millions which the Arabs acquired by the conquest of Egypt, (idem, p. 168.)and the two million four hundred thousand which the sultan of Constantinople levied in the last century. (Pie-tro della valle, torn. i. p. 352. Thevenor, part i. p. 824.) Pauw (Recberches, torn. ii. p. 365—373.) graduallyraises the revenue of the Pharaohs, the Ptolemies, and the Caesars, from six to fifteen millions of Germancrown*. *J
(8) The list of Schultens (Index Geograph. ad Calcem Vir. Saladin. p. 5.) contains two thousand three hun­dred and ninety-six places; that of d'Anville, (Mem. sur 1'Egypte, p. 29.) from the divan of Cairo, enumeratestwo thousand six hundred and ninety-six.
(O) See Maillet, (Description de 1'Egypte, p. 28.) who seems to argue with candour and judgment. Iammuch better satisfied with the observations than with the reading of the French consul. He was itrnorant ofGreek and Latin literature, and his fancy is too much delighted with the fictions of the Arabs. Their best







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


fenced the intemperate shouts and execrations, which degraded the episcopal gra­vity: but, on the formal accusation of the legates, Dioscorus was compelled todescend from his throne to the rank of a criminal, already condemned in the opi­nion of his judges. The orientals, less averse to Nestorius than to Cyril, ac­cepted the Romans as their deliverers: Thrace, and Pontus, and Asia, were exas­perated against the murderer of Flavian, and the new-patriarchs of Constantinopleand Antioch secured their places by the sacrifice of their benefactor. The bi­shops of Palestine, Macedonia and Greece, were attached to the faith of Cyril;but in the face of the synod, in the heat of the battle, the leaders with their obse­quious train, passed from the right to the left wing, and decided the victory bythis seasonable desertion of the seventeen suffragans who sailed from Alexandria,four were tempted from their allegiance, and the thirteen, falling prostrate on theground, implored the mercy of the council, with sighs and tears, and a patheticdeclaration, that, if they yielded, they should be massacred, on their return toEgypt, by the indignant people. A tardy repentance was allotted to expiate theguilt or error of the accomplices of Dioscorus: but their sins were accumulated onhis head; he neither asked nor hoped for pardon, and the moderation of those whopleaded for a general amnesty, was drowned in the prevailing cry of victory andrevenge. To save the reputation of his late adherents, some personal offenceswere skilfully detected—his rash and illegal excommunication of the pope, and hiscontumacious refusal (while he was detained a prisoner) to attend the summons ofthe synod. Witnesses were introduced to prove the special facts of his pride, ava­rice, and cruelty; and the fathers heard with abhorrence, that the alms of thechurch were lavished on the female dancers, that his palace, and even his bath,•was open to the prostitutes of Alexandria, and that the infamous Pansophia, orIrene, was publicly entertained as the concubine of the patriarch.(l)
For these scandalous offences Dioscorus was deposed by the synod, and banishedby the emperor: but the purity of his faith was declared in the presence, and withthe tacit approbation, of the fathers. Their prudence supposed, rather than pro­nounced the heresy of Eutyches, who was never summoned before their tribunal;and they sat silent and abashed, when a bold Monophysite, casting at their feet avolume of Cyril, challenged them to anathematize in his person the doctrine of thesaint. If we fairly peruse the acts of Chalcedon as they are recorded by the or­thodox party,(2) we shall find that a great majority of the bishops embraced thesimple unity of Christ; and the ambiguous concession, that he was formed of orfrom two natures, might imply either their previous existence, or their subse­quent confusion, or some dangerous interval between the conception of the manand the assumption of the God. The Roman theology, more positive and precise,adopted the term most offensive to the ears of the Egyptians, that Christ existedin two natures: and this momentous particle(3) (which the memory, rather thanthe understanding, must retain) had almost produced a schism among the catho­lic bishops. The tome of Leo had been respectfully, perhaps sincerely, subscribed:but they protested, in two successive debates, that it was neither expedient norlawful to transgress the sacred landmarks which had been fixed at Nice, Constan­tinople, and Ephesus, according to the rule of Scripture and tradition. At lengththey yielded to the importunities of their masters, but their infallible decree, afterit had been ratified with deliberate votes and vehement acclamations, was over­turned in the next session by the opposition of the legates and their oriental friends.It was in vain that a multitude of episcopal voices repeated in chorus, " The de­finition of the fathers is orthodox and immutable! The heretics are now disco-
(1) Concil. torn. iv. p. 1276.—A specimen of the witand mRliee of tbe people it preserved in the Greek An­thology (lib. ii. c 5. p. 188. t'dit. Wechel.) although the application was unknown to the editor Brodastls. Thenameless epigrammatist raises a tolerable pun, by confounding the episcopal salutation of u Peace be to all!"with the genuine or corrupted name of the bishop's concubine.
Etptv)) wolvrtrrmv £r,irrxoi,os tintv S7ri\SmvtIIujs £uvxtm< TTXtrtv Hv iwovec tvSov ;
I am ignorant whether the patriarch, who seems to have been a jealous lover, is the Cimon of a precedingepigram, whose *«o5 eorijxoc was viewed with envy and wonder by Priapus himself.
(2) Those who reverence the infallibility of synods may try to ascertain their sense. The leading bishopiwere attended bv partial or careless scribes, who dispersed their copies round the world, pur Greek MSS.ore sullied with the false and proscribed reading of ik tmv oua-tiov (Concil. torn. iii. p. 1460.) the authentictranslation of Pope Leo I. does not seem to have been executed; and the old Latin versions materially differftom the present Vulgate, which was revised (A. D. 550) by Rusticus,a Roman priest, from tbe best MSS.of'the Axoijtorroi at Constantinople, (Ducange, C. P. Christiana, lib. iv. p. 151. a famous monastery of Latins,Greeks, and Syrians. See Cuncil, torn. iv. p. 19(0—2049. and Pagi Critics, torn. ii. p. 326, &c.
(3) It is darkly represented in the microscope of Petavius (torn. v. lib. iii. c. 5.;) yet the subtle theologian is■himself afraid—ne quis foriasse supervaeaneam, et nimisauxiam putet bnjnimodi vacularum irrquisitionem,-et ab imtitmi Uieologici gravitate alienism (p. 124J







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


exercise, he appeared in person on the banks of the Euphrates, curbed the prideof the Saracens, and suppressed the dangerous though just revolt of the Mani-chacans. His indignation against a rebel who had long eluded his pursuit, pro­voked him to wish and to pray, that by the grace of God, he might drive threearrows into the head of Chrysochir. That odious head, which had been obtainedby treason rather than by valour, was suspended from a tree, and thrice exposedto the dexterity of the imperial archer: a base revenge against the dead, moreworthy of the times, than of the character of Basil. But hisprincipal merit wasin the civil administration of the finances and of the laws. To replenish an ex­hausted treasury, it was proposed to resume the lavish and ill-placed gifts of hispredecessors: his prudence abated one moiety of the restitution; and a sum of3,200,000/. was instantly procured to answer the most pressing demands, and toallow some space for the mature operations of economy. Among the variousschemes for the improvement of the revenue, a new mode was suggested of capi­tation, or tribute, which would have too much depended on the arbitrary discre­tion of the assessors. A sufficient list of honest and able agents was instantly pro­duced by the minister; but on the more careful scrutiny of Basil himself, only twocould be found, who might be safely intrusted with such dangerous powers; andthey justified his esteem by declining his confidence. But the serious and success­ful diligence of the emperor established by degrees an equitable balance of pro­perty and payment, of receipt and expenditure; a peculiar fund was appropriatedto each service; and a public method secured the interest of the prince and theproperty of the people. After reforming the luxury, he assigned two patrimonialestates to supply the decent plenty, of the imperial table: the contributions of thesubject were reserved for his defence: and the residue was employed in the em­bellishment of the capital and provinces. A taste for building, however costly,may deserve some praise and much excuse; from thence industry is fed, art is en­couraged, and some object is attained of public emolument or. pleasure; the use ofa road, an aqueduct,or a hospital, is obvious and solid; and the hundred churchesthat arose by the command of Basil, were consecrated to the devotion of the age.In the character of a judge he was assiduous and impartial; desirous to save, butnot afraid to strike: the oppressors of the people were severely chastised; but hispersonal foes, whom it might be unsafe to pardon, were condemned, after the lossof their eyes, to a life of solitude and repentance. The change of language andmanners'demanded a revision of the obsolete jurisprudence of Justinian: the vo­luminous body of his institutes, pandects, code, and novels, was digested underforty titles, in the Greek idiom; and the Basilica, which were improved and-com­pleted by his son and grandson, must be referred to the original genius of thefounder of their race. This glorious reign was terminated by at) accident in thechase. A furious stag entangled his horns in the belt of Basil, and raised himfrom his horse: he was rescued by an attendant, who cut the belt and slew the ani­mal; but the fall, or the fever, exhausted the strength of the aged monarch, andhe expired in the palace, amidst the tears of his family and people. If he struckoff the head of the faithful servant for presuming to draw his sword against hissovereign, the pride of despotism, which had lain dormant in his life, revived inthe last moments of despair, when he no longer wanted or valued the opinion ofmankind.
Of the four sons of the emperor, Constantine died before his father, whose griefand credulity were amused by a flattering impostor and a vain apparition. Ste-
Ehen, the youngest, was content with the honours of a patriarch and a saint: both,eo and Alexander were alike invested with the purple, but the powers of govern­ment were solely exercised by the elder brother. The name of Leo VI. has beendignified with the title of fihiloso/iker; and the union of the prince and the sage, ofthe active and speculative virtues, would indeed constitute the perfection of humannature. _ But the claims of Leo are far short of this ideal excellence. Did he reducehis passions and appetites under the dominion of reason ? His life was spent in thepomp of the palace, in the society of his wives and concubines; and even the cle­mency which he showed, and the peace which he strove to preserve, must be im­puted to the softness and indolence of his character. Did he subdue his prejudices,and those of his subjects? His mind was tinged with the most puerile superstition;the influence of the clergy, and the errors of the people, were consecrated by hislaws; and the oracles of Leo, which reveal, in prophetic style, the fates of the em­pire, are founded on the arts of astrology and divination. If we still inquire the rea­son of his sage appellation, it can onl v be replied* that the son of Basil was less igno­







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 415


above the eify of Peace.(l) His son Motawakkel was a jealous and cruel tyrant:odious to his subjects, he cast himself on the fidelity of the strangers, and thesestrangers, ambitious and apprehensive, were tempted by the rich promise of a re­volution. At the instigation, or at least in the cause of his son, they burst into hisapartment at the hour of supper, and the caliph was cut into seven pieces by thesame swords which he had recently distributed among the guards of his life andthrone. To this throne, yet streaming with a father's blood, Montasser was tri­umphantly led; but in a reign of six months, he found only the pangs of a guiltyconscience. If he wept at the sight of an old tapestry which represented the crimeand punishment of the sons of Chosroes; if his days were abridged by grief andremorse, we may allow some pity to a parricide, who exclaimed in the bitternessof death, that he had lost both this world and the world to come. After this actof treason, the ensigns of royalty, the garment and walking-staff of Mahomet,were given and torn away by the foreign mercenaries, who in four years created,deposed, and murdered three commanders of the faithful. As often as the Turkswere inflamed by fear, or rage, or avarice, these caliphs were dragged by the feet,exposed naked to the scorching sun, beaten with iron clubs, and compelled to pur­chase, by the abdication of their dignity, a short reprieve of inevitable fate. (2)At length, however, the fury of the tempest was spent or diverted: the Abbassidesreturned to the less turbulent residence of Bagdad; the insolence of the Turkswas curbed with a firmer and more skilful hand, and their numbers were dividedand destroyed in foreign warfare. But the nations of the east had been taughtto trample on the successors of the prophet; and the blessings of domestic peacewere obtained by the relaxation of strength and discipline. So uniform are themischiefs of military despotism, that I seem to repeat the story of theprxtorians ofHome.?3)
While the flame of enthusiasm was damped by the business, the pleasure, andthe knowledge, of the age, it burnt with concreted heat in the breasts of the cho­sen few, the congenial spirits, who were ambitious of reigning either in this worldor in the next. How carefully soever the book of prophecy had been sealed bythe apostle of Mecca, the wishes, and (if we may profane the word,) even thereason of fanaticism, might believe that, after the successive missions of Adam,Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Mahomet, the same God, in the fulness oftime, would reveal a still more perfect and permanent law. In the two hundredand seventy-seventh year of the Hegira, and in the neighbourhood of Cufa, an.Arabian preacher, of the name of Carmath, assumed the lofty and incomprehen­sible style of the guide, the director, the demonstration, the word, the Holy Ghost,the camel, the herald of the Messiah, who had conversed with him in a humanshape, and the representative of Mahommed the son of Ali, of St. John the Bap­tist, and of the angel Gabriel. In his mystic volume, the precepts of the Koran■were refined to a more spiritual sense: he relaxed the duties of ablution, fasting,and pilgrimage; allowed the indiscriminate use of wine and forbidden fruit; andnourished the fervour of his disciples by the daily repetition of fifty prayers. Theidleness and ferment of the rustic crowd awakened the attention of the magistratesof Cufa; a timid persecution assisted the progress of the new sect, and the nameof the prophet became more revered after his person had been withdrawn fromthe world. His twelve apostles dispersed themselves among the Bedoweens, "arace of men," says Abulfeda, " equally devoid of reason and religion;" and the-success of their preaching seemed to threaten Arabia with a new revolution. TheCarmathians were ripe for rebellion, since they disclaimed the title of the houseof Abbas, and abhorred the worldy pomp of the caliphs of Bagdad. They weresusceptible of discipline, since they vowed a blind and absolute submission to theimam, who was called to the prophetic office by the voice of God and the people.Instead of the legal tithes, he claimed the fifth of their substance and spoil: the mostflagitious sins were no more than the type of disobedience; and the brethren weret


(1) He changed the old names of Suroere, or Samara, into the fanciful title of Sem&lrral, that which gire»pleasure at first sight (D'Herbe)rit, Bibliotheque Orientate, p. 808, d'Anvillc, l'Euphrate et le Tigre, p. 97,98.)
(2) 'Tattea*speeimen,thedeatb of the caliph Motaz: Correptum pedibus petrahunt, et sudibtis probe per-taulcant,etspoliafum laceris vestibus in sole collocant, pne cujus, accerrimo a»tu pedes alternis attolebat etdemittebat. Adltantiurn aliquis misero colaphos continuo ingerabat, quos ille objectis manibus arertere stu-
detmt Quo facto traditus tortori fuit totoque ti-iduo cibo potuqueprohibitus .... Suflbcatus, 8tc.
( Abulfeda, p. 206.) of the caliph Mohtadi, he says, cervices ipsi perpertris scubas contundebant, testrculasquupedibus ooiKutlcabant (p. 208.)
(31 See under the feigns of lUotassepi, MotawaURel, MosMmEr. Moqpin, Slottx. Mflhfarli and MoMmedi indie Biblftmrqne of dllerbelSt, end die nowfanrUiav Annals of Eltnaon, A&ulphitagius, and AT>ulfe.d».







OCR Output








4U THE DECLINE AND FALL


Persians, wno had obtained service and settlement in the Byzantine empire. TheGreeks were repulsed and vanquished, but it was by the arrows of the Turkishcavalry; and had not their bow-strings been damped and relaxed by the evening?rain, very few of the Christians could have escaped with the emperor from thefield of battle. They breathed at Dorylieum, at the distance of three days; andTheophilus, reviewing his trembling squadrons, forgave the common flight bothof the prince and people. After this discovery of his weakness, he vainly hopedto deprecate the fame of Amorium: the inexorable caliph rejected with contempthis prayers and promises; and detained the Roman ambassadors to be the witnessesx>f his great revenge. They had nearly been the witnesses of his shame. The vi­gorous assaults of fifty-five days were encountered by a faithful governor, a veterangarrison, and a desperate people; and the Saracens must have raised the siege ifa domestic traitor had not pointed to the weakest part of the wall, a place which■was decorated with the statues of a lion and a bull. The vow of Motassemwas accomplished with unrelenting rigour: tired, rather than satiated, with de­struction, he returned to his new palace of Samara, in the neighbourhood of Bag­dad, while the unfortunate^!) Theophilus implored the tardy and doubtful aid ofhis western rival, the emperor of the Franks. Yet in the seige of Amorium above■seventy thousand Moslems had perished: their loss had been revenged by the, slaughter of thirty thousand Christians, and the sufferings of an equal number ofcaptives, who were treated as the most atrocious criminals. Mutual necessity couldsometimes extort the exchange or ransom of prisoners;(2) but in the national andreligious conflict of the two empires, peace was without confidence, and war, with­out mercy. Quarter was seldom given in the field; those who escaped the edgeof the sword, were condemned to hopeless servitude, or exquisite torture;' and acatholic emperor relates, with visible satisfaction, the execution of the Saracens ofCrete, who were flayed alive, or were plunged into caldrons of boiling oil. (3) Toa point of honour Motassem had sacrificed a flourishing city, two hundred thousandlives, and the property of millions. The same caliph descended from his horse,and dirtied his robe to relieve the distress of a decrepit old man, who, with hisladen ass, had tumbled into a ditch. On which of these actions did he reflect withthe most pleasure, when he was summoned by the angel of death?(4)
With Motassem, the eighth of the Abbassides, the glory of his family and na­tion expired. When the Arabian conquerors had spread themselves over the east,and were mingled with the servile crowds of Persia, Syria, and Egypt, they in­sensibly lost the freeborn and martial virtues of the desert. The courage of thesouth is the artificial fruit of discipline and prejudice; the active power of enthu-•siasm had decayed, and the mercenary forces of the caliph were recruited in thoseclimates of the north, of which valour is the hardy and spontaneous production.Of the Turks,(S) who dwelt beyond the Oxus and Jaxartes, the robust youths,either taken in war, or purchased in trade, were educated in the exercises of thefield, and the profession of the Mahometan faith. The Turkish guards stood inarms round the throne of their benefactor, and their chiefs usurped the dominionof the palace and the provinces. Motassem, the first author of this dangerous ex­ample, introduced into the capital above fifty thousand Tui'ks; their licentious con­duct provoked the public indignation, and the quarrels of the soldiers and peopleinduced the caliph to retire from Bagdad, and establish his own residence and thecamp of his barbarian favourites at Samara on the Tigris, about twelve leagues
(1) In theeast lie km styled Autozh (Continuator Theophan. lib. iii. p. 84.0 but such was the ignorant*of the west, that Ms ambassadors, in public discourse, might boldly narrate, de vicloriis, quas ad versus ezteraf"bcllando gentes crelitus fuerat assecutus (Annalist. Bertinian. apud Fagi, torn. iii. p. 720.)
(2) Abulpharagius (Dynast, p. 167,168.) relates one of these singular transactions on the bridge of the riser£amnsin Cilicia,the limit of the two empires, and one day's journey westward of Tarsus (D'Anville, Geogva-phie Ancienne, torn. ii. p. 91.) Four thousand four hundred and sixty Moslems, eight hundred women aaAchildren, one hundred confederates, were exchanged for an equal number of Greeks. They passed each otherin the middle of the bridge, and when they reached their respective friends, they shouted Allar Aciar.mi&Corie Eleisen. Many of the prisoners of Amorium were probably among them, but in the same year (A. H-231.) the most illnstrious of them, the forty-two martyrs, were beheaded by the caliph's order.
.(3) Constantin. Porphyrogenitus, in Vit. Basil, c. 61. p. 186. These Saracens were indeed treated with pecu­liar severity as pirates and renegadoes.
(4) For Theophilus, Motassem. and the Amorian war, see the Continuator of Theophanes (lib. iii.p. T7—MjG«iesins (lib. ni. p. 24—34.,) Cedrenus (528—532.,) Elmacin (Hist. Saracen, p. 180.,) Aimlpharagius (Dynast, n.165,166.0 Abulfeda (Annal. Moslem, p. 191.,) d'Herbelot (Bibliot. Orientate, p. 639,610.)
(5) M- de Guignes, who sometimes leaps, and sometimes stumbles, in the gulf between Chinese and Maho­metan ntirr, thinks he can see that these Turks are the Hocifkt alias the J&Mc4e,or high wag&m; that theyv,?.t "{""SPintD nn**£ hordesvfrqm China and Sibrj&to the domitfltms of the califlhs anfl gamaifidea, &c.<Iijst,deaHWiWni. IrT. pj ^3jfc 123—J-Tj?) •







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 16i


In comparing the proportion of the victorious and the vanquished people, thechange of language, will afford the most probable inference. According to thisstandard it will appear, that the Lombards of Italy, and the Visigoths of Spain,were less numerous than the Franks or Burgundians; and the conquerors of Gaulmust yield, in their turn, to the multitude of Saxons, and Angles who almost era­dicated the idioms of Britain. The modem Italian has been insensibly formed bythe mixture of nations; the awkwardness of the barbarians in the nice manage­ment of declensions and conjugations, reduced them to the use of articles andauxiliary verbs; and many new ideas have been expressed by Teutonic appella­tions. Yet the principal stock of technical and familiar words is found to be ofLatin derivational) and if we were sufficiently conversant with the obsolete, therustic, and the municipal dialects of ancient Italy, we should trace the origin ofmany terms which might, perhaps, be rejected by the classic purity of Rome.A numerous army constitutes but a small nation, and the powers of the Lombardswere soon diminished by the retreat of twenty thousand Saxons, who scorned adependant situation, and returned, after many bold and perilous adventures, totheir native country.(2) The camp of Alboin was of formidable extent, but theextent of a camp would be easily circumscribed within the limits of a city; andits martial inhabitants must be thinly scattered over the face of a large country.When Alboin descended from the Alps, he invested his nephew, the first duke ofFriuli, with the command of the province and the people; but the prudent Gisulfwould have declined the dangerous office, unless he had been permitted to choose,among the nobles of the Lombards, a sufficient number of families(3) to form aperpetual colony of soldiers and subjects. In the progress of conquest, the sameoption could not be granted to the dukes of Brescia and Bergamo, of Pavia or Tu­rin, of Spoleto or Beneventum; but each of these, and each of their colleagues,settled in his appointed district with a band of followers, who resorted to hisstandard in war, and his tribunal in peace. Their attachment was free and ho­nourable: resigning the gifts and benefits which they had accepted, they mightemigrate with their families in the jurisdiction of another duke; but their absencefrom the kingdom was punished with death, as a crime of military desertion. (4)The posterity of the first conquerors struck a deeper root in the soil, which, byevery motive of interest and honour, they were bound to defend. A Lombardwas born the soldier of his king and his duke; and the civil assemblies of the na­tion displayed the banners, and assumed the appellation, of a regular army. Ofthis army, the pay and the rewards were drawn from the conquered provinces;and the distribution, which was not effected till after the death of Alboin, is dis­graced by the foul marks of injustice and rapine. Many of the most wealthyItalians were slain or banished; the remainder were divided among the strangers,and a tributary obligation was imposed (under the name of hospitality,) of payingto the Lombards a third part of the fruits of the earth. Within less than seventyvears, this artificial system was abolished by a more simple and solid tenure. (5)Either the Roman landlord was expelled by his strong and insolent guest; or theannual payment, a third of the produce, was exchanged by a more equitabletransaction for an adequate proportion of landed property. Under these foreignmasters, the business of agriculture, in the cultivation of corn, vines, and olives,was exercised with degenerate skill and industry, by the labour of the slaves andnatives. But the occupations of a pastoral life were more pleasing to the idlenessof the barbarians. In the rich meadows of Venetia, they restored and improvedthe breed of horses for which that province had once been illustrious;(6) and the


Title, torn. i. p. 374—387.) has followed the Warned Camillo Pelegrini in the geography or the kingdom ofNaples. After the loss of the tmc Calabria, the rarity of the Greeks substituted that name instend of themore ignoble appellation of Bruttium; and the change appears to have take place before the time of Charle­magne, (Eginard, p. 75.)
(1) Maffli (Verona Illustrate, part i. p. 310—321.,) and Mtiratori, (Antiehita Italiane, torn. ii. Dissertazione,32,33. p. 71—365.) have asserted the native claims of the Italian idiom: the former with enthusiasm, the lattetwith discretion: both with learning, ingenuity, and truth.
(2) Paul.de Gest. Langobard, lib. iii. c. 5—7.
(3) Paul, lib. ii. c. 9. He calls these families or generations by the Teutonic name of Faras, which is like­wise used in the Lombard laws. The humble deacon was not insensible of the nobility of hit own race. Seelib. iv. c. 39.
(4) Compare No. 3 and 177 of the laws of Rotharis.
(5) Paul, lib. ii. c. 31,32. lib. iii. c. 16. The laws of Rotharis, promulgated A. D. 643. do not contain thesmallest vestige of this payment of thirds; but they preserve many curious circumstances of the state of Italyand the manners of the Lombards.
(6) The studs of Dionysius of Syracuse, and his frequent victories in the Olympic games, had diffusedamong the Greets the fame of the Venetian horses; but the breed was extinct in the time of Strabo flib. r. p­







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


and Aden the camels of the Koreishites were laden with a precious cargo of aro-matics; a supply of corn and manufactures was purchased in the fairs of Bostraand Damascus; the lucrative exchange diffused plenty and riches in the streets ofMecca; and the noblest of her sons united the love of arms with the profession ofmerchandise.(l)
The perpetual independence of the Arabs has been the theme of praise amongstrangers and natives; and the arts of controversy transform this singular eventinto a prophecy and a miracle, in favour of the posterity of Ismael.(2) Some ex­ceptions that can neither be dissembled nor eluded, render this mode of reasoningas indiscreet as it is superfluous: the kingdom of Yemen has been successively sub­dued by the Abyssinians, the Persians, the sultans of Egypt,(3) and the Turks:(4)the holy cities of Mecca and Medina have repeatedly bowed under a Scythian ty­rant; and the Roman province of Arabia(5) embraced the peculiar wilderness inwhich Ismael and his sons must have pitched their tents in the face of their bre­thren. Yet these exceptions are temporary or local; the body of the nation hasescaped the yoke of the most powerful monarchies; the arms of Sesostris and Cy­rus,, of Pompey and Trajan, could never achieve the conquest of Arabia; the pre­sent sovereign of the Turks(6) may exercise a shadow of jurisdiction, but hispride is reduced to solicit the friendship of a people, whom it is dangerous to pro­voke, and fruitless to attack. The obvious causes of their freedom are inscribed onthe character and country of the Arabs. Many ages before Mahomet(7) their in­trepid valour had been severely felt by their neighbours in offensive and defensivewar. The patient and active virtues of a soldier are insensibly nursed in the ha­bits and discipline of a pastoral life. The care of the sheep and camels is aban­doned to the women of the tribe; but the martial youth under the banner of theemir, is ever on horseback, and in the field, to practise the exercise of the bow,the javelin, and the scimitar. The long memory of their independence is thefirmest pledge of its perpetuity, and succeeding generations are animated to provetheir descent, and to maintain their inheritance. Their domestic feuds are sus­pended on the approach of a common enemy; and in their last hostilities againstthe Turks, the caravan of Mecca was attacked and pillaged by fourscore thousandof the confederates. When they advance to battle, the hope of victory is in thefront; in the rear the assurance of a retreat. Their horses and camels, who ineight or ten days can perform a march of four, or five hundred miles, disappearbefore the conqueror; the secret waters of the desert elude his search; and hisvictorious troops are consumed with thirst, hunger, and fatigue, in the pursuit ofan invisible foe, who scorns his efforts, and safely reposes in the heart of the burn­ing solitude. The arms and deserts of the Bedoweens are not only the safe-guardsof their own freedom, but the barriers also of the happy Arabia: whose inhabi­tants, remote from war, are enervated by the luxury of the soil and climate. Thelegions of Augustus melted away in disease and. lassitude ;(8) and it is only by anaval power that the reduction of Yemen has been successfully attempted* When
(1) Mirnm dictu ex innutneris populis pars seqtta in commerciii aut in latrociniis dcget. fPlin. Hist. Nat. 6".32.) See Sale's Koran, Sural, 106. p. 503. Poeock, Specimen, p. 2. d'Herbelot. Bibliot. Orient, p. 361. Pri-deaux's Life of Mahomet, p. 5. Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet, torn. i. p. 72. 120. 126, ore.
(2) A nameless doctor (Universal Hist. vol. 20. octavo edition) has formally demonstrated ihe truth ofChristianity by the independence of the Arabs. A critic, besides the exceptions of fact, might dispute themeaning or the text, (Genes, xvi. 12.) the extent of the application, and the foundation of the pedigree.
(3) It was subdued, A. D. 1173. by a brother of the great Saladin, who founded a dynasty of Curds or Ayou-bites (Guignes, Hist, des Huns, torn. i. p. 425. D'Herbelot, p. 477.)
(4) By the lieutenant of Soliman, (A. D. 1538.) and Selim II. (1568.) See Cantemir's Hist, of the OthmanEmpire, p. 201.221. The pasha, who resided at Saana, commanded twenty-one beys, hut no revenue was everremitted to the porte. (Marsigli, Stato-Militare dell Imperio Ottomanno, p. 124.) and the Turks were ex­pelled about the year 1630. (Nietmhr, p. 167, 168.)
(5) Of the Roman province, under the name of Arabia and the third Palestine, the principal cities wereBostra and Petra, which dated their era from the year 105, when they were subdued by Palma, a lieutenant ofTrajan. (Dion. Cassius, lib. Ixviii.) Petra was the capital of the Nabathsenm, whose name is derived fromthe eldest of the sons of Ismael. (Genes, xxv. 12, See. with the Commentaries of Jerome, Ix. Clere, and Cal-met.) Justinian relinquished a palm country of ten days'journey to the south of ^K'ah. (Pi-ocop. de Bell. Per-aic. lib. i. c. 19.) and the Romans maintained a centurian and a custom-house (Arrian in ?eriolo Marts Ery-thrxi. p. 11. in Hudson, torn, i.) at a place (hf-x* xw/utt Pagus A thus Hawara) in the territory of Medina. (D'An-ville Memoiresurl'Egypte, p. 243.) These real possessions, and some naval inroads of Trajan, (Peripl. p. 14,15.) are magnified by history and medals into the Roman conquest of Arabia.
(0) Niebuhr (Description de I'Arabia, p. 302,303,329—331.) affords the most recent and authentic intelligenceof the Turkish empire in Arabia.
(7) Diodorus Siculus, tom.ii. lib. xix. p. 390—393. edit. Wesseling) has clearly exposed the freedom of theNabathsean Arabs, who resisted the arms of Antigonus and his son.
(8) Strabo, lib. xvi. p. 1127—1129. Plin. Hist. Natur. 6.32. Alius Galltts landed near Medina, and marchednear a thousand miles into the nart of Yemen between Mareb and the ocean. The non ante devictis Sabeseregibus, (Od. i. p. 29.) and the intacti Arftuiim thesauri, (Od, iii. 24.) of Horace, attest the virgin purity of*1 rebia.







OCR Output








226 THE BECUNE AND FALL


Christianity was successfully preached to the Bactrians, the Huns, the Persians, theIndians, the Persarmenians", the Medes, and the Elamites: the barbaric churches,from the gulf of Persia to the Caspian sea, were almost infinite; and their recentfaith was conspicuous in the number and sanctity of their monks and martyrs.The pepper coast of Malabar, and the isles of the ocean, Socotora and Ceylon,were peopled with an increasing multitude, of Christians, and the bishops andclergy of those sequestered regions derived their ordination from the catholic ofBabylon. In a subsequent age, the zeal of the Nestorians overleaped the limits,which had confined the ambition and curiosity both of the Greeks and Persians.The missionaries of Balch and Samarcand pursued without fear the footsteps ofthe roving Tartar, and insinuated themselves into the camps of the valleys of Imaus,and the banks of the Selinga. They exposed a metaphysical creed to those illite­rate shepherds: to those sanguinary warriors they recommended humanity and re­pose. Yet a Khan, whose power they vainly magnified, is said to have receivedat their hands the rites of baptism, and even of ordination; and the fame of fires'tor or firesbyter John(l) has long amused the credulity of Europe. The royalconvert was indulged in the use of a portable altar; but he despatched an embassyto the patriarch, to inquire how, in the season of lent, he should abstain from ani­mal food, and how he might celebrate the Eucharist in a desert that produced nei­ther corn nor wine. In their progress by sea and land, the Nestorians entered China,by the port of Canton and the northern residence of Sigan. Unlike the senatorsof Rome, who assumed with a smile the characters of priests and augurs, the man­darins, who affect in public the reason of philosophers, are devoted in private toevery mode of popular superstition. They cherished and they confounded thegods of Palestine, and of India; but the propagation of Christianity awakened thejealousy of the state, and, after a short vicissitude of favour and persecution, theforeign sect expired in ignorance and oblivion. (2) Under the reign of the caliphs,the Nestorian church was diffused from China to Jerusalem and Cyprus; and theirnumbers, with those of the Jacobites, were computed to surpass the Greek andLatin communions. (3) Twenty-five metropolitans or archbishops, composed theirhierarchy; but several of these were dispensed, by the distance and danger of theway, from the duty of personal attendance, on the easy condition that every sixyears they should testify their faith and obedience to the catholic or patriarch ofBabylon, a vague appellation, which has been successively applied to the royalseats of Seleucia, Ctesiphon, and Bagdad. These remote branches are long sincewithered, and the old patriarchal trunk(4) is now divided by the Elijahs of Mosul,the representatives, almost in lineal descent, of the genuine and primitive succes­sion, the Josejihs of Amida, who are reconciled to the church of Rome,(5) and theSimeons of Van or Ormia, whose revolt at the head of forty thousand families, waspromoted in the sixteenth century by the sophists of Persia, The number of threehundred thousand is allowed for the whole body of the Nestorians, who under the
p. 9,10. edit. Hoeschel.,) Thevenot (in the fint part of his Relation ties Voyages, &c.,) and Fabricins (Bibliot.Grcec. lib. iii. c. 25. torn. ii. p. 603—617.) hai been published by father Montfaucon at Paris, 1707, in the NovaColtectio Patrum (torn. ii. p. 113—346.) It u as the design of the author to confute the impious heresy of thosewho maintain that the earth is a globe, and not a flat oblong table, as it is represented in the Scriptures (lib. ii.p. 138.) But the nonsense of the monk is mingled with the practical knowledge of the traveller, wboperformed his voyage. A. D. 513, and published his book at Alexandria, A. D. 347, (lib. ii. p. 140,141. Mont­faucon, Praefar. o. ii.) The Nestorianism of Cosmas, unknown to his learned editor, was detected by LaCroze (Christianisme des Indes, torn. i. p. 40—55.0 and is continued by Assenianni (Bibliot. Orient, torn. iv. p.605,606.)
0) In its long progress to Mosul, Jerusalem, Rome, 8rc. the story of Prester John evaporated in a monstrousfable, of which some features have been borrowed from the Lama of Thibet, (Hist. Genealogiqne des Tartars,p. 2. p. 42. Hist, de Gengiscan. p. 31, &c.) and were ignorantly transferred by the Portuguese to the emperorof Abyssinia. (Ludnlph. Hist. AStbiop. Comment, lib. ii. c. 1.) Yet it is probable that, in the eleventh andtwelfth centuries, Nestorian Christianity was professed by the horde of Koraites. (D'Herbelot, p. 256. 915.959.Assemanni,tum. iv. p. 468—504.)
(2) The Christianity of China, between the seventh and the thirteenth century, is invincibly proved by theconsent of Chinese. Arabian, Syriac, and Latin evidence. (Assemanni. Biblioth. Orient, torn. iv. p. 502—552.Mem. de I'Academie des Inscript. torn. «x. p. 802—819.) The. inscription of Sigansu. which describes thefortunes of the Nestorian church, from the first mission, A. D. 636. to the current year 781, is accused of for-jjery by La Croze, Voltaire, &c. who become the dupes of their own cunning, while they are afraid of a Jesuiti­cal fraud.
(3) Jacobitse et Nestorians plures quam Gneci et Latini. Jacob a Vitriaco, Hist. Hierosol. lib. ii. c. 76. p.1093. in the Gesta Dei per Francos. The numbers are given by Thotuassin, Discipline lie I'Eglise, torn. i.p. 172.
(4) The division of the patriarchate may be traced in the BibliotHeca Orient, of Assemanni, torn. i. p. 523—549. totn.ii. p. 457, ton), iii. p. 603. p. 621—623. torn. iv. p. 164—169. p. 423. p. 622—629, &c.
(5) The pompous language of Rome, on the submission of a Nestorian patriarch, is elegantly represented inthe seventh book of Fra-Paolo, Babylon, Nineveh, Atbela, and the trophies of Alexander, Tauris. and Ecba-«sna, the Tignt and Indus. 1







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. ill


heads. (1) In a manly oration, not unworthy of a Roman censor, the eunuch re­proved these disorderly vices, which sullied their fame, and endangered theirsafety. The soldiers blushed and obeyed: discipline was confirmed, the fortifica­tions were restored; a duke was stationed for the defence and military commandof each of the principal cities;(2) and the eye of Narses pervaded the ample pros­pect from Calabria to the Alps. The remains of the Gothic nation evacuated thecountry, or mingled with the people: the Franks, instead of revenging the deathof Buccelin, abandoned, without a struggle, their Italian conquests: and the re­bellious Sindbal, chief of the Heruli, was subdued, taken, and hung on a lofty gal­lows by the inflexible justice of the exarch. (3) The civil state of Italy, after theagitation of a long tempest, was fixed by a pragmatic faction, which the empe­ror promulgated at the request of the pope. Justinian introduced his own Juris­prudence into the schools and tribunals of the west: he ratified the acts of Theo-doric and his immediate successors, but every deed was rescinded and abolished,which force had extorted, or fear had subscribed, under the usurpation of Totila.A moderate theory was framed to reconcile the rights of property with the safetyof prescription, the claims of the state with the poverty of the people, and thepardon of offences with the interest of virtue and order of society. Under the ex­archs of Ravenna, Rome was degraded to the second rank. Yet the senatorswere gratified by the permission of visiting their estates in Italy, and of approach­ing without obstacle the throne of Constantinople; the regulation of weights andmeasures was delegated to the pope and senate; and the salaries of lawyers andphysicians, of orators and grammarians, were destined to preserve or rekindle thelight of science in the ancient capital. Justinian might dictate benevolent edicts,(4)and Narses might second his wishes by the restoration of cities, and more especial­ly of churches. But the power of kings is most effectual to destroy: and the twen­ty years of the Gothic war had consummated the distress and depopulation of Ita­ly. As early as the fourth campaign, under the discipline of Belisarius himself,fifty thousand labourers died of hunger(5) in the narrow region of Picenum;(6)and a strict interpretation of the evidence of Procopius would swell the loss of Ita­ly above the total sum of her present inhabitants. (7)
I desire to believe, but I dare not affirm, that Belisarius sincerely rejoiced in thetriumph of Narses. Yet the consciousness of his own exploits might teach him toesteem without jealousy the merit of a rival; and the repose of the aged warriorwas crowned by a last victory which saved the emperor and the capital. Thebarbarians who annually visited the provinces of Europe were less discouraged bysome accidental defeats, than they were excited by the double hope of spoil andof subsidy. In the thirty-second winter of Justinian s reign, the Danube was deep­ly frozen: Zabergan led the cavalry of the Bulgarians, and his standard was fol­lowed by a promiscuous multitude of Sclavonians. The savage chief passed with­out opposition the river and the mountains, spread his troops over Macedonia andThrace, and advanced with no more than seven thousand horse to the long wallswhich should have defended the territory of Constantinople. But the works ofman are impotent against the assaults of nature: a recent earthquake had shakenthe foundations of the wall; and the forces of the empire were employed on thedistant frontiers of Italy, Africa, and Persia. The seven schoola($) or companies
(1) E\itito ystp c.;j*i, cutsis ujts u&iXrrftx; Tat; atr.TiSat; -ny^v kxi r» xp*vn ay*C9fliw; otvov xati 5atp3«T3v etrcjoffjat,(Agathias, lib. ii. p. 48. In the first scene of Richard III. our Enicliih poet hat beautifully enlarged on thiiidea, for which, however, he was not Indebted to the Bvzantinc historian.
(2) Maffei hai proved (Verona Illastrata, p. 1. lib. x.'p. 257—380.,) against the common opinion, that thedukes of Italy were instituted before the conquest of the Lombards by Narses himself. In the PragmaticSanction (No. 23.) Justinian restrains the judices militares.
(3) See Pantus Diaconus, lib. iii. c. 2. p. 776. Menander (in Excerpt. Legat. p. 133.) mentions some risings inItaly by the Franks, and Theophanes (p. 201.) hints at some Gothic rebellions.
(4) The Pragmatic Sanction of Justinian, which restores and regulates the civil state of Italy, consist* oftwenty-seven articles: it is dated August 15, A. D. 554; is addressed to Narses, V. J. Propositus Sacri Cubiculi,and to Antiochus) Praefectus Pnetono Italia:; and has been preserved by Julian Antecessor, and in the Cor­pus Juris Civilii, after the novels and edicts of Justinian, Justin, and Tiberius,
(5) A still greater number was consumed by famine in the southern provinces, without («to;) the Io­nian gulf. Acorns were used in the place of bread. Procopius had seen a deserted orphan suckled by ashe-goat. Seventeen passengers were lodged, murdered, and eaten by two women, who were detected andslain by the eighteenth, &e.
(6) Quinta regio Piceni est; quondam oberrimsB multitudinis, ccclx. millia Picentium in fldem P. R.venere (Plin. Hist. Natur. iii. 18.) In the time of Vespasian, this ancient population was already dimipnislied.
(7) Perhaps fifteen or sixteen millions. Procopius (Anecdot. c. 18.) computes that Africa lost five mil­lions, that Italy was thrice as extensive, and that the depopulation was in a larger proportion, fiut biareckoning is inflamed by passion, and clouded with uncertainty.
(I) In the decay of these military schools, the satire of Procopius (Anecdot. c. xiv. Aleman. p. 102,103.) is.confirmed and illustrated by Agathtas (lib. t. p. 159.) who cannot be rejected as a hostile witness,







OCR Output








14 THE DECLIKE AND FALL


for the sole purpose of giving a date to the year, and a festival to the people. Butthe expenses of this festival, in which the wealthy and the vain aspired to surpasstheir 'predecessors, insensibly arose to the enormous sum of 80,000/.; the wisestsenators declined a useless honour, which involved the certain ruin of their fami­lies; and to this reluctance I should impute the frequent chasms in the last age ofthe consular Fasti. The predecessors of Justinian had assisted from the publictreasures the dignity of the less opulent candidates; the avarice of that prince pre-*ferred the cheaper and more convenient method of advice and regulation.(l) Se­ven processions or spectacles were the number to which his edict confined the horseand chariot-races, the athletic sports, the music, and pantomimes of the theatre,and the hunting of wild beasts; and small pieces of silver were discreetly substi­tuted to the gold medals, which had always excited tumult and drunkenness, whenthey were scattered with a profuse hand among the populace. Notwithstandingthese precautions and his own example, the succession of consuls finally ceased inthe thirteenth year of Justinian, whose despotic temper might be gratified by thesilent extinction of a title which admonished the Romans of their ancient free­dom.^) Yet the annual consulship still lived in the minds of the people: theyfondly expected its speedy restoration; they applauded the gracious condescensionof successive princes, by whom it was assumed in the first year of their reign; andthree centuries elapsed, after the death of Justinian, before that obsolete dignity,which had been suppressed by custom, could be abolished by law. (3) The imper­fect mode of distinguishing each year by the name of a magistrate, was usuallysupplied by the date of a permanent era: the creation of the world, according tothe Septuagint version, was adopted by the Greeks;(4) and the Latins, since theage of Charlemagne, have computed their time from the birth of Christ. (5)
»
CHAPTER XLI.


Conquest of Justinian in the West.—Character and first Campaigns of Belisarius.—Heinvades and subdues the Vandal Kingdom of Africa.—His Triumph.—The GothicWar.—He recovers Sicily, Naples, and Rome.—Siege of Rome by the Goths.—TheirRetreat and Losses.—Surrender of Ravenna.—Glory of Belisarius—His domesticShame and Misfortunes,
When Justinian ascended the throne, about fifty years after the fall of thewestern empire, the kingdoms of the Goths and Vandals had obtained a solid,and, as it might seem, a legal establishment, both in Europe and Africa. The ti­tles which Roman victory had inscribed, were erased with equal justice by thesword of the barbarians; and their successful rapine derived a more venerablesanction from time, from treaties, and from the oaths of fidelity, already repeatedby a second or third generation of obedient subjects. Experience and Christiani­ty had refuted the superstitious hope, that Rome was founded by the gods to reignfor ever over the nations of the earth. But the proud claim of perpetual and in­defeasible dominion which her soldiers could no longer maintain, was firmly as­serted by her statesmen and lawyers, whose opinions have been sometimes re-
(1) See the regulations of Justinian (Novell. 105.,) dated at Constantinople, July 5, and addressed to Strite'gins, treasurer of the empire.
(2) Procopius, iu Anecdot. c. 46. Aleman. p. 106. In the eighteenth year after the consulship of Besilius,according to the reckoning of Marcellinus, victor. Marius, &c, the secret history was composed, and, in theeyes of Procopius, the consulship was finally abolished.
(3) By I>eo the philosopher. (Novell. 94. A. D. 886—911.) See Pagi Dissertat. Hypatiea, p. 325—362.) andDucange. (Gloss. Grsec. p. 1635, 1636.) Even the title was vilified; consulates codicilli . . . vilescunt, saysthe emperor himself. ;
(4) According to Julius African us, &c. the world was create*] the first of September, five thousand fivehundred and eight years, three months, and twenty-fivc-days, before the birth of Christ; (see Pezron, Anti-qnite des Terns defendue, p. 20—28.) and this era has been used by the Greeks, the Oriental Christians, andeven by the Russians, till the reign of P*?ter I. The period, however arbitrary, is clear and convenient. Ofthe seven thousand two hundred and ninety-six years, which are supposed to elapse since the creation, weshall find three thousand of ignorance and darkness; two thousand either fabulous or doubtful; one thousandof ancient history, commencing with the Persian empire, and the Republics of Rome and Athens; one thou­sand from the fall of the Roman empire in the west, to the discovery of America; and the remaining two hun­dred and ninety-six will almost complete three centuries of the modern state of Europe and mankind. I re­gret this chronology, so far preferable to our double and perplexed method of counting backward and forwardthe years before and after the Christian era.
(5) The era of the world has prevailed in the east since the sixth general council. (A. D. 681.) In the westthe Christian era was first invented in the sixth century: it was propagated in the eighth by the authorityand writings of venerable Rede: but it was not till the tenth, that the use became legal and popular. SeeFArt de verifier les Dates, Dissert. Pretiminaire, p. hi. 13. Dictionnaire Diplomatique, torn, i. p. 329—337, theworks of a laborious society of Benedictine monks.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 299


to-revive the institutions of the Roman monarchy. But his successors only oncein their lives appeared on the banks of the Tiber, to receive their crown in theVatican^) Their absence was contemptible, their presence odious and formi­dable. They descended from the Alps, at the head of their barbarians, who werestrangers and enemies to the country; and their transient visit was a scene of tu­mult and bloodshed. (2) A faint remembrance of their ancestors still tormentedthe Romans; and they beheld with pious indignation the succession of Saxons,Franks, Svvabians, and Bohemians, who usurped the purple and prerogatives ofthe Caesars.
There is nothing perhaps more adverse to nature and reason, than to hold inobedience remote countries and foreign nations, in opposition to their inclinationand interest. A torrent of barbarians may pass over the earth, but an extensiveempire must be supported by a refined system of policy and oppression; in thecentre, an absolute power, prompt in action, and rich in resources; a swift andeasy communication with the extreme parts: fortifications to check the first effortof rebellion: a regular administration to protect and punish; and a well-disciplinedarmy to inspire fear, without provoking discontent and despair. Far different wasthe situation of the. German Cscsars, who were ambitious to enslave the kingdomof Italy. Their patrimonial estates were stretched along the Rhine, or scatteredin the provinces; but this ample domain was alienated by the imprudence or dis­tress of successive princes; and their revenue from minute and vexatious preroga­tive, was scarcely sufficient for the maintenance of their household. Their troopswere formed by the legal or voluntary service of their feudal vassals, who passed theAlps with reluctance, assumed the license of rapine and disorder, and capriciouslydeserted before the end of the campaign. Whole armies were swept away by thepestilential influence of the climate: the survivors brought back the bones of theirprinces and nobles,(3) and the effects of their own intemperance were often im­puted to the treachery and malice of the Italians, who rejoiced at least in the cala­mities of the barbarians. This irregular tyranny might contend on equal termswith the petty tyrants of Italy; nor can the people, or the reader, be much inte­rested in the event of the quarrel. But in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, theLombards rekindled the flame of industry and freedom; and the generous examplewas at length imitated by the republics of Tuscany. In the Italian cities a mu­nicipal government had never beeu totally abolished; and their first privileges weregranted by the favour and policy of the emperors, who were desirous of erecting aplebeian barrier against the independence of the nobles. But their rapid progress,the daily extension of their power and pretensions, were fou' ded on the numbersand spirit of these rising communities. (4) Each city filled the measure of herdiocess or district: the jurisdiction of the counts and bishops, of the marquises andcounts, was banished from the land; and the proudest nobles were persuaded orcompelled to desert their solitary castles, and to embrace the more honourablecharacter of freemen and magistrates. The legislative authority was inherent inthe general assembly; but the executive powers were intrusted to three consuls,annually chosen from the three orders of cafitains, valvassors,{_5) and common's,into which the republic was divided. Under the protection of equal law, the la­bours of commerce and agriculture were gradually revived; but the martial spiritof the Lombards was nourished by the presence of danger; and as often as the bellwas rung, or the standard (6) erected, the gates of the city poured forth a nu­merous and intrepid band, whose zeal in their own cause was soon guided by theuse and discipline of arms. At the foot of these popular ramparts, the pride of the


(1) The coronation of the emperor, and tome original ceremonies of the tenth century, arc preserved in-thePauegyric oo Bereugarius, (Script. Ital. torn. ii. part 1. 405—414.) illustrated by the notes of Hadrian, Vale-■iui. and Leibnitz. Sigonitls has related the whole process of the Roman expedition in good Latin, but with,sons' errors of time and fact. (lib. vi. p. 441—446.)
(2) In a quarrel at tlie coronation of Conrad II. Muratori takes leave to observe—dovcano ben essere alforaindiscipiiiuti.Barbario, txutinli i Tedeschi. Annal. torn. viii. p. 368.
(3) After boiling away the flesh. The caldrons for that purpose were a necessary piece of travelling furni­ture; and a German who was using it for his brother, promised it to a friend, after it should have been em­ployed for himself (Schmidt, torn. iii. p. 423, 424.) The same author observes that the whole Saxon line wasextinguished in Italy, (torn. i. p. 440.)
(4) Otho, bishop of Frinsiniren, has left an important passage on the Italian cities; (lib. ii. c. 13. in Script.Ital. torn. vi. p. 707—710.) and the rise, progress and government of these republics, are perfectly illustratedby Muratori. (Antiquitat. Ital. Medii .Svi, torn. iv. dissert. 4J—52. p. 1—675. Anna!, torn. 8—10.)
(J) For these titles, -ee Selden, (Titles of Honour, vol. iii. part 1. p. 488.) Ducange, (Gloss. Latin, torn. ii.p. 140. torn. vi. p. 776.) and St. Marc. (Abrege Chronologique, torn. ii. p. 719.)
A6) The Lombards invented and used the curortum, a standard planted una car or wagon, drawn byateam of oxftn. Ducange, torn. ii. p. 194,195. Muratori, Amiqultat. torn. ii. <tis. 36. p. 480—493.)







OCR Output








158 THE DECLINE AND FALL


collected the merits, or dreaded the resentment, of their victorious general. Bjrthe mediation of the pope, who undertook a special pilgrimage to Naples, theirrepentance was accepted; and Narses assuming a milder aspect and a more duti­ful language, consented to fix his residence in the capitol. His death,(l) thoughin the extreme period of old age, was unseasonable and premature, since his ge­nius alone could have repaired the last and fatal error of his life. The reality, orthe suspicion, of a conspiracy disarmed and disunited the Italians. The soldiersresented the disgrace, and bewailed the loss, of their general. They were igno­rant of their new exarch, and Longinus was himself ignorant of the state of thearmy and the province. In the preceding years Italy had been desolated by pes­tilence and famine; and disaffected people ascribed the calamities of nature to theguilt or folly of their rulers. (2)
Whatever might be the grounds of his security, Alboin neither-expected norencountered a Roman army in the field. He ascended the Julian Alps, andlooked down with contempt and desire on the fruitful plains to which his victorycommunicated the perpetual appellation of Lombakdy. A faithful chieftain, anda select band, were stationed at Forum Julii, the modern Friuli, to guard thepasses of the mountains. The Lombards respected the strength of Pavia, andlistened to the prayers of the Trevisans: their slow and heavy multitudes proceed­ed to occupy the palace and city of Verona; and Milan, now rising from her ashes,was invested by the powers of Alboin five months after his departure from Panno-nia. Terror preceded his march; he found every where, or he left, a dreary so­litude; and the pusillanimous Italians presumed, without a trial, that the strangerwas invincible. Escaping to lakes, or rocks, or morasses, the affrighted crowdsconcealed some fragments of their wealth, and delayed the moment of their ser­vitude. Paulinus, the patriarch of Aquileia, removed his treasures, sacred andprofane, to the isle of Grado,(3) and his successors were adopted by the infant re­public of Venice; which was continually enriched by the public calamities. Ho-noratus, who filled the chair of St. Ambrose, had credulously accepted the faith­less offers of a capitulation; and the archbishop, with the clergy and nobles of Mi­lan, were driven by the perfidy of Alboin to seek a refuge in the less accessibleramparts of Genoa. Along the maritime coast, the courage of the inhabitantswas supported by the facility of supply, the hopes of relief, and the power of es­cape; but from the Trentine hills to the gates of Ravenna and Rome, the inlandregions of Italy became, without a battle or a siege, the lasting patrimony of theLombards. 1 he submission of the people invited the barbarian to assume thecharacter of a lawful sovereign, and the helpless exarch was confined to the officeof announcing to the emperor Justin, the rapid and irretrievable loss of his.pro-vinces and cities. (4) One city, which had been diligently fortified by the Goths,resisted the arms of a new invader; and while Italy was subdued by the flying de­tachments of the Lombards, the royal camp was fixed above three years be­fore the western gate of Ticinum, or Pavia. The same courage which obtainsthe esteem of a civilized enemy, provokes the fury of a savage, and the impa­tient besieger had bound himself by a tremendous oath, that age, and sex, anddignity, should be confounded in a general massacre. The aid of famine at lengthenabled him to execute his bloody vow; but as Alboin entered the gate, his horsestumbled, fell, and could not be raised from the ground. One of his attendants* was prompted by compassion, or piety, to interpret this miraculous sign as thewrath of heaven: the conqueror paused and relented; he sheathed his sword, and,
geacefully reposing himself in the palace of Theodoric, proclaimed to the trem-ling multitude, that they should live and obey. Delighted with the situation ofthe city, which was endeared to his pride by the difficulty of the purchase, the


11) The Heath of Narses is mentioned hy Paul, lib. ii. c. II. Anastas. in Vit. .lohan. iii. n. 43.; Agnelliis,T.iber Pontifical, Raven, in Scrip. Rer. Italiearum, torn. ii. part. i. p. 114.124. Yet I cannot believe with Ag-nellus that Narses was ninety-five years of age. Is it probable that all his exploits were performed at four­score?
(3) The designs of Narses and of the Lombards for the invasion of Italy, are exposed in the last chapter ofthe first book, and the seven first chapters of the second book of Paul the deacon.
(3) Which from this translation was called New Aquileia, (Chron. Venet. p. 3.) The patriarch of Gradosoon became the first citizen of the republic, (p. 9, &e.) but his seat was not removed to Venice till the year1450. He is now decorated with titles and honours; but the genius of the church has bowed to that of the■state, and the government cf a catholic city is strictly Presbyterian. Thomassin, Discipline de 1'Eglise,torn. i. p. 156, 157.1M—165. Anielotile la Hr> issaye. Governement-de Venise, torn. i. p. 256—261.
(4) Paul has given a description of Italy, as ii was then divided, into eighteen regions, (lib. ii. e, 14—24.)The Disertatio Chorographica de Italia. Medii. jEvi, by father Beretti, a Benedictine monk, and reigns pro-tftssor at Pavia. has been usc-Pillv consulted.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 227


name of Chaldeans or Assyrians, are confounded with the most learned or the mostpowerful nation of eastern antiquity.
According to the legend of antiquity, the gospel was preached in India by St.Thomas. (1) At the end of the ninth century, his shrine, perhaps in the neigh­bourhood of Madras, was devoutly visited by the ambassadors of Alfred, and theirreturn with a cargo of pearls and spices rewarded the zeal of the English monarch,who entertained the largest projects of trade and discovery. (2) When the Por­tuguese first opened the navigation of India, the Christians of St. Thomas had beenseated for ages on the coast of Malabar, and the difference of their character andcolour attested the mixture of a foreign race. In arms, in arts, and possibly in vir­tue, they excelled the natives of Hindostan: the husbandman cultivated the palmtree, the merchants were enriched by the pepper trade, the soldiers preceded thenaira or nobles of Malabar, and their hereditary privileges were respected by thegratitude or the fear of the king of Cochin and the Zamorin himself. They ac­knowledged a Gentoo sovereign; but they were governed, even in temporal con­cerns, by the bishop of Angamala. He still asserted his ancient title of Metropo­litan of India, but his real jurisdiction was exercised in fourteen hundred churches,and he was intrusted with the care of two hundred thousand souls. Their reli­gion would have rendered them the firmest and most cordial allies of the Portu­guese, but the inquisitors soon discerned in the Christians of St. Thomas, theunpardonable guilt of heresy and schism. Instead of owning themselves the sub­jects of the Roman pontiff, the spiritual and temporal monarch of the globe, theyadhered, like their ancestors, to the communion of the Nestorian patriarch: andthe bishops, whom he ordained at Mosul, traversed the dangers of the sea andland to reach their diocesses on the coast of Malabar. In their Syriac liturgy, thenames of Theodore and Nestorius were piously commemorated: they united theiradoration of the two persons of Christ; the title of Mother of God was offen­sive to their ear, and they measured with scrupulous avarice the honours ofthe Virgin Mary, whom the superstition of the Latins had almost exalted tothe rank of a goddess. When her image was first presented to the disciplesof St. Thomas, they indignantly exclaimed, "We are Christians, "not ido­laters!" and their simple devotion was content with the veneration of the cross.Their separation from the western world had left them in ignorance of the im­provements or corruptions of a thousand years; and their conformity with thefaith and practice of the fifth century, would equally disappoint the preju­dices of a papist or a protestant. It was the first care of the ministers of Rometo intercept all correspondence with the Nestorian patriarch, and several of hisbishops expired in the prisons of the holy office. The flock, without a shep­herd, was assaulted by the power of the Portuguese, the arts of the Jesuits, andthe zeal of Alexes de Menezes, archbishop of Goa, in his personal visitation of thecoast of Malabar. The synod of Diamper, at which he presided, consummatedthe pious work of the reunion, and rigorously imposed the doctrine and disciplineof the Roman church, without forgetting auricular confession, the strongest engineof ecclesiastical torture. The memory of Theodore and Nestorius was condemned,and Malabar was reduced under the dominion of the pope, of the primate, and ofthe Jesuits, who invaded the see of Angamala, or Cranganor. Sixty years of ser­vitude and hypocrisy were patiently endured; but as soon as the Portuguese empirewas shaken by the courage and industry of the Dutch, the Nestorians asserted,■with vigour and effect the religion of their fathers. The Jesuits were incapableof defending the power which they had abused: the arms of forty thousand Chris­tians were pointed against their falling tyrants: and the Indian archdeacon as­sumed the character of bishop, till a fresh supply of episcopal gifts and Syriacmissionaries could be obtained from the patriarch of Babylon. Since the expul-
(1) The Indian missionary St. Thomas, an apostle, a Manichfean, or an Armenian merchant, (La Croze,Christianisme ries Indes, torn. i. p. 57—70.) was famous, however, as early as the time of Jerome, (ad Marcel-lum, epist. 143.) Marco Polo was informed on the spot that he suffered martyrdom in the city of Malabar, orMeliapour, a league only from Madras, (d'Anville, Eeolaircissemens sur rinde, p. 125.) where the Portuguesefounded an episcopal church under the name of St. Thome, and where the saint performed an annual mira­cle, till he was silenced by the profane neighbourhood of the English. (La Croze, torn. it. p. 7—16.)
(2) Neither the author of the Saxon Chronicle, (A. D. 883.) nor William of Malmesbury, (de Gestis RegutnAngliae, lib. ii. c 4. p. 44.) were capable, in the twelfth century, of inventing this extraordinary fact; they areincapable of explaining the motives and measures of Alfred; and their hasty notice serves only to provoke ourcuriosity. William of Malmesbury feels the difficulty of the enterprise, quod quivis in hoc seculo miretur;and I almost suspect that the English ambassadors collected their cargo and legend in Etfypt. The royal au­thor has not enriched his Orasius Aee Barringron's Miscellanies) with an Iruijau as -well 44 a Scanil'maviariTOjuge.


 







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


Kinnisrin, or Chalcis, in Syria, as he was preparing to lead against Constantinoplethe remaining ferces of the east. The brother of Moslemah was succeeded by akinsman and an enemy; and the throne of an active and able prince was degradedby the useless and pernicious virtues of a bigot. While he started and satisfiedthe scruples of a blind conscience, the siege was continued through the winter bythe neglect rather than by the resolution of the caliph Omar.(l) The winterproved uncommonly rigorous: above a hundred days the ground was covered withdeep snow, and the natives of the sultry climes of Egypt and Arabia lay torpidand almost lifeless in their frozen camp. They revived on the return of spring; asecond effort had been made in their favour; and their distress was relieved by thearrival of two numerous fleets, laden with corn, and arms, and soldiers; the firstfrom Alexandria, of four hundred transports and galleys: the second of the threehundred and sixty vessels from the ports of Africa. But the Greek fires wereagain kindled, and if the destruction was less complete, it was owing to the expe­rience which had taught the Moslems to remain at a safe distance, or to the per­fidy of the Egyptian mariners, who deserted with their ships to the emperorof the Christians. The trade and navigation of the capital were restored; andthe produce of the fisheries supplied the wants, and even the luxury, of the inha­bitants. But the calamities of famine and disease were soon felt by the troops ofMoslemah, and as the former was miserably assuaged, so the latter was dread­fully propagated, by the pernicious nutriment which hunger compelled them toextract from the most unclean or unnatural food. The spirit of conquest, andeven of enthusiasm, was extinct: the Saracens could no longer straggle beyondtheir lines, either single or in small parties, without exposing themselves to themerciless retaliation of the Thracian peasants. An army of Bulgarians was at­tracted from the Danube by the gifts and promises of Leo; and these savage aux­iliaries made some atonement for the evils which they had inflicted on the em­pire, by the defeat and slaughter of twenty-two thousand Asiatics. A report wasdexterously scattered, that the Franks, the unknown nations of the Latin world,were arming by sea and land in the defence of the Christian cause, and their for­midable aid was expected with far different sensations in the camp and city. Atlength, after a siege of thirteen months,(2) the hopeless Moslemah received fromthe caliph the welcome permission of retreat- The march of the Arabian cavalryover the Hellespont, and through the provinces of Asia, was executed without de­lay or molestation; but an army of their brethren had been cut in pieces on theside of Bithynia, and the remains of the fleet were so repeatedly damaged by tem­pest and fire; that only five galleys entered the port of Alexandria to relate thetale of their various and almost incredible disasters. (3)
In the two sieges, the deliverance of Constantinople may be chiefly ascribed tothe novelty, the terrors, and the real efficacy, of the GreekJire.{A) The import­ant secret of compounding and directing this artificial flame was imparted by Calli-nicus, a native of Heliopolis in Syria, who deserted from the service of the caliph tothat of the emperor. (5) The skill of a chemist and engineer was equivalent to thesuccour of fleets and armies; and this discovery or improvement of the military artwas fortunately reserved for the distressful period, when the degenerate Romans ofthe east were incapable of contending with the warlike enthusiasm and youthfulvigour of the Saracens. The historian who presumes to analyze this extraordinary
venty pomegranates, a kid, six fowls, anil a huge quantity of the grapes of Taycf. If the bill of fere be correct,we must admire the appetite rather than the luxury of the sovereign of Asia. (Abulfeda, Annal. Moslem, p.
126.)
(1) See the article of Omar Ben Abdalaziz. in the Bibliotheque Orientate, (p. 689,600.) prseferens, says Elma-cin, (p. 91.) religionem suam rebus suis mundanis. He was so desirous of being with God. that he would nothare anointed his ear (his own saying) to obtain a perfect cure of his last malady. The caliph had only oneshin, and in an age of luxury his annual expense was no more than two drachms. (Abalpharagius, p. WOHand diu gayisus eo princi-ne tilit orbis Moslemus. (Abulfeda, p. 127.)
(2) Both Nicephorus and Theophanes agree, that the siege of Constantinople was raised the fifteenth of Au­gust: (A. D. 718.) but as the former, our best witness, affirms that it continued thirteen months, the latter mustbe mistaken in supposing that it began on the same day of the preceding year. I do not think that Pagi hasremarked this inconsistency.
(3) In the second siege of Constantinople, I have followed Nicephorus, (Brer. p. 33—50.) Theophanes,(Chronograph, p. 321—334.) Cedrenus, (Compend. p. 449—452.) Zunar.is, (torn. ii. p. 98—102.) Eimacin,(Hist. Saracen, p. 88.) Abulfeda, (Annal. Moslem, p. 126.) and Abulpharagius. (Dynast, p. 130.) the most satis­factory of the Arabs.
(4) Our sure and indefatigable guide in the middle ages and Byzantine History, Charles du Fresne du Cange,1ms treated in several places of the Greek fire, and his collections leave few gleanings behind. See particularlyGlossar. Med. et Infim. Graeettar. p. 1275. sub voce llvp faiwrtov uypav, Glossftr. Med. et lnfim. Latinitat. IffflisGrwcus. Observations sur Villehardonin, p. 305,306. Observations sur Joinville, p. 71,72. °
(5) Theophanes s yies him *(xitIX™ (n. 295.) Cedrenus (p. 437.) brings this artist from (the ruiits of) Hilit>-pons in *.gyp>; and chemistry was indeed the peculiar science of the Egyptians.


/ 1







OCR Output








■* THE DECLINE AND FALL


men had not represented the perils of the shore, and the signs of an impendingtempest. Still ignorant of the revolution, they declined, however, the rash at­tempt of forcing the chain of the port; and the adjacent harbour and suburb ofMandracium were insulted only by the rapine of a private officer who disobeyedand deserted his leaders. But the imperial fleet, advancing with a fair wind,steered through the narrow entrance of the Goletta, and occupied, in the deepand oapacious lake of Tunis, a secure station about five miles from the capital. (1)No sooner was Belisarius informed of their arrival, than he despatched ordersthat the greatest part of the mariners should be immediately landed to join thetriumph, and to swell the apparent numbers of the Romans. Before he allowedthem to enter the gates of Carthage, he exhorted them, in a discourse worthy ofhimself and the occasion, not to disgrace the glory of their arms; and to remem­ber that the Vandals had been the tyrants, but that they were the deliverers of theAfricans, who must now be respected as the voluntary and affectionate subjects oftheir common sovereign. The Romans marched through the streets iii closeranks, prepared for battle if an enemy had appeared; the strict order maintainedby the general, imprinted on their minds the duty of obedience; and in an age inwhich custom and impunity almost sanctified the abuse of conquest, the genius ofone man repressed the passions of a victorious army. The voice of menace andcomplaint was silent; the trade of Carthage was not interrupted; while Africachanged her master and her government, the shops continued open and busy; andthe soldiers after sufficient guards had been posted, modestly departed to thehouses which were allotted for their reception. Belisarius fixed his residence inthe palace; seated himself on the throne of Genseric; accepted and distributedthe barbaric spoil; granted their lives to the suppliant Vandals; and laboured to re­pair the damage which the suburb of Mandracium had sustained in the precedingnight At supper he entertained his principal officers with the form and magnifi­cence of a royal banquet. (2) The victor was respectfully served by the captiveofficers of the household; and, in the moments of festivity, when the impartialspectators applauded the fortune and merit of Belisarius, his envious flattererssecretly shed their venom on every word and gesture which might alarm the sus­picions of a jealous monarch. One day was given to these pompous scenes, which,may not be despised as useless, if they attracted the popular veneration; but theactive mind of Belisarius, which in the pride of victory could suppose a defeat,had already resolved that the Roman empire in Africa should not depend on thechance of arms, or the favour of the people. The fortifications of Carthage hadalone been exempted from the general proscription; but in the reign of ninety-five•years they were suffered to decay by the thoughtless and indolent Vandals. A wiserconqueror restored with incredible despatch the walls and ditches of the city.His liberality encouraged the workmen; the soldiers, the mariners, and the citi­zens, vied with each other in the salutary labour; and Gelimer, who had feared totrust his person in an open town, beheld with astonishment and despair the risingstrength of an impregnable fortress.
That unfortunate monarch, after the loss of his capital, applied himself to col­lect the remains of an army scattered, rather than destroyed, by the precedingbattle; and the hopes of pillage attracted some Moorish bands to the standard ofGelimer. He encamped in the fields of Bulla, four days'journey from Carthage jinsulted the capital, which he deprived of the use of an aqueduct; proposed a highreward for the head of every Roman; affected to spare the persons and propertyof his African subjects, and secretly negotiated with the Anan sectaries and theconfederate Huns, Under these circumstances, the conquest of Sardinia servedonly to aggravate his distress; he reflected with the deepest anguish, that he hadwasted, in that useless enterprise, five thousand of his bravest troops; and he read,with grief and shame, the victorious letters of his brother Zano, who expressed asanguine confidence that the king, after the example of their ancestors, had alrea­dy chastised the rashness of the Roman invader. "Alas! my brother," repliedGelimer, " Heaven has declared against our unhappy nation. While you have
(t) The neighbourhood of Carthage, the sea, the land, and (he rivers, are changed almost at much as theworks of man. The isthmus, or neck of the city, is now confounded with the continent; the harbour is a dry
Slain; and the lake, or stagnum, no more than a morass, with six or seven feet water in the mid channel. See'Anville (Geographic Ancienne, torn. iii. p. 82.,) (Shaw's Travels, p. 77—84.) Marmol (Description dePAfrique, torn, ii. p. 465.,) and Thuanust (58. 12. tom.iti. p. 334.)
(2) From Delphi, the name of Delphieum was given, both in Greek and Latin, to a tripod; and, by aneasy analogy, the same appellation was extended at Rome, Constantinople, and Carthage, to the royal ban-quetting room. (Procopias, Vandal, lib. i. c. 21. Ducange, Gloss. Gnec. p. 277. AtKfnm, ad Alexiad, p. 412.)







OCR Output








J5'l THE DECLINE AND FALL


of the ancients, may in a great measure be ascribed; but the advantages of thesoil and climate had been understood and cultivated since the reign of the Mace­donian kings. Before the invasion of the Saracens, Carizme, Bochara, and Sa-marcand, were rich and populous under the yoke of the shepherds of the north.These cities were surrounded with a double wall; and the exterior fortification, ofa larger circumference, enclosed the fields and gardens of the adjacent district.The mutual wants of India and Europe were supplied by the diligence of the Sog-dian merchants; and the inestimable art of transforming linen into paper, has beendiffused from the manufacture of Samarcand over the western world. (1)
II. No sooner had Abubeker restored the unity of faith and government, thanhe despatched a circular letter to the Arabian tribes.—" In the name of themost merciful God, to the rest of the true believers. Health and happiness,and the mercy and blessing of God be upon you. I praise the most high God,and I pray for his prophet Mahomet. This is to acquaint you, that I intend tosend the true believers into Syria(2) to take it out of the hands of the infidels.And I would have you know, that the fighting for religion is an act of obedience toGod." His messengers returned with the tidings of pious and martial ardourwhich they had kindled in every province; and the camp of Medina was suc­cessively filled with the intrepid bands of the Saracens, who panted for action,complained of the heat of the season, and the scarcity of provisions; and accusedwith impatient murmurs the delays of the caliph. As soon as their numbers werecomplete, Abubeker ascended the hill, reviewed the men, the horses, and thearms, and poured forth a fervent prayer for the success of their undertaking.In person and on foot, he accompanied the first day's march; and when the blush­ing leaders attempted to dismount, the caliph removed their scruples by a decla­ration, that those who rode, and those who walked in the service of religion, wereequally meritorious. His instructions(3) to the chiefs of the Syrian army, wereinspired by the warlike fanaticism which advances to seize, and affects to despise,the objects of worldly ambition. " Remember (said the successor of the prophet)that you are always in the presence of God, on the verge of death, in the assu­rance of judgment, and the hope of paradise. Avoid injustice and oppression;consult with your brethren, and study to preserve the love and confidence of yourtroops. When you fight the battles of the Lord, acquit yourselves like men,without turning your backs; but let not your victory be stained with the blood ofwomen or children. Destroy no palm trees, nor burn any fields of corn. Cutdown no fruit trees, nor do any mischief to cattle, only such as you kill to eatWhen you make any covenant or article, stand to it, and be as good as your word.As you go on, you will find some religious persons who live retired in monasteries,and propose to themselves to serve God that way: let them alone, and neither killthem nor destroy their monasteries;(4) and you will find another sort of peoplethat belong to the synagogue of Satan, who have shaven crowns;(5) be sure youcleave their skulls, and give them no quarter till they either turn Mahometans, orpay tribute." All profane or frivolous conversation; all dangerous recollection ofancient quarrels, was severely prohibited among the Arabs: in the tumult of acamp, the exercises of religion were assiduously practised: and the intervals ofaction were employed in prayer, meditation, and the study of the Koran. The


(1) A curious description of Samarcand is inserted in the Bibliotheca Arabico-Hispana, torn. i. p. 208, &e.The librarian Casiri (torn. ii. is.) relates, from credible testimony, that paper was first imported from China toSamarcand, A. H. 30, and tnieni«f, or rather introduced at Mecca, A. H. 88. The escurial library containspaper MSS. as old as the fourth or fifth century of the Hegira.
(2) A separate history of the conquest of Syria has been composed by Al Wakidi, cadi of Bagdad, who vatbom A. D. 748, and died A. D. 822; he likewise wrote the conquest of Egypt, of Diarbekir, &e. Above themeagre and recent chronicles of the Arabians, Al Wakidi has the double merit of antiquity and copiousness.His tales and traditions afford an artless picture of the men and the times. Yet his narrative is too often defec­tive, trifling, and imnrobable. Till something better shall be found, his learned and spirited interpreter, (Oek-ley, in bis History of the Saracens, vol. i. p. 21—342.) will not deserve the petulant animadversion of Keitke.(Prodidagmata ad Hajcji Chalifai Tabulas, p. 236.) I am sorry to think that the labours of Ockley were con­summated in a jail. (See his two prefaces to the first vol. A. D. 1708, to the second, 1718, with the list of the 'authors at tbe end.)
(3) The instructions, Sec. of the Syrian war, are described by Al Wakidi and Ockley, torn. i. p. 22—27. Sec.In the sequel it is necessary to contract, and needless to quote, their circumstantial narrative. My obligationsto others shall be noticed. •
(4) Notwithstanding this precept, M. Pauw (Recherches surles Egyptiens. tom. ii. p. 192. edit. Lausanne)represents the Bedoweens as the implacable enemies of the Christian monks. For my own part, I am more in­clined to suspect the avarice of the Arabian robbers, and the prejudices of the German philosopher.
(5) Even in the seventeenth century, the monks were generally laymen; they wore their hair long- and dis­hevelled, and shaved their heads when they were ordained priests. The circular tonsure was sttored and mys­terious: it was the crown of thorns; but it was likewise n royal diadem, and every priest was a king, esc. (Tbo-mastin, Discipline de l'Eglise, tom. i. p. 721—758. especially p. 737, 738.)







OCR Output








lib THE DECLINE AKD FALL


The philosophy of Bayle dispelled a prejudice which Milton's muse had so re­cently adornei}, that the comet, from its horrid hair, skakes pestilence and roar.(l)Its road in the heavens was observed with exquisite skill by Flamstead and Cas-sini; and the mathematical science of Bernoulli, Newton, and Halley, -investi- pgated the laws of its revolutions. At the eighth period, in the year 2255, theircalculations may perhaps be verified by the astronomers of some future capital idthe Siberian or American wilderness.
II. The near approach of a comet may injure or destroy the globe which we in­habit; but the changes on its surface have been hitherto produced by the action ofvolcanoes and earthquakes. (2) The nature of the soil may indicate the countriesmost exposed to these formidable concussions, since they are caused by subterra­neous fires, and such fires are kindled by the union and fermentation of iron andsulphur. But their times and effects appear to lie beyond the reach of human cu­riosity, and the philosopher will discreetly abstain from the prediction of earth­quakes, till he has counted the drops of water that silently filtrate on the inflam­mable mineral, and measured the caverns which increase by resistance the explo­sion of the imprisoned air. Without assigning the cause, history will distinguishthe periods in which these calamitous events have been rare or trequent, and willobserve that this fever of the earth raged with uncommon violence during thereign of Justinian. (3) Each year is marked by the repetition of earthquakes, ofsuch duration that Constantinople has been shaken above forty days; of such ex­tent that the shock has been communicated to the whole surface of the globe, orat least of the Roman empire. An impulse or vibratory motion was felt; enormouschasms were opened, huge and heavy bodies were discharged into the air, the seaalternately advanced and retreated beyond its ordinary bounds, and a mountain wastorn from Libanus,(4) and cast into the waves, where it protected, as a mole, thenew harbour of Botrys(5) in Phoenicia. The stroke that agitates an ant-hill, maycrush the insect myriads in the dust; yet truth must extort a confession, that manhas industriously laboured for his own destruction. The institution of great cities,which include a nation within the limits of a wall, almost realizes the wish of Ca­ligula, that the Roman people had but one neck. Two hundred and fifty thousandpel-sons are said to have perished in the earthquake of Antioch, whose domesticmultitudes were swelled by the conflux of strangers to the festival of the Ascen­sion. The loss of Bcrytus(6) was of smaller account but of much greater value.That city, on the coast of Phoenicia, was illustrated by the study of the civil law,■which opened the surest road to wealth and dignity: the schools of Berytus werefilled with the rising spirits of the age, and many a youth was lost in the earthquake,who might have lived to be the scourge or the guardian of his country. In thesedisasters, the architect becomes the enemy of mankind. The hut of a savage, orthe tent of an Arab, may be thrown down without injury to the inhabitant; and thePeruvians had reason to deride the folly of their Spanish conquerors, who with somuch cost and labour erected their own sepulchres. The rich marbles of a patri­cian are dashed on his own head: a whole people is buried under the ruins ofpublic and private edifices, and the conflagration is kindled and propagated by theinnumerable fires which are necessary for the subsistence and manufactures of agreat<city. Instead of the mutual sympathy which might comfort and assist thedistressed, they dreadfully experience the vices and passions which are releasedfrom the fear of punishment; the tottering houses are pillaged by intrepid avarice;
ancients in their idolatry. Bernoulli, (Bee his Elogc, in Fontenelle, torn. v. p. 99.) was forced to allow that thetail, though not the head, was a sign of the wrath of God.
(1) ParadisC Lost was published in the year 1667. and the famous lines (lib. ii. 70S. Sec.) which startled thelicenser, may allude to the recent comet of 1664, observed by Cassini at Rome, in the presence of queen Chris-liana. (Fontenelle, in his Etogc, torn. v. p. 338.) Had Charles II. betrayed any symptoms of curiosity or fear?
(2) For the cause of earthquakes, see Buffon, torn. i. p. 502—536. Supplement a I'Hist. Naturelle, torn. v.p. 382—390. edition in 4tn.) Valmont de Bomare(Dictionaired'Histoire Naturelle, Trembtcment dc Terre, Py­rites) Watson; Chemical Essays, torn. i. p. 181—200.)
(3) The earthquakes that shook the Roman world in the reign of Justinian, are described or mentioned byProcopius, (Goth. lib. iv. e. 24. Anecdot. c. 18.) Agathias, lib. ii. p. 52—54. lib. v. p. 145—152, John Malala,(Chron. torn. ii. p. 140—146. 176, 177. 183. 193.220.229.231. 233,234.) and Theophanes (p. 151. 183. 189. 191—196.)
(4) An abrupt height, a perpendicular cape between Aradus and Botrys, named by the Greeks 8s*r *f*Tm-x»*and fyirpoa-awov or /.iSawpio-^wov, by the scrupulous Christians. (Polyb. lib. v. p. 411. Pompon. Mela, lib. i. c. 13.p. 87.) cum Isaac Voss. Ohservat. Maundrell. Journey, p. 32,33. Pocock's l>escription, vol. 2. p. 99.
(5) Bo'rys was founded (ami. ante Christ. 935—903.) by Ithobal, kins of Tyre. (Marsham. Canon. Chron.p. 387,388.) Its poor representative, the village of Patrone, is now destitute of a harbour.
(6) The university, splendour, and ruin of Berytus, are celebrated by Heineccius, (p. 351—356.) as an essen­tial part of the history of the Roman law. It was overthrown in the twenty-fifth year of Justinian, A. D. 551,July 9; (Theophanes, p. 192.) but Agathias (lib. ii. p. Jl, 52.) suspends the earthquake till he has achieved she







OCR Output








234. THE DECLINE AND FALL


the Nubians at length executed their threats of returning to the worship of idols jthe climate required the indulgence of polygamy, and they have finally preferredthe triumph of the koran to the abasement of the cross. A metaphysical religionmay appear too refined for the capacity of the negro race: yet a black or a parrotmight be taught to repeat the -words of the Chalcedon or Monophysite creed.
Christianity was more deeply rooted in the Abyssinian empire; and, althoughthe correspondence has been sometimes interrupted above seventy or a hundredyears, the mother-church of Alexandria retains her colony in a state of perpetualpupilage. Seven bishops once composed the Ethiopic synod: had their numberamounted to ten, they might have elected an independent primate; and one of theirkings was ambitious of promoting his brother to the ecclesiastical throne. Butthe event was foreseen, the increase was denied; the episcopal office has beengradually confined to the abuna,(l) the head and author of the Abyssinian priest­hood; the patriarch supplies each vacancy with an Egyptian monk; and the cha­racter of a stranger appears more venerable in the eyes of the people, less dan­gerous in those of the monarch. In the sixth century, when the schism of Egyptwas confirmed, the rival chiefs, with their patrons, Justinian and Theodora, stroveto outstrip each other in the conquest of a remote and independent province. Theindustry of the empress was again victorious, and the pious Theodora haB esta-lished in that sequestered church the faith and discipline of the Jacobites. (2)Encompassed on all sides by the enemies of their religion, the Ethiopians sleptnear a thousand years, forgetful of the world, by whom they were forgotten.They were awakened by the Portuguese, who, turning the southern promontoryof Africa, appeared in India and the Red Sea, as if they had descended throughthe air from a distant planet. In the first moments of their interview, the subjectsof Rome and Alexandria observed the resemblance, rather than the difference oftheir faith; and each nation expected the most important benefits from an alliancewith their Christian brethren. In their lonely situation, the Ethiopians had almostrelapsed into the savage life.. Their vessels, which had traded to Ceylon, scarcelypresumed to navigate the rivers of Africa; the ruins of Axume were deserted, thenation was scattered in villages, and the emperor (a pompous name) was content,both in peace and war, with the immoveable residence of a camp. Conscious oftheir own indigence, the Abyssinians had formed the rational project of importingthe arts and ingenuity of Europe;(3) and their ambassadors at Rome and Lisbonwere instructed to solicit a colony of smiths, carpenters, tilers, masons, printers,surgeons, and physicians, for the use of their country. But the public danger sooncalled for the instant and effectual aid of arms and soldiers to defend an unwarlikepeople from the barbarians who ravaged the inland country, and the Turks andArabs who advanced from the sea-coast in more formidable array. Ethiopia wassaved by four hundred and fifty Portuguese, who displayed in the field the nativevalour of the Europeans, and the artificial powers of musket and cannon. In amoment of terror, the emperor hadSpromised to reconcile himself and his subjectsto the catholic faith; a Latin patriarch represented the supremacy of the pope;(4)the empire, enlarged in a tenfold proportion, was supposed to contain more goldthan the mines of America; and the wildest hopes of avarice and seal were builton the willing submission of the Christians of Africa.
But the vows which pain had extorted, were foresworn on the return of health.The Abyssinians still adhered with unshaken constancy to the Monophysite faith;their languidi belief was inflamed by the exercise of dispute; they branded the
ffie name of the Nubian geographer (p. 18..) who represents them as a nation of Jacobites. The rays of histo­rical light that twinkle in the history of Renaudot (p. 178. 820.224. 281. 288. 405. 434. 451. 464.,) are all pre­vious to this era. See the modern state in the Lettres Edificantes (Recueil iv. J and Busching (torn. is. p.152—159 par Berenger.)
(1) The abuna is improperly dignified by the Latins with the title of patriarch. The Abyssinians acknow­ledge only the four patriarchs, and their chief is no more tban a metropolitan, or national primate (Ludolph.Hist. Athiopic. et Comment, lib. iii. c. Tii.) The seven bishops of Renaudot (p. 511.,) who existed A. D. 1131,are unknown to the historian.
(2) I know not why Assemannns (Ribliot. Orient, torn. ii. p. 384.) should call in question these probable mis-aions of Theodora into Nubia and ^Ethiopia. The slight notices of Abyssinia till the year 1500 are supplied byRenaudot, CP; 330. 341,381.382. 405. 443, fee. 452. 456. 463.475. 480. 511.525. 559. 564.) from the Coptic wri­ters. The mind of Ludolphus was a perfect blank.
{3) Ludolph. Hist. ACthiop. lib. iv. c. 5. The most necessary arts are now exercised by the Jews, and the fo­reign trade is in the hands of the Armenians. What Gregory principallv admired and envied was the indus­try of Europe—nrtes et opificia.
(4) John Bermudez, whose relation, printed at Lisbon, 1569, was translated into Englhh by Purchas, (Pil­grims, lib. viL c. 7.1149, &e.) and from thence into French by La Croze (Christianisme d'dEthiope. p. 93—265.) The piece i» curious; but the author may be suspected of deceiving Abyssinia, Rome and PortaKul-Hh title to the rank of patriarch is dark and doubtful (Ludolph. Comment. No. ML p. 473.)-







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AN 13 FALL


lawful heirs of the blood and sceptre of Clovis, a younger branch, from the brea­ther of Dagobert, of the Merovingian house. Their ancient kingdom was reducedto the duchy of Gascogne, to the counties of Fesenzac and Armagnac, at the footOf the Pyrenees: their race was propagated till the beginning of the sixteenth cen­tury; and, after surviving their Carlovingian tyrants, they were reserved to feelthe injustice, or the favours, of a third dynasty. By the reunion of Aquitain, Francewas enlarged to its present boundaries, with the additions of the Netherlands andSpain, as far as the Rhine. II. The Saracens had been expelled from France bythe grandfather and father of Charlemagne; but they still possessed the greatestpart of Spain, from the rock of Gibraltar to the Pyrenees. Amidst their civil di­visions, an Arabian emir of Saragossa implored his protection in the diet of Pa-derborn. Charlemagne undertook the expedition, restored the emir, without dis­tinction of faith, impartially crushed the resistance of the Christians, and rewardedthe obedience and service of the Mahometans. In his absence he instituted theSpanish march,{\) which extended from the Pyrenees to the river Ebro: Barce­lona was the residence of the French governor: he possessed the counties of 2?ou-sillon and Catalonia; and the infant kingdoms of Navarre and Arragon were sub­ject to his jurisdiction. III. As king of the Lombards, and patrician of Rome,he reigned over the greatest part of Italy,(2) a tract of a thousand miles from theAlps to the borders of Calabria. The duchy of Beneventum, a Lombard fief,had spread, at the expense of the Greeks, over the modern kingdom of Naples.But Arrechis, the reigning duke, refused to be included in the slavery of his coun­try; assumed the independent title of prince: and opposed his sword to the Car­lovingian monarchy. His defence was firm, his submission was not inglorious,and the emperor was content with an easy tribute, the demolition of his fortresses,• and acknowledgment, on his coins, of a supreme lord. The artful flattery of hisSon Grimoald added the appellation of father, but he asserted his dignity with pru­dence, and Beneventum insensibly escaped from the French yoke. (3) IV. Char­lemagne was the first who united Germany under the same sceptre. The nameof Oriental France is preserved in the circle of Franconia; and the people ofHesse and Thuringia, were recently incorporated with the victors, by the confor­mity of religion and government. The Alemanni, so formidable to the Romans,were the faithful vassals and confederates of the Franks; and their country wasinscribed within the modern limits of Alsace, Sivabia, and Switzerland. The Ba­varians, with a similar indulgence of their laws and manners, were less patient ofa master: the repeated treasons of Tasillo justified the abolition of her hereditarydukes; and their power was shared among the counts, who judged and guardedthat important frontier. But the north of Germany, from the Rhine and beyondthe Elbe, was still hostile and pagan; nor was it till after a war of thirty-threeyears that the Saxons bowed under the yoke of Christ and of Charlemagne. Theidols and their votaries were extirpated: the foundation of eight bishoprics, ofMunster, Osnaburg, Paderborn, and Minden, of Bremen, Verden, Hildesheim,and Halberstadt, define on either side of the Weser, the bounds of ancient Saxo­ny: these episcopal seats were the first schools and cities Of that savage land; andthe religion and humanity of the children atoned, in some degree, for the massa­cre of the parents. Beyond the Elbe, the Slavi, or Sclavonics, of similar man-tiers and various denominations, overspread the modern dominions of Prussia, Po­land, and Bohemia, and some transient marks of obedience have tempted theFrench historian to extend the empire to the Baltic and the Vistula. The conquestor conversion of those countries is of a more recent age; but the first union of Bo­hemia with the Germanic body may be justly ascribed to the arms of Charlemagne.V. He retaliated on the Avars, or Huns, of Pannonia, the same calamities whichthey had inflicted on the nations. Their rings, the wooden fortifications whichencircled their districts and villages, were broken down by the triple effort of aFrench army, that was poured into their country by land and water, through theCarpathian mountains, and along the plains of the Danube. After a bloody con-
xnily of Montesquieu, (not of the president de Montesquieu) is descended in the female line from Clotaire andClovis—an innocent pretension!
(1) The governors or counts of the Spanish march revolted from Charles the Simple about the year 900; anda poorpittance, the Ronaillon, has been recovered in 1642. by the kings of France. (Longnerue, Descriptionde la France, torn. i. p. 220—222.) Yet the Rousillon contains one hundred and eighty-eight thousand ninehundred subjects, and annually pays two million six hundred thousand livres; (Necker, Administration desFinances, torn. i. p. 278,279.) more people, perhaps, and doubtless more money, than the inarch of Charle­magne.
(2) Schmidt. Hist, des Allemands, torn. ii. p. 200, Sec.
(3) -St« Criannone, torn, i> p. 37*, 375. and the Annals of Muratori.







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. > 231


of the three chapters, were separated from the communion of the saints, and so­lemnly delivered to the prince of darkness. But the Latin churches were morejealous of the honour of Leo and the synod of Chalcedon; and if they had fought asthey usually did under the standard of Rome, they might have prevailed in the causeof reason and humanity. But their chief was a prisoner in the hands of the ene­my, the throne of St. Peter, which had been disgraced by the simony, was be­trayed by the cowardice of Vigilius, who yielded, after a long and inconsistantstruggle, to the despotism of Justinian and the sophistry of the Greeks. Hisapostacy provoked the indignation of the Latins, and no more than two bishopscould be found who would impose their hands on his deacon and successor Pela-gius. Yet the perseverance of the popes insensibly transferred to their adversa­ries the appellation of schismatics: the Illyrian, African, and Italian churches,were oppressed by the civil and ecclesiastical powers, not without some effort ofmilitary force;(l) the distant barbarians transcribed the creed of the Vatican, andin the period ot a century, the schism of the three chapters expired in an obscureangle of the Venetian province. (2) But the religious discontent of the Italianshad already promoted the conquests of the Lombards, and the Romans them­selves were accustomed to suspect the faith, and to detest the government of theirByzantine tyrant.
Justinian was neither steady nor consistent in the nice process of fixing his vola­tile opinions and those of his subjects. In his youth, he was offended by theslightest deviation from the orthodox line, in his old age he transgressed the mea­sure of temperate heresy, and the Jacobites, not less than the catholics, werescandalized oy his declaration, that the body of Christ was incorruptible, and thathis manhood was never subject to any wants and infirmities, the inheritance of ourmortal flesh. This fantastic opinion was announced in the last edicts of Justinian;and at the moment of his seasonable departure, the clergy had refused to tran­scribe, the prince was prepared to persecute, and the people were resolved to suf­fer or resist. A bishop of Treves, secure beyond the limits of his power, ad­dressed the monarch of the east in the language of authority and affection:" Most gracious Justinian, remember your baptism and your creed! Let not yourgray hairs be defiled with heresy. Recall your fathers from exile, and your fol­lowers from perdition. You cannot be ignorant, that Italy and Gaul, Spain andAfrica, already deplore your fall, and anathematize your name. Unless, withoutdelay, you destroy what you h ive taught; unless you exclaim, with a loud voice, Ihave erred, I have sinned, anathema to Nestorius, anathema to Eutyches, you willdeliver your soul to the same flames in which they will eternally burn." He died andmade no sign (3) His death restored in some degree the peace of the church, andthe reigns of his four successors, Justin, Tiberius, Maurice, and Phocas, are dis­tinguished by a rare, though fortunate, vacancy, in the ecclesiastical history of theeast. (4)
The faculties of sense and reason are least capable of acting on themselves; theeye is most inaccessible to the sight, the soul to the thought: yet we think, andeven feel, that one will, a sole principle of action, is essential to a rational and con­scious being. When Heraclius returned from the Persian war, the orthodox hero-consulted his bishops, whether the Christ whom he adored, of one person, but oftwo natures, was actuated by a singular, or double will. They replied in the sin­gular, and the emperor was encouraged to hope that the Jacobites of Egypt andSyria might be reconciled by the profession of a doctrine, most certainly harmless,and most probably true, since it was taught even by the Nestorians themselves. (5)
(1) See the complaints of l.iberatus and Victor, and the exhortations or pope Pelagius to the conqueror andexarch of ltaK Scliisma .... |»ee potestates publicas oppdimatur, &c. (Concil. torn. vi. p. 487, &c.) An•o suppress »"• si ctiiiors of an Illyrian city. (Sec Procopius, de Bell. Goth. lib. iv. c. 25.)
* Sixf*xxovT*i. He seems to promise an ecclesiastical history. It would have
of Aquileia were reconciled by pope Honorius, A. D. 638t (Muratori,-again relapsed, and the schism was not finally extinguished till 698.■in had overlooked the fifth general council with contemptuous si-m. vii. p. 487—404.)
I. torn. 6. p. 511—513.) he himself, like most of the Gallican prelates,. torn. vi. p. 1007.) was separated from the comlnonion of the four pa­ce chapters. Baronius almost pronounces the damnation of Justi-
tinian, (lib. iv. e. 39—41.) and the edict of his successor, lib. v. vs is filled with civil, instead of ecclesiastical events,consistent doctrine of the Nestorians, had been observed 1-•iidn more fully exposed bv Atmlnharajpii-. . B>!>' i


'tt»


 


 







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. V>9


or even of admonition. Be assured, dread sir, that the greater part of your troopshave already deserted to the Goths. If the war could be achieved by the pre­sence of Belisarius alone, your wishes are satisfied; Belisarius in the midst of Italy.But if you desire to conquer, far other preparations are requisite: without a mili­tary force, the title of general is an empty name. It would be expedient to restoreto my service my own veterans and domestic guards. Before I can take the field,I must receive an adequate supply of light and heavy-armed troops; and it is only ,with ready money that you can procure the indispensable aid of a powerful bodyof the cavalry of the HUns."(l) An officer, in whom Belisarius confided, wassent from Ravenna to hasten and conduct the succours; but the message was ne­glected, and the messenger was detained at Constantinople by an advantageousmarriage. After his patience had been exhausted by delay and disappointmentthe Roman general repassed the Hadriatic, and expected at Dyrrachium the arri­val of the troops, which were slowly assembled among the subjects and allies ofthe empire. His powers were still inadequate to the deliverance of Rome, whichwas closely besieged by the Gothic king. The Appian way, a march of forty days,was covered by the barbarians; and as the prudence of Belisarius declined a battle,he preferred the safe and speedy navigation of five'days from the coast of Epirusto the mouth of the Tiber.
After reducing, by force or treaty, the towns of inferior note in the midlandprovinces of Italy, Totila proceeded, not to assault but to encompass and starve,the ancient capital. Rome was afflicted by the avarice, and guarded by the va­lour, of Bessas, a veteran chief of Gothic extraction, who filled, with a garrisonof three thousand soldiers, the spacious circle of her venerable walls. From thedistress of the people he extracted a profitable trade, and secretly rejoiced in thecontinuance of the siege. It was for his use that the granaries had been replen­ished ; the charity of pope Vigilius had purchased and embarked an ample supply ofSicilian corn; but the vessels which escaped the barbarians were seized by a ra­pacious governor, who imparted a scanty sustenance to the soldiers, and sold theremainder to the wealthy Romans. The medimnus, or fifth part of the quarterof wheat, was exchanged for seven pieces of gold; fifty pieces were given for ant)X, a rare and accidental prize; the progress of famine enhanced this exhorbitantvalue, and the mercenaries were tempted to deprive themselves of the allowance,■which was scarcely sufficient for the support of life. A tasteless and unwholesomemixture, in which the bran thrice exceeded the quantity of flour, appeased thehunger of the poor; they were gradually reduced to feed on dead horses, dogs,cats, and mice, and eagerly, to snatch the grass, and even the nettles, which grewamong the ruins of the city. A crowd of spectres, pale and emaciated, their bo­dies oppressed with disease, and their minds with despair, surrounded the palaceof the governor, urged, with unavailing truth, that it was the duty of a master tomaintain his slaves, and humbly requested that he would provide for their sub­sistence, permit their flight, or command their immediate execution. Bessas re­plied, with unfeeling tranquillity, that it was impossible to feed, unsafe to dismiss,and unlawful to kill, the subjects of the emperor. Yet the example of a privatecitizen might have shown his countrymen that a tyrant cannot withhold the privi­lege of death. Pierced by the cries of five children, who vainly called on their fa­ther for bread, he ordered them to follow his steps, advanced with calm and silentdespair to one of the bridges of the Tiber, and, covering his face, threw himselfheadlong into the stream, in the presence of his family and the Roman people.To the rich and pusillanimous, Bessas(2) sold the permission of departure; butthe greatest part of the fugitives expired on the public highways, or were inter­cepted by the flying parties of barbarians. In the meanwhile, the artful govern­or soothed the discontent, and revived the hopes, of the Romans, by the vague re­ports of the fleets and armies which were hastening to their relief from the extremi­ties of the east. They derived more rational comfort from the assurance thatBelisarius had landed at the fwrt; and, without numbering his forces, they firmlyrelied on the humanity, the courage, and the skill of their great deliverer.
(1) Procopius, lib. iii. e. 12. The soiil of a hero is deeply impressed on tlie letter j nor can we con­found such genuine and original acts with the elaborate and often empty speeches of the Byzantine his­torians
- (*) The avarice of Bessas is not dissembled by Procopius, (lib. iii. c. 17.20.) He expiated the loss of Rome■liy the glorious conquest of Petrea: (Goth. lib. iv. c. 12.) but the same vices followed him from lite Tiber toihe Phasii: (c. 13.) and the historian is equally true to the merits and defects of his character. The chastise-jnent which the author of the romance ot Bclitairc has inflicted on the oppressors of Rome is more agreeableto justice than to history.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 21


hitants, about thirty thousand males, condensed, within the period of a single life,the genius of ages and millions. Our sense of the dignity of human nature is ex­alted by the simple recollection, that Isocrates(l) was the companion of Plato andXenophon; that he assisted, perhaps with the historian Thucydides, at the firstrepresentations of the CEdipus of Sophocles and the Iphigenia of Euripides; and thathis pupils jEschines and Demosthenes contended for the crown of patriotism inthe presence of Aristotle, the master of Theophrastus, who taught at Athens withthe founders of the Stoic and Epicurean sects. (2) The ingenious youth of Atticaenjoyed the benefits of their domestic education, which was communicated withoutenvy to the rival cities. Two thousand disciples heard the lessons of Theophras­tus;^) the schools of rhetoric must have been still more populous than those ofphilosophy; and a rapid succession of students diffused the fame of their teachers,as far as the utmost limits of the Grecian language and name. Those limits wereenlarged by the victories of Alexander; the arts of Athens survived her freedomand dominion; and the Greek colonies, which the Macedonians planted in Egypt,and scattered over Asia, undertook long and frequent pilgrimages to worship theMuses in their favourite temple on the banks of the Ilissus. The Latin conquerorsrespectfully listened to the instructions of their subjects and captives; the namesof Cicero and Horace were enrolled in the schools of Athens; and, after the perfectsettlement of the Roman empire, the natives of Italy, of Africa and of Britain, con­versed in the groves of the academy with their fellow-students of the east. Thestudies of philosophy and eloquence are congenial to a popular state, which en­courages the freedom of inquiry, and submits only to the force of persuasion. Inthe republics of Greece and Rome, the art of speaking was the powerful engine ofpatriotism or ambition; and the schools of rhetoric poured forth a colony of states­men and legislators. When the liberty of public debate was suppressed, th« ora­tor in the honourable profession of an advocate, might plead the cause of innocenceand justice; he might abuse his talents in the more profitable trade of panegyric; andthe same precepts continued to dictate the fanciful declamations of the sophist, andthe chaster beauties of historical composition. The systems, which professed to un­fold the nature of God, of man, and of the universe, entertained the curiosity of thephilosophic student; and, according to the temper of his mind, he might doubt withthe sceptics, or decide with the Stoics, sublimely speculate with Plato, or severe­ly argue with Aristotle. The pride of the adverse sects had fixed an unattainableterm of moral happiness and perfection; but the race was glorious and salutary;the disciples of Zeno, and even those of Epicurus, were taught both to act and tosuffer; and the death of Petronius was not less effectual than that of Seneca, tohumble a tyrant by the discovery of his impotence. The light of science couldnot indeed be confined within the walls of Athens. Her incomparable writersaddress themselves to the human race; the living masters emigrated to-Italy andAsia; Berytus, in later times, was devoted to the study of the law; astronomy andphysic were cultivated in the museum of Alexandria; but the Attic schools ofrhetoric and philosophy maintained their superior reputation from the Peloponne-sian war to the reign of Justinian. Athens, though situated in a barren soil,possessed a pure air, a free navigation, and the monuments of ancient art. Thatsacred retirement was seldom disturbed by business of trade, or government; andthe last of the Athenians were distinguished by their lively wit, the purity of theirtaste and language, their social manners, and some traces, at least in discourse, ofthe magnanimity of their fathers. In the suburbs of the city, the academy of thePlatohists the lyceum of the Peripatetics, the /wrtico of the Stoics and the gardenof the Epicureans, were planted with trees and decorated with statues: and thephilosophers, instead of being immured in a cloister, delivered their instructionsin spacious and pleasant walks, which, at different hours, were consecrated to theexercises of the mind and body. The genius of the founders still lived in thosevenerable seats; the ambition of succeeding to the masters of human reason, ex­cited a generous emulation; and the merit of the candidates was determined, on.each vacancy, by the free voices of an enlightened people. The Athenian pro­fessors were-paid by their disciples: according to their mutual wants and abilities,
(1) The life of Isocrates extends from Olymp. 86. 1. to 110. 3. (ante Christ. 436—433.) Sec Dionys. Halicarn,torn. ii. p. 149,150. edit. Hudson; Plutarch (live anonymous)in Vit. X. Oratorutn, p. 1538—1543, edit, H. Steph.Phot. Cod. 259. p. 1453.
(8) Theschoolsof Athens are copiously, though concisely, represented in the Fortuna Attica of Meunius.(c. viii. p. 52—73. in torn. i. Opp.) For the state and arts of the city, see the first book of Pausanias, and a smalltimet of Diesearchus (in the second volume of Hudson's Geographers,) who wrote about Olymp. 117. DodweH'c,Dissertat. sect.
(3) Diogen. Laert. de Vit. Philosoph. L T. iegro. 37. p. 289.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. S7


and mortal strokes: his faithful guards imitated his valour, and defended his per­son; and the Goths, after the loss of a thousand men, fled before the arms of ahero. They were rashly pursued to their camp; and the Romans, oppressed bymultitudes, made a gradual, and at length a precipitate retreat to the gates of thecity; the gates were shut against the fugitives; and the public terror was increasedby the report that Belisarius was slain. His countenance was indeed disfiguredby sweat, dust, and blood; his voice was hoarse, his strength was almost exhausted,but his unconquerable spirit still remained; he imparted that spirit to his despond­ing companions; and their last desperate charge was felt by the flying barbarians;as if a new army, vigorous and entire, had been poured from the city. The Fla-minian gate was thrown open to a real triumph; but it was not before Belisariushad visited every post, and provided for the public safety, that he could be per­suaded by his wife and friends, to taste the needful refreshments of food and sleep.In the more improved state of the art of war, a general is seldom required, oreven permitted, to display the personal prowess of a soldier; and the example ofBelisarius may be added to the rare examples of Henry IV. of Pyrrhus and ofAlexander.
After this first and unsuccessful trial of their enemies, the whole army of theGoths passed the Tiber, and formed the siege of the city, which continued abovea year, till their final departure. Whatever fancy may conceive, the severe com­pass of the geographer defines the circumference of Rome within a line of twelvemiles and three hundred and forty-five paces; and that circumference, except inthe Vatican, has invariably been the same from the triumph of Aurelian to thepeaceful but obscure reign of the modern popes.(l) But in the day of her great­ness, the space within her walls was crowded with habitations and inhabitants;and the populous suburbs, that stretched along the public roads, were darted likeso many rays from one common centre. Adversity swept away these extraneousornaments, and left naked and desolate a considerable part even of the seven hills.Yet Rome, in its present state, could send into the field above thirty thousandmales, of a military age;(2) and, notwithstanding the want of discipline and ex­ercise, the far greater part inured to the hardships of poverty, might be capableof bearing arms for the defence of their country and religion. The prudence ofBelisarius did not neglect this important resource. His soldiers were relieved bythe zeal and diligence of the people, who watched while they slept, and labouredw.hile they reposed; he accepted the voluntary service of the bravest and most in­digent of the Roman youth; and the companies of townsmen sometimes represent­ed, in a vacant post, the presence of the troops which had been drawn away tomore essential duties. But his just confidence was placed in the veterans who had4fought under his banner in the Persian and African wars; and although that gallantband was reduced to five thousand men, he undertook, with such contemptiblenumbers, to defend a circle of twelve miles, against an army of one hundred andfifty thousand barbarians. In the walls of Rome, which Belisarius constructed orrestored, the materials of ancient architecture may be discerned;(3) and the■whole fortification was completed, except in a chasm still extant between thePincian and Flaminian gates, which the prejudices of the Goths and Romans leftunder the effectual guard of St. Peter the apostle. (4) The battlements or bas­tions were shaped in sharp angles; a ditch, broad and deep, protected the foot ofthe rampart: and archers on the rampart were assisted by military engines—thebalista, a powerful cross-bow, which darted short but massy arrows; the onagri,.or wild asses, which, on the principle of a sling, threw stones and bullets of anenormous size.(5) A chain was drawn across the Tiber; the arches of the aque-
(1) M. d'Anville has given in the MemoirPS of the Academy for the year 1750, (torn. xxx. p. 198—236.) a planof Rome on ft smaller scale, but far more accurate than that which he had delineated in 1738 for Rolling his­tory. Experience had improved his knowledge: and instead of Rossi's topography, he used t he new and ex­cellent map of Nolli. Pliny's old measure of thirteen must be reduced to eighteen miles. It is easier to altera text, than to remove hills or buildings.
(2) In the year 1709, Labat (Voyages en Italie, torn. iii. p. 218.) reckoned one hundred and thirty-eight thou­sand five hundred and sixty-eight Christian souls, besides eight or ten thousand Jews—without souls! In theyear 1763, the numbers exceeded one hundred and sixty thousand.
(3) The accurate eye of Nardini (Uoma Antica, lib. i. c. 8. p. 31.) could distinguish the turaultuarie opera diBeiisario.
(4) The fissure and leaning in the tipper part of the wail, which Frocopius observed, (Goth. lib. i. c. IS.) is•visible to the present hour. (Donat. Roma Vetus, lib. i. c. 17. p. 53, 54.)
(5) Lijtoius (Opp. torn. iii. Poliorcet. lib. iii.) was ignorant of this clear and conspicuous passage of Procopius.(Goth. lib. i. c. 21.) The engine was named owevpo?, the wild ass, a calcitrando. (Hen. Steph. Tbesaur. Lin­gua; Gnec torn. ii. p. 1340,1341. torn. iii. p. 877.) I have seen an ingenious model, contrived and execute;! byGeneral Melville, which imitates or surpasses tha art of amiquitv.
Vol. III. 8







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIBE. tt*


milay temper was diffused among the subjects of the caliph. Their stern enthu­siasm was softened by time and prosperity: they sought riches in the occupations ofindustry, fame in the pursuits of literature, and happiness in the tranquillity of do­mestic life. War was no longer the passion of the Saracens; and the increase ofpay, the repetition of donatives, were insufficient to allure the posterity of thosevoluntary champions who had crowded to the standard of Abubeker and Omarfor the hopes of spoil and of paradise.
Under the reign of the Ommiades, the studies of the Moslems were confinedto the interpretation of the Koran, and the eloquence and poetry of their native-tongue. A people continually exposed to the dangers of the field must esteem thehealing powers of medicine, or rather of surgery; but the starving physicians ofArabia murmured a complaint, that exercise and temperance deprived them ofthe greatest part of their practice. (1) After their civil and domestic wars, thesubjects of the Abbassides, awakening from this mental lethargy, found leisure,and felt curiosity, for the acquisition of profane science. This spirit was first en­couraged by the caliph Almansor, who besides his knowledge of the Mahometanlaw, had applied himself with success to the study of astronomy. But when thesceptre devolved to Almamon, the seventh of the Abbassides, he completed the' designs of his grandfather, and invited the Muses from their ancient seats. Hisambassadors at Constantinople, his agents in Armenia, Syria and Egypt, collectedthe volumes of the Grecian science: at his command they were translated by themost skilful interpreters into the Arabic language; his subjects were exhorted as­siduously to peruse these instructive writings; and the successor of Mahomet as­sisted with pleasure and modesty at the assemblies and disputations of the learned," He was not ignorant," says Abulpharagius, " that they are the elect of God, hisbest and most useful servants, whose lives are devoted to the improvement of theirrational faculties." The mean ambition of the Chinese and Turks may glory inthe industry of their hands, or the indulgence of their brutal appetites. Vet thesedexterous artists must view with hopeless emulation, the hexagons and pyramidsof the cells of a bee-hive :(2) these fortitudinous heroes are awed by the superiorfierceness of the lions and tigers; and in their amorous enjoyments, they are muchinferior to the vigour of the grossest, and most sordid of the quadrupeds. Theteachers of wisdom are the true luminaries and legislators ot a world, which,without their aid, would again sink in ignorance and barbarism. "(3) The zealand curiosity of Almamon were imitated by succeeding princes of the line of Ab­bas: their rivals, the Fatimites of Africa and the Ommiades.of Spain, were thepatrons of the learned, as well as the commanders of the faithful: the same royalprerogative was claimed by their independent emirs of the provinces: and theiremulation diffused the taste and the rewards of science from Samarcand and Bocharato Fez and Cordova. The vizier of a sultan consecrated a sum of two hundredthousand pieces of gold to the foundation of a college at Bagdad, which he en­dowed with an annual revenue of fifteen thousand dinars. The fruits of instruc­tion were communicated, perhaps at different times, to six thousand disciples ofevery degree, from the son of the noble to that of the mechanic: a sufficient al­lowance was provided for the indigent scholars; and the merit or industry of theprofessors was repaid with adequate stipends. In every city the productions ofArabic literature were copied and collected by the curiosity of the studious, andthe vanity of the rich. A private doctor refused the invitation of the sultan ofBochara, because the carriage of his books would have required four hundredcamels. The royal library of the Fatimites consisted of one hundred thousandmanuscripts, elegantly transcribed and splendidly bound, which were lent, with­out jealousy or avarice, to the students of Cairo. Yet this collection must appearmoderate, if we can believe that the Ommiades of Spain had formed a library ofsix hundred thousand volumes, forty-four of which were employed in the mere
(1) The Gulistau (p. 289.) relates the conversation or Mahomet and* physician, (Epiitol. Rrnaudot. in Fa,nciui, Bibliot. G rac. torn. i. p. SIS.) The prophet himself was skilled in the art of medicine; and Gainier,
Vie de Mahomet, torn. iii. p. 354—405.) has given on extract of the aphorisms which are extant under his name.
(2) See their curious architecture in Resurnar. (Hist, des Insects, torn. v. Memoire 8.) These hexajrnns av«elosed by a pyramid; the angles of the three sides of a similar pyramid, such as would accomplish the given endwith the smallest quantity possible of materials, were determined by a mathematician, at one hundred andnine degrees t went) -six mintttes for the larger, seventy degrees thirty-two minutes for the smaller. The actualxneuureisone hundred and ninedegrees twunty-eight minutes, seventy degrees thirty>two minates. Yet thaiperfect harmony raises the work at the expense of the artist; the bees are not masters of transcendant geometry.
(3) Saed Bbn Ahmed, cadhi of Toledo, who died A. H. 462, A. D. 1069, has furnished Ahulpharagius.fDjnast.p. loo.) with this curious passage, as well as with the text of Pocock's Specimen Historic Arabom. A numberof literary anecdotes of philosophers, physician*, See. who have fitmrisned under each callplrpswrvtne principalAieut uf tne dynssties of A&ut|>haraghif.


Tl!







OCR Output








■586 THE DECLINE AND FALL


of the next age, the fable was rejected by the contempt of historians(l) and pc-«ts,(2) and the tacit or modest censure of the advocates of the Roman church. (3)The popes themselves have indulged a smile at the credulity, of the vulgar, (4)but a false and obsolete title still sanctifies their reign; and by the same fortunewhich has attended the decretals and the Sibylline oracles, the edifice has subsist­ed after the foundations have been undermined.
While the popes established in Italy their freedom and dominion, the images,the first cause of their revolt, were restored in the eastern empire.(5) Under thereign of Constantine V. the union of civil and ecclesiastical power had overthrownthe tree, without extirpating the root, of superstition. The idols, for such they werenow held, were secretly cherished by the order and the sex most prone to devo­tion: and the fond alliance of the monks and females, obtained a final victory overthe reason and authority of man. Leo IV. maintained with less rigour the religionof his father and grandfather; but his wife, the fair and ambitious Irene, had im­bibed the zeal of the Athenians, the heirs of the idolatry, rather than the philoso­phy, of their ancestors. During the life of her husband, these sentiments wereinflamed by danger and dissimulation, and she could only labour to protect andpromote some favourite monks whom she drew from their caverns, and seated onthe metropolitan thrones of the east. But as soon as she reigned in her own nameand that of her son, Irene more seriously undertook the ruin of the Iconoclasts; andthe first step of her future persecution, was a general edict for liberty of conscience.In the restoration of the monks, a thousand images were exposed te the public ve­neration; a thousand legends were invented of their sufferings and miracles. Bythe opportunities of death or removal, the episcopal seats were judiciously filled;the most eager competitors for earthly or celestial favour, anticipated and flatteredthe judgment of their sovereign; and the promotion of her secretary Tarasius, gaveIrene the patriarch of Constantinople, and the command of the oriental church.But the decrees of a general council could only be repealed by a similar assem­bly;^) the Iconoclasts, whom she convened, were bold in possession, and averseto debate; and the feeble voice of the bishops was re-echoed by the more formidableclamour of the soldiers and people of Constantinople. The delay and intrigues ofa year, the separation of the disaffected troops, and the choice of Nice for a secondorthodox synod, removed these obstacles; and the episcopal conscience was again,after the Greek fashion, in the hands of the prince. No more than eighteen dayswere allowed for the consummation of this important work: the Iconoclasts ap­peared, not as judges, but as criminals or penitents; the scene was decorated by thelegates of pope Hadrian and the eastern patriarch, (7) the decrees were framed bythe president Tarasius, and ratified by the acclamations and subscriptions of threehundred and fifty bishops. They unanimously pronounced, that the worship ofimages is agreeable to Scripture and reason, to the fathers and councils of the
(1) See Guiccinrdini, a servant of the popes, in that long and valuable digression, which has resumed itsplace in the last edition, correctly published from the author's MS., and printed in four volumes in quarto, un­der the name of Friburgo, 1775w(Istoria d'ltalia, torn. i. p. 385—395.)
(2) The Paladin Astolpho found it in the moon, among the things that were lost uponearth. (Orlando Furi-010,34,80.)
Di van fiore ad un grand monte passa,, Ch'ebbe gia buono odore, or p'uzza forte
Questo era il dono (se pero dir lace)Che Constantino at buon Silvestro fece.
Yet this incomparable poem has been approved by a bull of Leo X.
(3) See Baronius. A. D. 324, no. 117—123. A. D. 1191, no. 51. &c. The cardinal wishes to suppose thatHome was offered by Constantine, and refused by Silvester. The act of donation he considers, strangelyenough, as a forgery of the Greeks.
(4) Baronius n'en dit guerres contre: encore en a Oil tropdit,et l'on vouloit sans moi (Cardinal du Perron,)qui 1'eropechai, eensurer certe partie de son histoire. J'en devisai un jour avec le Pane, et il ne roe reponditautre chose "che yolete! i Canonici la lenRono." i le desoit cn riant. (Penoniana, p. 77.)
(5) The remaining history of images, from Irene to Theodora, is collected, for the catholics, by BaroniusandPagi, (A. D. 780—840.) Katalis Alexander, (Hisr. N. T. seculuni viii. Panoplia adversus Hseretieos, p.118—173.) and Dupin: (liibliot. Eceles. torn. vi. p. 136—154.) for the proteslantl, by Spanheim, (Hist. I mac. p.SOS—639.) Basnage, (Hist, de I'Eglise, torn. i. p. 556—572. torn. ii. p. 1362—1385.) and Mosheim. (Institnt. Hist.Eceles. secul. viii. et vx.) The protesiants, except Mosheim, are soured with controversy; but the catholics,except Dupin,are inflamed by the fury and superstition of the monks; and even Le Beau, (Hist, du Bas em­pire) a gentlenian and a scholar, is infected by the odious contaKion.
(6) Seethe Acts, in Greek and Latin, of the second council of Nice, with a number of relative pieces, in theseventh volume of the councils, p. 645—1600. A faithful version, with some critical notes, would provoke, indifferent readers, a sigh or a smile.
(7) The pope's legates were casual messengers, two priests without any special commission, and who weredisavowed on their return. Some vagabond monks were persuaded by the catholics to represent the orientalpatriarchs. This cunous anecdote is revealed by Theodore Studites, (epist. i.38. in Sirmond. Opp. torn. v. p-1319.) one Of the warmest Iconoclasts of the age.







OCR Output








184 THE DECLINE AND FALL


their antagonists, and Germanus himself was hurried along by the crowds, whorushed to the palace of Hebdomon, seven miles from the city, to adore the ma­jesty of Phocas the centurion. A modest wish of resigning the purple to the rankand merit of Germanus was opposed by his resolution, more obstinate and equallysincere:,the senate and clergy obeyed his summons, and as soon as the patriarchwas assured of his orthodox belief, he consecrated the successful usurper in thechurch of St. John the Baptist. On the third day, amidst the acclamations of athoughtless people, Phocas made his public entry in a chariot drawn by four whitehorses; the revolt of the troops was rewarded by a lavish donative, and the newsovereign, after visiting the palace, beheld from his throne the games of the hip­podrome. In a dispute of precedency between the two factions, his partial judg­ment inclined in favour of the greens. Remember that Maurice is still alive, re­sounded from the opposite side; and the indiscreet clamour of the blues admonishedand stimulated the cruelty of the tyrant. The ministers of death were des­patched to Chalcedon: they dragged the emperor from his sanctuary; and thelive sons of Maurice were successively murdered before the eyes of their agonizingparent. At each stroke, which he felt in his heart, he found strength to rehearsea pious ejaculation,—Thou art just, O 'Lord.' and thy judgments are righteous.And such, in the last moments, was his rigid attachment to truth and justice, thathe revealed to the soldiers the pious falsehood of a nurse who presented her ownchild in the place of a royal infant. (1) .The tragic scene was finally closed by theexecution of the emperor himself, in the twentieth year of his reign, and the sixty-third year of his age. The bodies of the father and his five sons were cast intothe sea, their heads were exposed at Constantinople to the insults or pity of themultitude, and it was not till some signs of putrefaction had appeared, that Pho­cas connived at the private burial of these venerable remains. In that grave, thefaults and errors of Maurice were kindly interred. His fate alone was remem­bered; and at the end of twenty years, in the recital of the history of Theophylact,the mournful tale was interrupted by the tears of the audience. (2)
Such tears must have flowed in secret; and such compassion would have beencriminal, under the reign of Phocas, who was peaceably acknowledged in theprovinces of the east and west. The images of the emperor and his wife Leontiawere exposed in the Lateran to the veneration of the clergy and senate of Rome,and afterwards deposited in the palace of the Csesars, between those of Constan-tine and Theodosius. As a subject and a Christian, it was the duty of Gregory toacquiesce in the established government, but the joyful applause with which hesalutes the fortune of the assassin, has sullied with indelible disgrace the charac­ter of the saint. The successor of the apostles might have inculcated with de­cent firmness the guilt of blood, and the necessity of repentance; he is content tocelebrate the deliverance of the people and the fall of the oppressor; to rejoicethat the piety and benignity of Phocas have been raised by Providence to the im­perial throne; to pray that his hands may be strengthened against all his enemies;and to express a wish, perhaps a prophecy, that after a long and triumphant reign,he maybe transferred from a temporal to an everlasting kingdom. (3) I havealready traced the steps of a revolution so pleasing, in Gregory's opinion, both toheaven and earth; and Phocas does not appear less hateful in the exercise thanin the acquisition of power. The pencil of an impartial historian has delineatedthe portrait of a monster;(4) his diminutive and deformed person, the closenessof his shaggy eve-brows, his red hair, his beardless chin, and his cheek disfiguredand discoloured by a formidable scar. Ignorant of letters, of laws, and even ofarms, he indulged in the supreme rank a more ample privilege of lust and drunk­enness, and his brutal pleasures were either injurious to his subjects or disgraceful


(1) From this generous attempt, Corneille has deduced the intricate web of his tragedy of Heraclius, whichrequires more than one representation to be clearly understood; (Corneille de Voltaire, torn. v. p. 300.) andwhich, after an interval of some years, is said to have puzzled the author himself. Anecdotes Dramatiqucs,torn. i. p. 422.
(2) The revolt of Phocas and death of Maurice are told by Theophylact Simocatta, lib. viii. e. 7—12.) thePaschal Chronicle (p. 379,380.) Theophanes, (Chronograph, p. 238—244.) Zonaras, torn. ii. lib. i*iv. p. 77—80.)and Cedrenus, (p. 399—404.)
(3) Gregor. hbvxi. epist. 38. indict. 6. Benignitatem, vestras pietatis ad imperiale fastigium pervennissegaudemus. Lauentur cosli et exultet terra, et de vestris benignis actibus universal reipublicse populus noneusque vehementer afilictus liilarescat, Sec. This base flattery, the topic of Protestant invective, is justly cen­sured by the philosopher Bayle. (Dictionaire Critique, Gregoire I. No. H. torn. ii. p. 597, J98.) Cardinal Ba-ronius justifies the pope at the expense of toe fallen emperor.
(4) The images of Phocas were destroyed; but even the malice of his enemies would suffer one copy ofsuch a portrait or caricature (Cedrenus, p. 404.) to escape the flames.
4







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


terest to throw himself on the favour of the nation and the support of the Sara­cens. In his first conference with Amrou, he heard without indignation the usualoption of the Koran, the tribute, or the sword. "The Greeks," replied Mokaw-kas, " are determined to abide the determination of the sword; but with the GreeksI desire no communion, either in this world or in the next, and I abjure for everthe Byzantine tyrant, his synod of Chalcedon, and his Melchite slaves. For my-.self and my brethren, we are resolved to live and die in the profession of the gos­pel and unity of Christ. It is impossible for us to embrace the revelations of yourprophet; but we are desirous of peace, and cheerfully submit to pay tribute andobedience to his temporal successors." The tribute was ascertained at two piecesof gold for the head of every Christian: but old men, monks, women, and children,of both sexes, under sixteen years of age, were exempted from this personal as­sessment; the Copts above and below Memphis swore allegiance to the caliph,and promised a hospitable entertainment of three days to every Mussulman whoshould travel through their country. By this charter of security, the ecclesiasti­cal and civil tyranny of the Melchites was destroyed:(l) the anathemas of St. Cy­ril were thundered from every pulpit; and the sacred edifices, with the patrimonyof the church, were restored to the national communion of the Jacobites, who en­joyed without moderation the moment of triumph and revenge. At the pressingsummons of Amrou, their patriarch Benjamin emerged from his desert; and, af­ter the first interview, the courteous Arab affected to declare, that he had neverconversed with a Christian priest of more innocent manners, and a more venera­ble aspect.(2) In the march from Memphis to Alexandria, the lieutenant ofOmar intrusted his safety to the zeal and gratitude of the Egyptians; the roadsand bridges were diligently repaired; and in every step of his progress, he coulddepend on a constant supply of provisions and intelligence. The Greeks ofEgypt, whose numbers could scarcely equal a tenth of the natives, were over­whelmed by the universal defection; they had ever been hated, they were no lon­ger feared; the magistrate fled from his tribunal, the bishop from his altar; andthe distant garrisons were surprised or starved by*the surrounding multitudes-Had not the Nile afforded a safe and ready conveyance to the sea, not an individualcould have escaped, who, by birth, or language, or office, or religion, was con­nected with their odious name.
By the retreat of the Greeks from the provinces of Upper Egypt, a considera­ble force was collected in the island of Delta; the natural and artificial channelsof the Nile afforded a succession of strong and defensible posts; and the road toAlexandria was laboriously cleared by the victory of the Saracens in two-and-twenty days of general or partial combat. In their annals of conquest, the siegeof Alexandria(3) is perhaps the most arduous and important enterprise. Thefirst trading city in the world was abundantly replenished with the means of sub­sistence and defence. Her numerous inhabitants fought for the dearest of humanrights, religion and property; and the enmity of the natives seemed to excludethem from the common benefit of peace and toleration. The sea was continual­ly open; and if Heraclius had been awake to the public distress, fresh armies ofRomans and barbarians might have been poured into the harbour to save the se­cond capital of the empire. A circumference of ten miles would have scatteredthe forces of the Greeks, and favoured the stratagems of an active enemy; butthe two sides of an oblong square were covered by the sea ami the lake Marccotis,awl each of the narrow ends exposed a front of nr> more than ten furlongs. Theefforts of the Arabs were not inadequate to the difficulty of the attempt and thevalue of the prize. From the throue of Medina, the eyes of Omar were fixed onthe camp and city: his voice excited to arms the Arabian tribes and the veteransof Syria; and the merit of a holy war was recommended by the peculiar fameand fertility of Egypt. Anxious for the ruin or expulsion of their tyrants, the
(1) The prefecture of Egypt, and the conduct of the war, liatl been trusted by Heraclius to the patriarchCyrus. (Theophan. p. 280,331.) "In Spain (said James II.) do yon not consult your priests?"' ** We do (re­plied the catholic ambassador,) and our affairs succeed accordingly." I know not how to relate the plans ofCyrus, of paying tribute without impairing the revenue, and of converting Omar by his marriage with theemperor's daughter. (Nicephnr. Breviar. p. 17,18.)
(2) See the Life of Benjamin, in Renaudot, (Hist. Patriarch. Alexandrin. p. 156—172.) who has enriched theconquest of Egypt with some facts from the Arabic text of Severus the Jacobite historian.
(3) The local description of Alexandria is perfectly ascertained by the master-hand of the first of geographers(d'Anville, Memoire sur PEgypt, p. 52—63.;) but we may borrow the eyes of the modern travellers, more espe­cially of Thevenot (Voyage an Levant, part 1. p. 381—395.,) Pocock (vol. i. p. 2—13.,) and Niebuhr (Voyage enArabic, torn. i. p. 34—43.) Of the two modern rivals, Savary ant! Volney, the one may amuse, the other willinstruct.
:







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


Whomsoever they accused were cast into her peculiar prisons,(l) inaccessible tothe inquiries of justice; and it was rumoured, that the torture of the rack, orscourge had been inflicted in the presence of a female tyrant, insensible to thevoice of prayer or of pity.(2) Some of these unhappy victims perished in deepunwholesome dungeons, while others were permitted, after the loss of their limbs,their reason, or their fortune, to appear in the world the living monuments of hervengeance, which was commonly extended to the children of those whom she hadsuspected or injured. The senator or bishop, whose death or exile Theodora had
grenounced, was delivered to a trusty messenger, and his diligence was quickenedy a menace from her own mouth. " If you fail in the execution of my commands,I swear by him who liveth for ever, that your skin shall be flayed from yourbody. "(3)
If the creed of Theodora had not been tainted with heresy, her exemplary de­votion might have atoned, in the opinion of her cotemporaries, for pride, avarice,and cruelty. But if she employed her influence to assuage the intolerant fury ofthe emperor, the present age will allow some merit to her religion, and much in­dulgence to her speculative errors. (4) The name of Theodora was introduced,with equal honour, in all the pious and charitable foundations of Justinian; andthe most benevolent institution of his reign may be ascribed to the sympathy ofthe empress for her less fortunate sisters, who had been seduced or compelled toembrace the trade of prostitution. A palace, on the Asiatic side of the Bospho-rus, was converted into a stately and spacious monastery, and a liberal mainte­nance was assigned to five hundred women, who had been collected from thestreets and brothels of Constantinople. In this safe and holy retreat, they weredevoted to perpetual confinement; and the despair of some, who threw themselvesheadlong into the sea, was lost in the gratitude of the penitents, who had been de­livered from sin and misery, by their generous benefactress. (5) The prudenceof Theodora is celebrated by Justinian himself; and his laws are attributed to thesage counsels of his most revered wife, whom he had received as the gift of theDeity. (6) Her courage was displayed amidst the tumult of the people and theterrors of the court. Her chastity, from the moment of her union with Justinian,is founded on the silence of her implacable enemies: and, although the daughterof Acacius might be satisfied with love, yet some applause is due to the firmnessof a mind which could sacrifice pleasure and habit to the stronger sense either ofduty or interest. The wishes and prayers of Theodora could never obtain theblessing of a lawful son, and she buried an infant daughter, the sole offspring ofher marriage. (7) Notwithstanding this disappointment, her dominion was per­manent and absolute; she preserved, by art or merit, the affections of Justinian;and their seeming dissensions were always fatal to the courtiers who believed themto be sincere. Perhaps her health had been impaired by the licentiousness of heryouth; but it was always delicate, and she was directed by her physicians to usethe Pythian warm baths. In this journey, the empress was followed by the pre-torian prefect, the great treasurer, several counts and patricians, and a splendidtrain of four thousand attendants; the highways were repaired at her approach;a palace was erected for her reception: and as she passed through Bithynia, shedistributed liberal alms to the churches, the monasteries, and the hospitals, thatthey might implore Heaven for the restoration of her health. (8) At length, inthe twenty-fourth year of her marriage, and the twenty-second of her reign, shewas consumed by a cancer;(9) and the irreparable loss was deplored by her lms-
(1) Her prison!, a labyrinth, a Tarlarm, (Anecdot. c. 4.) were under Ihe palace. Darkness is propitious tocruelty, but it is likewise favourable to calumny and fiction.
(2) A more jocular whipping was inflicted on Saturninus, for presuming to say that his wife, a favourite ofthe empress, had not been found mtp^to,-. (Anecdot. e. 17.)
(3) Per viventem in s&cula excoriai i te faciam. Anastasius de Vitis Pout. Roman in Vijrilio, p. 40.
(4) Ludewig, p. 161—166. I give him credit for the charitable attempt, although he hath not much charityin his temper.
(5) Compare the anecdotes (c. 17.) with the Edifices, (lib. i. c. 9.) Haw differently may the same fact bestated! John Malala (torn. ii. p. 174, 175.) observes, that on this, or a similar occasion, she released and clothedthe girls whom she had purchased from the stews at five aurei a-piece.
(6) Novel, viii. I. An allusion to Theodora. Her enemies read the name Dsemouodora. (Aleman. p. 66.)
(7) St. Sabas refused to pray for a son of Theodora, lest he should prove a heretic worse than Anastasiushimself. (Cyril, in Vit. St. Saba:, apud Aleman. p. 70. 109.)
(8) See John Malala, torn. ii. p. 174. Theophanes, p. 158. Procopius de Edific. lib. v. c. 3.)
(9) Theodora Chalcedonensis synodi inimica canceris plaga toto corpore perfusa vitam prodigiose finivit(Vietor Tununensis in Chron.) On such occasions, an orthodox mind is steeled against pity. Alamannus (p.12,13.) understands the etwB3*>c xxaiprfu of Theophanes as civil language, which does not imply either piety ortepemaneej yet two yean after her death, St. Theodora is celebrated by Paul Silemiarius. (in Proem, v. 55-61.
Vol. III. 2







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


ries;(l) but, although he laid them at the foot of the throne, the pride of Justinianmust have been wounded by the praise of a hero, who perpetually eclipses the gloryof his inactive sovereign. The conscious dignity of independence was subdued bythe hopes and fears of a slave; and the secretary of Belisarius laboured for pardonand reward in the six books of the imperial edifices. He had dexterously chosena subject of apparent splendour, in which he could loudly celebrate the genius, themagnificence, and the piety of a prince, who, both as a conqueror and legislator,had surpassed the puerile virtues of Themistocles and Cyrus. (2) Disappointmentmight urge the flatterer to secret revenge; and the first glance of favour mightagain tempt him to suspend and suppress a libel;(3) in which the Roman Cyrus isdegraded into an odious and contemptible tyrant, in which both the emperorand his consort Theodora are seriously represented as two demons, who had as­sumed a human form for the destruction of mankind. (4) Such base inconsistencymust doubtless sully the reputation, and detract from the credit, of Procopius: yet,after the venom of his malignity hj^s been suffered to exhale, the residue of theanecdotes, even the most disgraceful facts, some of which had been tenderly hint­ed in his public history, are established by their internal evidence, or the authen­tic monuments of thetimes.(5) From these various materials, I shall now pro­ceed to describe the reign of Justinian, which will deserve and occupy an amplespace. The present chapter will explain the elevation and character of Theodo­ra, the factions of the circus, and the peaceful administration of the sovereign ofthe east. In the three succeeding chapters, I shall relate the wars of Justinianwhich achieved the conquest of Africa and Italy; and I shall follow the victoriesof Belisarius and Narses, without disguising the vanity of their triumphs, or thehostile virtue of the Persian and Gothic heroes. The series of this volume willembrace the jurisprudence and theology of the emperor; the controversies andsects which still divide the oriental church; the reformation of the Roman law,which is obeyed or respected by the nations of modern Europe.
I. In the exercise of supreme power, the first act of Justinian was to divide itwith the woman whom he loved, the famous Theodora,(6) whose strange eleva­tion cannot be applauded as the triumph of female virtue. Under the reign ofAnastasius, the care of the wild beasts maintained by the green faction of Con­stantinople, was intrusted to Acacius, a native of the isle of Cypress, who, fromhis employment, was surnamed the master of the bears. This honourable officewas given after his death to another candidate, notwithstanding the diligence ofhis widow, who had already provided a husband and a successor. Acacius hadleft three daughters, Comito,(7) Theodora, and Anastasia, the eldest of whomdid not then exceed the age of seven years. On a solemn festival, these helplessorphans were sent by their distressed and indignant mother in the garb of sup-'phants, into the midst of the theatre; the green faction received them with con­tempt, the blues with compassion; and this difference, which sunk deep into themind of Theodora, was felt long afterward in the administration of the empire.As they improved in age and beauty, the three sisters were successively devotedto the public and private pleasures of the Byzantine people; and Theodora, afterfollowing Comito on the stage, in the dress of a slave, with a stool on her head,was at length permitted to exercise her independent talents. She neither danced,nor sung, nor played on the flute; her skill was confined to the pantomime arts;she excelled in buffoon characters, and as often as the comedian swelled her
Maltref, a Jesuit of Thoulouse. in 1663, fur distant from the Louvre press and the Vatican MS., from which,however, he obtained tome supplements. His promised commentaries, &c, have never appeared. The Aga-thias of Leyden, (1594) has been wisely reprinted by the Paris editor, with the Latin version of BonaventuraVuteanius, a learned interpreter. (Huet. p. 176.)
(1) Agathias in Prafat. p. 7, 8. lib. iv. p. 137. Evagrius, lib. iv. c. 12. See likewise Ptiotius, cod. 63. p. 65.
(2) Kwpou mijfui (says he, Priefat. ail 1. de Edificiis srspi itris.wiTwv) is no more than Kvpou irxtSix—a pun! Inthese five books, Procopius affects a Christian, as well as a courtly style.
(3) Procopius discloses himself, (Prafat. ad Anecdot. c. 1. 2. 5 ) and the anecdotes are reckoned as the ninthbook by Smdas. (torn. iti. p. 186. edit. Kuster.) The silence of Evagrius is a poor objection. Baronius (A. D.548. No. 24.) regrets the loss of this secret history: it was then in the Vatican library, in his own custody, andwas first published sixteen years after his death, with the learned, but partial notes of Nicholas Alemannus.(Ludg. 1623.)
(4) Justinian an ass—the perfect likeness of Domitian—(Anecdot. c. 8.)—Theodora's lovers driven from herbed by rival demons—her marriage foretold with a great demon—a monk saw the prince of the demons, in­stead of Justinian, on the throne—;the servants who watched, beheld a face without features, a body walkingwithout a head, &c. 8cc. Procopius declares his own and his friends1 belief in these diabolicul stories, (c. 12.)
(5) Montesquieu (Considerations sur la Grandeur et la Decadence des Romains, c. 20.) gives credit to theseanecdotes, as connected, 1. with the weakness of the empire; and 2. with the instability of Justinian's laws.
(6) For the life and manners of tiie empress Theodora, see the Anecdotes; more especially c. 1—5.9—17.,with the learned notes of Alemannus—a reference to which is always implied.
(7) Comito was afterwards married to Sittas, duke of Armenia, the father perhaps, at least she might be thetnother, of the empress Sophia. Two nephews of Theodora may be the sons of Anastasia. (Aleman. p. 30,31.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 241


cated with a foolish pride, that his birth had given him the command of millions^of whom the smallest community would not have chosen him for their local ma­gistrate. His favourite ministers were two beings the least susceptible of humansympathy; a eunuch and a monk: to the one he abandoned the palace, to the otherthe finances; the former corrected the emperor's mother with a scourge, the lat­ter suspended the insolvent tributaries, with their heads downward?, over a slowand smoky fire. Since the days of Commodus and Caracalla, the cruelty of theRoman princes had most commonly been the effect of their fear; but Justinian,who possessed some vigour of character, enjoyed the sufferings, and braved therevenge, of his subjects about ten years, till the measure was full of his crimesand of their patience. In a dark dungeon, Leontius, a general of reputation, hadgroaned above three years with some of the noblest and most deserving of the pa­tricians: he was suddenly drawn forth to assume the government of Greece; andthis promotion of an injured man was a mark of the contempt rather than of theconfidence of his prince. As he was followed to the port by the kind offices ofhis friends, Leontius observed, with a sigh, that he was a victim adorned for sa­crifice, and that inevitable death would pursue his footsteps. They ventured toreply, that glory and empire might be the recompense of a generous resolution; thatevery order of men abhorred the reign of a monster; and that the hands of twohundred thousand patriots expected only the voice of a leader. The night waschosen for their deliverance; and in the first effort of the conspirators, the prefectwas slain; and the prisons were forced open: the emissaries'of Leontius proclaimedin every street,—Christians! to St. Sofihia: and the seasonable text of the patri­arch, This is the day of the Lord! was the prelude of an inflammatory sermon.From the church the people adjourned to the hippodrome: Justinian, in whosecause not a sword had been drawn, was dragged before these tumultuary judges,and their clamours demanded the instant death of the tyrant. But Leontius, whowas already clothed with the purple, cast an eye of pity on the prostrate son ofhis own benefactor and of so many emperors. The life of Justinian was spared;the amputation of his nose, perhaps of his tongue, was imperfectly performed: thehappy flexibility of the Greek language could impose the name of Rhinotmetus;and the mutilated tyrant was banished to Chersonse in Crim-Tartary, a lonelysettlement, where corn, wine, and oil, were imported as foreign luxuries.
On the edge of the Scythian wilderness, Justinian still cherished the pride of hisbirth and the hope of his restoration. After three years' exile, he received thepleasing intelligence that his injury was avenged by a second revolution, and thatLeontius in his turn had been dethroned and mutilated by the rebel Apsimar, whoassumed the more respectable name of Tiberius. But the claim of lineal suc­cession was still formidable to a plebeian usurper, and his jealousy was stimulatedby the complaints and charges of the Chersonites, who beheld the vices of the ty­rant in the spirit of the exile. With a band of followers, attached to his personby common hope or common despair, Justinian fled from the inhospitable shoreto the horde of the Chozars, who pitched their tents between the Tanais and Bo-rysthenes. The khan entertained with pity and respect the royal suppliant: Phana-goria, once an opulent city, on the Asiatic side of the lake Moeotis, was assignedfor his residence; and every Roman prejudice was stifled in his marriage with thesister of the barbarian, who seems, however, from the name of Theodora, tohave received the sacrament of baptism. But the faithless Chozar was soontempted by the gold of Constantinople; and had not the design been revealed bythe conjugal love of Theodora, her husband must have been assassinated, or be­trayed into the power of his enemies. After strangling, with his own hands, thetwo emissaries of the khan, Justinian sent back his wife to her brother, and em­barked on the Euxine in search of new and more faithful allies. His vessel wasassaulted by a violent tempest; and one of his pious companions advised him todeserve the mercy of God by a vow of general forgiveness, if he should be re­stored to the throne. " Of forgiveness (replied the intrepid tyrant ?) may I pe­rish this instant—may the Almighty whelm me in the waves—if I consent to sparea single head of my enemies!" He survived this impious menace, sailed into themouth of the Danube, trusted his person in the royal village of the Bulgarians,and purchased the aid of Terbelis, a pagan conqueror, by the promise of hisdaughter, and a fair partition of the treasures of the empire. The Bulgariankingdom extended to the confines of Thrace; and the two princes besieged Con­stantinople at the head of fifteen thousand horse. Apsimar was dismayed by thesudden and hostile apparition of his rival, whose head had been promised by the
Vox,, nr. n







OCR Output








378 THE DECLINE AND FALL


and the caliph Moawiyah was invited by the cries of the Africans themselves. Thtrsuccessors of Heraclius had been informed of the tribute which they had been com­pelled to stipulate with the Arabs: but instead of being moved to pity and relievetheir distresses, they imposed, as an equivalent or a fine.sji second tribute of a si­milar amount. The ears of the Byzantine ministers were shut against the com­plaints of their poverty and ruin: their despair was reduced to prefer the domi­nion of a single master; and the extortions of the patriarch of Carthage, who wasinvested with civil and military power, provoked the sectaries, and even the ca­tholics, of the Roman province to abjure the religion as well as the authority oftheir tyrants. The first lieutenant of Moawiyah acquired a just renown, subduedan important city, defeated an army of thirty thousand Greeks, swept away four­score thousand captives, anil enriched with their spoils the bold adventurers of Sy­ria and Egypt. (1) But the title of conqueror of Africa is more justly due to hissuccessor Akbah. He marched from Damascus at the head of ten thousand ofthe bravest Arabs: and the genuine force of the Moslems was enlarged by thedoubtful aid and conversion of many thousand barbarians. It would be difficult,nor is it necessary, to tiace the accurate line of the progress of Akbah. The in­terior regions have been peopled by tlve orientals with fictitious armies and imagi­nary citadels. In the warlike province of Zab or Numidia, fourscore thousand ofthe natives might assemble in arms; but the number of three hundred and sixtytowns is incompatible with the ignorance or decay of husbandry ;(2) and a circum­ference of three leagues will not be justified by the ruins of Erbe or Lambesa, theancient metropolis of that inland country. As we approach the sea coast, thewell known cities of Bugia(3) and Tangier(4) define the more certain limits of theSaracen victories. A remnant of trade still adheres to the commodious harbourof Bugia, which, in a more prosperous age, is said to have contained about twentythousand houses; and the plenty of iron which is dug from the adjacent mountainsmight have supplied a braver people with the instruments of defence. The remoteposition and venerable antiquity of Tingi, or Tangier, have been decorated by theGreek and Arabian fables; but the figurative expressions of the latter, that thewalls were constructed of brass, and that the roofs were covered with gold and sil­ver, may be interpreted as the emblems of strength and opulence. The provinceof Mauritania Tingitana,(5) which assumed the name of the capital, had been im­perfectly discovered and settled by the Romans; the five colonies were confined toa narrow pale, and the more souchern parts were seldom explored except by theagents of luxury, who searched the forests for ivory and citron-wood(6) and theshores of the ocean for the purple shell-fish. The fearless Akbah plunged intothe heart of the country, traversed the wilderness in which his successors erectedthe splendid capitals of Fez and Morocco(7) and at length penetrated to the vergeof the Atlantic and the great desert. The river Suz descends from the westernsides of mount Atlas, fertilizes like the Nile, the adjacent soil, and falls into thesea at a moderate distance from the Canary, or Fortunate, islands. Its banks wereinhabited by the last of the Moors, a race of savages, without laws, or discipline,or religion; they were astonished by the strange and irresistible terrors of the ori­ental arms; and, as they possessed neither gold nor silver, the richest spoil was the
(1) Theophanes (in Chronograph, p. 2930 inserts the vague rumours that might reach Constantinople, or tb«western conquests of the Arabs; and 1 leain from Paul Warnefrid, deacon of Aqnileia, (de Gestis Langobard,lib. v. c. 15.) that at this time they sentn fleet from Alexandria into the Silician and African seas.
(2) See Novairi (apud Otter, p. 118.) Leo Africanus, fol. 81. verso,) who reckons only cinque citta e infiniteeasai; Marmol, (Description de I'Afrique, torn. iii. p. 33.) and Shaw, (Travels, p. 57. 65—68.)
(3) Leo African, fol. 38. verso, 59. recto. Marmol^tom. ii. p. 415. Shaw**p. 43.
(4) Leo African.fol. 52. Marmol, torn. ii. p. 228.
(5) Regio ignobilis, ct vis. quicqnam illustre sortita, parvis oppidis habitatur, parva flumina emiltit, solociuam viris melior, et segniti- gentis obscura. Pomponius Mela, l. 5.3.10. Mela deserves the more credit,since his own Phoenician anct stors had miexntecl from Tiugitana to Spain. (See in 2. 6. a passage of that geo­grapher so cruelly tortured h\ Stlmasius. I*a.v.- Vossius, and the most virulent of critics, .Tames (rronovins.) HeJived at the time of the final reduction of that country by the emperor Claudius; yet almost tiiirty years after­ward, Pliny (Hist. Nat. 5.1.) complains of hi. authors, too lazv to inquire, too proud to confess their ignoranceof that wild and remote province.
(6) The foolish fashion of this citron-wood prevailed at Rome among the men, as much as the taste for pearlsamong the women. A round hoard or tabli-. four or five fret in diameter, sold for the price of an estate (lati-fundii taxatione.) eight, ten. or twelve thousand pounds sterling. (Plin. Hist. Natur. 13. 29.) I conceive that Imust not confound the tree citrut with that of the fruit citrum. But lam not botanist enough to define the former(it is like the wild cypress) by the vulgar or Limueftn name; nor will I decide whether the citrum be the onuiKeor the lemon. Salmasiusnpprart to exhaust the subject, but he too involves himself in the web of his disorderlyerudition. (Plinian. Exercitat. torn. ii. p.66r), &c.)
(7) Leo African, fol. 16, verso. Marmol, torn. ii. p. 28. This province, the first scene of the exploits andgreatness of the cJeri^i, isofttu mentioned in the curious history ot'that dynasty at the end of tbe third volumeof Marmol, Description de I'Afrique. The third vol. of the Recherches irtitoriuo.es sur les Maures (lately pub­lished at Paris,) illustrates the history and geography of the kingdom of Fez and Morocco.







OCR Output








Ol' THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 363


a peremptory order, that the fate of the province and the war should be decidedby a single battle. The Syrians were attached to the standard of Rome and ofthe cross; but the noble, the citizen, and the peasant, were exasperated by the in­justice and cruelty of a licentious host, who oppressed them as subjects, and des­pised them as strangers and aliens. (1) A report of these mighty preparations wasconveyed to the Saracens in their camp of Etnesa; and the chiefs, though resolvedto fight, assembled a council: the faith of Obu Obeidah would have expected onthe same spot the glory of martyrdom; the wisdom of Caled advised an honoura­ble retreat to the skirts of Palestine and Arabia, where they might await the suc­cours of their friends, and the attack of the unbelievers. A speedy messengersoon returned from the throne of Medina, with the blessings of Omar and Ali, theprayers of the widows of the prophet, and a reinforcement of eight thousand Mos­lems. In their way they overturned a detachment oT Greeks, and when theyjoined at Yermuk, the camp of their brethren, they found the pleasing intelligence^that Caled had already defeated and scattered the Christian Arabs of the tribe ofGassan. In the neighbourhood of Bosra, the springs of mount Hermon descendin a torrent to the plain of Decapolis, or ten cities; and the Hieromax, a namewhich has been corrupted to Yermuk, is lost after a short course in the lake of Ti­berias.^) The banks of this obscure stream were illustrated by a long and bloodyencounter. On this momentous occasion, the public voice, and the modesty ofAbu Obeidah, restored the command to the most deserving of the Moslems. Ca­led assumed his station in the front, his colleague was posted in the rear, thatthe disorder of the fugitives might be checked by his venerable aspect andthe sight of the yellow banner which Mahomet had displayed before the walls ofChaibar. The last line was occupied by the sister of Derar, with the Arabianwomen who had enlisted in this holy war, who were accustomed to wield the bowand the lance, and who in a moment of captivity had defended, against the uncir-cumcised ravishers, their chastity and religion.(3) The exhortation of the gene­ral was brief and forcible. "Paradise is before you, the devil and hell-fire in yourrear." Yet such was the weight of the Roman cavalry, that the right wing of theArabs was broken and separated from the main body. Thrice, did they retreat indisorder, and thrice were they driven back to the charge by the reproaches andblows of the women. In the intervals of action, Abu Obeidah visited tire tents ofhis brethren, prolonged their repose by repeating at once the prayers of two diffe­rent hours; bound up their wounds with his own hands, and administered the com­fortable reflection, that the infidels partook of their sufferings without partakingof their reward. Four thousand and thirty of the Moslems were buried in thefield of battle; and the skill of the Armenian archers enabled seven hundred toboast that they had lost an eye in that meritorious service. The veterans of theSyrian war acknowledged that it was the hardest and most doubtful of the ciayswhich they had seen." But it was likewise the most decisive: many thousands ofthe Greeks and Syrians fell by the swords of the Arabs; many were slaughtered »after the defeat, in the woods and mountains; many, by mistaking the ford, weredrowned in the waters of the Yermuk; and however the loss may be magnified,(4)the Christian writers confess and bewail the bloody punishment of their sins. (5)Manuel the Roman general, was either killed at Damascus, or took refuge in themonastery of mount Sinai. An exile in the Byzantine court, Jabalah lamented themanners of Arabia, and his unlucky preference of the Christian cause.(6) He
(1) I have read somewh vein Tacitus, or Grotius, Snbjectos haber.t lanqtiam. suos, viles tnnquam alieno*.Same Greek officer* ravished the wife, and murdtrcd thechild, of their Syrian iandlord; .and Manuel smiled atIiis imdutiful complaint.
(2) See Reelaml, Palestine, torn. i. p. 272. 233. torn, ii. p. 771. 775. This learned profVsior was equal to thetask of describing the Holy Land, sineehe wns alike conversant with Grfek and Latin, with Hebrew and Ara­bian literature. The Yermuk, or Hieromax, is noticed hyCellarius (Geoeraph. Antiq. torn. ii. p. 3Q2.;andd'Anville (Geographic Ancienne, torn, ii, p. 185.) The Arabs anil even Abulfcda himself, do not see™ tp re­cognise the scene of their victory.
(3) These women were of the tribe of the Hamyrites, who derived their origin from the ancient Amalekitef.Their females were accustomed to ride on horseback, and to fight like the Arra/.ons of old (Ockley, vol. i. p. 67.)
(4) We killed of them, says Abu Obeidah to the caliph, one hundred and fifty thousand, and made prisonersfnrty thousand (Ockley, vol.*i. p. 241.) As I cannot doubt his veracity, nor believe his computation, I mustsuspect that the Arabic historians indulged themselves in the practice of composing speeches and letters fortheir heroes.
(5) After deploring the sins of the Christians, Theopbr.nes adds (Chronograph, p. 276.) uvurrn » *pw**eAux?~',x ivrrTMV tifiet; tov tou XpWTOv, jtai ytvtTeit TTtt'jrrn $>op* Trrwtr*," tou P»/*x«sa« TrpXTtu h xecrce to TowSoxw Keyto(does he mean Aiznadin?) teat Itfpwtuv, xca tijv »6,-rj«ow a^«tTo;£wi«v. His account is brief and obscure, but heaccuses the numbers of the enemy, the adverse wind, and the cloud of dust: p* SmtS'.mK (the Homan*)«vr<*pi<r-o)»Trr»i c^Spei; Sin rev gcvipSTSe, (jttmitmi, xsc< tetvrovf Sttl.h'ivns (I; rcrs o-rwaSoti; roy Xifftixysj trormuiv ixmKswX.st'ra aeJV. (Chronograph, p. 280.)(») See Abulfcda (Anna". Moslem, p. 70,7!.) who transcribes the poetical complaint of Jabalah himself, am)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. ?


t


cheeks, and complained with a ridiculous tone and gesture of the blows that wereinflicted, the whole theatre of Constantinople resounded with laughter and ap­plause. The beauty of Theodora(l) was the subject of more flattering praise,and the source of more exquisite delight. Her features were delicate and regu­lar; her complexion, though somewhat pale, was tinged with a natural colour;every sensation was instantly expressed by the vivacity of her eyes; her easy mo­tions displayed the graces of a small but elegant figure; and either love or adula­tion might proclaim, that painting and poetry were incapable of delineating thematchless excellence of her form. But this form was degraded by the facilitywith which it was exposed to the public eye, and prostituted to licentious desire.Her venal charms were abandoned to a promiscuous crowd of citizens and stran­gers, of every rank, and of every profession; the fortunate lover who had beenpromised a night of enjoyment, was often driven from her bed by a stronger ormore wealthy favourite; and when she passed through the streets, her presencewas avoided by all who wished to escape either the scandal or the temptation.The satirical historian has not blushed(2) to describe the naked scenes whichTheodora was not ashamed to exhibit in the theatre. (3) After exhausting thearts of sensual pleasure, (4) she most ungratefully murmured against the parsimo­ny of nature;(5) but her murmurs, her pleasures, and her arts must be veiled inthe obscurity of a learned language. After reigning for some time, the delightand contempt of the capital, she condescended to accompany Ecebolus, a native ofTyre, who had obtained the government of the African Pentapolis. But thisunion was frail and transient: Ecebolus soon rejected an expensive or faithless con­cubine; she was reduced at Alexandria to extreme distress; and, in her laboriousreturn to Constantinople, every city of the east admired and enjoyed the fair Cy­prian, whose merit appeared to justify her descent from the peculiar island of Ve­nus. The vague commerce of Theodora, and the most detestable precautions,preserved her from the danger which she feared; yet once, and once only, shebecame a mother. The infant was saved and educated in Arabia, by his father,who imparted to him on his deathbed, that he was the son of an empress. Filledwith ambitious hopes, the unsuspecting youth immediately hastened to the pa­lace of Constantinople, and was admitted to the presence of his mother. As he,was never more seen, even after the decease of Theodora, she deserves the foulimputation of extinguishing with his life a secret so offensive to her imperial vir­tue.
In the most abject state of her fortune and reputation, some vision, either ofsleep or of fancy, had whispered to Theodora the pleasing assurance that she wasdestined to become the spouse of a potent monarch. Conscious of her approach­ing greatness, she returned from Paphlagonia to Constantinople; assumed, like askilful actress, a more decent character; relieved her poverty by the laudable in­dustry of spinning wool, and affected a life of chastity and solitude in a,'small house,which she afterward changed into a magnificent temple. (6) Her beauty, assistedby art or accident, soon attracted, captivated, and fixed, the patrician Justinian, whoalready reigned with absolute sway under the name of his uncle. Perhaps she con­trived to enhance the value of a gift which she had so often lavished on the mean­est of mankind; perhaps she inflamed, at first by modest delays, and at last by sensualallurements, the desires of a lover, who from nature or devotion was addicted to


(1) Her statue was raised at Constantinople, on a porphyry column. See Procopius, (de Edit. lib. i. c. 11.;who gives her portrait in the Anecdotes, (c. 10.) Aleman. (p. 47.) produces one from a Mosaic at Ravenna*loaded with pearls and jewels, and yet handsome. „
(2) A fragment of the Anecdotes (c. 9,) somewhat too naked, was suppressed by Alemanmis, though extantin the Vatican MS. nor has the defect been supplied in the Paris or Venice editions. La Mothe le Vayer (torn.8. p. U5.Xgave the first hint of this curious and genuine passage (Jortin's Remarks, vol. iv. p. 360.) which hehad received from Rome, and it has been since published in the Menagiana (torn. iii. p. 254—250,) with a Latinversion.
(3) After the mention of a narrow girdle (as none could appear stark naked in the theatre,) Procopius thu3
proceeds.—AvK^fflTOKmsi Tf ev Tw iffafij wttm ixiito. ©htjc 5s ti«s . . . xpiSse? auTij wnfAlv tiuv KtSoHov epfinrsvk; St 01 %ttv=j, 01 £; touto *r«pfcx£u»s^£voi tvTvyy/ivGv TOij gra/ytxrtv ttixpSe xxTKfffxe ernXopuvol Itrfllflv. I have heard
that a learned prelate, now deceased, was fond of quoting this passage in conversation.
(4) Theodora surpassed the Crispa of Ansonius (Epigram 71.) who imitated thecapitalis luxus of the femalesof Nola. See 0,uintilian Institut. viti. 6. and Torrentius ad Horat. Sermon, lib. i. sat. 2. 5.101. At a memora­ble supper, thirty slaves waited round the table; ten young men feasted with Theodora. Her charity was uni-venal.
Et lassata viris, necdum satiata, recessit.
(I) HJf m' Tpi'-ov Tpujnjpaf(ov fpyxi^itfv» fvf%aA.fi Tf| ejurff oWepopOuiffvif OTi of fjaf xxi TfTTC-j; sfvTS) fuptmpvi- fj
wv ffo-i tpictwv, 0-4* oWth f»< txs tvx fpyxgicrgxf. She wished for a fourth altar, on which she might pour liba*tions to the god of love.
(6) Anonym, de Antiquitat. C P. lib. iii. 132, in Banduri Imperium Orient, torn, l.p.48. Ludewig(p. 154.)argues sensibly that Theodora would not have immortalized a brothel) but I apply this fact to her second andchaster residence at Constantinople.







OCR Output








TriE DECLINE AND FALL


■was subject, as his own* to the sceptre of Charlemagne. The people swore alie^giance to his person and family: in his name money was coined, and justice wasadministered; and the election of the popes was examined and confirmed by his au­thority. Except an original and self-inherent claim of sovereignty, there was notany prerogative remaining, which the title of emperor could add to the patrician ofRome.(l)
The gratitude of the Carlovingians was adequate to these obligations, and theirnames are consecrated as the saviours and benefactors of the Roman church. Herancient patrimony of farms and houses was transformed by their bounty into thetemporal dominion of cities and provinces; and the donation of the exarchate wasthe first-fruits of the conquest of Pepin. (2) Astolphus with a sigh relinquishedhis prey; the keys and the hostages of the principal cities were delivered to theFrench ambassador; and, in his master's name, he presented them before thetomb of St. Peter. The ample measure of the exarchate(S) might comprise allthe provinces of Italy which had obeyed the emperor and his vicegerent; but itsstrict and proper limits were included in the territories of Ravenna, Bologna, andFerrara; its inseparable dependency was the Pentapolis, which stretched along theHadriatic from Rimini to Ancona, and advanced into the midland country as far asthe ridges of the Appennine. In this transaction, the ambition and avarice of the, popes had been severely condemned. Perhaps the humility of a Christian priestshould have rejected an earthly kingdom, which it was not easy for him to governwithout renouncing the virtues of his profession. Perhaps a faithful subject, or agenerous enemy, would have been less impatient to divide the spoils of the bar­barian; and if the emperor had intrusted Stephen to solicit in his name the resti­tution of the exarchate, I will not absolve the pope from the reproach of treacheryand falsehood. But in the rigid interpretation of the laws, every one may accept,without injury, whatever his benefactor can bestow without injustice. The Greekemperor had abdicated or forfeited his right to the exarchate; and the sword ofAstolphus was broken by the stronger sword of the Carlovingian. It was'not in thecause of the Iconoclast that Pepin had exposed his person and army in a doubleexpedition beyond the Alps; he possessed, and might lawfully alienate, his con­quests; and to the importunities of the Greeks, he piously replied, that no humanconsideration should tempt him to resume the gift which he had conferred on theRoman pontiff for the remission of his sins, and the salvation of his soul. Thesplendid donation was granted in supreme and absolute dominion, and the worldbeheld for the first time a Christian bishop invested with the prerogatives of a tempo­ral prince; the choice of magistrates, the exercise of justice, the imposition of taxes,and the wealth of the palace of Ravenna. In the dissolution of the Lombard king­dom, the inhabitants of the duchy of Spoleto(4) sought a refuge from the storm,shaved their heads after the Roman fashion, declared themselves the servantsand subjects of St. Peter, and completed by this voluntary surrender, the pre­sent circle of the ecclesiastical state. That mysterious circle was enlarged toan indefinite extent, by the verbal or written donation of Charlemagne,(5)who, in the first transports of his Victory, despoiled himself and the Greekemperor of the cities and islands which had formerly been annexed to the ex­archate. But in the cooler moments of absence and reflection, he viewed, withan eye of jealousy and envy, the recent greatness of his ecclesiastical ally. Theexecution of his own and his father's promises was respectfully eluded: the
(1) Paului Diaconus, who wrote before the empire of Charlemagne, describes Rome as his subject city—ves-'tras civitatM, (ad Pompeium Festum) suis addidit sceptris. (de Metensis Ecclesise Episconis.) Some Carte-vingian medals, struck at Home, have engaged Le Blanc to write an elaborate, though partial dissertation ontheir authority at Rome both as patricians and emperors. (Amsterdam, 1692, in quarto.)
(2) Mosheim (Institution Hist. Eccles. p. 263.) weighs this donation with fair and deliberate prndence. "Theoriginal act has never been produced; but the Liber Pontificalis represents, (p. 171..) and theCodex Carolinussupposes, this ample gift. Both are colemporary records; aud the latter is more authentic, since it has beenpreserved, not in the papal, but the imperial library.
(3) Between the exorbitant claims, and narrow concessions of interest and prejudice, from which even Mu-ratori (Antiquitat. torn. i. p. 63—68.) is not exempt. I have been guided, in the limits of the exarchate andPentapolis, by the Dissertatio Chorographica Italia Medii Mvi, torn. x. p. 160—180.
(4) Spoletini deprecnti sunt, ut eos in servitio B. Petri reciperet et more Rornanornm tonsurart faceraf,(Atiastasius, p. 185.) Yet it may be a question whether they gave their own persons or their country.
(5) The policy and donations of Charlemagne are carefully examined by St. Marc, (Abrege, torn. i. p. 390—408.) who has well studied the Codex Carolinus. I believe, with him, that they were only verbal. The mostancient act of donation that pretends to be extant, is that of the emperor Louis the Pious; (Signonius, de Reg­no Italite, lib. iv. Qpenx, torn. ii. p. 267— 270.) its authenticity, or at'least its integrity, are much questioned:(Pagi, A. D. 817, no. 7, &c. Muratori, Annali. torn. vi. p. 432, &c. Dissertat. Chorographica, p. 33,34.) bat Is« no reasonable objection to these princes so freely disposing of what waj not their own.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


The appellation of great has been often bestowed and sometimes deserved, butCharlemagne is the only prince in whose favour the title has been indissolublyblended with the name. That name, with the addition of saint, is inserted in theRoman calendar; and the saint, by a rare felicity, is crowned with the praises ofthe historians and philosophers of an enlightened age.(l) His real merit is doubt­less enhanced by the barbarism of the nation and the times from which he emerged;but the afifiarent magnitude of an object is likewise enlarged by an unequal com­parison; and the ruins of Palmyra derive a casual splendour from the nakednessof the surrounding desert. Without injustice to his fame, I may discern someblemishes in the sanctity and greatness of the restorer of the western empire. Ofhis moral virtues, chastity is not the most conspicuous;(2) but the public happinesscould not be materially injured by his nine wives or concubines, the various indul­gence of meaner or more transient amours, the multitude of his bastards whomhe bestowed on the church, and the long celibacy and licentious manners of hisdaughters,(3) whom the father was suspected of loving with too fond a passion.I shall be scarcely permitted to accuse the ambition of a conqueror; but in a dayof equal retribution, the sons of his brother Carloman, the Merovingian princes ofAquitain, and the four thousand five hundred Saxons who were beheaded on thesame spot, would have something to allege against the justice and humanity ofCharlemagne. His treatment of the vanquished Saxons(4) was an abuse of theright of conquest; his laws were not less sanguinary than his arms, and in the dis-.cussion of his motives whatever is subtracted from bigotry must be imputed totemper. The sedentary reader is amazed by his incessant activity of mind andbody; and his subjects and enemies were not less astonished at his sudden pre­sence, at the moment when they believed him at the most distant extremity of theempire; neither peace nor war, nor summer nor winter, were a season of repose:and our fancy cannot easily reconcile the annals of his reign with the geographyof his expeditions. But this activity was a national rather than a personal virtue;the vagrant life of a Frank was spent in the chase, in. pilgrimage, in military ad­ventures; and the journeys of Charlemagne were distinguished only by a more nu­merous train and a more important purpose. His military renown must be triedby the scrutiny of his troops; his enemies, and his actions. Alexander conqueredwith the arms of Philip; but the two heroes who preceded Charlemagne, be­queathed him their name, their examples, and the companions of their victories.At the head of his veteran and superior armies, he oppressed the savage or dege­nerate nations, who were incapable of confederating for their common safety: nordid he ever encounter an equal antagonist in numbers, in discipline, or in arms.The science of war has been lost and revived with the arts of peace; but his cam­paigns are not illustrated by any siege or battle of singular difficulty or success; andhe might behold, with envy, the Saracen trophies of his grandfather. After hisSpanish expedition, his rear-guard was defeated in the Pyrenian mountains; andthe soldiers, whose situation was irretrievable, and whose valour was useless,might accuse, with their last breath, the want of skill or caution of their general. (5)I touch with reverence the laws of Charlemagne, so highly applauded by a re­spectable judge. They compose not a system, but a series, of occasional and inl­


ander, (secul. u. dissert. I. p. 390—3g7.) Pagi, (torn. iii. p. 418.) Muratori, (Annali dltalia, torn. vi. p. 339—353.) Sigonius, (de Regno Italia, lib. iv.Opp. turn. ii. p. 247—251.) Spanheim, (de Beta Translatione Imperii)Giannone, (torn. i. p. 395—405.) St. Marc, (Abrege Chronologique, turn. i. p. 438-450.) Gaillard. (Hist, deCharlemagne, lorn. ii. p. 386—146. Almost all these moderns have some religious or national bias.
(1) By Mably, (Observations snr I'Histoire de France) Voltaire, (Histoire Generale) Robertson, (History ofCharles V.) and Montesquieu. (Esprit des Loix, lib. xxxi. c. 18.) In the year 1782, M. Gaillard published aitHistoire de Charlemagne, (in four vols, duodecimo) which I have freely and profitably used. The author isa man of sense and humanity: and his work is laboured with industry and eloquence.' But I have likewiseexamined the original monumenu of the reigns of Pepin and Charlemagne, in the fifth volume of the histo­rians of France.
(2) The vision of Weltin, composed by a monk, eleven years after the death of Charlemagne, shows Mm in
Eurgatory.with a vulture who is perpetually gnawing the guilty member, while the rest of his body, the em-lem of his virtues, is sound and perfect. (See Gaillard, torn. ii. p. 317—360.)
(3) The marriage of Eginhard with Imma, daughter of Charlemagne, ii, in my opinion, sufficiently refutedby the probrum and tuipicio that sullied these fair damsels, without excepting his own wife. (c. 19. p. 98—106,cum Notts Schmincke.) The husband must have been loo strong for the historian.
(4) Besides the massacres and transmigrations, the pain of death was pronounced against the fnllowiogcrimes. 1. The refusal of baptism. 2. The false pretence of baptism. 3. A relapse to idolatry. 4. The mur­der uf a priest or bishop. 5. Human sacrifices. 6. Eating meat in Lent. But every crime might be eipiaffdby baptism or penance; (Gaillard, torn. ii. p. 241—247.) and the Christian Saxons became the friends aadequal, of the Franks. (Stmv. Corpus Hist. Grrmanica-, p. 133.)
(5) In this action the famous Rutland, Rolando, Orlando, was slain—cum pluribus all is. See the truth itsEginhard, (e. ix. p. 51—56.) and the fable in an ingenious Supplement of M. Gaillard. (torn. iii. p. 474.) TheSpaniards are too proud of a victory which history ascribes to the Gascons, and romance to the Saracens.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


of the flesh and of the spirit. Disobedient to the latter, or at least to the meaning,of the royal summons, he was attended by fifty Egyptian bishops, who expectedfrom their patriarch's nod their inspiration of the Holy Ghost. He had contract­ed an intimate alliance with Memnon, bishop of Ephesus. The despotic primateof Asia disposed of the ready succours of thirty or forty episcopal votes: a crowdof peasants, the slaves of the church, was poured into the city, to support withblows and clamours a metaphysical argument; and the people zealously assertedthe honour of the Virgin, whose body reposed within the walls of Ephesus.(l)The fleet, which had transported Cyril from Alexandria, was laden with theriches of Egypt; and he disembarked a numerous body of mariners, slaves, and fa­natics enlisted with blind obedience under the banners of St. Mark and the motherof God. The fathers, and even the guards, of the council, were awed by thismartial array; the adversaries of Cyril and Mary were insulted in the streets, orthreatened in their houses; his eloquence and liberality made a daily increase inthe number of his adherents: and the Egyptian soon computed, that he mightcommand the attendance and the voices of two hundred bishops. (2) But the au­thor of the twelve anathemas foresaw and dreaded the opposition of John of An-tioch, who with a small, though respectable train of metropolitans and divines,was advancing by slow journeys from the distant capital of the east. Impatient ofa delay, which he stigmatized as voluntary and culpable,(3) Cyril announced theopening of the synod sixteen days after the festival of Pentecost. Nestorius, whodepended on the near approach of his eastern friends, persisted, like his prede­cessor Chrysostom, to disclaim the jurisdiction, and to disobey the summons, ofhis enemies: they hastened his trial, and his accuser presided in the seat of judg­ment. Sixty-eight bishops, twenty-two of metropolitan rank, defended his causeby a modest and temperate protest; they were excluded from the counsels of theirbrethren. Candidian, in the emperor's name, requested a delay of four days; theprofane magistrate was driven with outrage and insult from the assembly of thesaints. The whole of this momentous transaction was crowded into the compass ofa summer's day; the bishops delivered their separate opinions; but the uniformityof style reveals the influence or the hand of a master, who has been accusedof corrupting the public evidence of their acts and subscriptions. (4) Without a dis­senting voice they recognised, in the epistles of Cyril, the Nicene creed and thedoctrine of the fathers: but the partial extracts from the letters and homilies ofNestorius were interrupted by curses and anathemas; and the heretic was de­graded from his episcopal and ecclesiastical dignity. The sentence, maliciouslyinscribed to the new Judas, was affixed and proclaimed in the streets, of Ephesus:the weary prelates, as they issued from the church of the mother of God, weresaluted as her champions; and her victory was celebrated by the illuminations,the songs, and the tumult of the night.
On the fifth day the triumph was clouded by the arrival and indignation of theeastern bishops. In a chamber of the inn, before he had wiped the dust from hisshoes, John of Antioch gave audience to Candidian the imperial minister; who re­lated his ineffectual efforts to prevent or annul the hasty violence of the Egyptian.With equal haste and violence, the oriental synod of fifty bishops degraded Cyriland Memnon from their episcopal honours, condemned, in the twelve anathemas,the purest venom of the Apollinarian heresy, and described the Alexandrian pri­mate as a monster, born and educated for the destruction of the church. (5) Hi*
(1) The Christians of the four first centimes were ignorant of the death and burial of Mary. The traditionof Ephesus is affirmed by the synod (svfi* o fiio>.oyo? Iwawit;, x*i n fcoroxoc srspflsi-os M«f<*. Concil. torn,iii. p. 1102.) yet it has been superseded by the claim of Jerusalem; and her empty sepulchre, as it was shownto the pilgrims, produced the fable of her resurrection and assumption, in which the Greek and Latin churcheshave piously acquiesced. See Baronius (Annal. Eccles. A. D. 48. No. 6, &c.) and Tillemont, (Mem. Eccles.torn. i. p. 407—477.
(2) The Acts of Chalcedon (Concil. torn. iv. p. 1405,1408.) exhibit a lively picture of the blind, obstinate ser­vitude of the bishop of Egypt to their patriarch.
(3) Civil or ecclesiastical business detained the bishops at Antioch, tilt the eighteenth of May. Ephesus wasat the distance of thirty days* journey; and ten days more may be fairly allowed for accidents and repose.The march of Xenophon over the same ground enumerates about two hundred and sixty parasangs or leagues;and this measure might be illustrated from aacient and modern itineraries, if I knew now to compare thespeed of any army, a synod and a caravan. John of Antioch is reluctantly acquitted by Tillemont himself.(Mem. Eccles. torn. xiv. p. 286—28°.)
(4) Mff*$a«ivov ftti kxtix to Ssw to tv Egbtw trvmfavat uTD^v^m n-xvouflyi* St x«i rtvi u$t trfiM xitit/zrofitM K<J0iA.Xai>•nxvx^om-o;. Evagrius, lib. i. c 7. The same imputation was urged by Count Ircnseus; (torn. iii. p. 1249.) andthe orthodox critics do not find it an easy task to defend the purity of the Greek or Latin copies of theActs.
(5) O' J, ss* om6s» m s«M"»» rtflu; w ro*psi,-. After the coalition of John and Cyril, these invectives
Vo-x. nr. 27







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 425.


capital of the Abbassides. The consternation of the fugitives had already dif­fused the terror of his name; but the fancied riches of Bagdad had already beendissipated by the avarice and prodigality of domestic tyrants. The prayers of thepeople, and the stern demands of the lieutenant of the Bowides, required the ca­liph to provide for the defence of the city. The helpless Mothi replied, that hisarms, his revenues, and his provinces, had been torn from his hands, and that hewas ready to abdicate a dignity which he was unable to support. The emir waainexorable; the furniture of the palace was sold; and the paltry price of forty thou­sand pieces of gold was instantly consumed in private luxury. But the apprehen­sions of Bagdad were relieved by the retreat of the Greeks; thirst and hungerguarded the desert of Mesopotamia: and the emperor, satiated with glory, andladen with oriental spoils, returned to Constantinople, and displayed, in his tri­umph, the silk, the aromatics, and three hundred myriads of gold and silver.Yet the powers of the east had been bent, not broken, by this transient hurricane.After the departure of the Greeks, the fugitive princes returned to their capitals;the subjects disclaimed their involuntary oaths of allegiance; the Moslems againpurified their temples, and overturned the idols of the saints and martyrs; the Nes-torians and Jacobites preferred a Saracen to an orthodox master; and the num­bers and spirit of the Melchites were inadequate to the support of the church andstate. Of these extensive conquests, Antioch, with the cities of Cilicia and theisle of Cyprus, was alone restored, a permanent and useful accession to the Ro­man empire.(l)
(1) See the Annals of Elmacin. Abulpharagius, and Abulfeila, from A. H. 351, to A. H. 361.; and the reignaof Nieephorus Phocas and John Ziraisces, in the Chronicles of Zonaras (torn. ii. lib. x vi. p. 199. lib. xvii. 215.)and Cedrenus. (Compend. p. 549—684.) Their manifold defects are partly supplied, by the MS. history ofXeo the Deacon, which Pagi obtained from the Benedictines, and has inserted almost entire in the latin rcr-ekm. (Critica, torn, in p. 875. torn. iv. p. 37.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 101


tila with an insulting smile, " your pride now condescends to become a suppliant.""I am a suppliant," replied the prudent archdeacon: " God has now made us yoursubjects, and as your subjects we are entitled to your clemency." At this humbleprayer, the lives of the Romans were spared; and the chastity of the maids andmatrons was preserved inviolate from the passions of the hungry soldiers. Butthey were rewarded by the freedom of pillage, after the most precious spoils hadbeen reserved for the royal treasury. The nouses of the senators were plentifullystored with gold and silver; and the avarice of Bessas had laboured with so muchguilt and shame for the benefit of the conqueror. In this revolution, the sons anddaughters of Roman consuls tasted the misery which they had spurned or relieved,"wandered in tattered garments through the streets of the city, and begged theirbread, perhaps without success, before the gates of their hereditary mansions. Theriches of Rusticiana, the daughter of Symmachus and widow of Boethius, hadbeen generously devoted to alleviate the calamities of famine. But the barbarianswere exasperated by the report, that she had prompted the people to overthrowthe statues of the great Theodoric; and the life of that venerable matron wouldhave been sacrificed to his memory, if Totila had not respected her birth, hervirtues, and even the pious motive of her revenge. The next day he pronouncedtwo orations, to congratulate and admonish his victorious Goths, and reproach thesenate, as the vilest of slaves, with their perjury, folly, and ingratitude; sternlydeclaring, that their estates and honours were justly forfeited to the companionsof his arms. Yet he consented to forgive their revolt, and the senators repaid hisclemency by despatching circular letters to their tenants and vassals in the pro­vinces of Italy, strictly to enjoin them to desert the standard of the Greeks, to cul-'tivate their lands in peace, and to learn from their masters the duty of obedienceto a Gothic sovereign. Against the cities which had so long delayed the courseof his victories he appeared inexorable: one-third of the walls, in different parts,■were demolished by his command; fire and engines prepared to consume or sub­vert, the most stately works of antiquity: and the world was astonished by the fa­tal decree, that Rome should be changed into a pasture for cattle. The firm andtemperate remonstrance of Belisarius suspended the execution; he warned thebarbarian not to sully his fame by the destruction of those monuments, which werethe glory of the dead, and the delight of the living; and Totila was persuaded,by the advice of an enemy, to preserve Rome as the ornament of his kingdom, orthe fairest pledge of peace and reconciliation. When he had signified to the am­bassadors of Belisarius, his intention of sparing the city, he stationed an army atthe distance of one hundred and twenty furlongs, to observe the motions of the Ro­man general. With the remainder of his forces, he marched into Lucania andApulia, and occupied, on the summit of mount Garganus.(l) one of the camps ofHannibal. (2) The senators were dragged in his train, and afterwards confined inthe fortresses of Campania: the citizens, with their wives and children, were dis­persed in exile; and during forty days Rome was abandoned to desolate and drearysolitude. (3)
The loss of Rome was speedily retrieved by an action, to which, according to theevent, the public opinion would apply the names of rashness or heroism. Afterthe departure of Totila, the Roman general sallied from the port at the head of athousand horse, cut in pieces the enemy who opposed his progress, and visited withpity and reverence the vacant space of the eternal city. Resolved to maintain astation so conspicuous in the eyes of mankind, he summoned the greatest part of histroops to the standard which he erected on the capital: the old inhabitants wererecalled by the love of their country and the hopes of food; and the keys of Romewere sent a second time to the emperor Justinian. The walls, as far as they hadbeen demolished by the Goths, were repaired with rude and dissimilar materials;the ditch was restored; iron spikes(4) were profusely scattered in the highways
(1) Mount Garganns, now Monte St. Angelo,in tlie kingdom of Naples, runs three hundred stadia into theAdriatic sea (Strab. lib. vi. p. 436.,) and in the darker ages, was illustrated by the apparition, miracles, andchurch of St. Michael the archangel. Horace, a native of Apulia or Lucania, had seen the elms and oaks ofGarganus labouring and bellowing with the north wind that blew on that lofty coast (Carol, ii. 9. Epist.ii. 1.301.} ,
(2) I cannot ascertain this particular camp of Hannibal: but the Funic quarters were long and often in theneighbourhood of Arpi (T. Liv. xxii. 9.12. 24. 3, &c.)
(3) Totila .... Romam ingreditur ac evertit mnros domos aliquantas igni comburens, ae omnes
Romanorum res in proedam accepit, hos ipsos Romanns in Campaniam captivos abduxit. Post quam devasta-tionem.xl autampHus dies, Rama fuit ita desolala, ut nemo ibi hominum,nisi (nulla?) bestise raorarentur(Marcellin.in Chron. p. 54.)
(4) The tribuli are small engines with four spikes, one fixed in the ground, the three others erect or adverse







OCR Output








■jus THE DECLINE AND FALL


calmer moments, Nestorius confessed, that it might be tolerated or excused bythe union of the two natures; and the communication of their idioms:{V) but hewas exasperated by contradiction, to disclaim the worship of anew-born, an infantDeity, to draw his inadequate similes from the conjugal or civil partnerships oflife, and to describe the manhood of Christ, as the robe, the instrument, the ta­bernacle of his Godhead. At these blasphemous sounds, the pillars of the sanc­tuary were shaken. The unsuccessful competitors of Nestorius indulged theirpious or personal resentment, the Byzantine clergy was secretly displeased withthe intrusion of a stranger: whatever is superstitious or absurd, might claim theprotection of the monks; and the people were interested in the glory of their vir­gin patroness.(2) The sermons of the archbishop, and the service of the altar,were disturbed by seditious clamour; his authority and doctrine were renouncedby separate congregations; every wind scattered round the empire the leaves ofcontroversy; and the voice of the combatants on a sonorous theatre re-echoed inthe cells of Palestine and Egypt. It was the duty of Cyril to enlighten the zealand ignorance of his innumerable monks; in tlie school of Alexandria, he hadimbibed and professed the incarnation of one nature: and the successor of Atha-nasius consulted his pride and ambition, when he rose in arms against anotherArius, more formidable and more guilty, on the second throne of the hierarchy.After a short correspondence, in which the rival prelates disguised their hatredin the hollow language of respect and charity, the patriarch of Alexandria de­nounced to the prince and people, to the east and to the west, the damnable er­rors of the Byzantine pontiff. From the east, more, especially from Antioch, heobtained the ambiguous counsels of toleration and silence, which were addressedto both parties while they favoured the cause of Nestorius. But the Vatican re­ceived with open arms the messengers of Egypt. The vanity of Celestine wasflattered by the appeal; and the partial version of a monk decided the faith ofthe pope, who, with his Latin clergy, was ignorant of the language, the arts, andthe theology of the Greeks. At the head of an Italian synod, Celestine weighedthe merits of the cause, approved the creed of Cyril, condemned the sentimentsand person of Nestorius, degraded the heretic from his episcopal dignity, alloweda respite of ten days for recantation and penance, and delegated to his enemy theexecution of this rash and illegal sentence. But the patriarch of Alexandria,whilst he darted the thunders of a god, exposed the errors and passions of amortal; and his twelve(3) anathemas still torture the orthodox slaves, who adorethe memory of a saint, without forfeiting their allegiance to the synod of Chalce-don. These bold assertions are indelibly tinged with the colours of the Apollina-rian heresy; but the serious, and perhaps the sincere, professions of Nestorius,have satisfied the wiser and less partial theologians of the present times. (4)
Yet neither the emperor nor the primate of the east were disposed to obey themandate of an Italian priest; and a synod of the catholic, or rather of the Greekchurch, was unanimously demanded as the sole remedy that could appease or de­cide this ecclesiastical quarrel. (5) Ephesus, on all sides accessible by sea andland, was chosen for the place, the festival of Pentecost, for the day of the meet­ing; a writ of summons was despatched to each metropolitan, and a guard was sta­tioned to .protect and confine the fathers, till they should settle the mysteries ofheaven, and the faith of the earth. Nestorius appeared not as a criminal, but asa judge; he depended rather on the weight than the number of his prelates, andhis sturdy slaves from the baths of Zeuxippus were armed for every service of in­jury or defence. But his adversary Cyril was more powerful in the weapons both


(1) The «vTi-Wi; of the Greeks, a mutual loan or transfer of the idioms of properties of each nature to theother—of infinity to man, possibility to God, Sec. Twelve rules on this nicest of subjects compose the Theo­logical Grammar of Petavius. (Dogmata Theolog. torn. T. lib. iv. e. 14,15. p. 209, &c.)
(2) See Ducange,C. P. Christiana, lib. L p. 30,&c.
(3) Concil. torn. iiL p. 043. They have never been directly approved by the church. (Tillemont, Mem. Ec-cles. torn. xiv. p. 368—S72.) I almost pity the agony of rage and sophistry with which Petavius seems to beagitated in the sixth book of his Dogmata Theologica.
(4) Such as the rational Basnage, (ad torn. i. Variar. Lection. Canisii in Prefat. c ii. p. 11—23.) and La Croze,the universal scholar. (Christianisme des Indej, torn. i. p. 16—20. De I'Ethiope, p. 26. 27. Thesaur. Episr.p. 176, &c. 283. 285.) His free sentence is confirmed by that of his friends Jablonski (Thesaur. Epist. torn. i.p. 193—201.) and Mosheim, (idem, p. 304. Nestoriom crimine carnisse est et mea sententia;) and three?morerespectable judges wSl not easily be found. Asseman, a learned and modest slave, can hardly discern (Bibli-othec. Orient, torn. iv. p. 190—224.) the guilt and error of the Nestorians.
(fi) The origin and progress of the Nestorian controversy till the synod of Ephesus, may be found in So­crates, (lib. vii. c 32.) Evacrmi, (lib. i. c. 1,2.) Liberatus,(Brev.c. 1—4.) the original Acts, (Concil. torn. iii.p. 551—991. edit. Venise, 1728.) the Annals of Baronius and Fagi, aD<l the faithful collections of Tillcmoni.(Mem. Ecclei. torn. xiv. p. 283—377.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, 189


cocks, ostriches, roebucks, and wild boars, and the noble game of lions and tigerswere sometimes turned loose for the bolder pleasure of the chase. Nine hun­dred and sixty elephants, were maintained for the use or splendou:- of the greatking: his tents and baggage were carried into the field by twelve thousand greatcamels, and eight thousand of a smaller size;(l) and the royal stables were filledwith six thousand mules and horses, among whom the names of Shebdiz and Baridare renowned for their speed or beauty. Six thousand guards successively mount­ed before the palace-gate; the service of the interior apartments was performedby twelve thousand slaves, and in the number of three thousand virgins, the fair­est of Asia, some happy concubine might console her master for the age or in­difference of Sira. 1 he various treasures of gold, silver, gems, silk, and aroma-tics, were deposited in a hundred subterraneous vaults; and the chamber of Bada-■verd denoted the accidental gift of the winds which had wafted the spoils of Hera-clius into one of the Syrian harbours of his rival. The voice of flattery, and perhapsof fiction, is not ashamed to compute the thirty thousand rich hangings that adornedthe walls, the forty thousand columns of silver, or more probably of marble, andplated wood, that supported the roof; and a thousand globes of gold suspended inthe dome, to imitate the motions of the planets and the constellations of the zodi­ac. (2) While'the Persian monarch contemplated the wonders of his art andpower, he received an epistle from an obscure citizen of Mecca, inviting him toacknowledge Mahomet as the apostle of God. He rejected the invitation, andtore the epistle. It is thus (exclaimed the Arabian prophet) that God will tearthe kingdom, and reject the sufifilications, of Cliosroes. (3) Placed on the verge ofthe two great empires of the east, Mahomet observed with secret joy the progressof their mutual destruction; and in the midst of the Persian triumphs, he ven­tured to foretel, that before many years should elapse, victory would again returnto the banners of the Romans. (4)
At the time when this prediction is said to have been delivered, no prophecycould be more distant from its accomplishment, since the first twelve years ofHeraclius announced the approaching dissolution of the empire. If the motivesof Chosroes had been pure and honourable, he must have ended the quarrel withthe death of Phocas, and he would have embraced, as his best ally, the fortunateAfrican who had so generously avenged the injuries of his benefactor Maurice.The prosecution of the war revealed the true character of the barbarian: and thesuppliant embassies of Heraclius to beseech his clemency, that he would sparethe innocent, accept a tribute, and give peace to the world, were rejected withcontemptuous silence or insolent menace. Syria, Egypt, and the provinces ofAsia, were subdued by the Persian arms, while Europe, from the confines of Is-tria to the long wall of Thrace, was oppressed by the Avars, unsatiated with theblood and rapine of the Italian war. They had coolly massacred their male cap­tives in the sacred field of Pannonia; the women and children were reduced toservitude, and the noblest virgins were abandoned to the promiscuous lust of thebarbarians. The amorous matron who opened the gates of Firuli passed a shortnight in the arms of her royal lover: the next evening Romilda was condemned tothe embraces of twelve Avars, and the third day the Lombard princess was im­paled in the sight of the camp, while the chagan observed, with a cruel smile,that such a husband was the fit recompense of her lewdness and perfidy. (5) Bythese implacable enemies, Heraclius, on either side, was insulted and besieged:and the Roman empire was reduced to the walls of Constantinople, with the rem­nant of Greece, Italy, and Africa, and some maritime cities, from Tyre to Trebi-
. (1) The difference between the two races consists in one or two humps; the dromedary has only one; thesize of the proper camel is larger; the country he comes from, Turkestan or Bactriana; the dromedary isconfined to Arabia aod Africa. Buffon, Hist. Naturelle, torn. li. p. 211, &c. Aristot. Hist. Animal, torn. i. lib.u.c. 1.: tom.ii. p. 185.
(2) Theophanes, Chronograph, p. 268. D'Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientale. p. 997. The Greeks describethe decay, the Persians the splendour of Dastagerd; but the former speak from the modest witness of the eye,the latter from the vague report of the ear.
(3) The historians of Mahomet, Abnlfeda, (in Vit. Mahommed, p. 92,93.) and Gagnier, (Vie de Mahomet,J°m., ii. p. 247.) date this embassy in the seventh year of the Hegira, which commences A. D. 628. May 11.Their Chronology is erroneous, since Chosroes died in the month of February of the same year. (Pagi, Cri-tica, torn. ii. p. 779.) The count de Boulainvilliers (Vie de Mahommed, p. 327,328.) places this embassy aboutA.]). 615, soon after the conquest of Palestine. Yet Mahomet would scarcely have ventured so soon on sobold a step.
C4) See the thirtieth chapter of the Koran, entitled the Greeks. Our honest and learned translator Sale,.CP.. 330,331.) fairly states this conjecture, guess, wager, of Mahomet; but Boulainvilliers, p. 329—344,) withwicked intentions, labours to establish this evident prophecy of a future event, which must, in his opinion,embarrass the Christian polemics.
Paul Wameftid, de Gestis Langobardoruro, lib. ir. c, 38*-42. Muratori, Annali d'lralia, torn, v. n. 305, gee.







OCR Output








60 THE DECLINE AND FALL


the slaves; required his soldiers to dismiss their male and female attendants^andregulated their allowance, that one moiety should be given in provisions, and theother in money. His foresight was justified by the increase of the public distress*as soon as the Goths had occupied two rmportants posts in the neighbourhood ofRome by the loss of the port, or, as it is now called, the city of Porto, he was de­prived of the country on the right of the Tiber, and the best communication withthe sea; and he reflected with grief and anger, that three hundred men, could hehave spared such a feeble band, might have defended its impregnable works.Seven miles from the capital, between the Appian and the Latin ways, two prin­cipal aqueducts, crossing, and again crossing each other, enclosed within their solidand lofty arches a fortified space, (1) where Vitiges established a camp of seventhousand Goths to intercept the convoys of Sicily and Campania. The granariesof Rome were insensibly exhausted, the adjacent country had been wasted with fireand sword} and such scanty supplies as might yet be obtained by hasty excursions,were the reward of valour, and the purchase of wealth: the forage of the horses,and the bread of the soldiers, never failed; but in the last months of the siege, thepeople were exposed to the miseries of scarcity, unwholesome food,(2) and con­tagious disorders. Belisarius saw and pitied their sufferings; but he had foreseenand he watched the decay of their loyalty, and the progress of their discontent.Adversity had awakened the Romans from the dreams of grandeur and freedom,and taught them the humiliating lesson, that it was of small moment to their realhappiness, whether the name of their master was derived from the Gothic or theLatin language. The lieutenant of Justinian listened to their just complaints, buthe rejected with disdain the idea of flight or capitulation: repressed their clamo­rous impatience for battle; amused them with the prospect of sure and speedyrelief; and secured himself and the city from the effects of their despair or trea­chery. Twice in each month he changed the station of the officers to whom thecustody of the gates was committed: the various precautions, of patroles, watch­words, lights, and music, were repeatedly employed to discover whatever passedon the rampafts; out-guards were posted beyond the ditch, and the trusty vigilanceof dogs supplied the more doubtful fidelity of mankind. A letter was intercepted,which assured the king of the Goths, that the Asinarian gate, adjoining to the La-teran church, should be secretly opened to his troops. On the proof of suspicionof treason, several senators were banished, and the pope Sylverius was summonedto attend the representative of his sovereign, at his head-quarters in the Pincianpalace. (3) The ecclesiastics who followed their bishop, were detained in the firstor second apartment, (4) and he alone was admitted to the presence of Belisarius.Uhe conqueror of Rome and Carthage was modestly seated at the feet of Antonina,who reclined on a stately couch: the general was silent, but the voice of reproachand menace issued from the mouth of his imuerious wife. Accused by crediblewitnesses, and the evidence of his own subscription, the successor of St. Peterwas despoiled of his pontifical ornaments, clad in a mean habit of a monk, andembarked, without delay, for a distant exile in the east. At the emperor's com­mand, the clergy of Rome proceeded to the choice of a new bishop; and after asolemn invocation of the Holy Ghost, elected the deacon Vigilius, who had pur­chased the papal throne by a bribe of two hundred pounds of gold. The profit,and consequently the guilt, of this simony, was imputed to Belisarius.-but the heroobeyed the orders of his wife. Antonina served the passions of the empress; andTheodora lavished her treasures, in the vain hope of obtaining a pontiff hostile orindifferent to the council of Chalcedon. (5)
(1) Proeopjui (Goth, lib. ii. c. 3.) has forgot to name these aqueducts: nor can such a double intersection, atsuch a distance from Rome, be clearly ascertained from the writings of Frontinus Fabretti and Esehinard, deAquis and de Aero Romano, or from the local maps of Lameti and Cingolani. Seven or eight miles from thecity (fifty stadia,) on the road to Albano, between the Latin and Appian ways, I discern the remains of anaqueduct (probably the Septimian,) a series (six hundred and thirty paces) of arches twenty-fire feet high
IKpqAAi etrstyctv.)
(2) They made sausages, «x\«t»?, of mules' flesh: unwholesome, if the animals had died of the plague.Otherwise the famous Bologna sausages are said to be made of ass' flesh (Voyages deLabat,tom.ii.p.21lJ •
(3) The name of thepalace, the hill,and the adjoining gatefwereall derived from the senator Pincitit. Somerecent vestiges of temples and churches are now smoothed in the garden of the Minims of the Trinita delMonte (Nardini, lib. iv. c. 7. p. 136. Esehinard, p. 209, 210. the old plan of BufTxlino, and the great plan ofKolli.) Belisarius has fixed his station between the Pincian and Salarian gates (Procop. Goth. lib. i. c. 15.)
(4) From the mention of the primum et secundum velum, it should seem that Belisarius, even in a liege,re-preiented the emperor, and maintained the proud ceremonial of the Byzantine palace. *
(5) Of this act of sacrilege, Procoptim (Goth. lib. i. c. 25.) is a dry ahd reluctant witness. The narratives ofLiberatus (Breviarium, e. 22.) and Anastasius (de Vit. Pont. p. 39.,) are characteristic, but passionate. Hearthe execrations of cardinal Baronius (A. D. 536. No. 1S3. A. D. 538. No. 4-20.;) nonentum, (acinus omni e«.ctatioue dignum.







OCR Output








1G0 THE DECLINE AND FALL


The foresight of Totila had raised obstacles worthy of such an antagonist.Ninety furlongs below the city, in the narrowest part of the river, he joined thetwo banks bv strong and solid timbers in the form of a bridge; on which he erect­ed two lofty towers, manned by the bravest of his Goths, and profusely stored withmissile weapons and engines of offence. The approach of the bridge and towerswas covered by a strong and massy chain of iron; and the chain, at either end, onthe opposite side of the Tiber, was defended by a numerous and chosen detach­ment of archers. But the enterprise of forcing these barriers, and relieving thecapital, displays a shining example of the boldness and conduct of Belisarius.His cavalry advanced from the port along the public road, to awe the motions anddistract the attention of the enemy. His infantry and provisions were distributedin two hundred large boats; and each boat was shielded by a high rampart of thickplanks pierced with many small holes for the discharge of missile weapons. Inthe front, two large vessels were linked together to sustain a floating castle, whichcommanded the towers of the bridge, and contained a magazine of fire, sulphur,and bitumen. The whole fleet, which the general led in person, was laboriouslymoved against the current of the river. The chain yielded to their weight, andthe enemies who guarded the banks were either slain or scattered. As soon asthey touched the principal barrier, the fire-ship was instantly grappled to thebridge; one of the towers, with two hundred Goths, was consumed by the flames;the assailants shouted the victory; and Rome was saved, if the wisdom of Belisa­rius had not been defeated by the misconduct of his officers. He had previouslysent orders to Bessas to second his operations by a timely sally from the town; andhe had fixed his lieutenant, Isaac, by a peremptory command, to the station ofthe port. But avarice rendered Bessas immoveable; while the youthful ardour ofIsaac delivered him into the hands of a superior enemy. The exaggerated rumourof his defeat was hastily carried to the ears of Belisarius: he paused; betrayed inthat single moment of his life some emotions of surprise and perplexity; and reluc­tantly sounded a retreat, to save his wife Antonina, his treasures, and the only har­bour which he possessed on the Tuscan coast. The vexation of his mind producedan ardent and almost mortal fever; and Rome was left without protection to themercy or indignation of Totila. The continuance of hostilities had imbittered thenational hatred; the Arian clergy was ignominiously driven from Rome; Pelagius,the archdeacon, returned without success from an embassy to the Gothic camp;and a Sicilian bishop, the envoy or nuncio of the pope, was deprived of both hishands, for daring to utter falsehoods in the service of the church and state.
Famine had relaxed the strength and discipline of the garrison of Rome. Theycould derive no effectual service from a dying people; and the inhuman avarice ofthe merchant at length absorbed the vigilance of the governor. Four Isauriansentinels, while their companions slept, and their officers were absent, descendedby a rope from the wall, and secretly proposed to the Gothic king, to introducehis troops into the city. The offer was entertained with coldness and suspicion;they returned in safety; they twice repeated their visit; the place was twice exa­mined; the conspiracy was known and disregarded; and no sooner had Totila con­sented to the attempt, than they unbarred the Asinarian gate, and gave admittanceto the Goths. Till the dawn of day they halted in order of battle, apprehensiveof treachery or ambush; but the troops of Bessas, with their leader, had alreadyescaped; and when the king was pressed to disturb their retreat, he prudently re­plied, that no sight could be more grateful than that of a flying enemy. The pa­tricians, who were still possessed of horses, Decius, Basilius, 8cc. accompanied thegovernor; their brethren, among whom Olybrius, Orestes, and Maximus arenamed by the historian, took refuge in the church of St. Peter; but the assertion,that only five hundred persons remained in the capital, inspires some doubt of thefidelity either of his narrative or of his text.
As soon as daylight had displayed the entire victory of the Goths, their monarchdevoutly visited the tomb of the prince of the apostles; but while he prayed atthe altar, twenty-five soldiers, and sixty citizens, were put to the sword in thevestibule of the temple. The archdeacon Pelagius(l) stood before him with thegospel in his hand. " O Lord, be merciful to your servant. Pelagius," said To-
(.1) During the low? exile, rind after the death of Vigilius, the Roman church was governed, at first by thearchdeacon, and at length (A. D. 555.) by the pope Pelagius, who was not thought guiltless of the suffer­ings of his predecessor. See the original lives of the popes, under the name of Anastasius (Mnratori, Scrip.Rer. Italicarum, torn, iii. p, i. 130,131.) who relates several curious incidents of the sieges of Home and thewars of Italy.







OCR Output













OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


in the age of Job, the crime of impiety was punished by the Arabian magis­trate;^) and Mahomet was guilty of deserting and denying the national deities.But so loose was the policy of Mecca, that the leaders of the Koreish, instead ofaccusing a criminal, were compelled to employ the measures of persuasion or vio­lence. They repeatedly addressed Abu Taleb in the style of reproach and me­nace. "Thy nephew reviles our religion; he accuses our wise forefathers of ig­norance and folly, silence him quickly, lest he kindle tumult and discord in thecity. If he persevere, we shall draw our swords against him and his adherents,and thou wilt be responsible for theT)lood of thy fellow-citizens." The weightand moderation of Abu Taleb eluded the violence of religious faction; the mosthelpless or timid of the disciples retired to Ethiopia, and the prophet withdrewhimself to various places of strength in the town and country. As he was stillsupported by his family, the rest of the tribe of Koreish engaged themselves torenounce all intercourse with the children of Hashem, neither to buy nor sell,neither to marry nor to give in marriage, but to pursue them with implacable enmi­ty, till they should deliver the person of Mahomet to the justice of the gods. Thedecree was suspended in the Caaba before the eyes of the nation; the messengersof the Koreish pursued the the Mussulman exiles in heart of Africa: they be­sieged the prophet and his most faithful followers, intercepted their water, andinflamed their mutual animosity by the retaliation of injuries and insults.^ Adoubtful truce restored the appearances of concord, till the death of Abu Talebabandoned Mahomet to the power of his enemies, at the moment when he wasdeprived of his domestic comforts by the loss of his faithful and generous Cadijah.Abu Sophian, the chief of the branch of Ommiyah, succeeded to the principalityof the republic of Mecca. A zealous votary of the idols, a mortal foe of the lineof Hashem, he convened an assembly of the Koreishites and their allies, to decidethe fate of the apostle. His imprisonment might provoke the despair of his en­thusiasm; and the exile of an eloquent and popular fanatic would diffuse the mis­chief through the provinces of Arabia. His death was resolved; and they agreedthat a sword from each tribe should be buried in his heart, to divide the guilt ofhis blood, and baffle the vengeance of the Hashemites. An angel or a spy re­vealed their conspiracy; and flight was the only resource of Mahomet.(2) At thedead of night, accompanied by his friend Abubeker, he silently escaped from hishouse: the assassins watched at the door; but they were deceived by the figure ofAli, who reposed on the bed, and was covered with the green vestment of the apos­tle. The Koreish respected the piety of the heroic youth; but some verses of Ali,which are still extant, exhibit an interesting picture of his anxiety, his tenderness,and his religious confidence. Three days Mahomet and his companion were con­cealed in the cave of Thor, at the distance of a league from Mecca; and in theclose of each evening, they received from the son and daughter of Abubeker, asecret supply of intelligence and food. The diligence of the Koreish exploredevery haunt in the neighbourhood of the city; they arrived at the entrance of thecavern; but the providential deceit of a spider's web and a pigeon's nest, is sup­posed to convince them that the place was solitary and inviolate. " We are onlytwo," said the trembling Abubeker. " There is a third," replied the prophet;" it is God himself." No sooner was the pursuit abated, than the two fugitivesissued from the rock, and mounted their camels: on the road to Medina, they wereovertaken by the emissaries of the Koreish; they redeemed themselves withprayers and promises from their hands. In this eventful moment the lance of anArab might have changed the history of the world. The flight of the prophetfrom Mecca to Medina has fixed the memorable era of the Hegira,(S) which, atthe end of twelve centuries, still discriminates the lunar years of the Mahometannations. (4)
The religion of the Koran might have perished in its cradle, had not Medinaembraced with faith and reverence the holy outcasts of Mecca. Medina, or the
(1) In the time of Job, the crime of impiety was punished by the Arabian magistrate, (c. 13. v. 26—38.) Iblush for a respectable prelate, (de Poesi Hebraeorum, p. 650, 651. edit. Michaelis; and a letter of a late profes­sor in the university of Oxford, p. 15—53.) who justifies and applauds this patriarchal inquisition.
(2) TVHerbelot. Bibliot. Orient, p. 445. He quotes a particular history of the flight of Mahomet.
(3) The Hegrra was instituted by Omar, the second caliph, in imitation of the era of the martyrs of theChristians (d*Herbelot, p. 444.:) and properly commenced sixty-tight days before the flight of Mahomet, withthe first of Moharren, or first day of the Arabian year, which coincides with Friday, July 16, A. D. 622. (Abul­feda, Vit. Moham. c. xxii. xxiii. p. 45—50. and Greave's edition of Ullug Beig's Epochs: Arabum, &c. c. i. p. 8,10. fcc.)
(4) Mahomet's life, from his mission to the Hegira, may be found in Abulfeda (p. 14—45.) and Gagnier (tom-i. 134—251.542-383.) The legeud from p. 187-334. is vouched by Al .lannabi and disdained by Abulfeda.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


come. And I deny him that was crucified, and whosoever worships him. And 1choose God for my Lord, Islam for my faith, Mecca for my temple, the Moslemsfor my brethren, and Mahomet for my prophet; who was sent to lead us into theright way, and to exalt the true religion, in spite of those who join partners withGod." a i j
The conquest of Bosra, four days' journey from Damascus. (1) encouraged theArabs to besiege the ancient capital of Syria.(2) At some distance from the walls,they encamped among the groves and fountains of that delicious territory,(3) andthe usual option of the Mahometan faith, of tribute or of war, was proposed tothe resolute citizens, who had been lately strengthened by a re-enforcement offive thousand Greeks. In the decline, as in the infancy of the military art, a hos­tile defiance was frequently offered and accepted by the generals themselves :(4)many a lance was shivered in the plain of Damascus, and the personal prowess ofCaled was signalized in the first sally of the besieged. After an obstinate combat,he had overthrown and made prisoner one of the Christian leaders, a stout andworthy antagonist. He instantly mounted a fresh horse, the gift of the governorof Palmyra, and pushed forwards to the front of battle. " Repose yourself for amoment," said his friend Derar, " and permit me to supply your place: you arefatigued with fighting with this dog."—"O Derar!" replied the indefatigable Sara­cen, *' we shall rest in the world to come. He that labours to-day shall rest to-mor­row." With the same unabated ardour, Caled answered, encountered, and van­quished a second champion; and the heads of his two captives, who refused toabandon their religion, were indignantly hurled into the midst of the city. Theevent of some general and partial actions reduced the Damascenes to a closer de­fence: but a messenger, whom they dropped from the walls returned with thepromise of speedy and powerful succour, and their tumultuous joy conveyed theintelligence to the camp of the Arabs. After some debate, it was resolved by thegenerals to raise, or rather to suspend, the siege of Damascus, till they had givenbattle to the forces of the emperor. In the retreat, Caled would have chosen themore perilous station of the rear-guard; he modestly yielded to the wishes of AbuObeidah. But in the hour of danger he flew to the rescue of his companion, whowas rudely pressed by a sally of six thousand horse and ten thousand foot, andfew among the Christians could relate at Damascus, the circumstances of theirdefeat. The importance of the contest required the junction of the Saracens whowere dispersed on the frontiers of Syria and Palestine; and I shall transcribe oneof the circular mandates which was addressed to Amrou, the future conqueror ofEgypt. " In the name of the most merciful God: from Caled to Amrou, healthand happiness. Know that thy brethren the Moslems design to march to Aizna-din, where there is an army of seventy thousand Greeks, who propose to comeagainst us, that they may extinguish the light of God with their mouths: but Godpreserveth his light in spite of the infidels. (5) As soon, therefore, as this let­ter of mine shall be delivered to thy hands, come with those that are with thee toAiznadin, where thou shalt find us, if it please the most high God." The sum­mons was cheerfully obeyed, and the forty-five thousand Moslems who met on thesame day, on the same spot, ascribed to the blessing of Providence the effects oftheir activity and zeal.
About four years after the triumphs of the Persian war, the repose of Heracliusand the empire was again disturbed by a new enemy, the power of whose religionwas more strongly felt than it was clearly understood by the Christians of the east.
(1) Damascus is amply described by the Sherif at Edrisi, (Geograph. Nub. 118, 117.) and his translator, Sio-mta, (Appendix, c t.) Abulfeda. (Tabula Syria, p. 100.) Schu liens. (Indea. Geograph. ad Vit. Saladin.)d'Herbelot, (Biblior. Orient, p. 291.) Thcvenoi, (Voyage du Levant, part i. p. 688—698.) Maundrell, (Journeyfrom Aleppo to Jerusalem, p. 122—130.) and Pocock. (Description of the East, vol. ii. p. 117—127.)
(2) Noblmima civitas, says Justin. According to the oriental traditions, it was older than Abraham or Semi-ramis. Joseph. Antiq. Jud. lib. i. c. 6,7. p. 24.29. edit. Havercamp. Justin, 36. 2.
(3) EJn yxp Gt/xti tov AiO,- 7rs\tv »\t|9*c, x*i tm,- 'E»*,- xttxvh; et5**.Jwoi', Tijir (fpxii Kai ^lyirTilv ActfcMncav Xiyx,TOis TS »XA.0i; trvfiirxa-iYj otov npjyy ftoXAfl, xse* vimv ftsytSu, xtei jtp-ov tvx-AlfH* gal nfytn etyKxix Km lecratfiov trKrfsi,
>u*»}-i; *u?opi* v,x«o.etf, &c. Julian, epist. 24. p. 392. These splendid epithets are occasioned by the figs of Da­mascus, of which the author st-nds a hundred to his friend Serapion,and this rhetorical theme is inserted by Pe-tavius, Spanbeim, &c. (p. 390—396.) among the genuine epistles of Julian. How could they overlook that thewriter is an inhabitant of Damascus (he thrice affirms, that this peculiar fig grows only Toep' nvuvj a city whichJulian never entered or approached?
(4) Voltaire, who casts a keen and lively glance over the surface of history, has been strnck with the resem­blance of the fi i st Moslems and the heroes of the Iliad; the siege of Troy and that of Damascus. (Hist. Gene-rale, torn. i. p. 348.)
(5) These words are a teat of the Koran, c. 9. 32. 61.8. Like our fanatics of the last century, the Moslems,on every familiar or important occasion, spoke the language of their scriptures; a style more natural in theirmonths, than the Hebrew idiom transplanted into rhe climate and dialect of Britain.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE 'AND FALL


ty thousand Romans and strangers; and some months were successfully employedin the recovery of the cities of Syria, Mesopotamia, and Armenia, whose fortifi­cations had been imperfectly restored. Sarbar still maintained the important sta­tion of Chalcedon; but the jealousy of Chosroes, or the artifice of Heraclius, soonalienated the mind of that powerful satrap from the service of his king and coun­try. A messenger was intercepted with a real or fictitious mandate to the cadari-gan, or second in command, directing him to sendj without delay, to the throne,Hie head of a guilty or unfortunate general. The despatches were transmitted toSarbar himself; and as soon as he read the sentence of his own death, he dexte­rously inserted the names of four hundred officers, assembled a military council,and asked the cadarigan, whether he was prepared to execute the commands oftheir tyrant? The Persians unanimously declared, that Chosroes had forfeitedthe sceptre; a separate treaty was concluded with the government of Constanti­nople; and if some considerations of honour or policy restrained Sarbar from join­ing the standard of Heraclius, the emperor was assured, that he might prosecute,without interruption, his designs of victory and peace.
Deprived of his firmest support, and doubtful of the fidelity of his subjects, thegreatness of Chosroes was still conspicuous in its ruins. The number of five hun­dred thousand may be interpreted as an oriental metaphor, to describe the menand arms, the horses and elephants, that covered Media and Assyria against theinvasion of Heraclius. Yet the Romans boldly advanced from the Araxes to theTigris, and the timid prudence of Rhazates was content to follow them by forcedmarches through a desolate country till he received a peremptory mandate torisk the fate of Persia in a decisive battle. Eastward of the Tigris, at the end ofthe bridge of Mosal, the great Nineveh had formerly been erected:(l) the city,and even the ruins of the city, had long since disappeared :(2) the vacant spaceafforded a spacious field for the operations of the two armies. But these opera­tions are neglected by the Byzantine historians, and, like the authors of epic poe­try and romance, they ascribe the victory, not to the military conduct, but tothe personal valour, of their favourite hero. On this memorable day, Hera­clius, on his horse Phallus, surpassed the bravest of his warriors: his lip waspierced with a spear, the steed was wounded in the thigh, but he carried hismaster safe and victorious through the triple phalanx of the barbarians. In theheat of the action, three valiant chiefs were successively slain by the sword andlance of the emperor; among these was Rhazates himself; he fell like a soldier,but the sight of his head scattered grief and despair through the fainting ranks ofthe Persians. His armour of pure and massy gold, the shield of one hundred andtwenty plates, the sword and belt, the saddle and cuirass, adorned the triumph ofHeraclius, and if he had not been faithful to Christ and his mother, the championof Rome might have offered the fourth ofiime spoils to the Jupiter of the capitoL(3)In the battle of Nineveh, which was fiercely fought from day-break to the ele­venth hour, twenty-eight standards, besides those which might be broken or torn,were taken from the Persians; the greatest part of their army was cut in pieces,and the victors, concealing their'own loss, passed the night on the field. Theyacknowledged, that on this occasion it was less difficult to kill than to discomfitthe soldiers of Chosroes; amidst the bodies of their friends, no more than two bow­shot from the enemy, the remnant of the Persian cavalry stood firm till the seventhhour of the night; about the eighth hour they retired to their unrifled camp, col­lected their baggage, and dispersed on all sides, from the.want of orders ratherthan of resolution. The diligence of Heraclius was not less admirable in the useof victory; by a march of forty-eight miles in four-and-twenty hours, his vanguardoccupied the bridges of the greater and the lesser Zab; and the cities and palaces
(1) Ctesiasfapud Diodox. Sictil.tom. i. lib.ii. p. 115. edit. Wesseliug, assigns four hundred and eighty sta­dia (perhaps only thirty-two mites) for the circumference of Nineveh. Jonas talks of three days'journey, theone Hundred and twenty thousand persons described by the prophet as incapable of discerning tbeir righthand from thoii* left, may afford about seven hundred thousand persons of all ages for the inhabitants of thatancient capital, (GoEruet,OriffinesdesLoix.&c. torn. iii. part I. p. 02,930 which ceased to exist six hundredyears before Christ. The western suburb still subsisted, and is mentioned under the name of Mosul in the firstage of the Arabian caliphs. r
(2) Niebuhr (Voyage en Arabie, &c. torn. ii. p. 286.) passed over Nineveh without perceiving it. He mis­took for a ridge of hills the old rampart of brick or earth. It is said to have been one hundred feet high,flanked with fifteen hundred towers, each of the height of two hundred feet.
(3) Rex regia arma fero (says Romulus, in the first consecration) .... bina pot tea (continues Livy, 1.10.)inter tot bella, opima parta sunt spolia. adeonra ejus fortuna decoris. If Varro(apud Pomp. Featum. p. 306.edit. Dacier) could justify hit liberality in granting the opimespoils to a common soldier who had slain thefctug or general of the enemy, fee honour would hive been much more cheap ami common.







OCR Output








l.Vl THE DECLINE AND FALL


night, his domestics were awakened by an importunate crowd, who thundered at- his door, and obtained admittance, by revealing themselves to be the principalmembers of the senate. These welcome deputies announced the recent and mo­mentous secret of the emperor's decease: reported, or perhaps invented, his dy­ing choice of the best beloved and the most deserving of his nephews, and con­jured Justin to prevent the disorders of the multitude, if they should perceive,,with the return of light, that they were left without a master. After composinghis countenance to surprise, sorrow, and decent modesty, Justin, by the advice ofhis wife Sophia, submitted to the authority of the senate. He was conductedwith speed and silence to the palace: the guards saluted their new sovereign, andthe martial and religious rites of his coronation were diligently accomplished. Bythe hands of the proper officers he was invested with the imperial garments, thered buskins, white tunic, and the purple robe. A fortunate soldier, whom he in­stantly promoted to the rank of tribune, encircled his neck with a military collar:four robust youths exalted him on a shield; he stood firm and erect to receive theadoration of his subjects; and their choice was sanctioned by the benediction of thepatriarch, who imposed the diadem on the head of an orthodox prince. Thehippodrome was already filled with innumerable multitudes;, and ho soonqp did theemperor appear on the throne, than the voices of the blue and the green factions• were confounded in the same loyal acclamations. In the speeches which Justinaddressed to the senate and people, he promised to correct the abuses which haddisgraced the age of his predecessor, displayed the maxims of a just and benefi­cent government, and declared, that on the approaching calends of January.(l)he would revive in his own person, the name and liberality of a Roman consul.The immediate discharge of his uncle's debts exhibited a solid pledge of his faithand generosity; a train of porters laden with bags of gold advanced into the midstof the hippodrome, and the hopeless creditors of Justinian accepted this equitablepayment as a voluntary gift. Before the end of three years his example was imi­tated and surpassed by the empress Sophia, who delivered many indigent citizensfrom the weight of debt and usury: an act of benevolence the best entitled to gra­titude, since it relieves the most intolerable distress; but in which the bounty of aprince is the most liable to be abused by the claims of prodigality and fraud. (2) *On the seventh day of his reign, Justin gave audience to the ambassadors of theAvars, and the scene was decorated to impress the barbarians with astonishment,veneration, and terror. From the palace gate, the spacious courts and long por­ticos were lined with the lofty crests and gilt bucklers of the guards, who pre­sented their spears and axes with more confidence than they would have shown ina field of battle. The officers, who exercised the power, or attended the person,of the prince, were attired in their richest habits, and arranged according to themilitary and civil order of the hierarchy. When the veil of the sanctuary was with­drawn, the ambassadors beheld the emperor of the east on his throne beneath acanopy or dome, which was supported by four columns, and crowned with a wingedfigure of victory. In the first emotions of surprise, they submitted to the servileadoration of the Byzantine court; but as soon as they rose from the ground, Tar-getius, the chief of the embassy, expressed the freedom and pride of a barbarian.He extolled, by the tongue of his interpreter, the greatness of the chagan; bywhose clemency the kingdoms of the south were permitted to exist, whose victo­rious subjects had traversed the frozen rivers of Scythia, and who now coveredthe banks of the Danube with innumerable tents. The late emperor had culti­vated, with annual and costly gifts, the friendship of a grateful monarch, and theenemies of Rome had respected the allies of the Avars. The same prudence wouldinstruct the nephew of Justinian to imitate the liberality of his uncle, and to pur­chase the blessings of peace from an invincible people, who delighted and excelledin the exercise of war. The reply of the emperor was delivered in the samestrain of haughty defiance, anfl he derived his confidence from the God of theChristians, the ancient glory of Rome, and the recent triumphs of Justinian."The empire," said he, "abounds with men and horses, and arms sufficient to


verses of the two first books of Corippus, De Landibus Justini, Appendix Hist. Byzant. p. 401—416. Rome,1777.)
(1) It is surprising: how Fagi (Critica in Anna). Baron, torn. ii. p. G39.) eouM be tempted by any chroniclesto contradict the plain and decisive text of Corippus (vicina doua, lib. ii. 354; vicina dies, lib. iv, 1.) and topostpone, till A. D. 507, the consulship of Justin.
(2) The-iphnii. Chronograph, p. 205. Whenever Cedrenus or Zonaras arc mere transcribers, it is super­fluous to allege their testimony.







OCR Output








134 THE DECLINE AND FALL


cline of the Roman empire, the proud distinctions of the republic were graduallyabolished, and the reason or instinct of Justinian completed the simple form of anabsolute monarchy. The emperor could not eradicate the popular reverencewhich always waits on the possession of hereditary wealth, or the memory of fa­mous ancestors. He delighted to honour with titles and emoluments, his gene­rals, magistrates, and senators; and his precarious indulgence communicated somerays of their glory to the persons of their wives and children. But, in the eye ofthe law, all Roman citizens were equal, and all subjects of the empire were citi­zens of Rome. That inestimable character was degraded to an obsolete and emp­ty name. The voice of a Roman could no longer enact his laws, or create theannual ministers of his power; his constitutional rights might have checked thearbitrary will of a. master; and the bold adventurer from Germany or Arabia wasadmitted, with equal favour, to the civil and military command, which the citizenalone had been once entitled to assume over the conquests of his fathers. Thefirst Cscsars had scrupulously guarded the distinction of ingenuous and servilebirth, which was decided by the condition of the mother; and the candour of thelaws was satisfied, if her freedom could be ascertained during a single moment be­tween conception and the delivery. The slaves who were liberated by a generousmaster immediately entered into the middle class bf libertines or freedmen: butthey could never be enfranchised from the duties of obedience and gratitude:whatever were the fruits of their industry, their patron and his family inheritedthe third part; or even the whole of their fortune, if they died without childrenand without a testament. Justinian respected the rights of patrons; but his indul­gence removed the badge of disgrace from the two inferior orders of freedmen:whoever ceased to be a slave, obtained without reserve or delay, the station of acitizen; and at length the dignity of an ingenuous birth, which nature had refused,-was created, or supposed by the omnipotence of the emperor. Whatever re­straints of age, or forms, or numbers, had been formerly introduced to check theabuse of manumissions, and the too rapid increase of vile and indigent Romans,he finally abolished; and the spirit of his laws promoted the extinction of domes­tic servitude. Yet the eastern provinces were filled, in the time of Justinian, withmultitudes of slaves, either born or purchased for the use of their masters; andthe price, from ten to seventy pieces of gold, was determined by their age, theirstrength, and their education. (1) But the hardships of this dependant state werecontinually diminished by the influence of government and religion; and the prideof a subject was no longer elated by his absolute dominion over the life and hap­piness of his bondsman. (2)
The law of nature instructs most animals to cherish and educate their infantprogeny.. The law of reason inculcates to the human species the returns of that■piety. But the exclusive, absolute, and perpetual dominion of the father over hischildren, is peculiar to the Roman jurisprudence, (3) and seems to be coeval withthe foundation of the city. (4) The paternal power was instituted or confirmed byRomulus himself; and after the practice of three centuries, it was inscribed onthe fourth table of the decemvirs. In the forum, the senate, or the camp, theadult son of a Roman citizen enjoyed the public and private rights of a fierson:in his father's house, he was a mere thing; confounded by the laws with the move­ables, the cattle, and the slaves, whom the capricious master might alienate or de­stroy without being responsible to any earthly tribunal. The hand which be­stowed the daily sustenance might resume the voluntary gift, and whatever wasacquired by the labour or fortune of the son, was immediately lost in the property
(1) If the option of a slave was bequeathed to several legatees, they drew lots, and the losers were entitledto their share of his value; ten pieces of gold for a common servant or maid under ten years; if above that are,twenty; if they knew a trade, thirty; notaries or writers, fifty; midwives or physicians, sixty; eunuchs underten years, thirty pieces; above, fifty; if tradesmen, seventy. (Cod. lib. vi. tit. xliii. leg. iii.) These legal pricesare generally below those of the market.
(2) For the state of slaves and freedmen, see Institutes, lib. i. tit. 3—8. lib. ii. tit. ix. lib. iii. tit. viii. 9; Pan­dects or pigest. lib. i. tit. 5, 6. lib. xxxviii. tit. 1—1. and the whole of the fortieth book. Code, lib. vi. tit. 4, 5.■lib. vii. tit. 1—23. Be it henceforward understood that, with the original text, of the Institutes and Pandects,the correspondent articles in the Antiquities and Elements of Heineccius are implicitly ■quoted: and with thetwenty-seven first books of the Pandects, the learned and rational Commentaries of Gerard Noodt (Opera,torn. si. p. 1—590. the end. Lugd. Bat. 1724.)
(3) See the patria potesta in the Institutes (lib. i. tit. 9.,) the Pandects (lib. i. tit. 6,7. J and the Code (lib. viii.tit. 47—49.) Jus potestatis quod in liberui habemus proprium est civium Romanorum. Nulli enim alii sunthomines, qui talem in liberos habeant potestatem qualem nos habemus.
(4) nionysius, Hal. lib. ii. p. 94,9J. Gravioa (Opp. p. 286.) produces the words of (he twelve tables. Papi-nian (in Collatione Legum Uoroan. et Mosaicarum, tit. iv. p.204.) styles this patria potestatis, lex regia: Ulpittn>d Sabin. lib. xxvi. m Pandect, lib. i. tit. vi. leg. viii.) says, jos potestatis morihus receptum; and fnriosusfifi-itnun potestate habebit. How sacred, or rather, how absurd!







OCR Output








S5*> THE DECLINE AND FALL


and cruelty; and as soon as the head of Nicephorus was shown from the window,the tumult was hushed, and the Armenian was emperor of the east. On the dayof his coronation, he was stopped on the threshold of St. Sophia, by the intrepidpatriarch; who charged his conscience with the deed of treason and blood; and re­quired, as a sign of repentance, that he should separate himself from his morecriminal associate. This sally of apostolic zeal was not offensive to the prince,since he could neither love nor trust a wom^n who had repeatedly violated themost sacred obligations; and Theophano, instead of sharing his imperial fortune,was dismissed with ignominy from his bed and palace. In their last interview, shedisplayed a frantic and impotent rage; accused the ingratitude of her lover; as­saulted with words and blows her son Basil, as he stood silent and submissive inthe presence of a superior colleague; and avowed her own prostitution in proclaim­ing the illegitimacy of his birth. The public indignation was appeased by herexile, and the punishment of the meaner accomplices: the death of an unpopularprince was forgiven; and the guilt of Zimisces was forgotten in the splendour of hisvirtues. Perhaps his profusion was less useful to the state than the avarice ofNicephorus, but his gentle and generous behaviour delighted all who approachedhis person: and it was only in the paths of victory that he trod in the footsteps ofhis predecessor. The greatest part of his reign was employed in the camp and thefield: his personal valour and activity were signalized on the Danube and the Ti­gris, the ancient boundaries of the Roman world; and by his double triumph overthe Russians and the Saracens, he deserved the titles of saviour of the empire, andconqueror of the east. In his last return from Syria, he observed that the mostfruitful lands of his new provinces were possessed by the eunuchs. "And is it forthem," (he exclaimed, with honest indignation,) "that we have fought and con­quered? Is it for them that we shed our blood, and exhaust the treasures of ourpeople?" The complaint was re-echoed to the palace, and the death of Zimiscesis strongly marked with the suspicion of poison-Under this usurpation, or regency, of twelve years, the two lawful emperors,Basil and Constantine, had silently grown to the age of manhood. Their tenderyears had been incapable of dominion: the respectful modesty of their attendancesmd salutation, was due to the age and merit of their guardians: the childless am­bition of those guardians had no temptation to violate their right of succession: theirpatrimony was ably and faithfully administered; and the premature death of Zi­misces was a loss, rather than a benefit, to the sons of Romanus. Their want ofexperience detained them twelve years longer the obscure and voluntary pupils ofa minister, who extended his reign by persuading them to indulge the pleasures ofyouth, and to disdain the labours of government. In this silken web, the weaknessof Constantine was for ever entangled; but his elder brother felt the impulse ofgenius and the desire of action: he frowned, and the minister was no more. Basil•was the acknowledged sovereign of Constantinople and the provinces of Europe;but Asia was oppressed by two veteran generals, Phocas and Sclerus, who, alter­nately friends and enemies, subjects and rebels, maintained their independence,and laboured to emulate the example of successful usurpation. Against thesedomestic enemies the son of Romanus first drew his sword, and they trembled inthe presence of a lawful and high-spirited prince. The first, in the front of battle,■was thrown from his horse, by the stroke of poison, or an arrow; the second, whohad been twice loaded with chains, and twice invested with the purple, was de­sirous of ending in peace the small remainder of his days. As the aged suppliantapproached the throne, with dim eyes and faltering steps, leaning on his two at­tendants, the emperor exclaimed, in the insolence of youth and power,—"And isthis the man who has so long been the object of our terror!" After he had con­firmed his own authority, and the peace of the empire, the trophies of Nicephorusand Zimisces would not suffer their royal pupil to sleep in the palace. His long andfrequent expeditions against the Saracens were rather glorious, than useful to theempire; but the final destruction of the kingdom of Bulgaria appears, since thetime of Belisarius, the most important triumph of the Roman arms. Yet, insteadof applauding their victorious prince, his subjects detested the rapacious and rigidavarice of Basil; and in the imperfect narrative of his exploits, We can only discernthe courage, patience, and ferociousness of a soldier. A vicious education, tvhichcould not subdue his spirit, had clouded his mind; he was ignorant of everyscience; and the remembrance of his learned and feeble grandsire might encouragea real or affected contempt of laws and lawyers, of artists and arts. Of such acharacter, in such an age, superstition took a firm ajid lasting possession; after the







OCR Output








318 THE DECLINE AND FALL


even the head of the murderer, substitutes an innocent to the guilty person, andtransfers the penalty to the best and most considerable of the race by whom theyhave been injured. If he falls by their hands, they are exposed in their turn tothe danger of reprisals, the interest and principal of the bloody debt are accumu­lated; the individuals of either family lead a life of malice and suspicion, and fiftyyears may sometimes elapse before the account of vengeance be finally settled. (1)This sanguinary spirit, ignorant of pity or forgiveness, has been moderated, how­ever, by the maxims of honour, which require in every private encounter some de­cent equality of age and strength, of numbers and weapons. An annual festivalof two, perhaps of four, months, was observed by the Arabs before the time ofMahomet, during which their swords were religiously sheathed both in foreign anddomestic hostility; and this partial truce is more strongly expressive of the habitsof anarchy and warfare. (2)
But the spirit of rapine and revenge was attempered by the milder influence oftrade and literature. The solitary peninsula is encompassed by the most civilized na­tions of the ancient world: the merchant is the friend of mankind: and the annual ca­ravans imported the first seeds of knowledge and politeness into the cities, and eventhe camps, of the desert. Whatever may be the pedigree of the Arabs, their lan­guage is derived from the same original stock of the Hebrew, the Syriac, and theChaldean tongues; the independence of the tribes was marked by their peculiar dia­lects;^) but each, after their own, allowed a just preference to the pure and perspi­cuous idiom of Mecca. In Arabia as well as in Greece, the perfection of languageoutstripped the refinement of manners; and her speech could diversify the fourscorenames of honey, the two hundred of a serpent, the five hundred of a lion, the thou­sand of a sword, at a time when this copious dictionary was intrusted to the memo­ry of an illiterate people. The monuments of the Homerites were inscribed with anobsolete and mysterious character; but the Cufic letters, the groundwork of the pre­sent alphabet, were invented on the banks of the Euphrates; and the recent inven­tion was taught at Mecca by a stranger who settled in that city after the birth of Ma­homet. The arts of grammar, of metre, and of rhetoric, were unknown to the free-born eloquence of the Arabians; but their penetration was sharp, their fancy luxu­riant, their wit strong and sententious,(4) and their more elaborate compositions wereaddressed with energy and effect to the minds of their hearers. The genius andmerit of a rising poet were celebrated by the applause of his own and the kindredtribes. A solemn banquet was prepared, and a chorus of women, striking their tym-bals, and displaying the pomp of their nuptials, sung in the presence of their sonsand husbands the felicity of their native tribe; that a champion had now appearedto vindicate their rights; that a herald had raised his voice to immortalize theirrenown. The distant or hostile tribes resorted to an annual fair, which was abolish­ed by the fanaticism of the first Moslems; a national assembly, that must havecontributed to refine and harmonize the barbarians. Thirty days were employedin the exchange, not only of com and wine, but of eloquence and poetry. Theprize was disputed by the generous emulation of the bards; the victorious per­formance was deposited in the archives of princes and emirs, and we may read, inour own language, the seven original poems which were inscribed in letters ofgold, and suspended in the temple of Mecca. (5) The Arabian poets were the his­torians and moralists of the age; and if they sympathized with the prejudices, theyinspired and crowned the virtues, of their countrymen. The indissoluble union of
(1) The modem theory and practice of the Arabs in the revenge of murder, are described by Neibnhr (Be*scriptiou, p. 26—310 The harsher features of antiquity may be traced in the Koran, c. ii. p. 20. e. xvii. p. 330,with Sale's observations.
; (2) Procopius (de Bell. Persic, lib. i. e. 160 places the two holy months about the summer solstice. .The Ara­bians consecrate/our months of the year—the first, seventh, eleventh, and twelfth; and pretend, thatin a longseries of ages, the truce was infringed only four or sin times (Sale's Preliminary Discourse, p. 147—140. andTfotes on the ninth chapter of the Koran, p. 154, fcc. Casiri, Bibliot. Hispano-Arabica, torn. ii. p. 20, 21.)
(3) Arrian, in the second century, remarks (in Peripio Maris Erythrsei, p. 12.) the partial or total difference■of the dialects of the Arabs. Their language and letters are copiously treated by Pocock (Specimen, p. 150—154,) Casiri (Bibliot. Hispano-Arabica. torn. i. p. 1. 83. 292. torn. ii. p. 25, &c.,) and Neibuhr. (Description deI'Arabie.p. 72—86.) I pass slightly; I am not fond of repeating words like a parrot.
(4) A familiar tale in Voltaire's Zadig (le Chien et le Cheval) is related to prove the natural sagacity of theArabs (d'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orient, p. 120,121. Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet, torn. i. p. 37—46,) but d'Arvieux, orrather La Roque (Voyage de Palestine, p. 92,) denies the boasted superiority of the Bedoweens. The one bund*red and sixty-nine sentences of Ali (translated by Ockley, London, 1718,) afford a just and favourable specimenof Arabian wit.
(5) Pocock (Specimen, p. 158—161.) and Casiri (Bibliot. Hispano-Arabica, torn. i. p. 48, 84, &c. 119. torn. ii.p. 17, &c.) speak of the Arabian poets before Mahomet; the seven poems of the Caaba have been published inEnglish by sir William Jones; but his honourable mission to India has deprived us of his own notes, far mow


 







OCR Output








10-1 THE DECLINE AND FALL


of the Gothic kingdom: the senate and people were restored to their country; themeans of subsistence were liberally provided; and Totila, in the robe of peace,exhibited the equestrian games of the circus. Whilst he amused the eyes of themultitude, four hundred vessels were prepared for the embarkation of his troops.The cities of Rhegium and Tarentum were reduced: he passed into Sicily, the ob­ject of his implacable resentment, and the island was stripped of its gold and sil­ver, of the fruits of the earth, and of an infinite number of horses, sheep, andoxen. Sardinia and Corsica obeyed the fortune of Italy; and the sea-coast ofGreece was visited by a fleet of three hundred galleys. (1) The Goths werelanded in Corcyra and the ancient continent of Epirus; they advanced as far asNicopolis, the trophy of Augustus, and Dodona,(2) once favoured by the oracleof Jove. In every step of his victories the wise barbarian repeated to Justinianhis desire of peace, applauded the concord of their predecessors, and offered toemploy the Gothic arms in the service of the empire.
Justinian was deaf to the voice of peace; but he neglected the prosecution of war;and the indolence of his temper disappointed, in some degree, the obstinacy of hispassions. From this salutary slumber the emperor was awakened by the popeVigilius and the patrician Cethegus, who appeared before his throne, and adjuredhim, in the name of God and the people, to resume the conquest and deliveranceof Italy. In the choice of the generals, caprice as well as judgment was shown.A fleet and army sailed for the relief of Sicily under the conduct of Liberius; buthis youth and want of experience were afterwards discovered, and before hetouched the shores of the island, he was overtaken by his successor. In the placeof Liberius, the conspirator Artaban was raised from a prison to military honours;in the pious presumption, that gratitude would animate his valour and fortify hisallegiance. Belisarius reposed in the shade of his laurels, but the commandof the principal army was reserved for Germanus,(3) the emperor's nephew,whose rank and merit had been long depressed by the jealousy of the court.Theodora had injured him in the rights of a private citizen, the marriage of hischildren, and the testament of his brother; and although his conduct was pureand blameless, Justinian was displeased that he should be thought worthy of theconfidence of the malecontents. The life of Germanus was alesson of implicit obe­dience ; he nobly refused to prostitute his name and character in the factions of thecircus: the gravity of his manners was tempered by innocent cheerfulness; and hisriches were lent without interest to indigent or deserving friends. His valourhad formerly triumphed over the Sclavonians of the Danube and the rebels of Af­rica: the first report of his promotion revived the hopes of the Italians: and he wasprivately assured, that a crowd of Roman deserters would abandon, on his ap­proach, the standard of Totila.
His second marriage with Malasontha, the grand-daughter of Theodoric, en­deared Germanus to the Goths themselves; and they marched with reluctanceagainst the father of a royal infant, the last offspring of the line of Amali.(4) Asplendid allowance was assigned by the emperor: the general contributed his pri­vate fortune; his two sons were popular and active; and he surpassed in the promp­titude and success of his levies, the expectation of mankind. He was permittedto select some squadrons of Thracian cavalry: the veterans as well as the youth ofConstantinople and Europe, engaged their voluntary service; and as far as theheart of Germany, his fame and liberality attracted the aid of the barbarians.The Romans advanced to Sardica; an army of Sclavonians fled before their march;but within two days of their final departure, the designs of Germanus were termi­nated by his malady and death. Yet the impulse which he had given to the Ita­lian war still continued to act with energy and efl'ect. The maritime towns, An-
dini, Roma Antica, lib. Til. c. 9. p. 466. Donatui, Roma Antique, lib. it. c. 13. p. 334. But all antiquity is ig­norant of this relic.
(1) In these seas, Proeopius searched without success for the isle of Calypso. He was shown at Phasacia orCorcyra. the petrified ship of Ulysses; (OiItm. xiii. 163..) but he found it a recent fabric of many stones, de­dicated by a merchant to Jupiter Cassiut, (lib. ir. c. 22.) Eustathius had supposed it to be the fanciful likenessof a rock.
(2) M. d'Anville (Memoirei de l'Acad. torn, xxxii. p. 513—528. illustrates the gulf of Ambracia; but hecannot ascertain the situation of Dodona. A country in sight of Italy is less known than the wilds ofAmerica.
(3) See the acts of Germanus in the public (Vandal, lib. ii. c. 1(1—18. Goth. lib. iii. c. 31, 32.) and privatehistory (Anecdot. c. v..) and those of his son Justin, in Agathias (lib. ir. c. 130,131.) Kotwitbstanding anambiguous expression of Jornandes, fratri suo, Alemannus nas proved that he was the son of the emperor'sbrother.
(4) Confuncta Aniciorura gens cum Amala stirpe spem adhnc utriutque generis promittit, (Jornandes, c. bt.p. 703. He wrote at Ravenna before the death of Totila,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 243


the games of the hippodrome; from thence he paraded through the streets with athousand banners, and a thousand trumpets; refreshed himself in the baths ofZeuxippus, and returning to the palace, entertained his nobles with a sumptuousbanquet. At the meridian hour he withdrew to his chamber, intoxicated withflattery and wine, and forgetful that his example had made every subject ambi­tious, and that every ambitious subject was his secret enemy. Some bold conspi­rators introduced themselves into the disorder of the feast; and the slumberingmonarch was surprised, bound, blinded, and deposed before he was sensible of hisdanger. Yet the traitors were deprived of their reward; and the free voice of thesenate and people promoted Artemius from the office of secretary to that ofemperor: he assumed the title of Anastasius II. and displayed in a short and trou­bled reign the virtues both of peace and war. But after the extinction of the im­perial line, the rule of obedience was violated, and every change diffused the seedsof new revolutions. In a mutiny of the fleet, an obscure and reluctant officer of therevenue was forcibly invested with the purple: after some months of a naval war,Anastasius resigned the sceptre; and the conqueror, Theodosius III., submitted inhis turn to the superior ascendant of Leo, the general and emperor of the orientaltroops. His two predecessors were permitted to embrace the ecclesiastical pro­fession: the restless impatience of Anastasius tempted him to risk and to lose hislife in a treasonable enterprise; but the last days of Theodosius were honourableand secure. The single and sublime word " health," which he inscribed on histomb, expresses the confidence of philosophy or religion; and the fame of his mi­racles was long preserved among the people of Ephesus. This convenient shel­ter of the church might sometimes impose a lesson of clemency: but it may bequestioned whether it is for the public interest to diminish the perils of unsuccess­ful ambition.
I have dwelt on the fall of a tyrant: I shall briefly represent the founder of anew dynasty, who is known to posterity by the invectives of his enemies, and whosepublic and private life is involved in the ecclesiastical story of the Iconoclasts. Yetin spite of the clamours of superstition, a favourable prejudice for the character ofLeo the Isaurian, may be reasonably drawn from the obscurity of his birth, andthe duration of his reign.—I. In an age of manly spirit, the prospect of an impe-perial reward would have kindled every energy of the mind, and produceda crowd of competitors as deserving as they were desirous to reign. Even in thecorruption and debility of the modern Greeks, the elevation of a plebeian fromthe last to the first rank of society, supposes some qualifications above the level ofthe multitude. He would probably be ignorant and disdainful of speculative sci­ence; and in the pursuit of fortune, he might absolve himself from the obligationsof benevolence and justice; but to his character we may ascribe the useful virtuesof prudence and fortitude, the knowledge of mankind, and the important art ofgaining their confidence and directing their passions. It is agreed that Leo was anative of Isauria, and that Conon was his primitive name. The writers, whoseawkward satire is praise, describe him as an itinerant pedlar, who drove an asswith some paltry merchandise to the country fairs; and foolishly relate that he meton the road some Jewish fortune-tellers, who promised him the Roman empire, oncondition that he should abolish the worship of idols. A more probable accountrelates the migration of his father from Asia Minor to Thrace, where he exer­cised the lucrative trade of a grazier; and he must have acquired considerablewealth, since the first introduction of his son was procured by a supply of five hun­dred sheep to the imperial camp. His first service was in the guards of Justinian,where he soon attracted the notice, and by degrees, the jealousy of the tyrant.His valour and dexterity were conspicuous in the Colchian war: from Anastasiushe received the command of the Anatolian legions, and by the suffrage of the sol­diers he was raised to the empire, With the general applause of the Roman world.II. In this dangerous elevation, Leo III. supported himself against, the envy of hisequals, the discontent of a powerful faction, and the assaults of his foreign and do­mestic enemies. The catholics, who accuse his religious innovations, are obligedto confess that they were undertaken with temper, and conducted with firmness.Their silence respects the wisdom of his administration and the purity of his man­ners. After a reign of twenty-four years, he peaceably expired in his palace ofConstantinople; and the purple which he had acquired, was transmitted by theright of inheritance to the third generation.
In the long reign of thirty-four years, the son and successor of Leo, ConstantineV, surnamedCopronymus, attacked with less temperate zeal the images or idols







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. . 251


tkmed for their reception, and returned to Constantinople, from whence they weredistributed to their respective homes. But the freedom of Basil was naked anddestitute: his farm was ruined by the calamities of war: after his father's death,his manual labour or service, could no longer support a family of orphans; and heresolved to seek a more conspicuous theatre, in which every virtue and every vicemay lead to the paths of greatness. The first night of his arrival at Constantino­ple, without friends or money, the weary pilgrim slept on the steps of the churchof St. Diomede; he was fed by the casaal hospitality of a monk; and was intro­duced to the service of a cousin and a namesake of the emperor Theophilus: who,though himself of a diminutive person, was always followed by a train of tall andhandsome domestics. Basil attended his patron to the government of Peloponnesus;eclipsed, by his personal merit, the birth and dignity of Theophilus, and formeda useful connexion with a wealthy and charitable matron of Patras. Her spiritualor carnal love embraced the young adventurer, whom she adopted as her son.Danielis presented him with thirty slaves; and the produce of her bounty was ex­pended in the support of his brothers, and the purchase of some large estates inMacedonia. His gratitude or ambition still attached him to the service of The­ophilus; and a lucky accident recommended him to the notice of the court. A fa­mous wrestler, in the train of the Bulgarian ambassadors, had defied, at the royalbanquet, the boldest and most robust of the Greeks. The strength of Basil waspraised: he accepted the challenge; and the barbarian champion was overthrownat the first onset. A beautiful but vicious horse was condemned to be hamstrung;it was subdued by the dexterity and courage of the servant of Theophilus; and hisconqueror was promoted to an honourable rank in the imperial stables. But itwas impossible to obtain the confidence of Michael without complying with hisvices; and his new favourite, the great chamberlain of the palace, was raised andsupported by a disgraceful marriage with a royal concubine, and the dishonour ofhis sister, who succeeded to her place. The public administration had been aban­doned to the C<esar Bardas, the brother and enemy of Theodora; but the arts offemale influence persuaded Michael to hate and to fear his uncle: he was drawnfrom Constantinople, under the pretext of a Cretan expedition, and stabbed in thetent of audience, by the sword of the chamberlain, and in the presence of the em­peror. About a month after this execution, Basil was invested with the title ofAugustus and the government of the empire. He supported this unequal associa­tion till his influence was fortified by popular esteem. His life was endangered bythe caprice of the emperor; and his dignity was profaned by a second colleague,who had rowed in the galleys. Yet the murder of his benefactor must be con­demned as an act of ingratitude and treason; and the churches which he dedicatedto the name of St. Michael, were a poor and puerile expiation of his guilt.
The different ages of Basil I. may be compared with those of Augustus. Thesituation of the Greek did not allow him in his earliest youth to lead an armyagainst his country, or to proscribe the noblest of her sons; but his aspiring geniusstooped to the arts of a slave; he dissembled his ambition and even his virtues, andgrasped, with the bloody hand of an assassin, the empire which he ruled with thewisdom and tenderness of a parent. A private citizen may feel his interest repug­nant to his duty; but it must be from a deficiency of sense or courage, that an ab­solute monarch can separate his happiness from his glory, or his glory from thepublic welfare. The life or panegyric of Basil has indeed been composed andpublished under the long reign of his descendants; but even their stability on thethrone may be justly ascribed to the superior merit of their ancestor. *In his cha­racter, his grandson Constantine has attempted to delineate a perfect image ofroyalty; but that feeble prince, unless he had copied a real model, could not ea­sily have soared above the level of his own conduct or conceptions. But the mostsolid praise of Basil is drawn from the comparison of a ruined and a flourishingmonarchy, that which he wrested from the dissolute Michael, and that which hebequeathed to the Macedonian dynasty. The evils which had been sanctified bytime and example, were corrected by his master-hand; and he revived, if not thenational spirit, at least the order and majesty of the Roman empire. His appli­cation was indefatigable, his temper cool, his understanding vigorous and decisive;and in his practice he observed that rare "and salutary moderation, which pursueseach virtue, at an equal distance between the opposite vices. His military serviceliad been confined to the palace; nor was the emperor endowed with the spirit orthe talents of a warrior. Yet under his reign the Roman arms were again formi­dable to the barbarians. As soon as he had formed a new army by discipline and







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


When Justinian first meditated the conquest of Italy, he sent ambassadors to thekings of the Franks, and adjured them, by the common ties of alliance and religion,to join in the holy enterprise against the Arians. The Goths, as their wants weremore urgent, employed a more effectual mode of persuasion, and vainly strove, bythe gift of lands and money, to purchase the friendship, or at least the neutralityof a light and perfidious nation. (1) But the arms of Belisarius, and the revolt ofthe Italians, had no sooner shaken the Gothic monarchy, than Theodebert of Aus­tralia, the most powerful and warlike of the Merovingian kings, was persuaded tosuccour their distress by an indirect and seasonable aid. Without expecting theconsent of their sovereign, ten thousand Burgundians, his recent subjects, descend­ed from the Alps, and joined the troops which Vitiges had sent to chastise the re­volt of Milan. After an obstinate siege, the capital of Liguria was reduced by fa­mine, but no capitulation could be obtained, except for the safe retreat of the Ro­man garrison. Datius, the orthodox bishop, who had seduced his countrymen torebellion(2) and ruin, escaped to the luxury and honours of the Byzantine court;(3)but the clergy, perhaps the Arian clergy, were slaughtered at the foot of their ownaltars by the defenders of the catholic faith. Three hundred thousand males werereported to be slain;(4) the female sex, and the more precious spoil, was resignedto the Burgundians; and the houses, or at least the walls of Milan, were levelledwith the ground. The Goths, in their last moments, were revenged by the des­truction of a city, second only to Rome in size and opulence, in the splendour of itsbuildings, or the number of its inhabitants; and Belisarius sympathized alone in thefate of his deserted and devoted friends. Encouraged by this successful inroad,Theodebert himself, in the ensuing spring, invaded the plains of Italy with an ar­my of one hundred thousand barbarians. (5) The king, and some chosen followers,were 'mounted on horseback, and armed with lances; the infantry, without bowsor spears, were satisfied with a shield, a sword, and a double-edged battle-axe,which, in their hands, became a deadly and unerring weapon. Italy trembled atthe march of the Franks; and both the Gothic prince and the Roman general, alikeignorant of their designs, solicited, with hope and terror, the friendship of thesedangerous allies. Till he had secured the passage of the Po on the bridge of Pa-via, the grandson of Clovis dissembled his intentions, which he at length declared,by assaulting, almost at the same instant, the hostile camps of the Romans andGoths. Instead of uniting their arms, they fled with equal precipitation; and thefertile, though desolate, provinces of Liguria and JEmilia, were abandoned to a li­centious host of barbarians, whose rage was not mitigated by any thoughts of set­tlement or conquest. Among the cities which they ruined, Genoa, not yet con­structed of marble, is particularly enumerated: and the deaths of thousands, ac­cording to the regular practice of war, appear to have excited less horror thansome idolatrous sacrifices of women and children, which were performed with im­punity in the camp of the most Christian king. If it were not a melancholy truth,that the first and most cruel sufferings must be the lot of the innocent and helpless,<history might exult in the misery of the conquerors, who, in the midst of riches,>were left destitute of bread or wine, reduced to drink the waters of the Po, and to-feed on the flesh of distempered cattle. The dysentery swept away one-third oftheir army; and the clamours of his subjects, who were impatient to pass the Alps,disposed Theodebert to listen with respect to the mild exhortation of Belisarius,The memory of this inglorious and destructive warfare was perpetuated on themedals of Gaul: and Justinian, without unsheathing his sword, assumed the title ofconqueror of the Franks. The Merovingian prince was offended by the vanity ofthe emperor; he affected to pity the fallen fortunes of the Goths; and his insidiousoffer of a federal union was fortified by the promise or menace of descending fromthe Alps at the head of five hundred thousand men. His plans of conquest were
(1) This national reproach of perfidy (Procop. Gotli. lib. ii. c. 25.) offends the ear of La Mothe le Vayer(torn. viii. p. 163—165..; who criticises, as if he had not read the Greek historian.
(2) Baroaius applauds his treason, and justifies the catholic bishops—qui ne sab heretico principe degantomnem lapidem movant—a useful caution. The more rational Muratori (Annali d'ltalia, torn. v. p. 54.)iiints at the guilt of perjury, and blames at least the imprudence of Datius.
(S) St. Datius was more successful against devils than against barbarians. He travelled with a numerousretinue, and occupied at Corinth a large house (Baronius, A. D. 538. Mo. 89, A. D. 539. No. 20.)
(4) MupiosJes TpiMKovrz (compare Procopius. Goth. lib. ii. c. 7.21.) Yet such papulation is incredible; und thesecond or third city of Italy need not repine if we only decimate the numbers of the present text. Both Milanand Genoa revived in less than thirty years (Paul Diacoa. de Gestis Langobard, lib. ii. c. 36.
(5) Besides Procopius, perhaps too Homan, see the Chronicles of Marius and Marcellinus, Jornandes (inSuccess. Rega. in Muratori, torn. i. p. 241.,) and Gregory of Tours, (lib. iii. c. 32. in torn. ii. of the Historiansof France.) Gregory supposes a defeat of Beluarius, who, in Almoin (de Gejtfs Franc, lib. ii. c 53, in torn,iii. p. 59.,) is^Iain by the Franks.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


tiously renewed: the hopes of profit tempted the sacrilegious scribes to erase thecharacters of antiquity, and Sophocles or Tacitus were obliged to resign the parch­ment to missals, homdies, and the golden legend.^1) If such was the fate of themost beautiful compositions of genius, what stability could be expected for thedull and barren works of an obsolete science? The books of jurisprudence wereinteresting to few, and entertaining to none; their value was connected with pre­sent use, and they sunk for ever as soon as that use was superseded by the innova­tions of fashion, superior merit, or public authority. In the age of peace and learn­ing, between Cicero and the last of the Antonines, many losses had been alreadysustained, and some luminaries of the school, or forum, were known only to thecurious by tradition and report. Three hundred and sixty years of disorder anddecay accelerated the progress of oblivion; and it may fairly be presumed, that ofthe writings, which Justinian is accused of neglecting, many were no longer to befound in the libraries of the east. (2) The copies of Papinian or Ulpian, which the, reformer had proscribed, were deemed unworthy of future notice; the twelve ta­bles, and pretorian edict insensibly vanished, and the monuments of ancient Romewere neglected or destroyed by the envy and ignorance of the Greeks. Even thePandects themselves have escaped with difficulty and danger from the commonshipwreck, and criticism has pronounced, that all the editions and manuscripts ofthe west are derived from one original. (3) It was transcribed at Constantinoplethe beginning of the seventh century,(4) was successively transported by the acci­dents of war and commerce to Amalphi,(5) Pisa,(6) and Florence,(7) and is nowdeposited as a sacred relic(8) in the ancient palace of the republic. (9)
ft is the first care of a reformer to prevent any future reformation. To main­tain the text of the Pandects, the Institutes, and the Code, the use of ciphers andabbreviations was rigorously proscribed; and as Justinian recollected, that the per­petual edict had been buried %nder the weight of commentators, he denouncedthe punishment of forgery against the rash civilians who should presume to inter­pret or pervert the will of their sovereign. The scholars of Accursius, of Barto-lus, of Cujacius, should blush for their accumulated guilt, unless they dare to dis­pute his right of binding the authority of his successors, and the native freedom ofthe mind. But the emperor was unable to fix his own inconstancy; and while heboasted of renewing the exchange of Diomede, of transmuting brass into gold,(10)
copy was reduced from four or five hundred to sixty, fifty, and forty crowns. The public was at first pleasedwith the cheapness, and at length provoked by the discovery of the fraud. (Mattaire, Anna).Typography torn,i. p. 12. first edition.)
(1) This execrable practice prevailed from the eighth, and more especially from the twelfth, century, whenit became almost universal (Montfaucon, in the Memoires de l'Academie, turn. vi. p. 606, Etc. BibliothequeRaisonnee de la Diplomatique, torn, i, p. 170.)
(2) Poroponius f Pandect, lib. i. tit. ii. leg. ii.) observes, that of the three founders of the civil law, Mucins,Brutus, and Manilius, extant volumina, scripta Manilii monuments; that of some old republican lawyers, haecversantur eorum scripta intermanus hominum. Eight of the Augustan sages were reduced to a compendium:of Caseellius,scripta non extant sed unus liber, &c: of Trebatius, minus frequentantur: of Tubero, libra pa-rum grati sunt. Many quotations in the Pandects are derived from books which Tribonian never saw; and inthe long period from the seventh to the thirteenth century of Rome, the apparent reading of the moderns suc­cessively depends on the knowledge and veracity of their predecessors.
(3) Ali, in several instances, repeat the errors of the scribe and the transpositions of some leaves in the Flo­rentine Pandects. This fact, if it be true, is decisive. Yet the Pandects are quoted by Ivo of Chartres (whodied in 1117:) by Theobald, archbUhopof Canterbury, and by Vacariiis,ourfirst professor, in the year 1140(Sel-den ad Fhnam. c. 7. torn. ii. p. 1030—1085.) Have our British MSS. of the Pandects been collated ?
(4) See the description of this original in Brenckman (Hist. Pandect. Florent. lib. i. c. 2,3. p. 4—17. and lib. ii.)Politian, an enthusiast, revered it as the authentic standard of Justinian himself (p. 407,408.;) but this paradoxis refuted by the abbreviations of the Florentine MS. (lib. ii. c. 3, p. it7—130.) It is composed of two quartovolumes, with large margins, on a thin parchment, and the Latin characters betray the hand of a Greekscribe.
(5) Brenckman, at the end of his history, has inserted two dissertations on the republic of Amalphi, and the1 Pisan war in the year 1185, &c.
(6) The discovery of the Pandects at Amalphi (A. D. 1137.,) is first noticed (in 1501) by Ludovicus Bologni-nus (Brenckman, lib. i. c. 11. p. 73,74. lib. iv. c. 2. p. 417—425.) on the faith of a Pisan chronicle (p. 409,410.,)without a name or a date. The whole story, though unknown to the twelfth century, embellished by igno­rant ages, and suspected by rigid criticism, is not, however, destitute of much internal probability (lib. i. c. 4—a. p, 17—50.) The Liber Pandectarum of Pisa was undoubtedly consulted in the fourteenth century by thegreat Bartolus (p. 400,407. See lib. i. c. 9. p. 50—62.)
(7) Pisa was taken by the Florentines in the year 1406; and in 1411 the Pandects were transported to the ca­pital. These events are authentic and famous.
(8) They were now bound in purple,deposited in a rich casket,and shown to curious travellers by the monksand magistrates bare-headed, and with lighted tapers (Brenckman, lib. i. c. 10—12. p. 62—93.)
(9) After the collations of Politian, Bologninns and Antoninus Augustinus, and the splendid edition of thePandects by Taurellus (in 1551.) Henry Brenckman, a Dutchman, undertook a pilgrimage to Florence,wherehe employed several years in the study of a single manuscript. His Historia Pandectarum Flo rent inorum(Utrecht, 1722, in quarto.) though a monument of industry, is a small portion of hit original design.
(10) XpwKre* xxKkhwv ixaTOju&i tvvox&otwv apud Homerum patrem omnis virtlitis (1st Pruefat. ad Pandect.) Aline of Milton or Ta«o would surprise us in an act of parliament. Quae omnia obtinerc sancimus in omnecevum. Of the first code, he jays (2d. Prrefat.,) in setemum valituruin. Man and for ever!







OCR Output








in THE DECLINE AND FALL


Csesarea(l) records the epistle,(2) but he most strangely forgets the picture ofChrist;(3) the perfect impression of his face on a linen, with which he gratified thefaith of the- royal stranger, who had invoked his healing power, and offered thestrong city of Edessa to protect him against the malice of the Jews. The ignoranceof the primitive church is explained by the long imprisonment of the image in aniche of the wall, from whence, after an oblivion of five hundred years, it was re­leased by some prudent bishop, and seasonably presented to the devotion of thetimes. Its first and most glorious exploit was the deliverance of the city from thearms of Chosroes Nushirvan; and it was soon revered as a pledge of the divinepromise, that Edessa should never be taken by a foreign enemy. It is true, in­deed, that the text of Procopius ascribes the double deliverance of Edessa to thewealth and valour of her citizens, who purchased the absence, and repelled theassaults of the Persian monarch. He was ignorant, the profane historian, of thetestimony which he is compelled to deliver in the ecclesiastical page of Evagrius,that the Palladium was exposed on the rampart; and that the water, which hadbeen sprinkled on the holy face, instead of quenching, added new fuel to the flamesof the besieged. After this important service, the image of Edessa was preservedwith respect and gratitude; and if the Armenians rejected the legend, the morecredulous Greeks adored the similitude, which was not the work of any mortalpencil, but the immediate creation of the divine original. Thestyle and sentimentsof a Byzantine hymn will declare how far their worship was removed from thegrossest idolatry. " How can we with mortal eyes contemplate this image, whosecelestial splendour the host of heaven presumes not to behold? He who dwells inheaven condescends this day to visit us by his venerable image; He who is seatedon the cherubim, visits us this day by a picture, which the Father has delineatedwith his immaculate hand, which he has formed in an ineffable manner, and whichwe sanctify by adoring it with fear and love." Before the end of the sixth century,these images, made without hands, (in Greek it is a single word,) (4) were propa­gated in the camps and cities of the eastern empire;(5) they were the objects ofworship, and the instruments of miracles; and in the hour of danger or tumult,their venerable presence could revive the hope, rekindle the courage, or repressthe fury of the Roman legions. Of these pictures, the far greater part, the tran­scripts of a human pencil, could only pretend to a secondary likeness and impropertitle: but there were some of higher descent, who derived their resemblance froman immediate contact with the original, endowed, for that purpose, with a mira­culous and prolific virtue. The most ambitious aspired from a filial to a fraternalrelation with the image of Edessa; and such is the -veronica of Rome, or Spain, orJerusalem, which Christ in his agony and bloody sweat applied to his face, anddelivered to a holy matron. The fruitful precedent was speedily transferred tothe Virgin Mary, and the saints and martyrs. In the church of Diospolis, in Pa­lestine, the features of the mother of God(6) were deeply inscribed on a marblecolumn: the east and west have been decorated by the pencil of St. Luke; and the,evangelist, who was perhaps a physician, has been forced to exercise the occupa-
(1) Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. i. c. 13. The learned Assemannus has brought up the collateral aid of the threeSyrians, St. Ephrem, Josua Stylites, and James, bishop of Santa;; but I do not find any notice of the Syriaooriginal, or-the archives of Edessa (Bibliot. Orient, torn. i. p. 318. 420.554.0 their vague belief is probably de­rived from the Greeks.
(2) The evidences for these epistles is stated and rejected by the candid Lardner. (Heathen Testimonies, vol.i.p.279—309.) Vlmongtbe herd of bigots who are forcibly driven from this convenient but untenable post, Iam ashamed, with the Grabes, Caves, Tillemonts, &e. to discover Mr. Addison, an English gentleman; (hisWorks, vol. i. p. 528, Baskerville's edition:) but his superficial tract on the Christian religion owes its credit tobis name, its style, and the interested applause of our clergy.
(3) From the silence of James of Sarug, (Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, p. 289. 3is.) and the testimony of Eva­grius, (Hist. Eccles. lib. iv. c. 27.) I conclude that this fable was invented between the years 521 and 594, mostprobably after the siege of Edessa in 540. (Asseman. torn. i. p. 416. Procopius de Bell. P. '-sic. lib. ii.) It isthe sword and buckler of Gregory II. (in Epist. i. and Leon. Isaur. Coneil. torn. viii. p. fiftri, 657.) of John Da­mascene, (Opera, torn. i. p. 281, edit. Lequien) and of the second Nicene council. (Actin, v. p. 1030.) Themost perfect edition may be found in Cedrentis (Compend. p. 175—178.)
.(4) A?5£»p<wo<ito;. See Ducange,in Glos. Grree. et Lat. The subject is treated with equal learning andbigotry by the Jesuit Gretser. (Syntagma de Imaginibus non Manu factis, ad calcem Codini de Officiis, p. 289—330.) the ass, or rather the fox, of Ingoldstadt (see the Scaligerana-.) with equal reason and wit by the Protes­tant Beausobrc, in the ironical controversy which he has spread through many volumes of the BibliotbequeGermanique (torn. 1. p. 18—50. 20. p. 27—68. 25. p. 1—46. 27. p. 85.—112.28. p. 1—33. 31. p. 111—148. 32. p.75-107.34. p. 67-96.) re r
(J) Theophylact. Simocatta (lib. ii. c. 3. p. 34, lib. iii. c. i. p. 63.) celebrates the tsnfyun which he
styles (ra^ipowflijjTow ; yet it was no more than a copy, since he adds aexeiwov to sxstvov oi Fwjumioi (of Edessa)ecnrasirevs-i ti nfsnTov. See Pagi, torn. ii. A. D. 586. No. II.
(6) See in the genuine or supposed works of John Damascenus, two passages on the Virgin and St. Luke,winch have not Tieen npticed by Grets,cr, nor consequently by Beausobre. (Opera, Job. Damascen. torn, i.p,file. 631.)







OCR Output








K'E ^


 







OCR Output








CONTENTS.


A. D. PAOK
841-^870 Disorders of ike Turkish Guards 395
890—951 Rise and progress of the Carmathians 396
900 Their military exploits . ib.
939 They pillage Mecca . . 397
800—936 Revolt of the provinces ib.
The independent dynasties . ib.
800—968 The Jlglabites; the Edrisites; the To-
hcrits; the Sqffarides; the Samanides; the
Toulonides; the Ikshidites . 398
£92—1055 The Hamadanites; the Bowides ib.


A. D. - ^ PAGE
936 Fallen state of the Caliphs of Bagdad 398
960 Enterprises of the Greeks 390
Reduction of Crete . ib
963—975 The eastern conquests of Nieephorus
Phocas, and John Zimisccs . . ib.
Conquest of Cilicia . . 400)
Invasion of Syria ib.
Recovery ofAntioch . . ib.
Passage of Euphrates . 401
Danger of Bagdad . . ib.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 35?


In his palace of Constantinople or Antioch, he was awakened by the invasion ofSyria, the loss of Bosra, and the danger of Damascus. An army of seventy thou­sand veterans, or new levies, was assembled at Hems, or Emesa, under the com­mand 'of his general Werdan;(l) and these troops, consisting chiefly of cavalry,might be indifferently styled either Syrians, or Greeks, or Romans: Syrians, fromthe place of their birth or warfare; Greeks, from the religion and language oftheir sovereign; and Romans, from the proud appellation which was still profanedby the successors of Constantine. ' On the plain of Aiznadin, as Wajran rodeon a white mule decorated with gold chains, and surrounded with<^nens andstandards, ft% was surprised by the near approach of a fierce and naked-warrior,who had undertaken to view the state of the enemy. The adventurous valour ofDerar was inspired, and has perhaps been adorned, by the enthusiasm of his ageand country. The hatred of the Christians, the love of spoil, and the contemptof danger, were the ruling passions of the audacious Saracen; and the prospect ofinstant death could never shake his religious confidence; or ruffle the calmness ofhis resolution, or even suspend the frank and martial pleasantry of his humour.In the most hopeless enterprise, he was bold, and prudent, and fortunate: after in­numerable hazards, after being thrice a prisoner in the hands of the infidels, hestill survived to relate the achievements, and to enjoy the rewards, of the Sy­rian conquest. On this occasion, his single lance maintained a flying fight againstthirty Romans, who were detached by Werdan; and after killing or unhorsing se­venteen of their number, Derar returned in safety to his applauding brethren.When his rashness was mildly censured by the general, he excused himself withthe simplicity of a soldier. " Nay," said Derar, " I did not begin first: but theycame out to take me, and I was afraid that God should see me turn my back: andindeed I fought in good earnest, and without doubt God assisted me against them;and had I not been apprehensive of disobeying your orders, I should not havecome away as I did; and I perceive already that they will fall into our hands." Inthe presence of both armies, a venerable Greek advanced from the ranks with aliberal offer of peace; and the departure of the Saracens would have been pur­chased by a gift to each soldier of a turban, a robe, and a piece of gold; ten robes,and a hundred pieces to their leader; one hundred robes, and a thousand pieces tothe caliph. A smile of indignation expressed the refusal of Caled. " Ye Chris­tian dogs, you know your option: the Koran,' the tribute, or the sword. We area people whose delight is in war, rather than in peace; and we despise your pitifulalms, since we shall speedily be masters of your wealth, your families, and yourpersons." Notwithstanding this apparent disdain, he was deeply conscious of thepublic danger: those who had been in Persia, and had seen the armies of Chosroes,confessed that they never beheld a more formidable array. From the superiorityof the enemy, the artful Saracen derived a fresh incentive of courage. " You seebefore you," said he, '* the united force of the Romans: you cannot hope to escape,but you may conquer Syria in a single day. The event depends on your disciplineand patience. Reserve yourselves till the evening. It was in the evening that theprophet was accustomed to vanquish." During two successive engagements, histemperate firmness sustained the darts of the enemy, and the murmurs of histroops. At length, when the spirits and quivers of the adverse line were almostexhausted, Caled gave the signal of onset and victory. The remains of the im­perial army fled to Antioch, or Ciesarea, or Damascus; and the death of four hun­dred and seventy Moslems, was compensated by the opinion that they had sent tohell above fifty thousand of the infidels. The spoil was inestimable; many ban­ners and crosses of gold and silver, precious stones, silver and gold chains, and in­numerable suits of the richest armour and apparel. The general distributionwas postponed till Damascus should be taken: but the seasonable supply of armsbecame the instrument of new victories. The glorious intelligence was transmit­ted to the throne of the caliph, and the Arabian tribes the coldest or most hostileto the prophet's mission, were eager and importunate to share the harvest ofSyria.
The sad tidings were carried to Damascus by the speed of grief and terror; andthe inhabitants beheld from their walls the return of the heroes of Aiznadin. Am-
(1) The name of Werdan is unknown to Theoplianes, and though it might belong to an Armenian chief,iias very little of a Greek aspect or sound. If the Byzantine historians have mangled the oriental names, theArabs, in this instance, likewise have taken ample revenge on their enemies. In transposing the Greek cha­racter from right to left, might thev not produce, from the familiar appellation of Andrea, something like thesmvgram Werdan-







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 8Z


plexion of Africa no longer disfigure the most perfect of the human race. It isin the adjacent climates of Georgia, Mingrelia, and Circassia, that nature hasplaced, at least to our eyes, the model of beauty, in the shape of the limbs, thecolour of the skin, the symmetry of the features, and the expression of the coun­tenance-^) According to the destination of the two sexes, the men seemedformed for action, the women for love; and the perpetual supply of females fromMount Caucasus has purified the blood, and improved the breed, of the southernnations of Asia. The proper district of Mingrelia, a portion only of the ancientColchos, has long sustained an exportation of twelve thousand slaves. The num­ber of prisoners and criminals would be inadequate to the annual demand; but thecommon people are in a state of servitude to their lords, the exercise of fraud orrapine is unpunished in a lawless community; and the market is continually reple­nished by the abuse of civil and paternal authority. Such a trade, (2) which re­duces the human species to the level of cattle, may tend to encourage marriageand population: since the multitude of children enriches their sordid and inhumanparent. But this source of impure wealth must inevitably poison the national man­ners, obliterate the sense of honour and virtue, and almost extinguish the instinctsof nature; the Christians of Georgia and Mingrelia are the most dissolute of man­kind; and their children, who in a tender age are sold into foreign slavery, havealready learnt to imitate the rapine of the father and the prostitution of the mo­ther. Yet amidst the rudest ignorance, the.untaught natives discover a singulardexterity both of mind and hand; and although the want of union and disciplineexposes them to their more powerful neighbours, a bold and intrepid spirit hasanimated the Colcliians of every age. In the host of Xerxes, they served on foot;and their arms were, a dagger or a javelin, a wooden casque, and a buckler of rawhides. But in their own country the use of cavalry has more generally prevailed:the meanest of the peasants disdain to walk; the martial nobles are possessed,perhaps, of two hundred horses; and above five thousand are numbered in thetrain of the prince of Mingrelia. The Colchian government has been always apure and hereditary kingdom; and the authority of the sovereign is only restrainedby the turbulence of his subjects. Whenever they were obedient he could lead anumerous army into the field; but some faith is requisite to believe, that the sin­gle tribe of the Suanians was composed of two hundred thousand soldiers, or thatthe population of Mingrelia now amounts to four millions of inhabitants.(3)
It was the boast of the Colchians, that their ancestors had checked the victo­ries of Sesostris; and the defeat of the Egyptian is less incredible than his success­ful progress, as far as the foot of Mount Caucasus. They sunk without any me­morable effort, under the arms of Cyrus; followed in distant wars the standard ofthe great king, and presented him every fifth year with one hundred boys, and as-many virgins, the fairest produce of the land. (4) Yet he accepted this gift likethe gold and ebony of India, the frankincense of the Arabs, or the negroes andivory of Ethiopia: the Colchians were not subject to the dominion of a satrap, andthey continued to enjoy the name as well as substance of national independence. (5)After the fall of the Persian empire, Mithridates, king of Pontus, added Colchos tothe wide circle of his dominions on the Euxine; and when the natives presumed torequest that his son might reign over them, he bound the ambitious youth in chainsof gold, and delegated a servant in his place. In the pursuit of Mithridates, theRomans advanced to the banks of the Phasis, and their galleys ascended the rivertill they reached the camp of Pompey and his legions.(6) But the senate, and af­terwards the emperors, disdained to reduce that distant and useless conquest into
(1) Button (Hist. Nat. torn. iii. p. 433—437.) collects the unanimous suffrage of naturalists and travellers. If.in the time of Herodotus, they were in truth psya^Kpoic and ou^orp(and he had observed them with care,)this precious fact is an example of the influence of climate on a foreign colony.
(?) The Mingrelian ambassador arrived at Constantinople with two hundred persons: but be ate (sold) themday by day, till his retinue was diminished to a secretary and two valets. (Tavemier, torn, i. p. 365.) _ To pur­chase his mistress, a Mingrelian gentleman sold twelve priests and his wife to the Turks. (Chardin, torn. i.p. 06.)
(3) Strabo, lib. xi. p. 765. Lamberti, Relation de la Mingrelie. Yet we must avoid the contrary extreme ofChardin, who allows no more than twenty thousand inhabitants to supply an annual exportation of twelvethousand slaves, an absurdity unworthy of that judicious traveller.
(4) Herodot. lib. iii. e. 97. See, in lib. vii. c. 79. their arms and service in the expedition of Xerxes againstGreece.
(5) Xenophon, who had encountered the Colchians in his retreat (Anabasis, lib. iv. p. S20. 343. 348. edit.Hutchinson; and Foster's Dissertation, p. 53—58, in Spelroan's English version, vol. ii.) styles them aoTovopci,Before the conquest of Mithridates, they are named by Appian ifi«s •***jww<s (de Bell. Mithridatico. c. 15. torn,i. p. 661. of thelast and best edition, by John Schweighssuser, Lypsse. 1785, 3 vole, large octavo.)
(6) The conquest of Colchis by Mithridates and Pompey, is marked by Appian (de Bell. Mithridat.) andPlutarch (in Vit.Pomp.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. S-20


bricl and three thousand angels. His eye was fixed on the field of battle: theMussulmans fainted and were pressed: in that decisive moment the prophet startedfrom his throne, mounted his horse, and cast a handful of sand into the air. "Lettheir faces be covered with confusion." Both armies heard the thunder of hisvoice: their fancy beheld the angelic warriors;(l) the Koreish trembled and fled;seventy of the bravest were slain; and seventy captives adorned the first victoryof the faithful. The dead bodies of the Koreish were despoiled and insulted; twoof the most obnoxious prisoners were punished with death; and the ransom of theothers, four thousand drachms of silver, compensated in some degree the escapeof the caravan. But it was in vain that the camels of Abu Sophian explored anew road through the desert and along the Euphrates: they were overtaken bythe diligence of the Mussulmans; and wealthy must have been the prize, if twen­ty thousand drachms could be set apart for the fifth of the apostle. The resent­ment of the public and private loss stimulated Abu Sophian to collect a body ofthree thousand men, seven hundred of whom were armed with cuirasses, and twohundred were mounted on horseback; three thousand camels attended his march;and his wife Henda, with fifteen matrons of Mecca, incessantly sounded their tym-brels to animate the troops, and to magnify the greatness of Hobal, the most popu­lar deity of the Caaba. The standard of God and Mahomet was upheld by ninehundred and fifty believers: the disproportion of numbers was not more alarm­ing than in the field of Beder; and their presumption of victory prevailed againstthe divine and human sense of the apostle. The second battle was fought on mountOhud, six miles to the north of Medina :(2) the Koreish advanced in the form ofa crescent: and the right wing of cavalry was led by Caled, the fiercest and mostsuccessful of the Arabian warriors. The troops of Mahomet were skilfully postedon the declivity of the hill; and their rear was guarded by a detachment of fiftyarchers. The weight of their charge impelled and broke the centre of the ido­laters; but in the pursuit they lost the advantage of their ground: the archers de­serted their station: the Mussulmans were tempted by the spoil, disobeyed theirgeneral, and disordered their ranks. The intrepid Caled, wheeling his cavalryon their flank and rear, exclaimed, with a loud voice, that Mahomet was slain.He was indeed wounded in the face with a javelin; two of his teeth were shatteredwith a stone; yet, in the midst of tumult and dismay, he reproached the infidelswith the murder of a prophet; and blessed the friendly hand that staunched hisblood, and conveyed him to a place of safety. Seventy martyrs died for the sinsof the people; they fell, said the apostle, in pairs, each brother embraced his life­less companion :(3) their bodies were mangled by the inhuman females of Mecca;and the wife of Abu Sophian tasted the entrails of Hamza, the uncle of Mahomet.They might applaud their superstition and satiate their fury; but the Mussulmanssoon rallied in the field, and the Koreish wanted strength or courage to undertakethe siege of Medina. It was attacked the ensuing year by an army of ten thou­sand enemies; and this third expedition is variously named from the nations, whichmarched under the banner of Abu Sophian, from the ditch which was drawn be­fore the city, and a camp of three thousand Mussulmans. The prudence of Ma­homet declined a general engagement; the valour of Ali was signalized in singlecombat; and the war was protracted twenty days, till the final separation of theconfederates. A tempest of wind, rain, and hail, overturned their tents; the privatequarrels were fomented by an insidious adversary; and the Koreish, deserted bytheir allies, no longer hoped to subvert the throne, or to check the conquests, oftheir invincible exile. (4)
The choice of Jerusalem for the first kebla of prayer discovers the early pro­pensity of Mahomet in favour of the Jews; and happy would it have been for then-temporal interest, had they recognised, in the Arabian prophet, the hope of Israel
queant nisi una litura corrigi: Arahicenon sain eallebat et careliat judicio critico. J. .T. Reisfce, prtididagfaata*ad Hasrji Cbalisas Tabulas, p. 228. ad calcem Abulfeda; Syria Tabula;; Lepsise, 1766,in quart".
(1) The loose expressions of the Koran (c. iii. p. 124.125. c. viii. p. 9.) allow the commentators to fluctuatebetween the numbers of one thousand, three thousand, or nine thousand angels; and the smallest of these mightsuffice for the slaughter of seventy of the Koreish (Maraeci, Alcoran, torn. li. p. 131.) Yet the scholiasts confessthas tbis angelic band %vas not visible to any mortal eye (Maracci, p. 297.) They refine on the words (c. viii. 16.)" not thou, but God," gee. (D'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orientale, p. 600,601.)
(2) Geograph. Nnbiensts, p. 47.
(3) In the third chapter of the Koran (p. 50—53. with Sale's notes,) the prophet alleges some poor excuses fortbe defeat of Ohud.
(4) For the detail of the three Koreish wars, of Beder, of Ohud, and of the ditch, peruse Abulfeda (p. se­el. 64—69.73—77.) Gagnier (torn. ii. p. 23—15. 70—96. 120—139.) with the proper articles of D'Herbelot, andthe abridgments of Elmacin (Hist. Saracen, p. 6,7.) and AbulpBaragius. (Dynast, p. 102.)
Vol. III. 42







OCR Output








250 THE DECLINE AND FALL


sic and poetry, betrayed some symptoms of a liberal taste: the more ignoble arteof the son of Theophilus were confined to the chariot-race of the hippodrome. Thefour factions which had agitated the peace, still amused the idleness, of the capi­tal: for himself, the emperor assumed the blue livery; the three rival colours weredistributed to his favourites, and in the vile, though eager contention, he forgot thedignity of his person, and the safety of his dominions. He silenced the messengerof an invasion, who presumed to divert his attention in the most critical momentof the race; and by his command, the importunate beacons were ektinguished,that too frequently spread the alarm from Tarsus to Constantinople. The mostskilful charioteers obtained the first place in his confidence and esteem; their me­rit was profusely rewarded: the emperor feasted in their houses, and presentedtheir children at the baptismal font; and while he applauded his own popularity,he affected to blame the cold and stately reserve of his predecessors. The unna­tural lusts which had degraded even the manhood of Nero, were banished fromthe world; yet the strength of Michael was consumed by the indulgence of loveand intemperance. In his midnight revels, when his passions were inflamed bywine, he was provoked to issue the most sanguinary commands; and if any feelingsof humanity were left, he was reduced, with the return of sense, to approve thesalutary disobedience of his servants. But the most extraordinary feature in thecharacter of Michael, is the profane mockery of the religion of his country. Thesuperstition of the Greeks might indeed excite the smile of a philosopher: but hissmile would have been rational and temperate, and he must have condemned theignorant folly of a youth who insulted the objects of public veneration. A buffoonof the court was invested in the robes of the patriarch; the twelve metropolitans,among whom the emperor was ranked, assumed their ecclesiastical garments: theyused or abused the sacred vessels of the altar; and in their bacchanalian feasts,the holy communion was administered in a nauseous compound of vinegar and mus­tard. Nor were these impious spectacles concealed from the eyes of the city.On the day of a solemn festival, the emperor, with his bishops or buffoons, rodeon asses through the streets; encountered the true patriarch at the head of hisclergy; and by their licentious shouts and obscene gestures, disordered the gravityof the Christian procession. The devotion of Michael appeared only in some of­fence to reason or piety: be received his theatrical crowns from the statue of theVirgin; and an imperial tomb was violated for the sake of burning the bones ofConstantine the Iconoclast. By this extravagant conduct, the son of Theophilusbecame as contemptible as he was odious; every citizen was impatient for the deli­verance of his country; and even the favourites of the moment were apprehen­sive that a caprice might snatch away what a caprice had bestowed. In the thir­tieth year of his age, and in the hour of intoxication and sleep, Michael III. wasmurdered in his chamber by the founder of a new dynasty, whom the emperor hadraised to an equality of rank and power.
The genealogy of Basil the Macedonian (if it be not the spurious offspring ofpride and flattery) exhibits a genuine picture of the revolution of the most illus­trious families. The Arsacides, the rivals of Rome, possessed the sceptre of theeast near four hundred years: a younger branch of these Parthian kings continuedto reign in Armenia; and their royal descendants survived the partition and servi.-tude of that ancient monarchy. Two of these, Artabanus and Chlienes, escapedor retired to the court of Leo I.; his bounty seated them in a safe and hospitableexile, in the province of Macedonia: Adrianople was their final settlement.During several generations they maintained the dignity of their birth; and theirRoman patriotism rejected the tempting offers of the Persian and Arabian powers,who recalled them to their native country. But their splendour was insensiblyclouded by time and poverty: and the father "of Basil was reduced to a small farm,which he cultivated with his own hands: yet he scorned to disgrace the blood ofthe Arsacides by a plebeian alliance—his wife, a widow of Adrianople, waspleased to count ameng her ancestors, the great Constantine; and their royal in­fant was connected by some dark affinity of lineage or country with the MacedonianAlexander. No sooner was he born, than the cradle of Basil, his family, and hiscity, were swept away by an inundation of the Bulgarians: he was educated a slavein a foreign land; and in this severe discipline, he acquired the hardiness of bodyand flexibility of mind which promoted his future elevation. In the age of youthor manhood he shared the deliverance of the Roman captives, who generouslybroke their fetters, marched through Bulgaria to the shores of the Euxine, de­feated two armies of the barbarians, embarked in the ships which had been sta­







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, qs)


By, his marriage with this impious woman, Romanus the younger left two sons,Basil II. and Constantine IX. and two daughters, Theophano and Anne. Theeldest sister was given to Otho II. emperor of the west; the younger became thewife of Wolodomir, great duke and apostle of Russia, and by the marriage of hergrand-daughter with Henry I. king of France, the blood of the Macedonians, andperhaps of the Arsacides, still flows in the veins of the Bourbon line. After thedeath of her husband, the empress aspired to reign in the name of her sons, theelder of whom was five, and the younger only two years of age; but she soon feltthe instability of a throne, which was supported by a female who could not be es­teemed, and two infants who could not be feared. Theophano looked around fora protector, and threw herself into the arms of the bravest soldier: her heart wascapricious; but the deformity of the new favourite rendered it more probable thatinterest was the motive and excuse of her love. Nicephorus Phocas united, in thepopular opinion, the double merit of a hero and a saint. In the former character,his qualifications were genuine and splendid: the descendant of a race, illustriousby their military exploits, he had displayed in every station, and in every pro­vince, the courage of a soldier and the conduct of a chief; and Nicephorus wascrowned with recent laurels, from the important conquest of the isle of Crete. Hisreligion was of a more ambiguous cast; and his hair-cloth, his fasts, his pious idiom,and his wish to retire from the business of the world, were a convenient mask forhis dark and dangerous ambition. Yet he imposed on a holy patriarch, by whoseinfluence, and by a decree of the senate, he was intrusted, during the minority ofthe young princes, with the absolute and independent command of the orientalarmies. As soon as he had secured the leaders and the troops, he boldly marchedto Constantinople, trampled on his enemies, avowed his correspondence with theempress, and, without degrading her sons, assumed, with the title of Augustus,the pre-eminence of rank and the plenitude of power. But his marriage withTheophano was refused by the same patriarch who had placed the crown on hishead; by his second nuptials he incurred a year of canonical penance; a bar ofspiritual affinity was opposed to their celebration; and some evasion and perjurywere required to silence the scruples of the clergy and people. The popularityof the emperor was lost in the purple: in a reign of six years he provoked the ha­tred of strangers and subjects, and the hypocrisy and avarice of the first Nice­phorus were revived in his successor. Hypocrisy I shall never justify or palliate;but I will dare to observe, that the odious vice of avarice is of all others mosthastily arraigned, and most unmercifully condemned. In a private citizen, ouyjudgment seldom expects an accurate scrutiny into his fortune and expense: and ina steward of the public treasure, frugality is always a virtue, and the increase oftaxes too often an indispensable duty. In the use of his patrimony, the generoustemper of Nicephorus had been proved; and the revenue was strictly applied tothe service of the state: each spring the emperor marched in person against theSaracens; and every Roman might compute the employment of his taxes in tri­umphs, conquests, and the security of the eastern barrier.
Among the warriors who promoted his elevation, and served under his standard,a noble and Valiant Armenian had deserved and obtained the most eminent re­wards. The statue of John Zimisces was below the ordinary standard; but thisdiminutive body was endowed with strength, beauty, and the soul of a hero. Bythe jealousy of the emperor's brother, he was degraded from the office of generalof the east, to that of director of the posts, and his murmurs were chastised withdisgrace and exile. But Zimisces was ranked among the numerous lovers of theempress: on her intercession he was permitted to reside at Chalcedon, in the neigh­bourhood of the capital: her bounty was repaid in his clandestine and amorous visitsto the palace; and Theophano consented with alacrity to the death of an ugly andpenurious husband. Some bold and trusty conspirators were concealed in her mostprivate chambers; in the darkness of a winter night, Zimisces, with his principalcompanions, embarked in a small boat, traversed the Bosphorus, landed at thepalace stairs, and silently ascended a ladder of ropes, which was cast down by thefemale attendants. Neither his own suspicions, nor the warnings of his friends,nor the tardy aid of his brother Leo, nor the fortress which he had erected in thepalace, could protect Nicephorus from a domestic foe, at whose voice every doorwas opened to the assassins. As he slept on a bear-skin on the ground, ho wasroused by their noisy intrusion, and thirty daggers glittered before his eyes. It isdoubtful whether Zimisces imbrued his hands in the blood of his sovereign; but heenjoyed the inhuman spectacle of revenge. The murder was protracted by insult







OCR Output








420 the decline and fall


the inhabitants of the dependant districts. They were surrounded and taken byassault; but Tarsus was reduced by the slow progress of famine; and no soonerhad the Saracens yielded on honourable terms, than they were mortified by thedistant and unprofitable view of the naval succours of Egypt. They were dis­missed with a safe conduct to the confines of Syria; a part of the old Christianshad quietly lived under their dominion, and the vacant habitations were reple­nished by a new colony. But the moscli was converted into a stable; the pulpitwas delivered to the flames; many rich crosses of gold and gems, the spoils ofAsiatic churches, were made a grateful offering to the piety or avarice of the em­peror; and he transported the gates of Mopsuestia and Tarsus, which were fixedin the wall of Constantinople, an eternal monument of his victory. After theyhad forced and secured the narrow passes of mount Amanus, the two Romanprinces repeatedly carried their arms into the heart of Syria. Yet instead of as­saulting the walls of Antioch, the humanity or superstition of Nicephorus appearedto respect the ancient metropolis of the east: he contented himself with drawinground the city a line of circumvallation; left a stationary army; and instructed hislieutenant to expect, without impatience, the return of spring. But in the depthof winter, in a dark and rainy night, an adventurous subaltern, with three hun­dred soldiers, approached the rampart, applied his scaliug-ladders, occupied twoadjacent towers, stood firm against the pressure of multitudes, and bravely main­tained his post till he was relieved by the tardy, though effectual support of hisreluctant chief. The first tumult of slaughter and rapine subsided; the reign ofCaesar and of Christ was restored; and the efforts of a hundred thousand Saracens,and of the armies of Syria and the fleets of Africa, were consumed without effectbefore the walls of Antioch. The royal city of Aleppo was subject to Seifeddow-lat, of the dynasty of Hamaden, who clouded his past, glory by the precipitate re­treat which abandoned his kingdom and capital to the Roman invaders. In hisstately palace, that stood without the walls of Aleppo, they joyfully seized a well-furnished magazine of arms, a stable of fourteen hundred mules, and three hun­dred bags of silver and gold. But the walls of the city withstood the strokes oftheir battering rams: and the besiegers pitched their tents on the neighbouringmountain of Jaushan. Their retreat exasperated the quarrel of the townsmen andmercenaries; the guard of the gates and ramparts was deserted; and, while theyfuriously charged each other in the market place, they were surprised and de­stroyed by the sword of a common enemy. The male sex was exterminated bythe sword: ten thousand youths were led into captivity: the weight of the preciousspoil exceeded the strength and number of the beasts of burden; the superfluousremainder was burnt: and, after a licentious possession of ten days, the Bo-mans marched away from the naked and bleeding city. In their Syrian inroads,they commanded the husbandmen to cultivate their lands, that they themselves,the ensuing season, might reap the benefit; more than a hundred cities were re­duced to obedience; and eighteen pulpits of the principal moschs were committedto the flames, to expiate the sacrilege of the disciples of Mahomet. The classicnames of Hierapolis, Apamea, and Emesa, revive for a moment in the list of con­quest; the emperor Zimices encamped in the paradise of Damascus, and acceptedthe ransom of a submissive people; and the torrent was only stopped by the im­pregnable fortress of Tripoli, on the sea-coast of Phoenicia. Since the days ofHeraclius, the Euphrates, below the passage of mount Taurus, had been imper­vious, and almost invincible, to the Greeks. The river yielded a free passage tothe victorious Zimisces: and the historian may imitate the speed with which heoverran the once famous cities of Samosata, Edessa, Martyropolis, Amida,(l) andNisibis, the ancient limit of the empire in the neighbourhood of the Tigris. Hisardour was quickened by the desire of grasping the virgin treasures of Ecbata-na,(2) a well-known name, under which the Byzantine writer has concealed the
(Wesseling.Ilinerav.p.580.), Yet I cannot credit (his extreme popnlousness a few years after the testimony ofthe emperor Leo, ou yap nuKunKtft* ffrpaToy TOi,- K</.*$* Sjtp^itmt; ic-Ttv. (Taclica, c. 18. in Meursii Op. torn, r'up. 817.)
(1) The tent of Leo the deacon, in the corrupt names of Emeta and Myctarsim, reveals the cities of Amidstand Martyropolis. (Miafarekin. See Ahulfeda,Geoe;raph. p. 24J. vers. Reuke.) Of the former, Leo observesurbs munita et illostris; of the latter,Clara atque conspicua opibusque et pecore, reliquis ejus provinciU urbt-bus atque oppidis lonfje pra>stans.
(2) Ut et Ecbatana nergeret Agarenorumque rejjiara everteret aiunt enim urbium qua; uranism sunt
ac toto orbe exi.tivu tilicissimam esse auroque ditissimam. (Leo Diacon. apud Pagium, torn. iv. p. 3*0 Thissplendid description suits only wiih Bagdad, and cannot possibly apply either to Hamadan, the true Ecbatana,(d Anyille, Geop;. Ancienne, torn. n. p. 237.)or Tauris, which has commonly been mistaken for that city. Thename ot Ecbaiana, in the same indefinite sense, is transferred by a more classic authority (Cicero pro LesreMauiha, c.4.) tothe rovalseatof Miihridatei,kinr;ofPontus.







OCR Output








. OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. IS


ter this popular concession, Justinian proceeded to the hippodrome to confess hisown errors, and to accept the repentance of his grateful subjects; but they distrust­ed his assurances, though solemnly pronounced in the presence of the holy gospels;and the emperor, alarmed by their distrust, retreated with precipitation to thestrong fortress of the palace. The obstinacy of the tumult was now imputed to asecret and ambitious conspiracy, and a suspicion was entertained, that the insur­gents, more especially the green faction, had been supplied with arms and moneyby Hypatius and Pompcy, two patricians, who could neither forget with honour,nor remember with safety, that they were the nephews of the emperor Anastasius.Capriciously trusted, disgraced, and pardoned, by the jealous levity of the mo­narch, they had appeared as loyal servants before the throne; and, during fivedays of the tumult, they were detained as important hostages; till at length, thefeat's of Justinian prevailing over his prudence, he viewed the two brothers in thelight of spies, perhaps of assassins, and sternly commanded them to depart fromthe palace. After a fruitless representation, that obedience might lead to involun­tary treason, they retired to their houses, and in the morning of the sixth day, Hy­patius was surrounded and seized by the people, who, regardless of his virtuous rc-sistance^and the tears of his wife, transported their favourite to the forum of Con-stantine, and, instead of a diadem, placed a rich collar on his head. If the usurper,•who afterward pleaded the merit of his delay, had complied with the advice of thesenate, and urged the fury of the multitude, their first irresistible effort might haveoppressed or expelled his trembling competitor. The Byzantine palace enjoyed afree communication with the sea; vessels lay ready at the garden stairs; and a se­cret resolution was already formed, to convey the emperor with his family andtreasures to a safe retreat, at some distance from the capital.
Justinian was lost, if the prostitute whom he raised from the theatre had not re­nounced the timidity, as well as the virtues, of her sex. In the midst of a council,where Belisarius was present, Theodora alone displayed the spirit of a hero; andshe alone, without apprehending his future hatred, could save the emperor fromthe imminent danger, and his unworthy fears. " If flight," said the consort of Jus­tinian, " were the only means of safety, yet I should disdain to fly. Death is thecondition of our birth; but they who have reigned should never survive the loss cfdignity and dominion. I implore Heaven that I may never be seen, not a day,•without my diadem and purple; that I may no longer behold the light, when icease to be saluted with the name of queen. If you resolve, O Caesar! to fly, youhave treasures; behold the sea, you have ships: but tremble lest the desire of lifeshould expose you to wretched exile and ignominious death. . For my own part, Iadhere to the maxim of antiquity, that the throne is a glorious sepulchre." Thefirmness of a woman restored the courage to deliberate and act, and courage soondiscovers the resources of the most desperate situation. It was an easy and a de­cisive measure to revive the animosity of the factions: the blues were astonishedat their own guilt and folly, that a trifling injury should provoke them to conspirewith their implacable enemies against a gracious and liberal benefactor; they againproclaimed the majesty of Justinian, and the greens, with their upstart emperor;were left alone in the hippodrome. The fidelity of the guards was doubtful; butthe military force of Justinian consisted in three thousand veterans, who had beentrained to valour and discipline in the Persian and Illyrian wars. Under the com­mand «of Belisarius and Mundus, they silently marched in two divisions from thepalace, forced their obscure way through narrow passages, expiring flames, andfalling edifices, and burst open, at the same moment, the two opposite gates of thehippodrome. In this narrow space, the disorderly and affrighted crowd was incarpable of resisting on either side a firm and regular attack; the blues signalized thefury of their repentance; and it is computed, that above thirty thousand personswere slain in the merciless and promiscuous carnage of the day. Hypatius wasdragged from his throne, and conducted with his brother Pompey to the feet of theemperor: they implored his clemency; but their crime was manifest, their inno­cence uncertain, and Justinian had been too much terrified to forgive. The nextmorning the two nephews of Anastasius, with eighteen illustrious accomplices, ofpatrician or consular rank, were privately executed by the soldiers; their bodieswere thrown into the sea, their palaces rased, and their fortunes confiscated. Thehippodrome itself was condemned during several years to a mournful silence: withthe restoration of the games, the same disorders revived: and the blue and greenfactions continued to afflict the reign of Justinian, and to disturb the tranquillity ofthe eastern empire.(l)


(I) Marccllinus says, in general tcrraS, innumeris populii in circo trucidatis. rrocopius numbers thirty







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


I. A laudable regard for the honour of the first proselytes, has countenancedthe belief, the hope, the wish, that the Ebionites, or at least the Nazarenes, weredistinguished only by their obstinate perseverance in the practice of the Mosaicrites. Their churches have disappeared, their books are obliterated; their ob­scure freedom might allow a latitude of faith, and the softness of their infant creedwould be variously moulded by the zeal or prudence of three hundred years. Yetthe most charitable criticism must refuse these sectaries any knowledge of thepure and proper divinity of Christ. Educated in- the school of Jewish prophecyand prejudice, they had never been taught to elevate their hopes above a humanand temporal Messiah. (1) If they had courage to hail their king when he ap­peared in a plebeian garb, their grosser apprehensions were incapable of discern­ing their God, who had studiously disguised his celestial character under the nameand person of a mortal. (2) The familiar companions of Jesus of Nazareth con­versed with their friend and countryman, who in all the actions of rational andanimal life, appeared of the same species with themselves. His progress frominfancy to youth and manhood was marked by a regular increase in stature andwisdom; and after a painful agony of mind and body, he expired on the cross. Helived and died for the service of mankind; but the life and death of Socrates hadlikewise been devoted to the cause of religion and justice; and although the stoicor the hero may disdain the humble virtues of Jesus, the tears which he shed overhis friend and country may be esteemed the purest evidence of his humanity. Themiracles of the gospel could not astonish a people who held with intrepid faith,the more splendid prodigies of the Mosaic law. The prophets of ancient dayshad cured diseases, raised the dead, divided the sea, stopped the sun, and ascend­ed to heaven in a fiery chariot. And the metaphorical style of the Hebrewsmight ascribe to a saint and martyr, the adoptive title of Son of God.
Yet in the insufficient creed of the Nazarenes and the Ebionites, a distinction isfaintly noticed between the heretics, who confounded the generation of Christ inthe common order of nature, and the less guilty schismatics, who revered the vir­ginity of his mother, and excluded the aid of an earthly father. The incredulityof the former was countenanced by the visible circumstances of his birth; the le­gal marriage of his reputed parents, Joseph and Mary, and his lineal claim to thekingdom of David and the inheritance of Judah. But the secret and authentichistory has been recorded in several copies of the gospel according to St. Mat-thew,(3) which these sectaries long preserved in the original Hebrew(4) as the
compress ? If I persist in supporting each fact or reflection by its proper and special evidence, every linewould require a string of testimonies, and every note would swell to a critical dissertation. But the number­less passages of antiquity which I have seen with my own eyes, are compiled, digested, and illustrated by Pe-tavius and Le Clerc^by Beausobre and Mosheim. I shall be content to fortify my narrative by the names andcharacters of these respectable guides; and, in the contemplation of a minute or remote object, lam notashamed to borrow the aid of the strongest glasses.—1. The Dogmata Theologica of Petavius. is a work of in­credible labour and compass; the volumes which relate solely to the incarnation (two folios, fifth and sixth, ofeigh't'hunilred and thirty-seven pages) are divided into sixteen books—the first of history, the remainder ofcontroversy and doctrine. The Jesuit's learning is copious and correct; his Latinity is pure, his method clear,his argument profound and well connected: but he is the slave of the fathers, the scourge of heretics, and theenemy of truth and candour, as often as they are inimical to the catholic cnuse. 2. The Arminian lie Cierc,who has composed, in a quarto volume, (Amsterdam, 1716.) the ecclesiastical history of the two first centuries,was free both in his temper and situation;_his sense is clear, bnt his thoughts are narrow; he reduce* the reason,or folly of ages to the standard of his private judgment; and his impartiality is sometimes quickened, andsometimes tainted, by his opposition to the fathers. See the heretics (Corinthians,) 80. Ebionites, 103. Cac-pocratians, 120. Vafentinians, 121. Basilidians, 123. Marrionites, 141, Ice. under their proper dates. 3. TheHistoire Critique du Manicheisme (Amsterdam. 1734. 1739. in two vols, in quarto, with a posthumous disserta­tion sur les Nazarenes, Lausanne, 1745 J of M. de Beausobre is a treasure of ancient philosophy and theology.The learned historian spins with incomparable art the systematic thread of opinion, and transforms himselfby turns into the person of a saint, a sage, or a heretic. Yet his refinement is sometimes excessive; he betraysan amiable partiality in favour of the weaker side, and while he guards against calumny,he does not allowsufficient scope for superstition and fanaticism. A copious table of contents will direct tile reader to any pointthat be wishes to examine. .4. Less profound than Petavius, less independent than Le Clerc, less ingeniousthan Beausobre, the historian Mosheim is full, rational, correct, and moderate. In his teamed work, De Re­bus Christianis ante Constantinum (Helmstadt, 1753, in quarto.) see the Nazarenes and Ebionites, p. 172—179.828—332.; the Gnostics in general, p. 173. &c. Cerinthus, p. 196—202; Basilides, p. 852—361; Carpocrates,'n.363—367; Valentinus, p. 371—389; Marcion, p. 404—410; the Manichaeans, p. 829—8S7, &c.
(1) _Kae*^-ap ttzvtss y^tsti toi> Xp'TTOw ewSpwa-flv t5 xvbpv-jiv irpso-Soxcoptv yivxtrxTSxi,says the Jewish Tryphon,
(Justin. Dialog, p. 207.) in the name of his countrymen; and the modern Jews, the few who divert theirthoughts from money to religion, still hold the same language, and allege the literal sense of the prophets.
(2) Chrysostom (Basnage, Hist, des Juif"s, torn. v. c. 9. p. 183.) and Athanasius (Petav. Dogmat. Theolog. torn.t. lib. i. c. 2. p. 3.) are obliged to confess that the divinity of Christ is rarely mentioned by himself or hisapostles.
(3) The two first chapters of St. Matthew did not exist in the Ebionite copies; (Epiphan. Hteres. 3o. 13.)arid the .miraculous conception is one of the last articles which Dr. Priestley has curtailed from his scantyCreed.
(4) It is probable enough that the first of the gospels, for the use of the Jew ish converts, syas composed inthe Hebrew or Swiac idiom: the fact is attested by a chain of fathers—Papias, lrenxus, Origin, Jerome, si.It is devoutly bcEeveil by the catholics, and admitted by Casoubon, Grotius, and Isaac Vossius, among the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


Votion, which were consecrated to the honour of his celestial patrons. In the re­formation of the sixteenth century, freedom and knowledge had expanded all thefaculties of man; the thristof innovation superseded the reverence of antiquity,and the vigour of Europe could disdain those phantoms which terrified the sicklyand servile weakness of the Greeks.
The scandal of an abstract heresy can be only proclaimed to the people by theblast of the ecclesiastical trumpet; but the most ignorant can perceive, the mosttorpid must feel, the profanation and downfall of their visible deities. The firsthostilities of Leo were directed against a lofty Christ on the vestibule, and abovethe gate, of the palace. A ladder had been planted for the assault, but it was fu­riously shaken by a crowd of zealots and women: they beheld with pious trans­port, the ministers of sacrilege tumbling from on high, and dashed against thepavement; and the honours of the ancient martyrs were prostituted to these cri­minals, who justly suffered for murder and rebellion. (1) '1 he execution of the im­perial edict was resisted by frequent tumults in Constantinople and the provinces:the person of Leo was endangered, his officers were massacred, and the popularenthusiasm was quelled by the strongest efforts of the civil and military power.Of the Archipelago, or holy see, the numerous islands were filled with imagesand monks: their votaries abjured, without scruple, the enemy of Christ, his mo­ther, and the saints: they armed a fleet of boats and galleys, displayed their con­secrated banners, and boldly steered for the harbour of Constantinople, to place onthe throne a new favourite of God and the people. They depended on the succourof a miracle; but their miracles were inefficient against the Greek fire; and, afterthe defeat and conflagration of their fleet, the naked islands were abandoned to ■the clemency or justice of the conqueror. The son of Leo, in the first year of hisTeign, had undertaken an expedition against the Saracens: during his absence, thecapital, the palace, and the purple, were occupied by his kinsman Artavasdes; theambitious champion of the orthodox faith. The worship of images was triumph­antly restored; the patriarch renounced his dissimulation, or dissembled his senti­ments; and the righteous claim of the usurper was acknowledged, both in the newand in ancient Rome. Constantine flew for refuge to his paternal mountains; buthe descended at the head of the bold and affectionate Isaurians; and his final vic­tory confounded the arms and predictions of the fanatics. His long reign was dis­tracted with clamour, sedition, conspiracy, and mutual hatred, and sanguinaryrevenge: the persecution of images was the motive, or pretence, of his adversa­ries; and if they missed a temporal diadem, they were rewarded by the Greekswith the crown of martyrdom. In every act of open and clandestine treason, theemperor felt the unforgiving enmity of the monks, the faithful slaves of the su­perstition to which they owed their riches and influence. They prayed, theypreached, they absolved, they inflamed, they conspired; the solitude of Palestinepoured forth a'torrent of invective; and the pen of St. John Damascenus,(2) thelast of the Greek fathers, devoted the tyrant's head, both in this world and thenext. (3) I am not at leisure to examine how far the monks provoked, nor howmuch they have exaggerated, their real or pretended suffering, nor how many losttheir lives or limbs, their eyes or their beards, by the cruelty of the emperor. Fromthe chastisement of individuals, he proceeded to the abolition of the order; and,as is was wealthy and useless, his resentment might be stimulated by avarice andjustified by patriotism. The formidable name and mission of the Dragon>(<f) hisvisiter general, excited the terror and abhorrence of the black nation: the religious•communities were dissolved, the buildings were converted into magazines, or bar-


0) The holy confessor Theophanes approve* the principle of their rebetion, kwj.uivci (p. 330.Gregory II.) in Epist. i. ad Imp. Leon. Concil. torn. viii. p. 661. 664. applauds tlie zeal of the Byzantine wo­men who killed the imperial officer!.
(2) John, or Mansur, was a noble Christian of Damascus, who held a considerable office in the service of thecaliph. His zeal in the cause of images exposed him to the resentment and treachery of the Greek emperor;and on the suspicion of a treasonable correspondence, he was deprived cf his ritsht hand, which was miracu­lously restored by the Virgin. After this deliverance, he resigned his office, distributed hit wealth, and buriedhimself in the monastery of St. Sabas, between Jerusalem and die Dead Sea. The legend is famous, but hislearned editor, father Lcquien, has unluckily proved that St. John Damascenus was already a monk beforethe Iconoclast dispute (Oeera. torn. i. Vit. St. Joan. Damascen. p. 10—13. et Notas ad loc)
(3) After sending Leo to the devil, he introduces hii heir—ro pixw aurov ysvMMusytsM tij; *»xix; tturcv KJufpo«flssa$sv **»Ai»ysvaswMf. (Opera Damascen. torn. i. p. 625.) If the authenticity of this pi *ce he suspicious, we are surethat in other works, no longer extant, Damascenus bestowed on Constantine the title of wov Muw^iS X.ieroajs-
X»v,7rer»\»0i'. (toiTt. i. p. 306.) '
(4) In the narrative of this persecution from Theophanes and Cedrenus, Spanheim (p. 235—238.) is hapnrto compare the Dracoef Leo with the dragoons (Dra«w») of I.ouis XIV. and highly solaces himself with this-<>nrrovcrsial pun.


t







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


tinople, the islands of Crete(l) and Sicily were subdued by the Arabs. Theformer of these conquests is disdained by their own writers, who were ignorant ofthe fame of Jupiter and Minos; but it has not been overlooked by the Byzantinehistorians, who now begin to cast a clearer light on the affairs of their own times. (2)A band of Andalusian volunteers, discontented with the climate or government ofSpain, explored the adventures of the sea; but as they sailed in no more than tenor twenty galleys, their warfare must be branded with the name of piracy. As thesubjects and secretaries of the "white party, they might lawfully invade the domi­nions of the black caliphs. A rebellious faction introduced them into Alexandria;(S)they cut in pieces both friends and foes, pillaged the churches and the moschs,sold above six thousand Christian captives, and maintained their station in thecapital of Egypt, till they were oppressed by the forces and the presence of Al-mamon himself. From the mouth of the Nile to the Hellespont, the islands andsea-coasts both of the Greeks and Moslems were exposed to their depredations;they saw, they envied, they tasted, the fertility of Crete, and soon returned withforty galleys to a more serious attack. The Andalusians wandered over the landfearless and unmolested; but when they descended with their plunder to the sea­shore, their vessels were in flames, and their chief, Abu Caab, confessed himselfthe author of the mischief. Their clamours -accused His madness or treachery:"Of what do you complain?" replied the crafty emir. "I have brought you to aland flowing with milk and honey. Here is your true country; repose from yourtoils, and forget the barren place of your nativity.—And our wives and children?—Your beauteous captives will supply the place of your wives, and in their em­braces you will soon become the fathers of a new progeny." The first habitationwas their camp, with a ditch and rampart, in the bay of Suda; but an apostatemonk led them to a more desirable position in the eastern parts; and the name ofCandax, their fortress and colony, has been extended to the whole island, underthe corrupt and modern appellation of Candia. The hundred cities of the age ofMinos were diminished to thirty; and of these, only one, most probably Cydonia, hadcourage to retain the substance of freedom and the profession of Christianity. TheSaracens of Crete soon repaired the loss of their navy; and the timbers of mountIda were launched into the main. During a hostile period of one hundred andthirty-eight years, the princes of Constantinople attacked these licentious corsairswith fruitless curses and ineffectual arms. •
The loss of Sicily(4) was occasioned by an act of superstitious rigour. Anamorous youth, who had stolen a nun from her cloister, was sentenced by the em­peror to the amputation of his tongue. Euphemius appealed to the reason andpolicy of the Saracens of Africa; and soon returned with the imperial purple, afleet of one hundred ships, and an army of seven hundred horse and ten thousandfoot. They landed at Mazara near the ruins of the ancient Selinus; but after somepartial victories, Syracuse(5) was delivered by the Greeks, the apostate was slainbefore her walls, and his African friends were reduced to the necessity of feedingon the flesh of their own horses. In their turn they were relieved by a powerfulre-enforcement of their brethren of Andalusia: the largest and western part of theisland was gradually reduced, and the commodious harbour of Palermo was chosenfor the seat of the naval and military power of the Saracens. Syracuse preservedabout fifty years the faith which she had sworn to Christ and to Cssar. In thelast and fatal siege, her citizens displayed some remnant of the spirit which haG
(1) The authors from whom I have learned the most of the ancient and modern state of Crete, are Belon (Ob­servations, See. e. iii.—xx. Paris, 1555.,) Tournefort (Voyage tin Levant, torn. i. lettrea et 3.,) and Meursius(Creta, in his works, torn. iii. p. 343—544.) Although Crete is styled by Homer n*sby Dionysius Afco?* nmmi iufcorc;, I cannot conceive that mountainous island to surpass, or even to equal, io fertility, the greater partof Spain.
(2) The most authentic and circumstantial intelligence is obtained from the four books of the Continuation ofTheophanes, compiled by the pen or the command of Constantine Porphyrogenitus, with the life of his fa<hcrBasil the Macedonian (Scriptores poBt Theophanem, p. 1—162. a Francis. Combesis, Paris, 1685.) The loss ofCrete and Sicily is related, lib. ii. p. 46—52. To these we may add the secondary evidence of Joseph Geueiins(lib. ii.fr. 21. Venet. 1733.,) George Cedrenus (Compend. p. 506—508..) and John Scylitzes Curopalata (apndKaron. Anna). Eccles. A. D. 827. no. 24. Stc.) But the modern Greeks are such notorious plagiaries, that Xshould only emote a plurality of names.
(3) Benaudot (Hist. Patriarch. A"lex. p. 251—255. 268—270.) has described the ravages of the AndalusianArabs in Egypt, but has forgot to connect them with the conquest of Crete.
(4) (says the continuator of Theophanes, lih; ii. p. 51.) Ss T«yr» <r«[pso"T«Tc* *tn xXaTiwunpo* ^ totiypxqeuT* fcjfic^uwtrrw itej yjtfx; jxflowr* tipar. This history of the loss of Sicily is no longer extant. Muratori(Annal d'ltulia, torn. vii. p. 7. io. 21. &:c.) lias added some circumstances from the Italian chronicles.
(5) The splendid and interesting Tragedy of Tancrede would adapt itself much better to this epoch, titan fothe date (A. D. 1005.) which Voltaire himself has chosen. But I must gently reproach the poet, for bar&uTgjivto the Greek subjects the spirit of modern knights and ancient republicans.







OCR Output








188 THE DECLINE AND FALL


•who is distinguished among a crowd of saints by the epithet of alms-giver:{l) andthe revenues of the church, with a treasure of three hundred thousand pounds,were restored to the true proprietors, the poor of every country and every deno­mination. But Egypt itself, the only province which had been exempt, since thetimes of Diocletian, from foreign and domestic war, was again subdued by the suc­cessors of Cyrus. Pelusium, the key of that impervious country, was surprisedby the cavalry of the Persians: they passed, with impunity, the innumerable chan­nels of the Delta, and explored the long valley of the Nile, from the pyramidsof Memphis to the confines of Ethiopia. Alexandria might have been relievedby a naval force, but the archbishop and the prefect embarked for Cyprus; andChosroes entered the second city ot the empire, which still preserved a wealthyremnant of industry and commerce. His western trophy was erected, not on thewalls of Carthage,(2) but in the neighbourhood of Tripoli: the Greek colonies ofCyrene were finally extirpated; and the conqueror, treading in the footsteps of Alex­ander, returned in triumph through the sands of the Lybian desert. In the firstcampaign, another army advanced from the Euphrates to the Thracian Bosphorus;Chalcedon surrendered after a long siege, and a Persian camp was maintained aboveten years in the presence of Constantinople. The sea-coast of Pontus, the city ofAncyra, and the isle of Rhodes, are enumerated among the last conquests of thegreat king; and if Chosroes had possessed any maritime power, his boundless am­bition would have spread slavery and desolation over the provinces of Europe.
From the long disputed banks of the Tigris and Euphrates, the reign of thegrandson of Nushirvan was suddenly extended to the Hellespont and the Nile, theancient limits of the Persian monarchy. But the provinces, which had been fa­shioned by the habits of six hundred years to the virtues and vices of the Romangovernment, supported with reluctance the yoke of the barbarians. The idea ofa republic was kept alive by the institutions, or at least by the writings, of theGreeks and Romans, and the subjects of Heraclius had been educated to pronouncethe words of liberty and law. But it has always been the pride and policy of ori­ental princes, to display the titles and attributes of their omnipotence; to upbraida nation of slaves with their true name and abject condition, and to enforce, bycruel and insolent threats, the rigour of their absolute commands. The Christiansof the east were scandalized by the worship of fire, and the impious doctrine ofthe two principles; the Magi were not less intolerant than the bishops, and themartyrdom of some native Persians, who had deserted the religion *of Zoroaster,(3)was conceived to be the prelude of a fierce and general persecution. By the op­pressive laws of Justinian, the adversaries of the church were made the enemiesof the state; the alliance of the Jews, Nestoriansi and Jacobites, had contributedto the success of Chosroes, and his partial favour to the sectaries provoked thehatred and fears of the catholic clergy. Conscious of their fear and hatred, thePersian conqueror governed his new subjects with an iron sceptre; and as if hesuspected the stability of his dominions, he exhausted their wealth by exorbitanttributes and licentious rapine, despoiled or demolished the temples of the east,and transported to his hereditary realms the gold, the silver, the precious marbles,the arts, and the artists of the Asiatic cities. In the obscure picture of the cala­mities of the empire,(4) it is not easy to discern the figure of Chosroes himself, toseparate his actions from those of his lieutenants, or to ascertain his personal me­rit in the general blaze of glory and magnificence. He enjoyed with ostentationthe fruits of victory', and frequently retired from the hardships of war to the luxu­ry of the palace. But in the space of twenty-four years, he was deterred by su­perstition or resentment from approaching the gates of Ctesiphon: and his favour­ite residence of Artemita, or Dastagerd, was situate beyond the Tigris, aboutsixty miles to the north of the capital. (5) The adjacent pastures were coveredwith flocks and herds: the paradise or park was replenished with pheasants, pea-
(1) The lire of this worthy saint is composed by Leontius.a coremporary bishop; and I find in Baroniiif.(Annal. Eccles. A. D. 610. No. 10, &c.) and Fleury, (torn. viii. p. 235—242.) sufficient extracts of this edifyingwork,
(2) The error of Baronius, and many others, who have carried the arms of Chosroes to Carthage, insteadof Chalcedon, is founded on the uear resemblance of the Greek words KaKmSovx and K»px>iJev*, in thetext of Theophanes, && which have been sometimes confounded by transcribers and sometimes by critics.
(3) The genuine acts of St. Anastatius are published in those of the seventh general council, from whenceBaronius (Annal. Eccles. A. D. 614.626,627.) and Butler (Lives of the Saints, vol. i. p. 242—248.) have takentheir accounts. The holy martyr deserted from the Persian to -the notnan army, became a monk at Jerusa­lem, and insulted the worship of the Map, which was then established at Cxsarea in Palestine.
(4) Abulpharagius, Dynast, p. 99. Elmacin, Hist. Saracen, p. 14.
(5) D'Anville, Mem. de l'Academie des Inscriptions, torn, xxxit. p. 568—571.
t







OCR Output








120 THE DECLINE AND FALL


of marriage, the education of children, and the authority of parents, which may-seem to draw their origin from nature itself, are ascribed to the untutored wisdomof Romulus. The law of nations and of religious worship, which Numa introduced,was derived from his nocturnal converse with the nymph Egeria. The civil lawis attributed to the experience of Servius: he balanced the rights and fortunes ofthe seven classes of citizens; and guarded, by fifty new regulations, the observanceof contracts and the punishment of crimes. The state, which he had inclined to­wards a democracy, was changed by the last Tarquin into lawless despotism; and•when the kingly office was abolished, the patricians engrossed the benefits of free­dom. The royal laws became odious or obsolete; the mysterious deposite was si­lently preserved by the priests and nobles; and, at the end of sixty years, the citi­zens of Rome still complained that they were ruled by the arbitrary sentence ofthe magistrates. Yet the positive institutions of the kings had blended themselveswith the public and private manners of the city; some fragments of that venerablejurisprudence(l) were compiled by the diligence of antiquarians,(2) and abovetwenty texts still speak the rudeness of the Pelasgic idiom of the Latins. (3)
I shall not repeat the well-known story of the decemvirs, (4) who sullied by theiractions the honour of inscribing on brass, or wood, or ivory, the twelve tablesof the Roman laws. (5) They were dictated by the rigid and jealous spirit of anaristocracy, which had yielded with reluctance to the just demands of the people.But the substance of the twelve tables was adapted to the state of the city; and theRomans had emerged from barbarism, since they were capable of studying andembracing the institutions of their more enlightened neighbours. A wise Ephe-sian was driven by envy from his native country; before he could reach the shoresof Latium, he had observed the various forms of human nature and civil society;he imparted his knowledge to the legislators of Rome, and a statue was erected inthe forum to the perpetual memory of Hermodorus. (6) The names and divisionsof the copper-money, the sole coin of the infant state, were of Dorian origin :(7)the harvests of Campania and Sicily relieved the wants of a people whose agricul­ture was often interrupted by war and faction; and since the trade was establish­ed,^) the deputies, who sailed from the Tiber, might return from the same har­bours with a more precious cargo of political wisdom. The colonies of GreatGreece had transported and improved the arts of their mother-country. Cumie.and Rhegium, Crotona and Tarentum, Agrigentum and Syracuse, were in therank of the most flourishing cities. The disciples of Pythagoras applied philoso­phy to the use of government; the unwritten laws of Charondas accepted the aidof poetry and music, (9) and Zaleucus framed the republic of the Locrians, which
S279.,) is adopted by Gravina (Origines Juris Civilis, p. 28. edit. Lips. 1737.,) and is reluctantly admitted byaseou, his German editor.
(1) The most ancient code or digest was styled Jus Papirianum, from the first compiler, Papirius, who flour­ished somewhat before or after the Regifugium. (Pandect, lib. i. tit. 2.) The best judicial crities, eren Byn-kershoek (torn. i. p. 284,285.) and Heineccius (Hist. J. C. R. lib. i. c. 16,17, and Opp. torn. iii. sylloge 4. p. 1—8*0 K*Te credit to this tale of Fumponius, without sufficiently adverting to the value and rarity of such a mo-«ument,of the third century, of the illiterate city. 1 much suspect that the Cains Papirius, the PontifexMaximus, who revived the laws of Numa (Dionys. Hal. lib. iii. p. 171.0 left only an oral tradition; and thatthe Jus Papiriannm of Granius Flaecus (Pandect, lib. i. tit. 16. leg. 144.,) was not a commentary, but an ori­ginal work, compiled in the time of Caesar (Censorin. de Die Natali, lib. iii. p. 13. Duker de Latinitate, J. C.


Homaine of Terasson^p. 22—72. Paris, 1750, in folio; a work of more promise than performance.
(3) In the year 1444, seven or eight tables of brass were dug up between Cnrtona and Gubio. A part ofthese, for the rest is Etruscan, represents the primitive state of the Pelasgic letters and language, which areascribed by Herodotus to that district of Italy (lib. i. c. 56—58.) though this difficult passage may be explainednf a Crestona in Thrace (Notes de Larcher, torn. i. p. 256—261. The savage dialect of the Eugubine tableshas exercised, and may still elude the divination of criticism; but the root is undoubtedly Latin, of the sameage and character as the Saliare Carmen, which, in the time of Horace, none could understand. The Romanidiom, by an infusion of Doric and JSolic Greek, was gradually ripened into the style of the twelve tables, ofthe Duillian column,of Ennius, of Terence, and of Cicero (Gruter, Inscript. lorn. i. p. 142. Scipion Maffei,Istoria Diplomatica, p. 241—258. Bibliotheque Italique, torn. iii. p. 30—41. 174—205. torn. xiv. p. 1—52.)_(4) Compare Livy (lib. iii. c. 31—59.) with Dionysios Halicnrnossensis (lib. x. p. 644: xi. p. 691.) t How con­cise and animated is the Roman—how prolix and lifeless is the Greek! Yet he has admirably judged themasters, and denned the rules of historical composition.
(5) From the historians, Heineccius (Hist. J. R. lib. i. No. 26.) maintains that the twelve tables were of brass,—sereas: in the text of Pomponius we read eboreas; for which Sealiger has substituted roboreas (Bynkershoefc,p. 236.) Wood, brass, and ivory, might be successively employed.
(6) His exile is mentioned by Cicero (Tuseulan; Question, 5. 36.) his statue by Pliny (Hist. Nat. 34.11.)The letter, dream, and prophecy of Heraclitus, are alike spurious (Epistolse Grscc. Divers, p. 337.)
(7) This intricate subject of the Sicilian and Roman money is ably discussed by Dr. Bentley (Dissertationon the epistles of Phalaris, p. 427—479., whose powers in this controversy were called forth by honour and re­sentment.
(8) The Romans,or their allies, sailed as far as the fair promontory of Africa (Polyb. lib. iii. p. 177. edit.Casaubon, in folio.) Their voyages to Cumse, &c. are noticed by Livy and Dionysius.
(9) This circumstance would alone prove the antiquity of Charondas, the legislator of Rhegium and Cata­


 







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


catalogue. Their capital, Cordova, with the adjacent towns of Malaga, Almeria,and Murcia, had given birth to more than three hundred writers, and above se­venty public libraries were opened in the cities of the Andalusian kingdom. Theage of Arabian learning continued about five hundred years, till the great irruptionof the Moguls, and was coeval with the darkest and most slothful period of Eu­ropean annals; but since the sun of science has arisen in the west, it should seemthat the oriental studies have languished and declined. (1)
In the libraries of the Arabians, as in those of Europe, the far greater part otthe innumerable volumes were possessed only of local value or imaginary merit. (2)The shelves were Crowded with orators and poets, whose style was adapted tothe taste and manners of their countrymen: with general and partial histories,which each revolving generation supplied with a new harvest of persons andevents; with codes and commentaries of jurisprudence, which derived their au­thority from the law of the prophet; with the interpreters of the Koran, and or­thodox tradition; and with the whole theological tribe, polemics, mystics, scho­lastics, and moralists, the first or the last of writers, according to the different esti­mate, of sceptics or believers. The works of speculation or science may be reducedto the four classes of philosophy, mathematics, astronomy, and physic. The sagesof Greece were translated and illustrated in the Arabic language, and some trea­tises, now lost in the original, have been recovered in the versions of the east, (3)v/hich possessed and studied the writings of Aristotle and Plato, of Euclid andApollonius, of Ptolemy, Hippocrates, and Galen. (4) Among the ideal systems,which have varied with the fashion of the times, the Arabians adopted the philo­sophy of the Stagirite, alike intelligible or alike obscure for the readers of everyage. Plato wrote for the Athenians, and his allegorical genius is too closely blendedwith the language and religion of Greece. After the fall of that religion, the Pe­ripatetics, emerging from their obscurity, prevailed in the controversies of theoriental sects; and their founder was long afterward restored by the Mahometansof Spain to the Latin schools. (5) The physics, both of the Academy and the Ly-exum, as they are built, not on observation, but on argument, have retarded theprogress of real knowledge. The metaphysics of infinite, or finite spirit, have toooften been enlisted in the service of superstition. But the human faculties are for­tified by the art and practice of dialectics; the ten predicaments of Aristotle col­lect and methodize our ideas,(6) and his syllogism is the keenest weapon of dis­pute. It was dexterously wielded in the schools of the Saracens, but as it is moreeffectual for the detection of error than for the investigation of truth, it is not sur­prising that new generations of masters and disciples should still revolve in thesame circle of logical argument. The mathematics are distinguished by a pecu­liar privilege, that, in the course of ages, they may always advance, and can ne­ver recede. But the ancient geometry, if I am not misinformed, was resumed inthe same state by the Italians of the fifteenth century; and whatever may be theorigin of the name, the science of algebra is ascribed to the Grecian Diophantusby the modest testimony of the Arabs themselves. (7) They cultivated with moresuccess the sublime science of astronomy, which elevates the mind of man to dis-
(1) These literary anecdotes are borrowed from the Bibliotheca Arabico-Hispana, (Com. ii. p. 38.71.201,202.)Leo Afrieanus, (de Arab. Medieis et Fhilosophis, in Fabric Bibliot. Grac. torn. xiii. p. 259—298, partieolarly274) and Henaudot, (Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p. 274, 275. 53G, 537.) besides the chronological remarks of Abulpba-raapns.
(2) The Arabic catalogue of the Eseurial will girea just idea of the proportion of the classes. In the libraryof Cairo, the MSS. of astronomy and medicine amounted to six thousand five handled.with two fair globes, theoneofbrass.theolherofsilver. (Bibliot. Arab. Hisp. torn. i. p. 417.)
(3) As for instance, the fifth, sixth, and seventh books (the eighth is still wanting) of the Conic Sections ofApollomns Pergeeus, which were printed from the Florence MSS. 1661. (Fabric. Biblior. Grsee. torn. ii.D.559.) Yet the fifth book had been previously restored by the mathematical divination of Viviana. (See Jtiselope in Fontenclle, torn. v. p. 59. 8ie.)
(4) The merit of these Arabic versions is freely discussed by Renaudot. (Fabric. Bibliot. Grace, torn. i. p.812—816.) and piously defended by Gasira. (Bibliot. Arab. Hispana, torn. i. p. 238—240.) Most of the ver­sions nf Plato, Aristotle, Hippocrates. Galen, Sec. are ascribed to Monain, a physician ol'the Nestorian sect, whoflourished at Bagdad in the court of the caliphs, and died A. D. 876. He was at the head of a sehool or manu­factory of translations, and the works of his sons and disciples were published under his name. See Abnlpha-ragitis. (Dynast, p. 88. 115. 171—174. and Apuil Asseman, Bibliot. Orient, torn. ii. p. 438.) d* Herbelot, (B'hHot. Orientate, p. 456.) Asseman, (Bibliot. Orient, torn. iii. p. 164.) and Casiri, (Bibliot. Arab. Hispana, torn. i. p.238, Sec. 251. 286—290. 302. 304, Sec)
(5) See Mosheim, Iustitut. Hist. Eccles. p. 181. 214.236. 257. 315. 338. 396.438, &c.
(6) The most elegant commentary on the Categories or Predicaments of Aristotle may be found in the Phite-aophical Arrangements of Mr. .Tames Harris (London, 1775, in octavo,) who laboured to revive the studies ofGrecian literature and philosophy.
(7) Abulpharagius, Dynast, p. 81. 222. Bibliot. Arab. Hist. torn. ii. p. 370,371. In quern (says the primateof the Jacobites) ii immiaerit se lector, oceanum hoc in genere (al&braf) invenict. The time of Diophantes <tiAlexandria is unknown, but his six booksare still extant, and have been illustrated bv the Greek Plasudcs andthe Frenchman Mtziriae. (Fabric, Bibliot. Grace, torn. tv. p. i2r-I5.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


Jnarcand, with the Turkish tribes of Sogdiana and Scythia, were moved by the la­mentations and promises of the fallen monarch; and he solicited, by a suppliantembassy, the more solid and powerful friendship of the emperor of China. (1) Thevirtuous Taitsong,(2) the first of the dynasty of the Tang, may be justly comparedwith the Antonines of Rome: his people enjoyed the blessings ot prosperity andpeace; and his dominion was acknowledged by forty-four hordes of the barbariansof Tartary. His last garrisons of Cashgar and Khoten maintained a frequent in­tercourse with their neighbours of the Jaxartes and Oxus; a recent colony of Per­sians had introduced into China, the astronomy of the Magi; and Taitsong mightbe alarmed by the rapid progress and dangerous vicinity of the Arabs. I'he in­fluence, and perhaps the supplies of China, revived the hopes of Yezdegerd andthe zeal of the worshippers of fire; and he returned with an army of Turks toconquer the inheritance of his fathers. The fortunate Moslems, without un­sheathing their swords, were the spectators of his ruin and death., The grandsonof Chosroes was betrayed by his servant, insulted by the seditious inhabitants ofMerou, and oppressed, defeated, and pursued by his barbarian allies. He reachedthe banks of a river, and offered his rings and bracelets for an instant passage ina miller's boat. Ignorant or insensible of royal distress, the rustic replied, thatfour drachms of silver were the daily profit of his mill, and that he would not sus­pend his work unless the loss were repaid. In this moment of hesitation and de­lay, the last of the Sassanian kings was overtaken and slaughtered by the Turkishcavalry, in the nineteenth year of his unhappy reign. (3) His son Firuz, an hum­ble client of the Chinese emperor, accepted the station of captain of his guards;and the Magian worship was long preserved by a colony of loyal exiles in the pro­vince of Bucharia. His grandson inherited the regal name; but after a faint andfruitless enterprise, he returned to China, and ended his days in the palace of Si-gan. The male line of the Sassanides was extinct; but the female captives, thedaughters of Persia, were given to the conquerors in servitude, or marriage; andthe race of the caliphs and imams was ennobled by the blood of their royal mo­thers. (4)
After the fall of the Persian kingdom, the river Oxus divided the territories ofthe Saracens and of the Turks. This narrow boundary was soon overleaped bythe spirit of the Arabs: the governors of Chorasan extended their successive in­roads; and one of their triumphs was adorned with the buskin of a Turkish queen,which she dropped in her precipitate flight beyond the hills of Bochara.(5) Butthe final conquest of Transoxiana,(6) as well as of Spain, was reserved for theglorious reign of the inactive Walid; and the name of Catiliah, the camel driver,declares the origin and merit of his successful lieutenant. While one of his col­leagues displayed the first Mahometan banner on the banks of the Indus, thespacious regions between the Oxus, the Jaxartes and the Caspian sea, were re­duced by the arms of Catibah to the obedience of the prophet, and of the ca­liph. (J) A tribute of two millions of pieces of gold was imposed on the infidels;their idols were burnt or broken; the Mussulman chief pronounced a sermon inthe new mosch of Carizme; after several battles, the Turkish-hordes were drivenback to the desert; and the emperors of China solicited the friendship of the vic­torious Arabs. To their industry, the prosperity of the province, the Sogdiana
(1) Eo redegit angustiarum eundum regem exsnlem, lit Torcici regis et Sogdianr, et Sinensis, auxilia missisliteris itnploraret. (Abtrlfrtl. Annal. p. 74.) The connexion of (he Persian and Chinese history is illustrated byFreret, Mem. de P AcsuVmie. torn. xvi. p. 245—255.) and de Guignes. (Hist, des Huns, torn. ii. p. 54—55. anafor the geography of the borders, torn. ii. p. 1—43.)
(2) Hist. Sinica, p. 41—46. in the thiitl part of the Relations Curieuses of Th* venot.
(3J I have endeavoured to harmonize the various narrarives of Rlmacin. (Hist. Saracen, p. 37.) Abulphara-gios, (Dynast, p. 116.) Abuifeda, (Annal. p. 74.79.) and d'Herbelot. (p. 485.) The end of Yezdegerd was notonly unfortunate but obscure.
(4) The rwo daughter! of Yt-zdegcrd married Hassan, the son of Ali, and Mohammed, the son of Ahnbeker;and the first of these was the father of a numerous projreny. The daughter of Phirouz became the wife of thucaliph Walid, and their son Yt-zid derived his genuine or fabulous descent from the Chosroes of Persia, the Cte-sars of Rome, and the Chagans of the Turks or Avars. (D'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orientale, p. 96. 437.)
(5) It was valued at two thousand pieces of gold, and was rhe prize of Obeidollah, the son of Ziyad, a nameafterward infamous bj the murder of Hosein. (Ockley's History of the Saracens, vol. ii. p. 142, 143.) His bro­ther Salem was accompanied by his wife, the first Arabian woman (A. D. 680.) who passed the Oxus: she bor­rowed, or rather stole, the crown and .jewels of the princess of the Sogtlians. (231,232.)
(6) A part of Abulfeda's geography is translated by Greaves, inserted in Hudson's collection of the minor geo­grapher*, (torn, iii.) and emitted, Deseriptio Chorasmifeet Mamaralnahrce, id esr, regionum extra fiuvium,Oxutn, p. 80. The name of Tramaxiana, softer in sound, equivalent in sense, is aptly used bv Petit de la Croix,(Hist, de Gengiscan, 8tc.) and some modern Orientalists; but they are mistaken in ascribing it to the writers ofantiquity.
(7) The conquests of Catibah are faintly marked by Elmacin, (Hist. Saracen, p. 84.) d'Herbelot, (Bibliot.Orient. Catbah, Samaramd, Vulid) and tie Gnignea, Hist, des Huns, torn. i. p. 53, 59.)
Vol. TIT. 45







OCR Output








m THE DECUNE AND KAU.


Arabians disdained the study of any foreign idiom. The Greek interpreters werechosen among their Christian subjects; they formed the translations, sometimeson the original text, more frequently perhaps on a Syriac version; and in the crowdof astronomers and physicians, there is no example of a poet, an orator, or evenan historian, being taught to speak the language of the Saracens.(l) The mytho­logy of Homer would have provoked the abhorrence of those stern fanatics; theypossessed in lazy ignorance the colonies of the Macedonians, and the provinces ofCarthage and Rome: theiheroes of Plutarch and Livy were buried in oblivion; andthe history of the world before Mahomet was reduced to a short legend of the pa­triarchs, the prophets, and the Persian kings. Our education in the Greek andJ.atin schools may have fixed in our minds a standard of exclusive taste; and I amnot forward to condemn the literature and judgments of nations, of whose language2 am ignorant. Yet I know that the classics have much to teach, and I believe thatthe orientals have much to learn: the temperate dignity of style, the graceful pro­portions of art, the forms of visible and intellectual beauty, the just delineation ofcharacter and passion, the rhetoric of narrative and argument, the regular fabricof epic and dramatic poetry. (2) The influence of truth and reason is of a lessambiguous complexion. The philosophers of Athens and Rome enjoyed the bless­ings and asserted the rights, of civil and religious freedom. Their moral and po­litical writings might have gradually unlocked the fetters of eastern despotism,diffused a liberal spirit of inquiry and toleration, and encouraged the Arabian sagesto suspect that their caliph was a tyrant and their prophet an impostor. (3) Theinstinct of superstition was alarmed by the introduction even of the abstract sci­ences; and the more rigid doctors of the law condemned the rash and perniciouscuriosity of Almamon.(4) To the thirst of martyrdom, the vision of paradise,and the belief of predestination, we must ascribe the invincible enthusiasm of theprince and people. And the sword of the Saracens became less formidable, whentheir youth was drawn away from the camp to the college, when the armies of thefaithful presumed to read and to reflect. Yet the foolish vanity of the Greeks wasjealous of their studies, and reluctantly imparted the sacred fire to the barbariansof the east. (5)
In the bloody conflict of the Ommiades and Abbassides, the Greeks had stolenthe opportunity of avenging their wrongs, and enlarging their limits. But a severeretribution was enacted by Mohadi, the third caliph of the new dynasty, whoseizedJn his turn the favourable opportunity, while a woman and a child, Irene and Con-stantine, were seated on the Byzantine throne. An army of ninety-five thousandPersians and Arabs was sent from the Tigris to the Thracian Bosphorus, under thecommand of Harun,(6) or Aaron, the second son of the commander of the faith­ful His encampment on the opposite heights of Chrysopolis or Scutari, informedIrene, in her palace of Constantinople, of the loss of her troops and provinces.With the consent or connivance of their sovereign, her ministers subscribed an ig­nominious peace; and the exchange of some royal gifts could not disguise the an­nual tribute of seventy thousand dinars of gold, which was imposed on the Romanempire. The Saracens had too rashly advanced into the midst of a distant andhostile land: their retreat was solicited by the promise of faithful guides and plen­tiful markets; and not a Greek had courage to whisper, that their weary forcesnight be surrounded and destroyed in their necessary passage between a slipperymountain and the river Sangarius. Five years after this expedition, Harun ascend­ed the throne of his father, and his elder brother; the most powerful and vigorous


as, by Tbeophilns, ayards the end of thedo not believe, that


(1) Abnlpharagius, (Dynast, p. 25.148.) mentions a Syriac version of Homer** two poems, by"Christian Maronite of mount Libanus, who protested astronomy at Roha or Edessa, towr-1-«lghth century. His work would be a literary cariosity. I have read somewhere, but I ipPutaroh's Lives were translated into Turkish for the use of Mahomet the Second.
(2) I haveperused with much pleasure, Sir 'William Jones1 Latin Commentary on Asiatic Poetry, (London.1774, in octavo,) which was composed in the youth of that wonderful linguist. At present, in the maturity ofhis taste and judgment, be would perhaps abate of thefervent, and even partial, praise which be has bestowedon Ibe orientals.
(3) Among the Arabian philosophers, Averroes has been accused of despising the religion of the Jews, theChristians, and the Mahometans, (See his article in Bayle's Dictionary.) Each of these sects would agree, thatin two instances out of three, his contempt was reasonable.
(4) D'Herbelot, Brbliotheque Orientate, p. 543.
(5) ©l0t>M» *T07tev xpimi SI T)JVT»V ovtwv yvwff-tv, li tjv TB Pwjuaiav yives SKUjtM^tTtti axSorev JTOI?[Ttl Ttls ifoeff*!,
tie. Cedrenus, p. 548, who relates how manfully the emperor refused a mathematician to the instances, andoften of the caliph Almamon. This absurd scruple is expressed almost in the same words by the eontinuatorof Theopbanea, (Scriptores post Theophanem, p. 118.)
(8) See the reign and character of Harun at Rashid,in flie Ribliotheque Orientale, p. 431. 433. under his pro*tier title; and in the relative articles to which M. d'Hcrbelot refers. That learned collector hai slrowu mucbxasfein stripping Ore Oriental chronicles of (heir instructive and arjruiirig antctfotd







OCR Output








48 THE DECLINE AND FALL


fortune is confounded with the meanest of his vassals. (1) The name and si­tuation of this unhappy people might indicate their descent from one commonstock with the conquerors of Africa. But the use of a Sclavonian dialectmore clearly represents them as the last remnant of the new colonies, who suc­ceeded to the genuine Vandals, already scattered or destroyed in the age of Proco-pius.(2)
If Belisarius had been tempted to hesitate in his allegiance, he might have urged,even against the emperor himself, the indispensable duty of saving Africa from anenemy more barbarous than the Vandals. The origin of the Moors is involvedin darkness; they were ignorant of the use of letters. (3) Their limits cannot beprecisely defined: a boundless continent was open to the Lybian shepherds; thechange of seasons and pastures regulated their motions; and their rude huts andslender furniture were transported with the same ease as their arms, their families,and their cattle, which consisted of sheep, oxen, and camels. (4) During the vi­gour of the Roman power, they observed a respectful distance from Carthage andthe sea-shore; under the feeble reign of the Vandals, they invaded the cities ofNumidia, occupied the sea-coast from Tangier to Cxsaria; and pitched their camps,with impunity, in the fertile province of Byzacium. The formidable strength


whose vanity aspired to receive, in the emperor's name, the ensigns of their regaldignity. (5) They were astonished by the rapid event, and trembled in the pre­sence of their conqueror. But his approaching departure soon relieved the ap­prehensions of a savage and superstitious people; the number of their wives al­lowed them to disregard the safety of their infant hostages; and when the Romangeneral hoisted sail in the port of Carthage, he heard the cries, and almost beheldthe flames, of the desolated province. Yet he persisted in his resolution; and,leaving only a part of his guards to re-enforce the feeble garrisons, he intrusted thecommand of Africa to the eunuch Solomon,(6) who proved himself not unworthyto be the successor of Belisarius. In the first invasion, some detachments, withtwo officers of merit, were surprised and intercepted; but Solomon speedily as­sembled his troops, marched from Carthage into the heart of the country, and intwo great battles destroyed sixty thousand of the barbarians.
The Moors depended on their multitude, their swiftness, and their inaccessiblemountains; and the aspect and smell of their camels are said to have producedsome confusion in the Roman cavalry.(7) But as soon as they were commandedto dismount, they derided this contemptible obstacle: as soon as the columns as­cended the hills, the naked and disorderly crowd was dazzled by glittering armsand regular evolutions; and the menace of their female prophets was repeatedlyfulfilled, that the Moors should be discomfited by a beardless antagonist. Thevictorious eunuch advanced thirteen days'journey from Carthage, to besiege mountAurasius,(8) the citadel, and at the same time the garden, of Numidia. The rangeof hills, a branch of the great Atlas, contains, within a circumference of one hun-


(1) From the mouth of the great elector (in 1687.) Tollius describes the secret royalty anil rebellious spirit orthe Vandals of Brandenburg!), who could muster live or six thousand soldiers who had procured some canon,&c. (Itinerar. Hungar. p. 42. apud Dubos,Hist. dela Monarchic Francoise, torn. i. p. 182,183.) The veracity,not of the elector, but of Tollius himself, may justly be suspected.
(2) Procopius (lib. i. c. 22.) was in total darkness—QvStpvnt** ou£, ovc/«e e; t,us <rto&r«i. Under the reign ofDagobert,(A. D. 630.) the Sclavonian tribes of the Sorbi and Venedi already bordered on Thuringia. (Mas-con. Hist, of the Germans, 15.3—5.)
(3) Sallust represents the Moors as a remnant of the army of Heracles, (de Bell. Jugurth. c. 21.) and Proco­pius, (Vandal, fib. ii. e. 10.) as the posterity of the Cananaeans who fled from the robber Joshua {yurrtK.) Hequotes two columns, with a Phoenician inscription. I believe in the columns—I doubt the inscription—and Xreject the pedigree.
(4) Virgil (Georgic. 3. 339.) and Pomponiu9 Mela, (1.8.) describe the wandering life of the African shepherds,similar to that of the Arabs aud Tartars; aud Shaw (p. 222.) is the best commentator on the poet and the geo­grapher.
(5) The customary gifts were a sceptre, a crown or a cap, a white cloak, a figured tunicand shoes,all adornedwith gold and silver; nor were these precious metals less acceptable in the shape of coin. (Procop. Vandal, i.c.25.)
(6) See the African government and warfare of Solomon, in Procopius. (Vandal, lib. ii. e. 10—13.19,20.)He was recalled, and again restored; and his last victory dates in the thirteenth year of Justinian (A. IX 539.)An accident in his childhood had rendered him a eunuch: (lib. i. c. 2.) the other Roman generals were amplyfurnished with beards, *a>yovos swi ■ a^iwi, (lib ii. c. 8.)
(7) This natural antipathy of the horse for the camel, is affirmed by the ancients (Xenophon, Cyropsed. lib.vi. p. 438; lib. vii. p. 483.492. edit. Hutchinson. Polyaen. Stratagem, vii. 6. Plin. Hist. Nat. viii. 26. Aliansle Natur. Animal, lib. iii. c. 7..) but it is disproved, by daily experience, and derided by the best judges, theOrientals. (Voyage d'Olearius, p. 553.)
(8) Procopius is the first who describes Mount Aurasius. Vandal, lib. ii. c. 13. De Edilic. lib. vi. c. 7.) Hemay be compared with Leo Africanus, (dell Africa, parte 5. in Bamusio, torn. i. fol. 77, recto,) Marmo), (torn,ii. p. 430.) and Shaw, (p. 56-59.)


 


neutrality of the Moorish princes,







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 97


purified from the Rugian usurper, he reviewed the national force of five thousandsoldiers, and generously undertook the restoration of the kingdom of Italy.
The successors of Belisarius, eleven generals of equal rank, neglected to crushthe feeble and disunited Goths, till they were roused to action by the progress ofTotila and the reproaches of Justinian. The gates of Verona were secretly openedto Artabazus, at the head of one hundred Persians in the service of the empire.The Goths fled from the city. At the distance of sixty furlongs the Roman gene­rals halted to regulate the division of the spoil. While they disputed, the enemydiscovered the real number of the victors: the Persians were instantly over­powered, and it was by leaping from the wall that Artabazus preserved a lifewhich he lost in a few days by the lance of a barbarian, who had defied him tosingle combat. Twenty thousand Romans encountered the forces of Totila, nearFxnza, and on the hills of Mugello, of the Florentine territory. The ardour offreedmen, who fought to regain their country, was opposed to the languid temperof mercenary troops, who were even destitute of the merits of strong and well-dis­ciplined servitude. On the first attack they abandoned their ensigns, threw downtheir arms, and dispersed on all sides with an active speed which abated the loss,■whilst it aggravated the shame, of their defeat. The king of the Goths, whoblushed for the baseness of his enemies, pursued with rapid steps the path of ho­nour and victory. Totila passed the Po, traversed the Apennine, suspended theimportant conquest of Ravenna, Florence, and Rome, and marched through theheart of Italy, to form the siege, or rather blockade of Naples. The Romanchiefs, imprisoned in their respective cities, and accusing each other of the com­mon disgrace, did not presume to disturb his enterprise. But the emperor,alarmed by the distress and danger of his Italian conquests, despatched to the re­lief of Naples a fleet of galleys and a body of Thracian and Armenian soldiers.They landed in Sicily, which yielded its copious stores of provisions; but the de­lays of the new commander, an unwarlike magistrate, protracted the sufferingsof the besieged; and the succours, which he dropped with a timid and tardy hand,•were successively intercepted by the armed vessels stationed by Totila in the bayof Naples. The principal officer of the Romans was dragged, with a rope roundhis neck, to the foot of the wall, from whence, with a trembling voice, he exhort­ed the citizens to implore, like himself, the mercy of the conqueror. They re­quested a truce, with a promise of surrendering the city, if no effectual relief shouldappear at the end of thirty days. Instead of one month, the audacious barbariangranted them three, in the just confidence that famine would anticipate the term oftheir capitulation. After the reduction of Naples and Cumse, the provinces of< Lucania, Apulia, and Calabria, submitted to the kins of the Goths. Totila ledhis army to the gates of Rome, pitched his camp at Tibur, or Tivoli, within twen­ty miles of the capital, and calmly exhorted the senate and people to compare the-tyranny of the Greeks with the blessings of the Gothic reign.
The rapid success of Totila may be partly ascribed to the revolution which threeyears' experience had produced in the sentiments of the Italians. At the com­mand, or at least in the name, of a catholic emperor, the pope,(l) their spiritualfather, had been torn from the Roman church, and either starved or murdered ona desolate island. (2) The virtues of Belisarius were replaced by the various oruniform vices of eleven chiefs, at Rome, Ravenna, Florence, Perugia, Spoleto, &c.who abused their authority for the indulgence of lust or avarice. The improve­ment of the revenue was committed to Alexander, a subtle scribe, Ion? practisedin the fraud and oppression of the Byzantine schools; and whose name of Psalliction,the scissars,{j) was drawn from the dexterous artifice with which he reduced thesize, without defacing the figure, of the gold coin. Instead of expecting the res­toration of peace and industry, he imposed a heavy assessment on the fortunes ofthe Italians. Yet his present or future demands were less odious than a prosecu­tion of arbitrary rigour against the persons and property of all those, who, underthe Gothic kings, had been concerned in the receipt and expenditure of the public
(I) SylveriiiJ, bishop of Rome, was fim transported to Fatara, in Lyria, and at length starved (sub eorumcustodia inedia confectus) in the isle of Patmaria, A. T>. 538, June 20. (LiberM. in Breviar. c. 22. Anastasiui inSylverio. Baroniirs, A. D. 510. No. 2, S. Pagi in Vit. Pont. torn. i. p. 285, 286.) Frocopius (Anecdot. c. 10 ac­cuses only the empress and Antonina. .
f2) Palmaria, a small uland,opposite to Tarracina and the coast of the Volsci, (Cluver. Ital. Antiq. lib. in.c. 7. p. 1014.)
(3) As the Logothete Alexander, and most if his civil and military colleagues, were either disgraced ordespised, the ink of the Anecdotes (c. 4,5.12.) is scarcely blacker than that of the Gothic History (lib. iii. c.1.3,4. 9.20,21, Ike.)
Vol. III. 13







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 4?


of Solomon,(l) which he repeatedly pronounced, " Vanity! vanity! all is vanity!"Instead of ascending a triumphal car drawn by four horses or elephants, the mo­dest conqueror marched on foot at the head of his brave companions; his prudencemight decline an honour too conspicuous for a subject;-and his magnanimity mightjustly disdain what had been so often sullied by the vilest of tyrants. The gloriousprocession entered the gate of the hippodrome; was saluted by the acclamationsof the senate and people; and halted before the throne where Justinian and Theo­dora were seated to receive the homage of the captive monarch and the victorioushero. They both performed the customary adoration; and, falling prostrate -onthe ground, respectfully touched the footstool of a prince who had not unsheathedhis sword, and of a prostitute who had danced on the theatre: some gentle violencewas used to bend the stubborn spirit of the grandson of Genseric; and, howevertrained to servitude, the genius, of Belisarius must have secretly rebelled. Hewas immediately declared consul for the ensuing year, and the day of his in­auguration resembled the pomp of a second triumph; his curule chair was bornealoft on the shoulders of captive Vandals; and the spoils of war, gold cups, andrich girdles, were profusely scattered among the populace.
But the purest reward of Belisarius was in the faithful execution of a treaty, forwhich his honour had been pledged to the king of the Vandals. The religiousscruples of Gelimer, who adhered to the Arian heresy, were incompatible withthe dignity of senator or patrician; but he received from the emperor an ample es­tate in the province of Galatia, where the abdicated monarch retired with his fa­mily and friends, to a life of peace, of affluence, and perhaps of content. (2) Th6daughters of Hilderic were entertained with the respectful tenderness due to theirage and misfortune; and Justinian and Theodora accepted the honour of educatingand enriching the female descendants of the great Theodosius. The bravest of theVandal youth were distributed into five squadrons of cavalry, which adopted the-name of their benefactor, and supported in the Persian wars the glory of their an­cestors. But these rare exceptions, the reward of birth or valour, are insufficientto explain the fate of a nation, whose numbers, before a short and bloodless war,amounted to more than six hundred thousand persons. After the exile of theirking and nobles, the servile crowd might purchase their safety, by abjuring their cha­racter, religion, and language; and their degenerate posterity would be insensiblymingled with the common herd of African subjects. Yet even in the present age,and in the heart of the Moorish tribes, a curious traveller ha* discovered the whitecomplexion and long flaxen hair of a northern race;(3) and it was formerly believed,that the boldest of the Vandals fled beyond the power, or even the knowledge ofthe Romans, to enjoy their solitary freedom on the shores of the Atlantic ocean. (4)Africa had been their empire, it became their prison; nor could they entertain ahope, or even a wish,-of returning to the banks of the Elbe, where their brethren,of a spirit less adventurous, still wandered in their native forests. It was impossi­ble for cowards to surmount the barriers of unknown seas and hostile barbarians :it was impossible for brave men to expose their nakedness and defeat before theeyes of their countrymen, to describe the kingdoms which they had lost, and toclaim a share of the humble inheritance, which, in a happier hour, they had al­most unanimously renounced. (5) In the country between the Elbe and the Oder se­veral populous villages of Lusatia are inhabited by the Vandals: they still preservetheir language, their customs, and the purity of their blood; support, with someimpatience, the Saxon, or Prussian yoke; and serve with secret and voluntaryallegiance, the descendant of their ancient kings, who in his garb and present
(1) If the Ecclesiastics be truly a work of Solomon, and not, like Prior's poem, a pious and moral composi­tion of more recent times, in his name, and on the subject of his repentance. The latter is the opinion of thelearned and free spirited Grotitii (Opp. Theolog. torn. i. p. 258.:) and indeed the Ecclesiastics and Proverb*,display a larger compass of thought and experience than seem to belong either to a Jew or a king.
(2) In the BeHsaire of Marmontel, the king and the conqueror of Africa meet, sup, and convene, withoutrecollecting each other. It is surely a fault of that romance, that not only the hero, but all to whom he hadbeen so conspicuously known, appear to have lost their eyes or their memory.
(3) Shaw, p. 59. Yet since Procopius (lib. ii. c. 13.) speaks of a people of Mount Atlas, as already distin­guished by white bodies and yellow hair, the phenomenon (which is likewise visible in the Andes of Peru.Buffon,tom. iii. p. 504.) may naturally be ascribed to the elevation of the ground, and the temperature ofthe air.
(4) The geographer of Havenna (lib. iii. c. 11. p. 129—131. Paris, 1681.) describes the Mauritania Cadilenaopposite to Cadiz,) ubi gens Vandalorum, a Belisario devicta in Africa, f ugit et nunquara comparuit.
(5) A single voice had protested, and Genseric dismissed, without a formal answer, the Vandals of Germany*but those of Africa derided his prudence, and affected to despise the poverty of their forests (Procopius, Van­dal, lib. i. c. 32.)







OCR Output








224, THE DECLINE AND FALL


baric tongues, which had been revived in the studies of modern Europe, were un­intelligible to the inhabitants of the Roman empire. The Syriac and the Coptic,the Armenian and the Ethiopic, are consecrated in the service of their respectivechurches; and their theology is enriched by domestic versions,(l) both of theScriptures and of the most popular fathers. After a period of thirteen hundredand sixty years, the spark of controversy, first kindled by a sermon of Nestorius,still burns in the bosom of the east, and the hostile communions still maintain thefaith and discipline of their founders. In the most abject state of ignorance, po­verty, and servitude, the Nestorians and Monophysites reject the spiritual supre­macy of Rome, and cherish the toleration of their Turkish masters, which allowsthem to anathematise, on one hand, St. Cyril and the synod of Ephesus; on theother, pope Leo and the council of Chalcedon. The weight which they cast intothe downfall of the eastern empire demands our notice; and the reader may beamused with the various prospects of, I. The Nestorians. II. The Jacobites. (2) III.The Maronites. IV. The Armenians. V. The Copts; and, VI. The Abyssinians.To the three former, the Syriac is common; but of the latter, each is discrimi­nated by the use of a national idiom. Yet the modern natives of Armenia andAbyssinia would be incapable of conversing with their ancestors; and the Chris­tians of Egypt and Syria, who reject the religion, have adopted the language, ofthe Arabians. The lapse of time has seconded the sacerdotal arts; and in theeast, as well as in the west, the Deity is addressed in an obsolete tongue, unknownto the majority of the congregation.
I. Both in his native and his episcopal province, the heresy of the unfortunateNestorius was speedily obliterated. The oriental bishops, who at Ephesus hadresisted to his face the arrogance of Cyril, were mollified by his tardy concessions.The same prelates, or their successors, subscribed, not without a murmur, the de­crees of Chalcedon: the power of the Monophysites reconciled them with thecatholics in the conformity of passion, of interest, and insensibility of belief; andtheir last reluctant sigh was breathed in the defence of the three chapters. Theirdissenting brethren, less moderate or more sincere, were crushed by the penallaws: and as early as the reign of Justinian, it became difficult to find a church ofNestorians within the limits of the Roman empire. Beyond those limits they haddiscovered a new world, in which they might hope for liberty, and aspire to con­quest. In Persia, notwithstanding the resistance of the Magi, Christianity hadstruck a deep root, and the nations of the east reposed under its salutary shade.
The catholic, or primate, resided in the capital: in his synods, and in their dio-cesses, his metropolitans, bishops, and clergy, represented the pomp and honourof a regular hierarchy: they rejoiced in the increase of proselytes, who were con­verted from the Zendavesta to the gospel, from the secular to: the monastic life;and their zeal was stimulated by the presence of an artful and formidable enemy.The Persian church had been founded by the missionaries of Syria; and their lan­guage, discipline, and doctrine, were closely interwoven with its original frame.The catholics were elected and ordained by their own suffragans; but their filialdependance on the patriarchs of Antioch is attested by the canons of the orientalchurch.(S) In the Persian school of Edessa,(4) the rising generations of the faith­ful imbibed their theological idiom; they studied in the Syriac version the tenthousand volumes of Theodore of Mopsuestia, and they revered the apostolic faith
0) I shall not enrich ray ignorance with the spoilt of Simon, Walton* Mill, Wetstein, Assemannus, LudoT-phus. La Croze, whom I have consulted with some care. It appears, 1. That of all the versions which are ce­lebrated by the fathers, it is doubtful whether any are now extant in their pristine integrity. 2. That the Sy­riac has the best claim; and that the consent of the oriental sects is a proof that it is more ancient than theirschism.
(2) On the account of the Monophysites and Nestorians, 1 am deeply indebted to the Bibliotheca OrientalisClementino-Vaticana of Joseph Simon Assemannus. That learned Maronite was despatched in the year 1715,by pope Clement XI. to visit the monasteries of Egypt and Syria in search of MSS. His four folio volumes,published at Rome in 1719—1728. contain a part only, though perhaps the most valuable of his extensive pro­ject. As a native and as a scholar he possessed the Syriac literature; and, though a dependent of Rome, hewished to be moderate and candid.
(3) See the A rabic canons of Nice in the translation of Abraham Ecchelensis, No. 37—40. Concil. torn. ii. p.335, 33a. edit. Venet. These vulgar titles, Nicene and Arabic, are both apocryphal. The council of Niceenacted no more than twenty canons (Theodoret,' Hist. Eccles. lib. i.c. viii.;) and the remainder, seventy oreighty, were collected from the synods of the Greek church. The Syriac edition ofMaruthas is no longer ex­tant (Asseman. Bibliot. Oriental, torn. i. p. 195. torn. iii. p. 74.,) and the Arabic version is marked with manyrecent interpolations. Tet this code contains many curious relics of ecclesiastical discipline; and rinee it bequally revered by all the eastern communions, it was probably finished before the schism of the Nestoriansand Jacobites (Fabric. Bibliot. Grrec. torn. xi. p. 363—367.) i '
(4) Theodore the Reader (lib. ii. c. 5.40. ad calcem Hist. Eccles.) has noticed this Persian school of Edessa.Its ancient splendour, and the two eras of its downfall (A. D. 431 and 489.) are clearlvdiscussed by AsscmamnfBlblmtb. Onent. trim. ii. p. 492. iii. p. 376.379. iv. p. 70. 924.







OCR Output








106 THE DECLINE AND FALL


ity, an officer of experience proposed a measure, secure by the appearance ofrashness; that the Roman army should cautiously advance along the sea-shore,while the fleet preceded their march, and successively cast a bridge of boats overthe mouths of the rivers, the Timavus, the Brenta, the Adige, and the Po, tha tfall into the Hadriatic to the north of Ravenna. Nine days he reposed in the city,collected the fragments of the Italian army, and marched towards Rimini to meetthe defiance of an insulting enemy.
The prudence of Narses impelled him to a speedy and decisive action. Hispowers were the last effort of the state: the cost of each day accumulated the enor­mous account; and the nations, untrained to discipline or fatigue, might be rashlyprovoked to turn their arms against each other, or against their benefactor. Thesame .considerations might have tempered the ardour of Totila. But he was con­scious, that the clergy and people of Italy aspired to a second revolution: he felt orsuspected the rapid progress oftreason, and he resolved to risk the Gothic kingdomon the chance of a day, in which the valiant would be animated by instant danger,and the disaffected might be awed by mutual ignorance. In his march from Ra­venna, the Roman general chastised the garrison of Rimini, traversed in a directline the hills of Urbino, and re-entered the Flaminian way, nine miles beyond theperforated rock, an obstacle of ait and nature which might have stopped or retard­ed his progress. (1) The Goths were assembled in the neighbourhood of Rome;they advanced, without delay, to seek a superior enemy, and the two armies ap­proached each other at the distance of one hundred furlongs, between Tagina(2)and the sepulchres of the Gauls. (3) The haughty message of Narses was an of­fer, not of peace, but of pardon. The answer of the Gothic king declared his re­solution to die or conquer. " What day," said the messenger, " will you fix forthe combat?" "The eighth day," replied Totila: but early the next morning heattempted to surprise a foe, suspicious of deceit, and prepared for battle. Tenthousand Heruli and Lombards, of approved valour and doubtful faith, were placedin the centre. Each of the wings was composed of eight thousand Romans; theright was guarded by the cavalry of the Huns, the left was covered by fifteen hun­dred chosen horse, destined, according to the emergencies of action, to sustain theretreat of their friends, or to encompass the flank of the enemy. From his prc-
Ser station at the head of the right wing, the eunuch rode along the line, expressingy his voice and countenance the assurance of victory; exciting the soldiers of theemperor to punish the guilt and madness of a band of robbers; and exposing totheir view gold chains, collars, and bracelets, the rewards of military virtue. Fromthe event of a single combat, they drew an omen of success; and they beheld withpleasure the courage of fifty archers, who maintained a small eminence against threesuccessive attacks of the Gothic cavalry. At the distance only of two bow-shots,the armies spent the morning in dreadful suspense, and the Romans tasted somenecessary food, without unloosening the cuirass from their breast, or the bridlefrom their horses. Narses awaited the charge; and it was delayed by Totila tillhe had received his last succours of two thousand Goths. While he consumedthe hours in fruitless treaty, the king exhibited in a narrow space the strength andagility of a warrior. His armour was enchased with gold; his purple banner float­ed with the wind; he cast his lance into the air; caught it with the right hand; shift­ed it to the left; threw himself backward; recovered his seat; and managed a fierysteed in all the paces and evolutions of the equestrian school. As soon as the suc-
vered with wood*, lakes, and morassei. Man has subdued nature, and the land has been cultivated, sincethe waters are confined and embanked. See the learned researches of Muratori (Antiquitat. Italia: medii-A2vi, torn. i. dissert. 21. p. 253,254.) from Vitruvius, Strata, Herodian.old charters,and local knowledge.
(1) The Flaminian way, as it is corrected from the Itineraries, and the best modern maps, by dVAnville(Analyse de I'ltalie, p. 147—162.,) may be thus stated: Rome to Narni, fifty-one Roman miles: Terni, fifty-seven, Spoleto, seventy-five; Foligno, eighty-eight; Nocera, one hundred and three; Cagli, one hundred andforty-two; Intercisa, one hundred and fiftv-seven; Fossombrone, one hundred and sixty; Fano, one hundredand seventy-sis.; Pesaro,one hundred and eighty-four; Rimini, two hundred and eight—about one hundred andeighty-nine English miles. He takes no notice of the death of Totila; but Wesseling (Itinerar. p. 614.) ex­changes for the field of Taginas the unknown appellation of Ptanint, eight miles from Nocera.
(2) Taginss, or rather 1 adinse, is mentioned by Pliny; but the bishoprio of that obscure town, a mile fromGualdo, in the plain, was united, in the year 1007, with that of Nocera. The signs of antiquity are preservedin the local appellations, Fossato, the camp Capraia, Caprea, Bastia, Busta Gallortun. See Cluverius (ItaliaAntiqua, lib. it. e. 6. p. 615—617.,) Lucas Holstenius (Annotat. ad Cluver. p. 85,86.,) Guazzesi (Dissertat. p.177—217. a professed inquiry) and the maps of the ecclesiastical state and the march of Ancona, by Le Mai reand Mae/ini.
(3) The battle was fought in the year of Rome 458: and the consul Decius, by devoting his own life, as­sured the triumph of his countrvand his colleague Fabius (T. Liv. 10. 28,29.) Procopius ascribes to Ca-millus the victory of the hmta Gallorum; and his error is branded by Cluverius with the national reproach ofGiKcorum nugamcnta.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 145


2. The obligations of the second class, as they were contracted by the deliveryof a thing, are marked by the civilians with the epithet of real. (1) A grateful re­turn is due to the author of a benefit; and whoever is intrusted with the property ofanother, has bound himself to the sacred duty of restitution. In the case of afriendly loan, the merit of generosity is on the side of the lender only; in a deposite, .on the side of the receiver: but in a pledge, and the rest of the selfish commerceof ordinary life, the benefit is compensated by an equivalent, and the obligation torestore is variously modified by the nature of the transaction. The Latin languagevery happily expresses the fundamental difference between the commodalum andthe mutuum, which our poverty is reduced to confound under the vague and com­mon appellation of a loan. In the former, the borrower was obliged to restore thesame individual thing with which be had been accommodated for the temporarysupply of his wants; in the latter, it was destined for his use and consumption, andhe discharged this mutual engagement, by substituting the same specific value,according to a just estimation of number, of weight, and of measure. In the con­tract of sale, the absolute dominion is transferred to the purchaser, and he repaysthe benefit with an adequate sum of gold or silver, the price and universal standardof all earthly possessions. The obligation of another contract, that of location, isof a more complicated kind. Lands or houses, labour or talents, may be hired fora definite term; at the expiration of the time, the thing itself must be restored tothe owner with an additional reward for the beneficial occupation and employment.In these lucrative contracts, to which may be added those of partnership and com­missions, the civilians sometimes imagine the delivery of the object, and sometimespresume the consent of the parties. The substantial pledge has been refined intothe invisible rights of a mortgage or hyfwtheca; and the agreement of sale, for acertain price, imputes, from that moment, the chances of gain or loss to the ac­count of the purchaser. It may be fairly supposed, that every man will obey thedictates of his interest; and if he accepts the benefit, he is obliged to sustainthe expense, of the transaction. In this boundless subject, the historian will ob­serve the location of land and money, the rent of the one and the interest of the other,as they materially affect the prosperity of agriculture and commerce. The land­lord was often obliged to advance the stock andinstruments of husbandry, and to con­tent himself with a partition of the fruits. If the feeble tenant was oppressed by acci­dent, contagion, or hostile violence, he claimed a proportionable relief from the equi­ty of the laws: five years were the customary term, and no solid or costly improvementscould be expected from a farmer, who, at each moment, might be ejected by thesale of the estate. (2) Usury, (3) the inveterate grievance of the city, had been dis­couraged by the twelve tables, (4) and abolished by the clamours of the people. It■was revived by their wants and idleness, tolerated by the discretion of the pretors,and finally determined by the code of Justinian. Persons of illustrious rank wereconfined to the moderate profit of four per cent.; six was pronounced to be theordinary and legal standard of interest; eight was allowed for the convenience ofmanufacturers and merchants; twelve was granted to nautical ensurance, whichthe wiser ancients had not attempted to define; but except in this perilous adven­ture, the practice of exorbitant usury was severely restrained. (5) The most sim-
beginning of the present century, appear to have studied the civil law on the most just and liberal princi"pies.
(1) The nice and various subject of contracts hy consent is spread over fiiur books (17—20.) of the Pan­dects, and is one of the parts best deserving of the attention of an English student.
(2) The covenants of rent are denned in the Pandects (lib. xix.) and the Code, (lib. is-, tit. 65.) The quin­quennium, or term of five years, appears to have been a custom rather than a law; but in France, all leasesof land were determined in nine years. This limitation was removed only in the year 1775, (EncyclopedicMethodique, torn. i. de la Jurisprudence, p. 668. 669.) and I am sorry to observe that it yet prevails in thebeauteous and happy country where I am permitted to reside.
(3) I might implicitly acquiesce in the sense and learning of the three books of G. Noodt, de ftenore etusuris. (Opp. torn. i. p. 175—268.) The interpretation of the asses or centesimal usurae at twelve, the uncia-riae at one per cent, is maintained by the best critics and civilians; Nnodt. (lib. ii. c. 2. p. 207.) Gravina. (Opp.p. 205, &c. 210.) Heineccius, (Antiquitat. ad Institut. lib. iii. tit. 15.) Montesquieu, (Esprit, des I.oix, lib. xxii.c.22. tom.ii. p. 36. Defense de PEsprit des Loix. torn. iii. p. 478, fee. and above all John Frederic Gronovius,(de Pecunia Veteri, lib. iii. c. 13. p. 213—227.) and his three Antexegeses, (p. 455—655.) the founder, or at leastthe champion of this probable opinion; which is however perplexed with some difficulties.
(4) Prirao duodecim tabulis sancitnm est ne quis uneiario fcenore amplies exerceret. (Tacit. Annal.16.) Pour peu (says Montesquieu, Esprit des Loix, lib. xxii. c. 22.) qu'on soit verse dans I'histoire de Rome,on verra qu'une pareille loi ne devoir pas etre Pouvrage des decemvirs. Was Tacitus ignorant—or stupid?But the wiser and more virtuous patricians might sacrifice their avarice to their ambition, and might attemptto check the odious practice by such interest as no lender would accept, and such penalties as no debtor wouldincur.
(5) Justinian has not condescended to five usury a place in the Institutes; but the necessary rules and restric­tions are inserted in the Pandects, (lib. xxii. til. 1,2.) and the Cede, lib. iv. tit. 32,33.)
Vol. III. 19







OCR Output








166 THE DECLINE AND FALL


i


Italians beheld with astonishment a foreign race of oxen or buffalqes. (1) The de­population of Lombardy, and the increase of forests, affordedtan ample range for"the pleasures of the chase. (2) That marvellous art which teaches the birds ofthe air to acknowledge the voice, and execute the commands, of their master,had been unknown to the ingenuity of the Greeks and Romans.(3) Scandinaviaand Scythia produce the boldest and most tractable falcons;(4) they were tamedand educated by the roving inhabitants, always on horseback and in the field.This favourite amusement of our ancestors was introduced by the barbarians intothe Roman provinces; and the laws of Italy esteem the sword and the hawk as ofequal dignity and importance in the hand of a noble Lombard. (5)
So rapid was the influence of climate and example, that the Lombards of thefourth generation surveyed with curiosity and affright the portraits of their savageforefathers. (6) Their heads were shaven behind, but the shaggy locks hung overtheir eyes and mouth, and a long beard, represented the name and character ofthe nation. Their dress consisted of loose linen garments, after the fashion of theAnglo-Saxons, which were decorated, in their opinion, with broad stripes of va­riegated colours. The legs and feet were clothed in long hose, and open sandals;and even in the security of peace a trusty sword was constantly girt to their side.Yet this strange apparel, and horrid aspect, often concealed a gentle and generousdisposition; and as soon as the rage of battle had subsided, the captives and sub­jects were sometimes surprised by the humanity of the victor. The vices of theLombards were the effect of passion, of ignorance, of intoxication; their virtuesare the more laudable, as they were not affected by the hypocrisy of social manners,nor imposed by the rigid constraint of laws and education. I should not be ap­prehensive of deviating from my subject, if it were in my power to delineate theprivate life of the conquerors of Italy: and I shall relate with pleasure the adven­turous gallantry of Autharis, which breathes the true spirit of chivalry and ro­mance. (7) After the loss of his promised bride, a Merovingian princess, he soughtin marriage the daughter of the king of Bavaria; and the Garibald accepted thealliance of the Italian monarch. Impatient of the slow progress of negotiation,the ardent lover escaped from his palace, and visited the court of Bavaria in thetrain of his own embassy. At the public audience, the unknown stranger ad­vanced to the throne, and informed Garibald, that the ambassador was indeed theminister of state, but that he alone was the friend of Autharis, who had trustedhim with the delicate commission of making a faithful report of the charms of hisspouse. Theudelinda was summoned to undergo this important examination; andafter a pause of silent rapture, he hailed her as queen of Italy, and humbly re­quested, that, according to the custom of the nation, she would present a cup ofwine to the first of her new subjects. By the command of her father, she obeyed;
325.) Gisulf obtained from liis uncle gencrosarnm cquarum grebes. Paul,lib. ii. c. 9. The Lombards after­ward introduced caballi eylvatici—wild horses. Paul, lib. iv. c. 11.
(1) Tunc. (A. D. 596.) primum bubali in Italiam delati Italiae populis miracula tuere (Paul Warnefrid, lib.iv. c. 11.) The buffalof s, whose native climate appears to be Africa and India, are nnknown to Europe, ex­cept in Italy, where they are numerous and useful. The ancients were ignorant of these animals, unlessAristotle (Hist. Animal, lib. ii. c. i. p. 58. Paris, 1783.) has described them as the wild oxen of Arachosia. SeeBuffon, Hist. Naturelle, torn. xi. and supplement, torn. 6; Hist. Generale des Voyages, torn. i. p. 7. 481: ii. 105;iii. 291; iv. 234.461; v. 193; vi. 491; viii. 400; x. 666: Pennant's Quadrupeds, p. 24; Dictionaire d'Hist. Natu-relle, par Valmont de Uomare, torn. ii. p. 74. Vet I must not conceal the suspicion that Paul, by a vulgar er­ror, may have applied the name of bubatus to the aurochs, or wild bull, of ancient Germany.
(2) Consult the twenty-first Dissertation ofMuratori.
(3) Their ignorance is proved by the silence even of those who professedly treat of the arts of hunting andthe history of animals. Aristotle (Hist. Animal, lib. ix. c. 56. torn. i. p. 586. and the notes of his last editor, M.Camus, torn. ii. p. 314.,) Pliny (Hist. Natur. lib. x. c. 10.) .Elian, (de Natur. Animal, lib. ii. c. 42.,) and perhapsHomer (Odyss. xxii. 302—306.) describes with astonishment a tacit league and common chase between thehawks and the Thracian fowiers.
(4) Particularly the gerfaut or gyrfalcon, of the size of a small eagle. See the animated description of M.tie Buffon, Hist. Katnrelle, torn. xvi. p. 239, &c,
(5) Script. Rerum. Italicarum, torn. i. part 2. p. 129. This is the sixteenth law of the emperor Lewis thePious. His father Charlemagne had falconers in his household as well as huntsmen; (Memoires snr I'AncienneChevalerie, par M. de St. Pelaye, torn. iii. p. 175.) I observe in the laws of Rotharis a more early mention ofthe art of hawking (No. 322.) and in Gaul, in the fifth century, it is celebrated by Sidonius Apollinaris amonrthe talents of Avitus (202—207,) .Sw*
(6) The epitaph of Droctulf (Paul, lib. iii. c. 19.) may BsSlrplicd to ninny of his countrymen:
Terribilis visu facies, sed corda benignusLongaque robusto pectore barba fuit.
The portraits of the old Lombards might still be seen in the palace of Monza, twelve miles from Milanwhich had been founded or restored by queen Theudelinda (lib. iv. 22, 23. See Muratori, torn. i. dissertaz.*
13. p. 360.
(7) The story of Autharis and Theudelinda is related by Paul, lib. iii. c. 29. 34. and any fragment of Bava­rian antiquity excites the indefatigable diligence of the count de Buat. Hist, ties Pennies de 1'Eurone, torn, xip. 595—635, torn. xii. p. 1—53. ' '







OCR Output








THE


HISTORY
OF THE
DECLINE AND FALL
OF
THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


CHAPTER XL.


Elevation of Justin the Elder.—Reign of Justinian—I. Tlie Empress Theodora.—II.Factions of the Circup, and Sedition of Constantinople.—77/ Trade and Manufactureoj'Silk.—IV. Finances and Taxes.—V. Edifices of Justinian.—Church of St. Sophia.
fortifications and Frontiers of the Eastern Empire ibolilion of the Schools of Athens,
and the Consulship of Home.
The emperor Justinian was born(l) near the ruins of Sardica (the modern So­phia,) of an obscure race(2) of barbarians,(3) the inhabitants of a wild and deso­late country, to which the names of Dardania, of Dacia, and of Bulgaria, havebeen successively applied. His elevation was prepared by the adventurous spiritof his uncle Justin, who, with two other peasants of the same village, deserted forthe profession of arms, the more useful employment of husbandmen or shep­herds. (4) On foot, with a scanty provision of biscuit in their knapsacks, the threeyouths followed the high road to Constantinople, and were soon enrolled, for theirstrength and stature, among the guards of the emperor Leo. Under the two suc­ceeding reigns, the fortunate peasant emerged to wealth and honours; and his es­cape from some dangers which threatened his life, was afterward ascribed to theguardian angel who watches over the fate of kings. His long and laudable servicein the Isaurian and Persian wars, would not have preserved from oblivion the nameof Justin; yet they might warrant the military promotion, which in the course offifty years he gradually obtained the rank of tribune, of count, and of general, thedignity of senator, and the command of the guards, who obeyed him as their chief,at the important crisis when the emperor Anastasius was removed from the world.The powerful kinsmen, whom he had raised and enriched, were excluded fromthe throne; and the eunuch Amantius, who reigned in the palace, had secretlyresolved to fix the diadem on the head of the most obsequious of his creatures. Aliberal donative, to conciliate the suffrage of the guards, was intrusted for that pur­pose in the hands of their commander. But these weighty arguments were trea­cherously employed by Justin in his own favour; and as no competitor presumedto appear, the Dacian peasant was invested with the purple, by the unanimousconsent of the soldiers, who knew him to be brave and gentle; of the clergy andpeople, who believed him to be orthodox, and of the provincials, who yielded ablind and implicit submission to the will of the capital. The elder Justin, as he is
(1) There is some difficulty in the date of his birth (Ludewig in Vit. Jnitiniani, p. 125.:) none in the place—the district Bederiana—the village Tauresiura, which he decorated wW> his name and splendour (D'Anvitle,Hist, de P Acad., he. torn. xxai. p. 287.292.
(2) The names of these Dardanian peasants are Gothic, and almoit English; Jusliuian is a translation of up.rautla (upright;) his father Sttuitiui (in Grssco barbarous language stripe!,) was styled in bis silfcuje /,'«*(Stock;) his mother Bigleniza was softened into Vigilantia.
(3) Ludewig (p. 127—13J.) attempts to justify the Anician name of Justinian and Theodora, and to connectthem with a family, from which the house of Austria has been derived.
(4) See the anecdotes of Procopius (c. 0.) with the notes of N. Alemannus. The satirist would not havesunk, in the vague and decent appellation of yi*pyor, the fovxtyo; and (ro^opgo? of Zonaras. Yet why aaethose names disgraceful!—and what German baron would not be proud to descend from the Eumttus of theOdymy?







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 319


marked in the style of the Old and New Testament. Bat Mahomet was contentwith a character, more humble, yet more sublime, of a simple editor; the sub­stance of the Koran,(l) according to himself or his disciples, is uncreated andeternal; subsisting in the essence of the Deity, and inscribed with a pen of lighton the table of his everlasting decrees. A paper copy in a volume of silk andgems, was brought down to the lowest heaven by the angel Gabriel, who, underthe Jewish economy, had indeed been despatched on the most important errands;and this trusty messenger successively revealed the chapters and verses to theArabian prophet. Instead of a perpetual and perfect measure of the divine will,the fragments of the Koran were produced at the discretion of Mahomet; eachrevelation is suited to the emergencies of his policy or passion; and all contradic­tion is removed by the saving maxim, that any text of Scripture is abrogated ormodified by any subsequent passage. The word of God, and of the apostle, wasdiligently recorded by his disciples on palm leaves and the shoulder bones of mut­ton; and the pages, without order or connexion, were cast into a domestic chest inthe custody of one of his wives. Two years after the death of Mahomet, the sa­cred volume was collected and published by his friend and successor Abubeker:the work was revised by the caliph Othman, in the thirtieth year of the Hegira;and the various editions of the Koran assert the same miraculous privilege of auniform and incorruptible text. In the spirit of enthusiasm or vanity, the pro-
Ehet rests the truth of his mission on the merit of his book, audaciously challengesoth men and angels to imitate the beauties of a single page, and presumes to as­sert that God alone could dictate this incomparable performance. (2) This argu­ment is most powerfully addressed to a devout Arabian, whose mind is attuned tofaith and rapture, whose ear is delighted by the music ef sounds, and whose igno­rance is incapable of comparing the productions of human genius. (3) The har­mony and copiousness of style will not reach, in a version, the European infidel:he will peruse with impatience the endless incoherent rhapsody of fable, and pre­cept, and declamation, which seldom excites a sentiment or an idea, which some­times crawls in the dust, and is sometimes lost in the clouds. The divine attri­butes exalt the fancy of the Arabian missionary; but his loftiest strains must yieldto the sublime simplicity of the book of Job, composed in a remote age, in thesame country and in the same language. (4) If the composition of the Koran ex­ceed the faculties of a man, to what superior intelligence should we ascribe theIliad of Homer or the Philippics of Demosthenes ? In all religions, the life ofthe founder supplies the silence of his written revelation: the sayings of Mahometwere so many lessons of truth; his actions so many examples of virtue; and thepublic and private memorials were preserved by his wives and companions. Atthe end of two hundred years, the Sonna, or oral law, was fixed and consecratedby the labours of Al Bochari, who discriminated seven thousand two hundred andseventy-five traditions, from a mass of three hundred thousand reports, of a moredoubtful or spurious character. Each day the pious author prayed in the templeof Mecca, and performed his ablutions with the water of Zemzem; the pages weresuccessively deposited on the pulpit, and the sepulchre of the apostle; and thework has been approved by the four orthodox sects of the Sonnites.(5)
The mission of the ancient prophets, of Moses, and of Jesus, had been con­firmed by many splendid prodigies; and Mahomet was repeatedly urged, by theinhabitants of Mecca and Medina, to produce a similar evidence of his divine le­gation; to call down from heaven the angel or the volume of his revelation, tocreate a garden in the desert, or to kindle a conflagration in the unbelieving city.As often as he is pressed by the demands of the Koreish, he involves himself inthe obscure boast of vision and prophecy, appeals to the internal proofs of his doc­trine, and shields himself behind the providence of God, who refuses those signsand wonders that would depreciate the merit of faith and aggravate the guilt of
(1) For the Koran, see d'llerbelot, p. 85—38. Maracci, torn. i. in. Vit. Mohammed, p. 32—45. Sale, Prelimi­nary Discourse, p. 56—70.
(2) Koran, c. 17. 5. 89. In Sale, p. 235,230. In Maracci, p. 410.
(3) Yet a sect of Arabians were persuaded, that it might be equalled or surpassed by a human pen (Pocock,,Specimen, p. 221. Sec.;) and Maracci (the polemic is too hard for the translator) derides the rhyming affectationof the most applauded passage (lorn. i. part ii. p. 69—75,)
(4) Cotloquia (whether real or fabulous) in media Arabia atque nb Arabibns habtta. (Lowth, de Poesi Hebrae-oram Pralect. 32—34. with his German editor Michaelis, Epimetron iv.) Yet Michaelis (p. 671—673.) has de­tected many Egyptian imatres, the elephantiasis, papyrus, Nile, crocodile. Sec. The language is ambiguouslystyled, Arabico-Hebrma. The resemhlance of the sister dialects was much more visible in their childhood thanin their mature age. (Michaelis, p. 682. Schultens, in Pnelat. .lob.)
(5) Al Bochari died A. H. 221. See d'Herbelot, p. 208. 41S. 827. Gagnicr, Not. ad Abulftd. e. 1°. p. 33.







OCR Output








320 THE DECLINE AND FALL


infidelity. But the modest or angry tone of his apologies betrays his weakness andvexation; and these passages of scandal, establish beyond suspicion, the integrityof the Koran. (1) 1 he votaries of Mahomet are more assured than himself of hismiraculous gifts, and their confidence and credulity increase as they are fartherremoved from the time and place of his spiritual exploits. They believe or affirmthat trees went forth to meet him: that he was saluted by stones; that watergushed from his fingers; that he fed the hungry, cured the sick, and raised thedead; that a beam groaned to him; that a camel complained to him; that a shoul­der of mutton informed him of its heing poisoned; and that both animate and in­animate nature were equally subject to the apostle of God.(2> His dream of anocturnal journey is seriously described as a real and corporeal transaction. Amysterious animal, the borak, conveyed him from the temple of Mecca to that ofJerusalem, with his companion Gabriel, he successively ascended the seven hea­vens, and received and repaid the salutations of the patriarchs, the prophets, andthe angels, in their respective mansions. Beyond the seventh heaven, Mahometalone was permitted to proceed: he passed the veil of unity, approached withintwo bow-shots of the throne, and felt a cold that pierced him to the heart, whenhis shoulder was touched by the hand of God. After this familiar, though im­portant conversation, he again descended to Jerusalem, remounted the borak, re­turned to Mecca, and performed in the tenth part of a night, the journey of manythousand years. (3) According to another legend, the apostle confounded in a na­tional assembly the malicious challenge of the Koreish. His resistless word splitasunder the orb of the moon: the obedient planet stooped from her station in thesky, accomplished the seven revolutions round the Caaba, saluted Mahomet inthe Arabian tongue, and suddenly contracting her dimensions, entered at the col­lar, and issued forth through the sleeve, of his shirt. (4) The vulgar are amusedwith these marvellous tales; but the gravest of the Mussulman doctors imitate themodesty of their master, and indulge a latitude of faith or interpretation. (5)They might speciously allege, that in preaching the religion, it was needless toviolate the harmony, of nature; that a creed unclouded with mystery, may be ex­cused from miracles; and that the sword of Mahomet was not less potent than the.rod of Moses.
The polytheist is oppressed and distracted by the variety of superstition: athousand rites of Egyptian origin were interwoven with the essence of the Mosaiclaw; and the spirit of the gospel had evaporated in the pageantry of the church.The prophet of Mecca was tempted by prejudice, or policy, or patriotism, tosanctify the rites of the Arabians, and the custom of visiting the holy stone of theCaaba. But the precepts of Mahomet himself inculcate a more simple and ra­tional piety: prayer, fasting and alms, are the religious duties of a Mussulman; andhe is encouraged to hope, that prayer will carry him half way to God, fasting willbring him to the door of his palace, and alms will gain him admittance. (6) J.
(1) See more remarkably, Koran, c. 2. 6.12,13.17. Prideaux (Life of Mahomet, p. 18,19.) has confoundedthe impostor, Maracci, with a more learned apparatus, has shown that the passages which deny his miraclesnre clear and positive, (Alcoran, torn. i. part si. p. 7—12.) and those which seem to assert them, are ambiguousand insufficient, (p. 12—22.)
(2) See the Specimen Hisr. Arabum. the text of Abulpharagius, p. 17. the notes of Pocock, p_. 187—190.d'HerbelotBibliothequeOrientale, p. 76,77. Voyages de Chardin. torn. iv. p. 200—203. Maracci (Alcoran,torn. i. p. 22—64.) has most laboriously collected and confuted the miracles and prophecies of Mahomet, which,according to some writers, amount to three thousand.
(3) The nocturnal journey is circumstantially related by Abulfeda (in Vit. Mahommed, c. 19. p. 33.,) whowishes to think it a vision; by Prideaux (p. i. 40.) who aggravates the absurdities; and by Gagnier (torn. i. p.252—343.), who declares, from the zealous Ali Jannabi, that to deny this journey is to disbelieve the Koran."Yet the Koran, without naming either heaven, or Jerusalem, or Mecca, has only dropped a mysterious him:Lauiilli qui transtulitservum suum ab oratorio Haram ad oratorium rerootissimum (Koran, e. zvii. 5.1. inMaracci, torn. ii. p. 407. for Sale's version is more licentious.) A slender basis for the aeriel structure of tradi­tion.
(4) In the prophetic style, which uses the present or past for the future, Mahomet had said,—Appropinqua.vit hora et scissa est luna (Koran, c 54.5. 1. in Maracci, torn. ii. p. 688.) This figure of rhetoric has been con­verted into a fact, which is said to be attested by the most respectable eye-witnesses (Maracci, torn. ii. p. 690.)The festival is still celebrated by the Persians (Chardin, torn. iv. p. 201.0 and the legend is tediously spun outby Gagnier (Vie de Mahomet, torn. i. p. 183—234,) on the faith, as it should seem, of the credulous Ali Jannabi.Yet a Mahometan doctor has arraigned the credit of the principal witness (apud Pocock, Specimen, p. 187.;)the best interpreters are content with the simple sense of the Koran ( Al Beidawi, apud Hottinger, Hist. Orient,lib. ii. p. 302; and the silence of Abulfeda is worthy of a prince and a philosopher.
(5) Abulpharagius, in Specimen. Hist. Arab. p. 17. and his scepticism is justified in the notes of Pocock, p.190—194. from the purest authorities.
(4) The most authentic account of these precepts, pilgrimage, prayer, fasting, alms, and ablutions, is ex­tracted from the Persian and Arabian theologians by Maracci (Prodrom, part iv. p. 9—24.) Behind, (in his et-cellent treatise de Religione Mohammedica, Utrecht, 1717, p. 67—123.) and Chardin, (Voyages rn Perse, torn,iv. p. 47—195.) Maracci is a partial accuser; but the jeweller, Chardin, had the eves of a philosopher: andBehind, a judicious student, had travelled over the east in his closet at Utrecht.' The fourteenth letter of







OCR Output








1


1


 







OCR Output








*16 'l&E DECLINE; AliB FAlX


united and concealed by an oath of secrecy. After a bloody conflict, rthey prevailedin the province of Bahrein, along the Persian gulf: far and wide, the tribes of the -desert were subject to the sceptre, or rather to the sword, of Abu Said and his sonAbu Taher; and these rebellious imams could muster in the field a hundred andseven thousand fanatics. The mercenaries of the caliph were dismayed at theapproach of an enemy who neither asked nor accepted quarter; and the differencebetween them in fortitude and patience, is expressive of the change which threecenturies of prosperity had effected In the character of the Arabians. Suchtroops were discomfited in every action; the cities of Racca and Baalbec, of Cufaand Bassora, were taken and pillaged; Bagdad was filled with consternation; andthe caliph trembled behind the veils of his palace. In a daring inroad beyond theTigris, Abu Taher advanced to the gates of the capital with no more than fivehundred horse. By the special order of Moctader, the bridges had been brokendown, and the person or head of the rebel was expected every hour by the com­mander of the faithful. His lieutenant, from a motive of fear or pity, apprizedAbu Taher of his danger, and recommended a speedy escape. " Your master,"«aid the intrepid Carmathian to the messenger, " is at the head of thirty thousandsoldiers: three such men as these are wanting in his host;" at the same instant,turning to three of his companions, he commanded the first to plunge a daggerinto his breast, the second to leap into the Tigris, and the third to cast himselfheadlong down a precipice. They obeyed without a murmur. " Relate," con­tinued the imam, " what you have seen: before the evening your general shall bechained among my dogs." Before the evening, the camp was surprised and themenace was executed. The rapine of the Carmathians was sanctified by theiraversion to,the worship of Mecca; they robbed a caravan of pilgrims, and twentythousand devout Moslems were abandoned on the burning sands to a death ofhunger and thirst. Another year they suffered the pilgrims to proceed withoutinterruption; but, in the festival of devotion, Abu Taher stormed the holy city,and trampled on the most venerable relics of the Mahometan faith. Thirty thou­sand citizens and strangers were put to the sword; the sacred precincts were pol­luted by the burial of three thousand dead bodies; the well of Zemzem overflowedwith blood; the golden spout was forced from its place; the veil of the Caaba wasdivided among these impious sectaries; and the black stone, the first monumentof the nation, was borne away in triumph to their capital. After this deed of sa­crilege and cruelty, they continued to infest the confines of Irak, Syria, and Egypt;but the vital principle of enthusiasm had withered at the root. Their scruples ortheir avarice again opened the pilgrimage of Mecca, and restored the black stoneof the Caaba; and it is needless to inquire into what factions they were broken, orby whose swords they were finally extirpated. The sect of the Carmathians maybe considered as the second visible cause of the decline and fall of the empire ofthe caliphs.(l)
The third and most obvious cause was the weight and magnitude of the empireitself. The caliph Almamon might proudly assert, that it was easier for him torule the east and the west, than to manage a chess board of two feet square;(2)yet I suspect, that in both those games he was guilty ofrnany fatal mistakes; andI perceive, that in the distant provinces the authority of the first and most power­ful of the Abbassides was already impaired. The analogy of despotism invests therepresentative with the full majesty of the prince; the division and balance ofpowers might relax the habits of obedience, might encourage the passive subje'etto inquire into the origin and administration of civil government. He who is bornin the purple is seldom worthy to reign; but the elevation of a private man, of apeasant perhaps, or a slave, affords a strong presumption of his courage and capa­city. 'I he viceroy of a remote kingdom aspires to secure the property and inhe­ritance of his precarious trust; the nations must rejoice in the presence of theirsovereign; and the command of armies and treasures are at once the object and theinstrument of his ambition. A change was scarcely visible as long as the lieute­nants of the caliph were content with their vicarious title; while they solicited forthemselves or their sons a renewal of the imperial grant, and still maintained onthe coin, and in the public prayers, the name and prerogative of the commander
(0 For tlte sect of the Carmathians, consult Elraacin, (Hist. Saracen, p. 210—324. 229. 231. 238. 941. 2*3.)Abnlpharagius, fDynast, p. 179—182.) Abulfcda. (Annal. Moslem, p. 218, 219, &c. 245.285. 274) and d'Hfr-lielot, (Bibliotheque Orientale,p. 259—258. B35.) I find some inconsistencies of theoloiry and chronology, vhijui' wonld not be easy nor of much importance to reconcile.t (2) Hyde, Syntagma nisrettatton. ii. T>. 57. in Hist. ShaWlinliJ.







OCR Output








CONTENTS.


I'AIJR
307
308
:w
310
31 ]
ib.
312
ih.
313
ib.
314
315
ib.
ib.
ih.
316
ib.
317:
318
339
ib
ib.
320


A. D.
Her trade
National independence of the Arabs
Their domestic f reedom and character
Civil wars and private revenge
Annual truce
Their social qualifications and virtues
Dove of poetry
Examples of generosity
Ancient idolatry .
The Caaba, or temple of Mecca
Sacrifices and rites
Introduction of the Sabians
The JI a grans
The Jews
The Christians
562—609 Mirth and education of Mahomet
Deliverance of Mecca
Qualifications of the prophet
One God
Mahomet, the apostle of God, and the last oj
the prophets
Moses
Jesus •
The Koran .
Miracles . .
Precepts of Mahomet—prayer, fasting, alms 322
Resurrection . . 323
Hell and paradise . . ib.
609 Mahomet preaches at Mecca ■ 324
ti13—622 /* opposed by the Korcish ■ . ib
622 And driven from Mecca . ■ ib.
622 Received as prince of Medina - 325
622— 632 His regal dignity . . ib
He declares war against the infidels . ib
His defensive war against the Korcish of
Mecca . . . . «■
623 Battle of Beder .
Of Ohud ....
625 The nations, or the ditch
623— 627 Mahomet subdues the Jews of Arabia
529 Submission of Mecca
619—632 Conquest of Arabia
629—630 First war of the Mahometans against the
Roman empire
632 Death of Mahomet
His character
Private life of Mahomet
His wives . . •
And children
Character of AH632 Reign of Abubeker
634 of Omar
644 ofOthman
Discord of the Turks and Persians
655 Death of Othman
655-060 Reign of Ali
655, or 661—680 Reign of Moawiyah
680 Death of Hoscin
Posterity of Mahomet and Ali
Success o£ Maliomet
Permanency of his religion
His merit toward his country


ib
327
ib
ib.
325
ib


3303313:12
tl>.333
ib.
:i:i4ib.ib.:m
ib.
336
337
ib.
338
ib
ib.
33!)


CHATTER LI.
The Conquest of Persia, Syria, Egypt, Africa, and
Spain, by the Arabs or Saracens—Empire of the
Caliphs, or Successors of Mahomet—State of the
Christians, &c. under their government.
A.D. pack
632 Union of the Arabs . . 340
Character of their Caliphs i . ib.
Their conquests . 341
invasion of Persia . ib.
636 Battle of Cadesia . . 342
Foundation of Bassora ib.
637 Sack of Madayn . . . ib.
Foundation of Cnfa . ' 343
637-651 Conquest of Persia . ib.
651 Death of the last king . . 344
810 The conquest of Transoxiana . 345
632 Invasion of Syria . 346
Siege of Bosra ■ . 347
633 of Damascus . 348
633 Rattle of Aiznadin . 349
The Arabs return to Damascus 11


A. D. PACK
634 The city is taken by storm and capitulation 351
Pursuit of the Damascenes . 352
Fair of Abyla . . 353
635 Sieges of Heliopolis and Emesa . ib.
636 Battle of Yermuk . . .354
637 Conquest of Jerusalem . . 355
638 of Alej>po and Anttoch 350
Flight of Hcraclius . 357
End of the Syrian war . . ib.
633, 639 The conquerors of Syria 358
639, 655 Progress of the Syrian conquerors ib.
Egypt. Character and life of Amrou . 359
638 Invasion of Egypt . . 360
The cities of Memphis, Babylon, and Cairo 361
Voluntary submissiuji of the Copts or Ja­
cobites .... 363
Siege and conquest of Alexandria . 363
The Alexandrian library . . 364
Administration of Egypt . 365
Riches and populousncss . ib.
647 Africa. First invasion by Abdullah 367
The Prefect Gregory and his daughter ib.
Victory of the Arabs . 368
665, 689 Progress of the Saracens in Africa 369
610, 675 Foundation of Cairoan 370
BBS, 698 Conquest of Carthogc . . 371
698, 709 Final conquest of Africa ■ " 372
Adoption of the Moors . ib.
709 Spain. First temptations and designs of the
Arabs . . .373
State of the Gothic monarchy . ib.
710 The first descent of the Arabs . 374
711 Their second descent and victory ib.
Ruin of the Gothic monarchy . ib.
712, 713 Conquest of Spain by Musu . 375
714 Disgrace of Musa . 376
Prosperity of Spain under the Arabs 377
Religious toleration . . ib.
Propagation of Mahometanism ib
Fall of the Magians of Persia 378
749 Decline and fall of Christianity in Africa ib.
1149 And Spain ... 379
Toleration of the Christians . ib.
Their hardships . . 380
718 The empire of the caliphs . . ib.
CHAPTER MI.The Two Sieges of Constantinople by the Arabs—Their Invasion of France, and Defeat by CharlesMuriel—Civil War of the Ommiadcs and Abbawsides—Learning of the Arabs—Luxury of the Ca­liphs—Naval Enterprises on Crete, Sicily, and Home—Decay and Division of the Empire of the Caliphs—Defeats and Victories of the Greek Emperors.
A. D. PAGE
The limits of the Arabian conquests 381
668—675 First siege of Constantinople by tftc
Arabs . . . ib.
677 Peace and tribute . , 382
716—718 Second siege of Constantinople ib.
Failure and retreat of the Saracens 383
Invention and use of the Greek fire ib.
721 Invasion of France by the Arabs . 384
731 Expedition and victories of Abdcrame ib.
732 Defeat of the Saracens by Charles Martcl 365They retreat before the Franks ib.
746—750 Elevation of the Abbassides ib.
753 hall of the Ommiadcs . . 386
755 Revolt of Spain ib
Triple division of the. Caliphate . ib.
750—960 Magnificence of the Caliphs 387
Its consequences on private and public happi­
ness .... ib.
734, Src. 813, tec. Introduction of learning among
the Arabians . . 388
Their real progress in the sciences . 389
Want of erudition, taste, and freedom 390
781,805 Wars of Harun al Rashid against the.
Romans . 391
823 The Arabs subdue the Isle of Crete 399
827—878 And of Sicily . . ib.
846 Invasion of Rome by the Saracens . 393
849 Victory and reign of Leo IF. . ib.
852 Foundation of the Leonine city . 394
838 Amorian war between Thcophalus and Motas-
sum . ■ * * ib







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


were seated on the right hand of God; but the gracious, and often supernatural fa­vours, which in the popular belief were showered round their tomb, conveyed anunquestionable sanction of the devout pilgrims, who visited, and touched, andkissed these lifeless remains, the memorials of their merits and sufferings. (1) Buta memorial, more interesting than the skull or the scandals of a departed worthy,is a faithful copy of his person and features, delineated by the arts of painting orsculpture. In every age, such copies, so congenial to human feelings, have beencherished by the zeal of private Iriendship, or public esteem: the images of theRoman emperors were adored with civil and almost religious honours; a reverenceless ostentatious, but more sincere, was applied to the statues of sages and patriots;and these profane virtues, these splendid sins, disappeared in the presence of theholy men, who had died for their celestial and everlasting country. At first theexperiment was made with caution and scruple; and the venerable pictures werediscreetly allowed to instruct the ignorant, to awaken the cold, and to gratify theprejudices of the heathen proselytes. By a slow though inevitable progression,the honours of the original were transferred to the copy: the devout Christianprayed before the image of a saint: and the pagan rites of genuflexion, luminaries,and incense, again stole into the catholic church. The scruples of reason or piety,were silenced by the strong evidence of visions and miracles; and the pictures whichspeak, and move, and bleed, must be endowed with a divine energy, and may beconsidered as the proper objects of religious adoration. The most audacious pencilmight tremble in the rash attempt of defining, by forms and colours, the infinite Spi­rit of the eternal Father, who pervades and sustains the universe.(2) But the super­stitious mind was more easily reconciled to paint and to worship the angels, and,above all, the Son of God, under the human shape, which, on earth, they have con­descended to assume. The second person of the Trinity had been clothed with areal and mortal body; but that body had ascended into heaven, and, had not some si­militude been presented to the eyes of his disciples, the spiritual worship of Christmight have been obliterated by the visible relics and representations of the saints. Asimilar indulgence was requisite, and propitious, for the Virgin Mary: the place ofher burial was unknown; and the assumption of her soul and body into heaven wasadopted by the credulity of the Greeks and Latins. The use, and even the wor­ship of images, was firmly established before the end of the sixth century; theywere fondly cherished by the warm imagination of the Greeks and Asiatics; thePantheon and Vatican were adorned with the emblems of a new superstition; butthis semblance of idolatry was more coldly entertained by the rude, barbarians andthe Arian clergy of the west. The bolder forms of sculpture, in brass or marble,which peopled the temples of antiquity, were offensive to the fancy or conscienceof the Christian Greeks; and a smooth surface of colours has ever been-esteemeda more decent and harmless mode of imitation. (S)
The merit and effect of a copy depend on its resemblance with the original; butthe primitive Christians were ignorant of the genuine features of the Son of God,his mother and his apostles: the statue of Christ at Paneas in Palestine(4) was moreprobably that of some temporal saviour; the Gnostics and their profane monuments,were reprobated; and the fancy of the Christian artists could only be guided by theclandestine imitation of some heathen model. In this distress, a bold and dexterousinvention assured at once the likeness of the image and the innocence of the wor­ship. A new superstructure of fable was raised on the popular basis of a Syrianlegend, on the correspondence of Christ and Abgarus, so famous in the days ofEusebius, so reluctantly deserted by our modern advocates. The bishop of
(t) See ibis history, vol. ii. p. 4S0. vol. iii. p. 147. 478—487.)
(3) Ou yoq to ©itov u;rXouv xcet te^jiToi/ uipcjxi, tinwi T-xjfiuvriv ces-.ucx^ou: vi. Our; joipw Jt*» JjuA-aif rnv uwipavrtavx»» nyitmxpys"1 ov<r*xv n/xav ilms SuyvMapuv. (Concilium Nicenum, ii. in Collect. Labb. torn. viii. p. 1025. edit.Venet.) II seroit pentetre a-propos de ne point souflVir d'images de la Trinite ou de la Divinite; les defensenrsles plus 7-elei del images ayant condamne celles ci, et le conciie de Trente ne parlant que des images de JesusChrist et des saints. (Dupin. Bibliot. Eceles. torn. vi. p. 1S4.)
(3) This general history of images is drawn from the twenty-second book of the Hist, des Ea:lise Reforroeesof Basnage, torn. ii. p. 1310—1337. He was a protestant, but of a manly spirit; and on this bead the protestantsare so notoriously in the right, that they can venture to be impartial.) See the perplexity of poor Friar l'agi,Critica. torn. i. p. 42.
(4) After removing some rubbish of miracle and inconsistency, it may be allowed, that as late as the year360, Paneas in Palestine was decorated with a bronze statue, representing a grave personage wrapt in a cloak,with a grateful or suppliant female kneeling before him;—and that an inscription—to» Zmrt-p* tu> £u£py£T>r,—wasperhaps inscribed on the pedestal. By the Christians, this groupe was foolishly explained of their founder andthe poor woman whom he had cured of the bloody-flux. (Euseb. vii. 18. Philostorg. 7. 3, &c.) M. de Reau-eoure more reasonably conjectures the philosopher Apollonius, or the emperor Vespasian: in the latter suppo­sition, the female is a city, a province, or perhaps the queen Berenice. (Bibtiotheque G.ermanique, torn,. siji,
I—P2.)







OCR Output








3.56 THE DECLINE AND FALL


gem, obtained the object of his desires. War was the consequence which he fore­saw and solicitedj but the Lombards could not long withstand the furious assault ofthe Gepidsc, who were sustained by a Roman army. And as the offer of mar­riage was rejected with contempt, Alboin was compelled to relinquish his prey, andto partake of th6 disgrace which he had inflicted on the house of Cunimund.(l)
When a public quarrel is envenomed by private injuries, a blow that is not mor­tal or decisive can be productive only of a short truce, which allows the unsuccess­ful combatant to sharpen his arms for a new encounter. The strength of Alboinhad been found unequal to the gratification of his love, ambition, and revenge: hecondescended to implore the formidable aid of the chagan; and the arguments thathe employed are expressive of the art and policy of the barbarians. In the attackof the Gepidx, he had been prompted by the just desire of extirpating a people,whom their alliance with the Roman empire had rendered the common enemies ofthe nations, and the personal adversaries of the chagan. If the forces of the Avarsand the Lombards should unite in this glorious quarrel, the victory was secure, andthe reward inestimable: the Danube, the Hebrus, Italy, and Constantinople, wouldbe exposed, without a barrier, to their invincible arms. But if they hesitated ordelayed to prevent the malice of the Romans, the same spirit which had insulted,would pursue the Avars to the extremity of the earth. These specious reasonswere heard by the chagan with coldness and disdain: he detained the Lombardambassadors in his camp, protracted the negotiation, and by turns alleged his wantof inclination, or his want of ability, to undertake this important enterprise. Atlength he signified the ultimate price of his alliance, that the Lombards should im­mediately present him with the tithe of their cattle; that the spoils and captivesshould be equally divided; but that the lands of the Gepidx should become the solepatrimony of the Avars. Such hard conditions were eagerly accepted by the pas­sions of Alboin; and as the Romans were dissatisfied with the ingratitude and per­fidy of the Gepida:, Justin abandoned that incorrigible people to their fate, and re­mained the tranquil spectator of this unequal conflict. The despair of Cunimundwas active and dangerous. He was informed that the Avars had entered his con­fines; but on the strong assurance, that, after the defeat of the Lombards, the fo­reign invaders would, easily be repelled, he rushed forward to encounter the im­placable enemy of his name and family. But the courage of the Gepidie could se­cure them no'more than an honourable death. The bravest of the nation fell inthe field of battle; the king of the Lombards contemplated with delight the headof Cunimund; and his skull was fashioned into a cup, to satiate the hatred of theconqueror, or, perhaps, to comply with the savage custom of his country. (2) Af­ter this victory, no farther obstacle could impede the progress of the confederates,and they faithfully executed the terms of their agreement. (3) The fair countries ofWalachia, Moldavia, Transylvania, and the parts of Hungary beyond the Danube,were occupied, without resistance, by a new colony of Scythians: and the Dacianempire of the chagans subsisted with splendour above two hundred and thirty year?.The nation of the Gepidx was dissolved; but, in the distribution of the captives,the slaves of the Avars were less fortunate than the companions of the Lombards,whose generosity adopted a valiant foe, and whose freedom was incompatible withcool and deliberate tyranny. One moiety of the spoil introduced into the camp ofAlboin more wealth than a barbarian could readily compute. The fair Rosa­mond was persuaded, or compelled, to acknowledge the rights of her victoriouslover; and the daughter of Cunimond appeared to forgive those crimes whichmight be imputed to her own irresistible charms.
The destruction of a mighty kingdom established the fame of Alboin. In thedays of Charlemagne, the Bavarians, the Saxons, and the other tribes of theTeutonic language, still repeated the songs which described the heroic virtues,the valour, liberality, and fortune of the king of the Lombards.(4) But his am-
(1) The story is told by an impostor. (Theophylact. Symocat. lib. vi. c. 10.) but he had art enough to buildhis fictions on public and notorious facts.
(2) It appeara from Strabo, Pliny, and Ammianus Marcellinus, that the same practice was common amongthe Scythian tribes, rM uratori. Scriptores Rer. Italic, torn. i. p. 424.) The scalps of North America are like­wise trophies of valour. The skull of Cunimund was preserved above two hundred years among; theIiombards: and Paul himself was one of the guests to whom duke Ratchis exhibited this cup on a high fes­tival, f lib. ii. c. 28.)
(3) Paul. lib. i. c. 27. Menander. in Eicerp. Legat. p. 110,111.)
(4) Ut hactenns etiam tain apud Bajoariorura gentem, quain et Saxonum,sed et alios pjusdem lingua; he-mines - - - - in eorum carminibns celebretur. Paul. lib. i. e. 27. He died A. D. 799. (Muratori, in Prafat.torn. i. p. 397.) These Gt-rman songs, some of which might be as old as Tacitus, (de Moribus Germ. c. 20were compiled and transcribed by Charlemagne. Barbara et antiquissima carmfno, quibus veterum regum,







OCR Output













OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 263


tes and the Tigris, the dominion of Syria, and the conquest of Jerusalam, the threadof his life and of the public felicity was broken by a singular accident. He huntedthe wild boar in the valley of Anazarbus, and had fixed his javelin in the bodyof the furious animal: but, in the struggle, a poisoned arrow dropped from hisquiver, and a slight wound in his hand, which produced a mortification, was fatalto the best and greatest of the Comnenian princes.
A premature death had swept away the two eldest sons of John the Handsome;of the two survivors, Isaac and Manuel, his judgment or affection preferred theyounger; and the choice of the dying prince was ratified by the soldiers who hadapplauded the valour of the favourite in his Turkish war. The faithful Axuchhastened to the capital, secured the person of Isaac in honourable confinement,and purchased with a gift of two hundred pounds of silver, the leading ecclesiasticsof St. Sophia, who possessed a decisive voice in the consecration of an emperor.With his veteran and affectionate troops, Manuel soon visited Constantinople; hisbrother acquiesced in the title of Sebastocrator; his subjects admired the loftystature and martial graces of their new sovereign, and listened with credulity tothe flattering promise, that he blended the wisdom of age with the activity andvigour of youth. By the experience of his government, they were taught, that heemulated the spirit, and shared the talents of his father, whose social virtues wereburied in the grave. A reign of thirty-seven years is filled by a perpetual thoughvarious warfare against the Turks, the Christians, and the hordes of the wilder­ness beyond the Danube. The arms of Manuel were exercised on mount Taurus,in the plains of Hungary, on the coast of Italy and Egypt, and on the seas of Sicilyand Greece: the influence of his negotiations extended from Jerusalem to Romeand Russia; and the Byzantine monarchy, for awhile, became an object of respector terror to the powers of Asia and Europe. Educated in the silk and purple ofthe east, Manual possessed the iron temper of a soldier, which cannot easily beparalleled, except in the lives of Richard I. of England, and of Charles XII. of Swe­den. Such was the strength and exercise in arms, that Raymond, surnamed theHercules of Antioch, was incapable of wielding the lance and buckler of the Greekemperor. In a famous tournament, he entered the lists on a fiery courser, andoverturned in his first career two of the stoutest of the Italian knights. The firstin the charge, the last in the retreat, his friends and his enemies alike trembled,the former for his safety, and the latter for their own. After posting an ambuscadein a wood, he rode forth in quest of some perilous adventure, accompanied only byhis brother and the faithful Axuch, who refused to desert their sovereign. Eigh­teen horsemen, after a short combat, fled before them: but the numbers of theenemy increased; the march of the re-enforcement was tardy and fearful, andManuel, without receiving a wound, cut his way through a squadron of the Turks.In a battle against the Hungarians, impatient of the slowness of his troops, hesnatched a standard from the head of the column, and was the first, almost alone,who passed a bridge that separated him from the enemy. In the same country,after transporting his army beyond the Save, he sent back the boats, with an order,under pain of death, to their commander, that he should leave him to conquer ordie on that hostile land. In the siege of Corfu, towing after him a captive galley,the emperor stood aloft on the poop, opposing against the volley of darts and stones,,a large buckler and a flowing sail; nor could he have escaped inevitable death, hadnot the Sicilian admiral enjoined his archers to respect the person of a hero. Inone day, he is said to have slain above forty of the barbarians with his own hand; hereturned to the camp, dragging along four Turkish prisoners, whom he had tied tothe rings of his saddle: he was ever the foremost to provoke or accept a singlecombat; and the gigantic champions, who encountered his arm, were transpiercedby the lance, or cut asunder by the sword of the invincible Manuel. The story ofhis exploits, which appear as a model or a copy of the romances of chivalry, mayinduce a reasonable suspicion of the veracity of the Greeks: I will not, to vindicatetheir credit, endanger my own; yet I may observe, that in the long series of theirannals, Manuel is the only prince who has been the subject of similar exaggeration.With the valour of a soldier, he did not unite the skill or prudence of a general:his victories were not productive of any permanent or useful conquest; and hisTurkish laurels were blasted in his last unfortunate campaign, in which he lost hisarmies in the mountains of Pisidia, and owed his deliverance to the generosity ofthe sultan. But the most singular feature in the character of Manuel, is the con­trast of labour and sloth, of hardiness and effeminacy. In war he seemed igno­rant of peace; in peace he appeared incapable of war. In the field he slept in thesun or in the snow, tired in the longest marches the strength of his men and horses;,







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


on our humility; and they revere, as a god upon earth, the apostle St. Peter, -whoseimage you threaten to destroy.(l) The remote and interior kingdoms of the westpresent their homage to Christ and his vicegerent: and we now prepare to visitone of their most powerful monarchs, who desires to receive from our hands thesacrament of baptism. (2) The barbarians have submitted to the yoke of the gos­pel, while you alone are deaf to the voice of the shepherd. These pious barba­rians are kindled into rage; they thirst to avenge the persecution of the east.Abandon your rash and fatal enterprise; reflect, tremble, and repent. If you per- "sist, we are innocent of the blood that will be spilt in the contest: may it fall onyour own head." >
The first assault of Leo against the images of Constantinople had been witnessedby a crowd of strangers from Italy and the west, who related with grief and indig­nation the sacrilege of the emperor. But on the reception of his proscriptive edict,they trembled for their domestic deities; the images of Christ and the Virgin, ofthe angels, martyrs, and saints, were abolished in all the churches of Italy; and astrong alternative was proposed to the Roman pontiff, the royal favour as the
Srice of his compliance, degradation and exile as the penalty of his disobedience.Neither zeal nor policy allowed him to hesitate; and the haughty strain in whichGregory addressed the emperor displays his confidence in the truth of his doctrineor the powers of resistance. Without depending on prayers or miracles, he boldlyarmed against the public enemy, and his pastoral letters admonished the Italiansof their danger and of their duty.(S) At this signal, Ravenna, Venice, and thecities of the exarchate and Pentapolis, adhered to the cause of religion; their mili­tary force by sea and land consisted, for the most part, of the natives; and the spi­rit of patriotism and zeal was transfused into the mercenary strangers. The Italiansswore to live and die in the defence of the pope and the holy images: the Romanpeople was devoted to their father, and even the Lombards were ambitious toshare the merit and advantage of this holy war. The most treasonable act, but themost obvious revenge, was the destruction of the statues of Leo himself: the mosteffectual and pleasing measure of rebellion, was the withholding the tribute of Italy,and depriving him of a power which he had recently abused by the imposition ofa new capitation. (4) A form of administration was preserved by the election ofmagistrates and governors: and so high was the public indignation, that the Italianswere prepared to create an orthodox emperor, and to conduct him with a fleet andarmy to the palace of Constantinople. In that palace, the Roman bishops, thesecond and third Gregory, were condemned as the authors of the revolt, and everyattempt was made, either by fraud or force, to seize their persons, and to strike attheir lives. The city was repeatedly visited or assaulted by captains of the guards,and dukes and exarchs of high dignity or secret trust; they landed with foreigntroops, they obtained some domestic aid, and the superstition of Naples may blushthat her fathers were attached to the cause of heresy. But these clandestine oropen attacks were repelled by the courage and vigilance of the Romans; theGreeks were overthrown and massacred, their leaders suffered an ignominiousdeath, and the popes, however inclined to mercy, refused to intercede for theseguilty victims. At Ravenna,(5) the several quarters of the city had long exerciseda bloody and hereditary feud; in religious controversy they found a new aliment offaction: but the votaries of images were superior in numbers or spirit, and theexarch, who attempted to stem the torrent, lost his life in a popular sedition. Topunish this flagitious deed, and restore his dominion in Italy, the emperor sent a
(2) Awo mis ecsrioo-j Juntos tou \'.yoptvov iis-TETov (p. 665.) The pope appears to have imposed on the T|xanceof the Greeks; he lived and died in the Lateran; and in his time, all (he kingdoms or the west \braced Christianity. May not this unknown Septetus have some reference to the chief of the Saxon /to Ina, king of Wessex, who, in the pontificate of Gregory II. visited Rome for the purpose, not of bof pilgrimage? (Pagi, A. D. 689. No. 2. A. D. 726. No. 15.)
(3) I shall transcribe the important and decisive passage of the Liber Pontificals. Respiciens ergo praprofanam principis jussionem, jam contra imperatorem quasi contra hostem se armavit, rcnuens hauesim tfccribeos ubique se cavere Chtistianos, eo quod orta fuisset, impietas talis. Igitur permoti omnes Pcntlposes,atque Venetiarum exercitus contra Imperatoris jussionem restiterunt; dicentes se nunquam in ejusdempontificis con df;scendere necem, sed pro ejus magis defensione viriliter deeertare. (p. 156.)
(4) A census, or capitation, says Anastasius: (p. 156.) a most cruel tax, uuknown to the Saracens themselves,exclaims the zealous Maimbourg. (Hist.des Iconoclastes, lib. i.) and Theophanes, (p. 344.) who talks of Pha­raoh's numbering the male children of Israel. This mode of taxation was familiar to the Saracens; and, mostunluckily for the historian, it was imposed a few years afterward in France by his patron Louis XIV.
(5) Seethe Liber Pontificalis of Agnellus,fin the Scriptores Rerura Italioarum of Muratori, torn. ii. pars. I.)whose deeper shade of barbarism marks the difference between Rome and Ravenna. Yet we are indebted toAim for some curious and domestic facts— the quarrels and factions of Ravenna, f p. 154.) the revenge of Josl'-aianll. (p. 150,161.) the defeat of the Greeks, (p. 170,171, &c) - •


pius virim eras,apolen-







OCR Output








CONTENTS.


PAnjc


The Lombards and Avars destroy the king
and kingdom of the Gepida , 156
567 Jilboin undertakes the conquest of Italy 157
Disaffection and death of Narses - ib.
568—570 Conquest of a great part of Italy by the
Lombards . . . 158
573 Alboin is murdered by his wife Rosamond 150
Her flight and death . . .160
Clepho king of the Lombards . ib.
Weakness of the emperor Justin . 161
574 Association of Tiberius . . ib.
578 Death of Justin II. . . - 162
578—582 Reign of Tiberius II. . . ib.
His virtues .... 163
583— 602 The reign of Maurice . . ib.
Distress of Italy . . . 164
584— 590 Autharis king of the Lombards ib.
The exarchate of Ravenna ■ - 165
The kingdom of the Lombards . . 166
Language and Manners of the Lombards ib.
Dress and marriage • - - 167
Government . . . ib.
643 Laws .... 168
Misery of Rome . . ib.
The tombs and relics of the apostles 1611
Birth and profession of Gregory the Roman ib.
590—604 Pontificate of Gregory the great or first 170
His spiritual office . . ib.;
And temporal government • 171
His estates ... ib.
And alms ... . ib.
The saviour of Rome . 172


CHAPTER XLVI.
Revolutions of Persia after the Death of Chosroes or
Nusbirvan—His Son Hormouz, a Tyrant, is deposed
—Usurpation of Bahrain—Flight and Restoration of
Chosroes II.—His Gratitude to the Romans—The
Chagan of the Avars—Revolt of the Army against
Maurice—His Death—Tyranny of Phocas—Eleva­
tion of Heraclins—The Persian War—Chosroes sub­
dues Syria, Egypt, and Asia Minor—Siege of Con­
stantinople by the Persians and Avars—Persian
Expeditions—Victories and Triumph of Heraclius.
a. d. *agk
Contest of Rome and Persia . . 172
570 Conquest of Yemen by Nushirvan . 173
572 His last war with the Romans . . ib.
579 His death . - 174
579—590 Tyranny and vices of his son Hormouz ib.
590 Exploits of Bohr am . . . 175
His rebellion . . . 176
Hormouz is deposed and imprisoned . 177
Elevation of his son Chosroes . ib.
Death of Hormouz . . • 178
Chosroes flies to the Romans . ib.
His return, andfinal victory . . ib.
Death of Bahram . . . 179
591—603 Restoration of policy of Chosroes . ib.
570—600 Pride,policy, and power of the Chagan of
the Avars ... 180
595—602 Wars of Maurice against the Avars 181
State of the Roman armies . . 182
Their discontent . . . 183
And rebellion . . ib.
602 Election of Phocas . ib.
Revolt of Constantinople . . 184
Death of Maurice and his children 185
602—610 Phocas emperor . . . Ib.
His character ... ib.
And tyranny . . • 186
610 His fall and death . ib.
610—642 Reign of Heraclius . . 187
603 Chosroes invades the Roman empire . ib.
611 His conquest of Syria . . . 188
614 Of Palestine . .,189
616 Of Egypt . . . ib.
Of Asia Minor ... ib.
His reign and magnificence . ■ ib.
610—622 Distress of Heraclius . . 190
He solicits peace . . 191
621 His preparations for war . . ib.
622 First expedition of Heraclius against the Per­
sians . . ■ . 192
623, 624,625 His second expedition . 193


*■»• Pagi
'626 Deliverance of Constantinople frem the Per­
sians and Avars . . . 194
Alliances and conquests of Heraclius 195,
627 His third expedition . . ,196
And victories . . . 197
Flight of Chosroes . • . ib.
628 He is deposed . . . 198
And murdered by his son Siroes ib,
Treaty of peace between the two empires 199


CHAFPER XLVH.
Theological History of the Doctrine of the Incarnation
—The Human and Divine Nature of Christ—Enmity
of the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Constantinople
—St.CyriJ and Nestorius—Third General Council of
Ephesus—Heresy of Eutyches—Fourth General
Council of Chalcedon—Civil and Ecclesiastical Dis
cord—Intolerance of Justinian—The Three Chapters
—The Monothelite Controversy—Stale of the Orien
tal Sects; I. The Nestorians—II. The Jacobites—
III. The Maronites—IV. The Armenians— V. The
Copts—VI. The Abyesinians.
a. d. Paob
The incarnation of Christ . . 199
/. A pure man to the Ebionites . 260
His birth and elevation . ib.
//. A pure God to the Docetes 201
His incorruptible body .. - 202
///. Double nature of Cerinthus . 203
IV. Divine incarnation of Apollinaris ib.
V. Orthodox consent and verbal disputes 204
412—444 Cyril, patriarch of Alexandria 205
413, 414,415 His tyranny . . . ib
428 Nestorius, patriarch of Constantinople 206
429-431 His heresy . . 207
431 First consul of Ephesus 208
Condemnation of Nestorius . ib-
Opposition of the Orientals ■ ibt
431—435 Victory of Cyril ■ • 209
435 Exile of Nestorius . - 210
448 Heresy of Eutyches . . ib
449 Second council of Ephesus . 211
451 Council of Chalcedon . , ib.
Faith of Chalcedon . . .212
451—482 Discord of the east . . 213
482 The henoticon of Zeno . . ib.
508—518 Thetrisagion, and religious war, till the
death of Anastasius . 214
514 First religious war . . 215,
519—565 Theological character and government
of Justinian . . . ib.
His persecution of heretics • 216
Of Pagans . . , - ib,
Of Jews ... ib.
Of Samaritans . . . 217
His orthodoxy ... ib.
532—698 The three chapters . ■ ib.
553 Vth general council: Ilndof Constantinople 218
564 Heresy of Justinian . . ib-
629 The Monothelite controversy . . 219
639 The Ecthesis of Heraclius . rb,
648 Type of Constans . .220
680—681 Vhhgeneral council: Hid of Constanti­nople ... ib.
Union of the Greek and Latin churches . 221
Perpetual separation of the Oriental sects ib.
/. The Nestorians . . 222
500 Sole masters of Persia . ■ 223
500—1200 Theirmissions in Tartary, India, Chi­
na, be. . . 224
883 The Christians of St. Thomas in India . 225
II. The Jacobites . . 226
///. The Maronites . . .227
IV. The Armenians . . 228
V. The Copts or Egyptians . . 229
537—568 Thepatriarch Theodosius . 230
538 Paul . . . ib.
551 Apollinaris ... ib.
580 Eulogius . . . .231
609 John . . . ib.
Their separation and decay 232
625—661 Benjamin the Jacobite patriarch ib.
VI. The Abyssiniuiis and Nubians ib.
530 Church of Abyssinia . 233
1525—1550 The Portuguese in Abyssinia • . ib,







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


the offspring of slaves and strangers, was despicable in the eyes of the victoriousbarbarians. As often as the Franks or Lombards expressed their most bitter con­tempt of a foe, they called him a Roman; "and in this name," says the bishopLiutprand, " we include whatever is base, whatever is cowardly, whatever is per­fidious, the extremes of avarice and luxury, and every vice that can prostitute thedignity of human nature. "(1) By the necessity of their situation, the inhabitantsof Rome were cast into the rough model of a republican government: they werecompelled to elect some judges in peace, and some leaders in war; the nobles as­sembled to deliberate, and their resolves could not be executed without the unionand consent of the multitude. The style of the Roman senate and people was re­vived, (2) but the spirit was fled; and their new independence was disgraced bythe tumultuous conflict of licentiousness and oppression. The want of laws couldonly be supplied by the influence of religion, and their foreign and domestic coun­sels were moderated by the authority of the bishop. His alms, his sermons, hiscorrespondence with the kings and prelates of the west, his recent services, theirgratitude, an oath, accustomed the Romans to consider him as the first magistrateor prince of the city. The Christian humility of the popes was not offended bythe name of Domimts, or Lord; and their face and inscription are still apparenton the most ancient coins. (3) Their temporal dominion is now confirmed by thereverence of a thousand years; and their noblest title is the free choice of a peo­ple, whom they had redeemed from slavery. .- W
In the quarrels of ancient Greece, the holy people of Ellis enjoyed a perpetualpeace, under the protection of Jupiter, and in the exercise of the Olympic games. (4)Happy would it have been for the Romans if a similar privilege had guarded thepatrimony of St. Peter from the calamities of war; if the Christians who visitedthe holy threshold, would have sheathed their swords in the presence of the apos­tle and his successor. But this mystic circle could have been traced only by thewand of a legislator and a sage; this pacific system was incompatible with thezeal and ambition of the popes; the Romans were not addicted, like the inhabi­tants of Ellis, to the innocent and placid labours of agriculture; and the barba­rians of Italy, though softened by the climate, were far below the Grecian statesin the institutions of public and private life. A memorable example of repentanceand piety was exhibited by Liutprand, king of the Lombards. In arms, at thegate of the Vatican, the conqueror listened to the voice of Gregory 11.(5) with­drew his troops, resigned his conquests, respectfully visited the church of St. Pe­ter, and after performing his devotions, offered his sword and dagger, his cuirassand mantle, his silver cross and his crown of gold, on the tomb of the apostle.But this religious fervour was the illusion, perhaps the artifice of the moment; thesense of interest is strong and lasting; the love of arms and rapine was congenialto the Lombards; and both the prince and people were irresistibly tempted bythedisorders of Italy, the nakedness of Rome, and the unwarlike profession of hernew chief. On the first edicts of the emperor, they declared themselves thechampions of the holy images: Liutprand invaded the province of Romagna,which had already assumed that distinctive appellation; the catholics of the ex,-archate yielded without reluctance to his civil and military power; and a foreignenemy was introduced for the first time into the impregnable fortress of Ravenna.That city and fortress were speedily recovered by the- active diligence and mari­time forces of the Venetians; and those faithful subjects obeyed the exhortationsof Gregory himself, in separating the personal guilt of Leo from the general causeof the Roman empire. (6) The Greeks were less mindful of the service, than the
(1) Quos (Romanes) nos, Langobardi scilicet, Saxones, Franci, Lotharingi, Bajoari, Suevi, Burgundionestanto dcdigtiamur ut inimicos nostra* commofii, nil aliud, contttmeliarum nisi Romane. dicamui: tine solo, idest Komanorum nomine, quicquid i^nobilitatis, quicqnid timiditntis, quicquid avaritise. quicqnid luxuria:,quicqnid mendacii, immo quicquid vitiorum est comprehendentes (Liutprand. in Legat. Script. Ita). torn. ii.pars. I. p. 4S1.) For the sins of Cato or Tully, Minos might have imposed, as a tit penance, the daily perusalof this barbarous passage.
(2) Pipino reg? Francorum, omnii S''natiis atque universa populi generalitas a Deo serrate Romanse urbis(Codex Carolin. epist. xxxri. in Script. Ifal. torn, lit pari. 8. p. 160.) The names of senatus and senator werenever totally extinct (Dissert. Chorograph. p. 216,217.) but in the middle age they signified little more thanuobiles optimates, &e. (Ducange. Gloss. Latin.)
(3) See Muratori Antiquit. Italia; MVdii Mv), torn. ii. dissertat. 27. p. 548. On one of these coins we read Ha-dnanui Papa (A. D. 772;) on the reverse, Viet. DDNN, with the word CONOB. which the pere Josbert (Sciencedes Medailles, torn. ii. p. 42.) explains by COATstantinopoli Officina fcV, (secunda.)
(4) See West's Dissertation on the Olympic Games (Pindar, vol. ii. p. 32—36. edition in duodecimo,) and thejudicious reflections of Pokhius (lorn. i. lib. iv. p. 466. edit. Gronov.)
(5) The speech of Gregory to the Lombard is finely composed by Sigonius (de Regno Ilaliss lib. iii. Opera,torn. ii. p. 173.,) who imitates the license and the spirit of Sallust or Livy.
C3) The Venetian historians, John Sagorninus (Chron. Venct. p. 13.) and tbe doge Andrew Dandolo (Scrip.







OCR Output








OS THE ROHAN EMPIRE". 361


discharge by an executioner. The refusal of Alexius to march against a fourthrebel, the husband of his sister, destroyed the merit or memory of his past services:the favourites of Botaniates provoked the ambition which they apprehended andaccused; and the retreat of tne two brothers might be justified by the defence oftheir life or liberty. The women of the family were deposited in a sanctuary,respected by tyrants: the men, mounted on horseback, sallied from the city, anderected the standard of civil war. The soldiers, who had been gradually assem­bled in the capital and tne neighbourhood, were devoted to the cause of a victori­ous and injured leaden the ties of common interest and domestic alliance securedthe attachment of the house of Ducas: and the generous dispute of the Comneni wasterminated by the decisive resolution of Isaac, who was the first to invest hisyounger brother with the name and ensigns of royalty. They returned to Con­stantinople, to threaten rather than besiege that impregnable fortress; but thefidelity of the guards was corrupted: a gate was surprised; and the fleet was occu­pied by the active courage of George Pelzologus, who fought against his father,without foreseeing that he laboured for his posterity. Alexius ascended thethrone; and his aged competitor disappeared in a monastery. An army of variousnations was gratified with the pillage of the city; but the public disorders wereexpiated by the tears and fasts of the Comneni, who submitted to every penancecompatible with the possession of the empire.
The life of .the emperor Alexius had been delineated by a favourite daughter,who was inspired by a tender regard for his person, and a laudable zeal to perpe­tuate his virtues. Conscious of the just suspicion of her readers, the princess AnnaComnena repeatedly protests, that, besides her personal knowledge, she hadsearched the discourse and writings of the most respectable veterans; that after aninterval of thirty years, forgotten by, and forgetful of, the world, her mournful soli­tude was inaccessible to hope and fear; and that truth, the naked perfect truth, wasmore dear and sacred than the memory of her parent. Yet, instead of the simpli­city of style and narrative which wins our belief, an elaborate affectation of rhetoricand science betrays in every page the vanity of a female author. The genuinecharacter of Alexius is lost in a vague constellation of virtues: and the perpetualstrain of panegyric and apology awakens our jealousy, to question the veracityof the historian and the merit of the hero. We cannot however refuse her judi­cious and important remark, that the disorders of the times were the misfortuneand the glory of Alexius; and that every calamity which can afflict a declining em­pire was accumulated on his reign by the justice of Heaven and the vices of hispredecessors. In the east, the victorious Turks had spread, from Persia to Hel­lespont, the reign of the Koran and the crescent: the west was invaded by the ad­venturous valour of the Normans; and in the moments of peace, the Danube
Eoured forth new swarms, who had gained, in the science of war, what they had*t in the ferociousness of manners. The sea was not less hostile than the land;and while the frontiers were assaulted by an open enemy, the palace was distract­ed with secret treason and conspiracy. On a sudden the banner of the cross wasdisplayed by the Latins: Europe has precipitated on Asia; and Constantinople hadalmost been swept away by this impetuous deluge. In the tempest, Alexiussteered the imperial vessel with dexterity and courage. At the head of his ar­mies, he was bold in action, skilful in stratagem, patient of fatigue, ready to im­prove his advantages, and rising from his defeats with inexhaustible vigour. Thediscipline of the camp was revived, and a new generation of men and soldiers wascreated by the example and the precepts of their leader. In his intercourse withthe Latins, Alexius was patient and artful: his discerning eye pervaded the new sys­tem of an unknown world; and I shall hereafter describe the superior policy withwhich he balanced the interests and passions of the champions of the first crusade.In along reign of thirty-seven years, he subdued and pardoned the envy of his equals:the laws of public and private order were restored: the arts of wealth and sciencewere cultivated: the limits of the empire were enlarged in Europe and Asia; andthe Comnenian sceptre was transmitted to his children of the third and fourthgeneration. Yet the difficulties of the times betrayed some defects in his charac­ter; and have exposed his memory to some just or ungenerous reproach. Thereader may possibly smile at the lavish praise which his daughter so often bestowson a flying hero: the weakness or prudence of his situation might be mistaken for awant of personal courage; and his political arts are branded by the Latins with thenames of deceit and dissimulation. The increase of the male and female branchesof his family adorned the throne and secured the succession: but their princely







OCR Output








THE DECLINE' AND FALL


ly illumination. The use of the Greek, or, as it might now be called, the Sara­cen fire, was continued to the middle of the fourteenth century,(1) when the scien­tific, or casual compound of nitre, sulphur, and charcoal, effected a new revolutionin the art of war, and the history of mankind. (2)
Constantinople and the Greek fire might exclude the Arabs from the easternentrance of Europe; but in the west, on the side of the Pyrenees, the provincesof Gaul were threatened and invaded by the conquerors of Spain. (3) The de­cline of the French monarchy invited the attack of these insatiate fanatics. Thedescendants of Clovis had lost the inheritance of his martial and ferocious spirit;and their misfortune or demerit has affixed the epithet of lazy to the last kings ofthe Merovingian race. (4) They ascended the throne without power, and sunkinto the grave without a name. A country palace, in the neighbourhood of Com-piegne,(5) was allotted for their residence or prison; but each year, in the monthof March or May, they were conducted in a wagon drawn by oxen to the assem­bly of the Franks, to give audience to foreign ambassadors; and to ratify the actsof the mayor of the palace. That domestic officer was become the minister ofthe nation, and the master of the prince. A public employment was convertedinto the patrimony of a private family: the elder Pepin left a king of matureyears under the guardianship of his own widow and her child; and these feebleregents were forcibly dispossessed by the most active of his bastards. A govern­ment, half savage and half corrupt, was almost dissolved; and the tributarydukes, the provincial counts, and the territorial lords, were tempted to despisethe weakness of the monarch, and to imitate the ambition of the mayor. Amongthese independent chiefs, one of the boldest and most successful, was Eudes, dukeof Aquitain, who, in the southern provinces of Gaul, usurped the authority, andeven the title of king. The Goths, the Gascons, and the Franks, assembled un­der the standard of this Christian hero: he repelled the first invasion of the Sa­racens; and Zema, lieutenant of the caliph, lost his army and his life under thewalls of Thoulouse. The ambition of his successors was stimulated by revenge;they repassed the Pyrenees with the means and the resolution of conquest. Theadvantageous situation which had recommended Narbonne(6) as the first Romancolony, was again chosen by the Moslems; they claimed the province of Septe-maniaor Languedoc as a just dependence of the Spanish monarchy: the vine­yards of Gascony and the -city of Bordeaux were possessed by the sovereign ofDamascus and Samarcand; and the south of France, from the mouth of the Ga­ronne to that of the Rhone, assumed the manners and religion of Arabia.
But these narrow limits were scorned by the spirit of Abdalrahman, or Abde-rame, who had been restored by the caliph Hashem to the wishes of the soldiersand people of Spain. That veteran and daring commander adjudged to the obe­dience of the prophet whatever yet remained of France or of Europe, and pre­pared to execute the sentence, at the head of a formidable host, in the full confi-
(1) The vanity, or envy, of shaking the established property of Fame, has tempted some moderns to carrygunpowder above the fourteenth (see Sir William Temple, Dutens, Sec.) and the Greek fire above the seventhcentury (see the Saluste do President des Brosses7 torn. ii. p. 381.0 but their evidence, which precede* the vul­gar era of the invention, is seldom elear or satisfactory, and subsequent writers may be suspected of fraud orcredulity. In the earliest lieges, some combustibles ot oil and sulphur have been used, and the Greek fire hasromc affinities with gunpowder, both in nature and effects; for the antiquity of the first, a passage of Procopiui;(de Bell. Goth. lib. iv. c. 12.;) for that of the second, some facts in the A rab'ic history of Spain (A. D. 1240,1313,1332. Ribliot. Arab. Hisp.tom. ii. p. 6—8.0 are the most difficult to elude.
(2) That extraordinary man Friar Bacon, reveals two of the ingredients, saltpetre and sulphur, and concealsthe third in a sentence of mysterious gibberish, as if he dteaded the consequences of his own discovery (Biogra-phia Britanniea, vol. i. p. 430. new edition.)
(3) For the invasion of Frsnce, and the defeat of the Arabs by Charles Mantel, see the Historia Araburo (c:*i—xiv.) of Roderie Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo, who had before him the Chvistian chronicle of Isidore Ps-censis, and the Mahometan history of Novairi. The Moslems are silent or concise in the account of theirlosses, but M. Cardonne (torn. i. p. 129—131.) has given a pure and simple account of all that he could collectfromlbu Halikan Hidjazi, and an anonymous writer. The text of the Chronicles of France, and lives ofsaints, are inserted in the collection of Bouquet (torn, iii.) and the annals of Pagi, who (torn. iii. under the pro­per years) has restored the chronology, which is anticipated six years in the Annals of Baronius. The Dicnou-ary of Bayle (Ab'leramt and Munuzti) has more merit for lively reflection than original research.
(4) Eginhart, de Vita Caroli Magni,c. ii. p. 13—18. edit. Schinink, Utrecht, 1711. Some modem critics ac­cuse the minister of Charlemagne of exaggerating the weakness of the Merovingians; but the general outlineis just, and the French reader will forever repeat the beautiful lines of Boileau's Lutrin.
(5) Mamaccte on the Oyse, between Compiegne and Noyon, which Eginhart calls perparvi reditus vHtam(See the notes, and the map of ancient France for Dom. Bouquet's Collection.) Compendium, or Compiegne,was a palace of more dignity (Hadrian Valesii Notitia GaUiarum, p. 152.,) and that laughing philosopher, theabbe Galliani (Dialogoes sur le Commerce des Bleds,) may truly affirm, thas it was the residence of the roilttea Chretiens et tres chevelus.
(6) Even before that colony, A. U. C. 530(Velleius Patercul. 1. 15.,) in the time of Polybius (Hist. lib. iii. p.265. edit. Gronov.,) Narbonne was a Celtic town of the first eminence, and one of the most not them places ofthe known world (D'Anvil)e, Notice de I'Ancicnne Gaule, p. 173.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


of the father. His stolen goods (his oxen or his children) might be recovered bythe same action of theft;(l) and if either had been guilty of a trespass, it was inhis own option to compensate the damage, or resign to the injured party the ob­noxious animal. At the call of indigence or avarice, the master of a family coulddispose of his children or his slaves. But the condition of the slave was far moreadvantageous, since he regained by the first manumission his alienated freedom:the son was again restored to his unnatural father; he might be condemned to ser­vitude a second and third time, and it was not till after the third sale and delive­rance, (2) that he was enfranchised from the domestic power which had been sorepeatedly abused. According to his discretion, a father might chastise the realor imaginary faults of his children, by stripes, by imprisonment, by exile, by send­ing them to the country to work in chains among the meanest of his servants.The majesty of a parent was armed with the power of life and death;(3) and theexamples of such bloody executions, which were sometimes praised and neverpunished, may be traced in the annals of Rome, beyond the times of Pompey andAugustus. Neither age, nor rank, nor the consular office, nor the honours of a tri­umph, could exempt the most illustrious citizen from the bonds of filial subjec­tion :(4) his own descendants were included in the family of their common ances­tor; and the claims of adoption were not less sacred or less rigorous than those ofnature. Without fear, though not without danger of abuse, the Roman legisla­tors had reposed an unbounded confidence in the sentiments of paternal love; andthe oppression was tempered by the assurance, that each generation must succeedin its turn to the awful dignity of parent and master.
The first limitation of paternal power is ascribed to the justice and humanityof Numa: and the maid, who, with his father's consent, had espoused a free­man, was protected from the disgrace of becoming the wife of a slave. In thefirst ages, when the city was pressed, and often famished by her Latin and Tus­can neighbours, the sale of children might be a frequent practice; but as a Romancould not legally purchase the liberty of his fellow-citizen, the market must gra­dually fail, and the trade would be destroyed by the conquests of the republic.An imperfect right of property was at length communicated to sons; and the three­fold distinction of firofectious, adventitious, and firqfessional, was ascertained, bythe jurisprudence of the Code and Pandects. (5) Of all that proceeded from thefather, he imparted only the use, and reserved the absolute dominion; yet if his goodswere sold, the filial portion was excepted, by a.favourable interpretation, from thedemands of the creditors. In whatever accrued by marriage, gift, or collateralsuccession, the property was secured to the son; but the father, unless he had beenspecially excluded, enjoyed the usufruct during his life. As a just and prudent re­ward of military virtue, the spoils of the enemy were acquired, possessed, and be­queathed by the soldier alone; and the fair analogy was extended to the emolumentsof any liberal profession, the salary of public service, and the sacred liberality ofthe emperor or the empress. The life of a citizen was less exposed than his for­tune to the abuse of paternal power. Yet his life might be adverse to the interestor passions of an unworthy father: the same crimes that flowed from the corrup­tion, were more sensibly felt by the humanity, of the Augustan age; and the cruelErixo, who whipt his son till he expired, was saved by the emperor from the justfury of the multitude. (6) The Roman father, from the license of servile dominion,was reduced to the gravity and moderation of a judge. The presence and opinionof Augustus confirmed the sentence of exile pronounced against an intentional par­ricide by the domestic tribunal of Arius. Hadrian transported to an island the jea­lous parent, who, like a robber, had seized the opportunity of hunting, to assassi-
(1) Pandect, lib. xlviii. tit. ii. leg. xiv. No. 13. leg. xxxviii. No. t. Such was the decision of Ulpian andPaul.
(2) Thetrina mancipatio is most clearly defined by Ulpian (Fragment, x. p. 591,592. edit. Schulting,) andbest illustrated in the Antiquities of Heineccius.
(3) By Justinian, the old law, the jus necis of the Roman father (Institut. lib. iv. tit. ix. No. 7.) is reportedand reprobated. Some legal vestiges are left in the Pandects (lib. xliii. tit. xxix. leg. iii. No. 4.) and the Colla-tioLegum Rornanarum et Mosaicarum(tit. ii. No. 3. p. 189.)
(4) Except on public occasions, and in the actual exercise of his office. In puhlicis locis atque muneribus,fitque actionibus patrum, jura cum filiorum qui in magistratu sunt, potestatibus collata interquiescere panlu-lum et connivere, &c. Aul. Gellius, Noctes Atticse, ii. 2.) The lessons of the philosopher Taurus were jus­tified by the old and memorable example of Fabius; and we may contemplate the same story in the style of"XAvy (24.34.,} and the homely idiom of Claudius Quadrigarius the annalist. -
(5) See the gradual enlargement and security of the filial peculium in the Institutes (lib. ii. tit. ix.,) the Pan­dect s (lib. xr. tit. i. lib. xli. tit. i..) and the Code (lib. it. tit. 26,27.)
(o) The examples of Erixo and Arius arc related by Seneca (de dementia, 1,14,15.,) the former with boo.ror, the latter with applause,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMMRE,


which each member possessed an undivided share of the civil and political rightsof the community. In the more simple state of the Arabs, the nation is free, be­cause each of her sons disdains a base submission to the will of a master. Hisbreast is fortified with the austere virtues of courage, patience, and sobriety; thelove of independence prompts him to exercise the habits of self-command; andthe fear of dishonour guards him from the meaner apprehensions of pain, of dan­ger, and of death. The gravity and firmness of the mind are conspicuous in hisoutward demeanour: his speech is slow, weighty, and concise, he is seldom pro­voked to laughter, his only gesture is that of stroking his beard, the venerablesymbol of manhood; and the sense of his own importance teaches him to accosthis equals without levity, and his superiors without awe.(l) The liberty of theSaracens survived their conquest: the first caliphs indulged the bold and familiarlanguage of their subjects: they ascended the pulpit to persuade and edify the con­gregation: nor was it before the seat of empire was removed to the Tigris, thatthe Abbassides adopted the proud and pompous ceremonial of the Persian andByzantine courts.
In the study of nations and men we may observe the causes that render themhostile or friendly to each other, that tend to narrow or enlarge, to molify or exas­perate, the social character. The separation of the Arabs from the rest of man­kind, has accustomed them to confound the ideas of stranger and enemy; and thepoverty of the land has introduced a maxim of jurisprudence, which they believe 'and practise to the present hour. They pretend, that in the division of the earth,the rich and fertile climates were assigned to the other branches of the human fa­mily; and that the posterity of the outlaw Ismael might recover by fraud or force,the portion of inheritance, of which he had been unjustly deprived. Accordingto the remark of Pliny, the Arabian tribes are equally addicted to theft and mer­chandise : the caravans that traverse the desert are ransomed or pillaged; and theirneighbours, since the remote times of Job and Sesostris,(2) have been the victimsof their rapacious spirit. If a Bedoween discovers from afar a solitary traveller, herides furiously against him, crying with aloud voice, "Undress thyself, thy aunt,(my wife,) is without a garment." A ready submission entitled him to mercy; resist­ance will provoke the aggressor, and his own blood must expiate the blood whichhe presumes to shed in legitimate defence. A single robber, or a few associates,are branded with their genuine name; but the exploits of a numerous band as­sume the character of a lawful and honourable war. The temper of a people thusarmed against mankind, was doubly inflamed by the domestic license of rapine,murder, and revenge. In the constitution of Europe, the right of peace and waris now confined to a small, and the actual exercise to a much smaller, list of res­pectable potentates; but each Arab, with impunity and renown, might point hisjavelin against the life of his countryman. The union of the nation consisted onlyin a vague resemblance of language and manners; and in each community, thejurisdiction of the magistrate was mute and impotent. Of the time of ignorancewhich preceded Mahomet, seventeen hundred battles(3) are recorded by tradi­tion: hostility was imbittered with the rancour of civil faction: and the recital, inprose or verse, of an obsolete feud, was sufficient to rekindle the same passionsamong the descendants of the hostile tribes. In private life, every man, at leastevery family, was the judge and avenger of his own cause. The nice sensibilityof honour, which weighs the insult rather than the injury, sheds its deadly venomon the quarrels of the Arabs: the honour of their women, and of their beards, ismost easily wounded; an indecent action, a contemptuous word, can be expi­ated only by the blood of the offender; and such is their patient inveteracy, thatthey expect whole months and years the opportunity of revenge. A fine or com- 'pensation for murder is familiar to the barbarians of every age: but in Arabia thekinsman of the dead are at liberty to accept the atonement, or to exercise withtheir own hands the law of retaliation. The refined malice of the Arabs refuses


(1) I mntt remind the reader, that d'Arvieux.d'Herbelot, and Niebuhr, represent, in the most lively colours*the manners and government of the Arabs, which are illustrated by many incidental passages in the life ofMahomet.
(2) Observe the first chapter of Job, and the long wall of one thousand five hundred stadia which Sesostrisbuilt from Pelusium to Heliopolis (Diodor. Sicul. torn. i. lib. i. p. 67.) Under the name of Hycsot, the shepherdkings, they had formerly subdued Egypt (Marsham, Canon. Chron. p. 98—163, &c.)
(3) Or, according to another account, one thousand two hundred (d'Herbelot. Bibliotheque Orientate, p. 750the two historians, who wrote of the Ayam at Arab, the battles of the Arabs, lived in the ninth and tenth cen­turies. The famous war of Dahes and Gabrah was occasioned by two horses, lasted forty years, and ended in ftproverb (Pococfc, Specimen, p. 48.)







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 389


of conscience and religious worship. (1) In a field of battle, the forfeit lives of theprisoners were redeemed by the profession of Islam; the females were bound toembrace the religion of their masters, and a race of sincere proselytes was gra­dually multiplied by the education of the infant captives. But the millions of Asia­tic and African converts, who swelled the native band of the faithful Arabs, musthave been allured, rather than constrained, to declare their belief in one God andthe apostle of God. By the repetition of a sentence and the loss of a foreskin, the•subject or the slave, the captive or the criminal, arose in a moment the free andequal companion of the victorious Moslems. Every sin was expiated, every en­gagement was dissolved: the vow of celibacy was superseded by the indulgence ofnature; the active spirits who slept in the cloister were awakened by the trumpetof the Saracens: and in the convulsion of the world, every member of a new so­ciety ascended to the natural level of his capacity and courage. The minds of themultitude were tempted by the invisible as well as temporal blessings of the Ara­bian prophet; and charity will hope, that many of his proselytes entertained a se­rious conviction of the truth and sanctity of his revelation. In the eyes of an in­quisitive polytheist, it must appear worthy of the human and the divine nature.More pure than the system of Zoroaster, more liberal than the law of Moses, thereligion of Mahomet might seem less inconsistent with reason, than the creed ofmystery and superstition, which, in the seventh century, disgraced the simplicityof the gospel.
In the extensive provinces of Persia and Africa, the national religion has beeneradicated by the Mahometan faith. The ambiguous theology of the Magi stoodalone among the sects of the east: but the profane writings of Zoroaster(2)might, under the reverend name of Abraham, be dexterously connected with thechain of divine revelation. Their evil principle, the demon Ahriman, might berepresented as the rival or as the creature of the God of light. The temples ofPersia were devoid of images; but the worship of the sun and of fire might bestigmatized as a gross and criminal idolatry. (3) The milder sentiment was con­secrated by the practice of Mahomet(4) and the prudence of the caliphs; the Ma-gians or Ghebers were ranked with the Jews and Christians among the people ofthe written law;(5) and as late as the third century of the Hegira, the city of He­rat will afford a lively contrast of private zeal and public toleration. (6) Underthe payment of an annual tribute, the Mahometan law secured to the Ghebers ofHerat their civil and religious liberties: but the recent and humble mosch wasoversh adowed by the antique splendour of the adjoining temple of fire. A fanaticimam deplored, in his sermons, the scandalous neighbourhood, and accused theweakn-ess or indifference of the faithful. Excited by his voice, the people as­sembled in tumult; the two houses of prayer were consumed by the flames, butthe vacant ground was immediately occupied by the foundations of a new mosch.The injured Magi appealed to the sovereign of Chorasan; he promised justice andrelief; when, behold! four thousand citizens of Herat, of a grave character and ma­ture age, unanimously swore that the idolatrous fane had never existed; the inquisi­tion was silenced, and their conscience was satisfied, says the historian Mirchond,(7)
(1) The distinction between a proscribed and a tolevated sect, between the Harbii and the people of theBook, the believers in some divine revelation, is correctly d< fined in the conversation of the caliph Al Marauowith the idolaters, or Sabteans, of Chare. Hottinger, Hist. Orient, p. 107,108.
(2) The Zend or Pazend, the bible of the Ghebers, is reckoned by themselves, or at least by the Mahometans,among the ten books which Abraham received from heaven; and their religion is honourably styled the reli­gion of Abraham. (D'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orient-p. 701. Hyde, de Religione veterum Persarum, c. 3. p. 27,28, See.)I much fear that we do not possess any pm e and free description of the system of Zoroaster. Dr. Frideaux(Connexion, vol. i p. 300. oetavo) adopts the opinion, that be had been the slave and scholar of some Jewishprophet in the captivity of Babylon. Perhaps the Persians, who have been the masters of the Jews, would as­sert the honour, a poor honour, of being their masters.
(3) The Arabian Nights, a faithful and amusing picture of the oriental world, represent in the jrtost odious-colours, the Magiam, or worshippers of fire, to whom they attribute the annual sacrifice of a Mussulman. Thereligion of Zoroaster has not the least affinity with that of the Hindoos, yet they are often confounded by theMahometans; and the sword of Timour was sharpened by this mistake. (Hist, de Timour Bee, par Cherfed-din Ali Yezdi.lib.v.)
(4) Vie de Mahomet par Gagnier, torn. Hi. p. 114, 115.
(5) Hrec tres seetse, Judsei. Christiani, et qui inier Persas Magorum institutis addicti sunt, xa-r' egoxxv, populiTiiieri dicuntur, (Reland, Dissertat. torn. iii. p. 15.) The caliph Al Mamun confirms this honourable distinc.tion in favour of the three sects, with the vague and equivocal religion of the Sabxans, under which the ac-cient polytheists of Change were allowed to shelter their idolatrous worship. (Hottinger, Hist. Orient, p.167, 188.) a ' 1
(6) This singular story is related by d'Herbelot, (Bibliot. Orient, p. 448,449.) on the faith of Khondemir, andby Miichond himself. (Hist, priorum Begum Persarum, Ste. p. 9,10. not. p. 88,89.)
(7) Michond (Mohammed Emir Khoondah Shah,) a native of Herat, composed in the Persian language a ge­neral history of the east, from the creation to the jjcar of the Hegira 875. (A. D. 1471.) In the year 904. (A. D.1498.) the historian obtained the command of a princely library, and his applauded work, in seven or twelve







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


Belisarius disarmed, and naked, in the palace of Constantinople. Not a hopecould be entertained of shaking his long-tried fidelity; and they justly dreaded therevenge, or rather justice, of the veteran general, who might speedily assemblean army in Thrace to punish the assassins, and perhaps to enjoy the fruits of theircrime. Delay afforded time for rash communications and honest confessions: Ar-taban and his accomplices were condemned by the senate, but the extreme cle­mency of Justinian detained them in the gentle confinement of the palace, till hepardoned their flagitious attempt against his throne and life. If the emperor for­gave his enemies, he must cordially embrace a friend whose victories were aloneremembered, and who was endeared to his prince by the recent circumstance oftheir common danger. Belisarius reposed from his toils, in the high station of ge­neral of the east and count of the domestics; and the older consuls and patriciansrespectfully yielded the precedency of rank to the peerless merit of the first ofthe Romans. (1) The first of the Romans still-submitted to be the slave of hiswife; but the servitude of habit and affection became less disgraceful when thedeath of Theodora had removed the baser influence of fear. Joannina their ,daughter, and the sole heiress of their fortunes, was betrothed to Anastasius, thegrandson, or rather nephew of the empress,(2) whose kind interposition forward­ed the consummation of their youthful loves. But the power of Theodora ex­pired, the parents of Joannina returned, and her honour, perhaps her happi­ness, were sacrificed to the revenge of an unfeeling mother, who dissolved theimperfect nuptials before they had been ratified by the ceremonies of thechurch.(3)
Before the departure of Belisarius, Perusia was besieged, and few cities wereimpregnable to the Gothic arms. Ravenna, Ancona, and Crotona still resisted thebarbarians; and when Totila asked in marriage one of the daughters of France,he was stung by the just reproach, that the king of Italy was unworthy of his titletill it was acknowledged by the Roman people. Three thousand of the bravestsoldiers had been left to defend the capital. On the suspicion of a monopoly, theymassacred the governor, and announced to Justinian, by a deputation of the cler­gy, that unless their offence was pardoned, and their arrears were satisfied, theyshould instantly accept the tempting offers of Totila. But the officer, who suc­ceeded to the command (his name was Diogenes,) deserved their esteem and con­fidence; and the Goths, instead of finding an easy conquest, encountered a vigo­rous resistance from the soldiers and people, who patiently endured the loss ofthe port, and of all maritime supplies. The siege of Rome would perhaps havebeen raised, if the liberality of Totila to the Isaurians had not encouraged someof their venal countrymen to copy the example of treason. In a dark night,while the Gothic trumpet sounded on another side, they silently opened the gateof St. Paul: the barbarians rushed into the city, and the flying garrison was inter­cepted before they could reach the harbour of Centumcellx, A soldier trained inthe school of Belisarius, Paul of Cilicia, retired with four hundred men to themole of Hadrian. They repelled the Goths; but they felt the approach of famine,and their aversion to the taste of horse-flesh confirmed their resolution to risk theevent of a desperate and decish 3 sally. But their spirit insensibly stooped to theoffers of capitulation; they retrieved their arrears of pay, and preserved theirarms and horses, by enlisting in the service of Totila; their chiefs, who pleaded alaudable attachment to their wives and children in the east, were dismissed withhonour; and above four hundred enemies, who had taken refuge in the sanc­tuaries, were saved by the clemency of the victor. He no longer entertained awish of destroying the edifices of Rome, (4) which he now respected as the seat
(1) The honours of Belisarius are gladly commemorated by his secretary (Procop. Goth. lib. iii. c. 35. lib. iv»c 210 The title of STfucTn^o; is ill translated, at least in this instance, by prsefectus prastorio; and to a mili­tary character, magister militum is more proper and applicable (Ducange, Gloss. Grace, p. 1458,1450.)
(2) Aleroannus (ad Hist. Arcanam, p. 83.,) Ducange (Families Byzant. p~98.,) and Heineccius (Hist Juris Ci-vilis, p. 434.,) all three represent Anastasius as the son of the daughter of Theodora; and their opinion firmlyreposes on the ambiguous testimony of Procopius (Anccdot. c. 4,5.—SuyxrpiSaj twice repeated.) And yet Iwill remark, 1. That in the year 547. Theodora could scarcely have a grandson of the age of puberty: 2*That we are totally ignorant of this daughter and her husband; and, 3. That Theodora concealed her bas­tards, and that her grandson by Justinian would have been heir-apparent of the empire.
(3) The Be^oT^jtweTa, or sins of the hero of Italy and after his return, are manifested ajrxpxxxyvjme^ and mostprobably swelled, bv the author of the Anecdotes (c. iv. 5.) The designs of Antonina were favoured by thefluctuating jurisprudence of Justinian. On the law of marriage and divorce, that emperor was trochos versati-lior (Heineccius. Element. Juris. Civil, ad Oi-dinem Pandect, p. 4. No. 233.)
(4) The Romans were still attached to the monuments of their ancestors: and according to Procopius (Goth*lib. iv. c. 22.,) the galley of Apneas, of a single tank of oars, twenty-five feet in breadth, one hundred andtwenty in length, was preserved, entire in the navalia, near Monte Testaceo, at the foot of the Aventine (Nat­







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE,


. prophetess, they attacked the invaders with an enthusiasm similar to their own.The veteran bands of Hassan were inadequate to the defence of Africa: the con­quests of an age were lost in a single dayfand the Arabian chief, overwhelmed bythe torrents, retired to the confines of'Egypt, and expected, five years, the pro­mised succours of the caliph. After the retreat of the Saracens, the victoriousprophetess assembled the Moorish chiefs, and recommended a measure of strangeand savage policy. " Our cities," said she, " and the gold and silver which theycontain, perpetually attract the arms of the Arabs. These vile metals are not theobjects of our ambition; we content ourselves with the simple productions of theearth. Let us destroy these cities; let us bury in their ruins those pernicious trea­sures; and when the avarice of our foes shall be destitute of temptation, perhapsthey will cease to disturb the tranquillity of a warlike people." The proposal wasaccepted with unanimous applause. From Tangier to Tripoli, the buildings,or at least the fortifications, were demolished, the fruit trees were cut down, themeans of subsistence were extirpated, a fertile and populous garden was changedinto a desert, and the historians of a more recent period could discern the frequenttraces of the prosperity and devastation of their ancestors. Such is the tale of themodern Arabians. Yet I strongly suspect that their ignorance of antiquity, thelove of the marvellous, and the fashion of extolling the philosophy of barbarians,has induced them to describe, as one voluntary act, the calamities of three hun­dred years, since the first fury of the Donatists and Vandals. In the progress ofthe revolt, Cahina had most probably contributed her share of destruction; and thealarm of universal ruin might terrify and alienate the cities that had reluctantlyyielded to her unworthy yoke. They no longer hoped, perhaps they no longerwished, the return of their Byzantine sovereigns:. their present servitude was notalleviated by the benefits of order and justice; and the most zealous catholic mustprefer the imperfect truths of the Koran to the blind and rude idolatry of theMoors. The general of the Saracens was again received as the saviour of the pro­vince; the friends of civil society conspired against the savages of the land; and theroyal prophetess was slain in the first battle which overturned the baseless fabricof her superstition and empire. The same spirit survived under the successor ofHassan; it was finally quelled by the activity of Musa and his two sons, but thenumber of the rebels may be presumed from that of three hundred thousand cap­tives; sixty thousand of whom, the caliph's fifth, were sold for the profit of thepublic treasury. Thirty thousand of the barbarian youth were enlisted in thetroops; and the pious labours of Musa to inculcate the knowledge and practice of. the Koran, accustomed the Africans to obey the apostle of God and the command­er of the faithful. In their climate and government, their diet and habitation, thewandering Moors resembled the Bedoweens of the desert. With the religion, theywere proud to adopt the language, name, and origin of Arabs: the blood of thestrangers and natives was insensibly mingled; and from the Euphrates to the Atlan­tic the same nation might seem to be diffused over the sandy plains of Asia andAfrica. Yet I will not deny that fifty thousand tents of pure'Arabians might betransported over the Nile, and scattered through the Libyan desert; and I am notignurant that five of the Moorish tribes still retain their barbarous idiom, with theappellation and character of ivhite Africans. (1)
V. In the progress of conquest from the north and south, the Goths and the Sa­racens encountered each other on the confines of Europe and Africa. In the opi­nion of the latter the difference of religion is a reasonable ground of enmity, andwarfare. (2) As early as the time of Othman,(3) their piratical squadrons hadravaged the coasts of Andalusia;(4) nor had they forgotten the relief of Car­thage by the Gothic succours. In that age, as well as in the present, the kingsof Spain were possessed of the fortress of Ceuta; one of the columns of Hercu­les, which is divided by a narrow strait from the opposite pillar or point of Eu-
(1) The first book of Leo Afrieanus. and the observations of Dr. Shaw, (p. 220.223,227.247, &c.) will throwsome light on the roving tribes of Barbary, of Arabian,or Moorish descent. But Shaw had seen these savageswith distant terror; and Leo, a captive in the Vatican, appears to have lost more of his Arabic than he conldacquire of Greek or Roman learning. Many of his gross mistakes might be detected in the first period of theMahometan history.
(2) In a conference with a prince of the Greeks, Amrou observed that their religion was different; upoawhich score it was lawful for brothers to quarrel. Ockley's History of the Saracens, vol. i. p. 328.
(3) Abulfeda, Anna). Moslem, p. 78. vers. Reiske.
(4) The name of Andalusia is applied by the Arabs not only to the modem province, but to the whole penin­sula of Spain. (Geograph. Nub. p. 151. D'Heraelot, Bibliot. Orient, p. 114, 115.) The etymology has beenmost improbably deduced from Vandalusia, country of the Vandals. (D'Anville, Etats de 1'Europe, p. 146,147» &e.j But the Handalusia of Casiri. which signifies in Arabic, the region of the evening, of the west, in •word, the Hesperia of the Greeks is perfectly opposite, (Bibliot. Arabico-Hispana, torn. ii. p. 327, tic.)







OCR Output








- 1







OCR Output








38 THE DECLINE AND FALL


and maliciously observed, that the word archer is introduced by Homer(l) assterm of contempt. "Such contempt might perhaps be due to the naked youth,who appeared on foot in the fields of Troy, and lurking, behind a tomb-stone, orthe shield of a friend, drew the bow-string to their breast,(2) and dismissed a fee­ble and lifeless arrow. But our archers (pursues the historian) are mounted on.horses, which they manage with admirable skill; their head and shoulders are pro­tected by a casque or buckler; they wear greaves of iron on their legs, and theirbodies are guarded by a coat of mail. On their right side hangs a quiver, a sword onthe left, and their hand is accustomed to wield a lance, or javelin, in closer com­bat. Their bows are strong and weighty; they shoot in every possible direction,advancing, retreating, to the front, to the rear, or to either flank; and as they aretaught to draw the bow-string not to the breast, but to the right ear, firm indeedmust be the armour that can resist the rapid violence of their shaft." Five hun­dred transports, navigated by twenty thousand mariners of Egypt, Gilicia, andIonia, were collected in the harbour of Constantinople. The smallest of thesevessels may be computed at thirty, the largest at five hundred tons; and the fairaverage will supply an allowance, liberal, but not profuse, of about one hundredthousand tons, (3) for the reception of thirty-five thousand soldiers and sailors, offive thousand horses, of arms, engines, and military stores, and of a sufficientstock of water and provisions for a voyage, perhaps, of three months. The proudgalleys which in former ages swept the Mediterranean with so many hundredoars, had long since disappeared; and the fleet of Justinian was escorted only byninety-two light brigantines; covered from the missile weapons of the enemy,and rowed by two thousand of the brave and robust youth of Constantinople.Twenty-two generals are named, most of whom were afterward distinguished inthe wars of Africa and Italy: but the supreme command, both by land and sea,was delegated to Belisarius alone, with a boundless power of acting according tohis discretion, as if the emperor himself were present. The separation of the na­val and military professions is at once the effect and the cause of modern improve­ments in the science of navigation and maritime war.
In the seventh year of the reign of Justinian, and about the time of the summersolstice, the whole fleet of six hundred ships was ranged in martial pomp beforethe gardens of the palace. The patriarch pronounced his benediction, the empe­ror signified his last commands, the general's trumpet gave the signal of departure,and every heart, according to its fears or wishes, explored with anxious curiositythe omens of misfortune and success. The first halt was made at Perinthus orHeraclea, where Belisarius waited five days to receive some Thracian horses, amilitary gift of his sovereign. From thence the fleet pursued their course throughthe midst of the Propontis; but, as they struggled to pass the straits of the Helles­pont, an unfavourable wind detained them four days at Abydus, where the generalexhibited a memorable lesson of firmness and severity. Two of the Huns, who,in a drunken quarrel, had slain one of their fellow-soldiers, were instantly shownto the army suspended on a lofty gibbet. The national indignity was resented bytheir countrymen, who disclaimed the servile laws of the empire, and asserted thefree privilege of Scythia, where a small fine was allowed to expiate the hasty sal­lies of intemperance and anger. Their complaints were specious, their clamourswere loud, and the Romans were not averse to the example of disorder and impu­nity. But the rising sedition was appeased by the authority and eloquence of thegeneral: and he represented to the assembled troops the obligation of justice, theimportance of discipline, the rewards of piety and virtue, and the unpardonableguilt of murder, which, in his apprehension, was aggravated rather than excusedby the vice of intoxication. (4) In the navigation from the Hellespont to Pelopon-
(1) See the preface of Procopius. The enemies of archery might quote the reproaches of Diomede, (Iliad,A. 335, fee.) and the permittere vulncra ventis of Lncan: (viii. 384.) yet the Romans could not despise the ar­rows of the Parthians: and in the siege of Troy, Pandarus, Paris, and Tencer, pierced those haughty warriorswho insulted them as women or children.
(2) Nsupfiw n;v jreXseTfe, to£o> Ss 9-iJnpov. (Iliad. A, 1230 How concise—how just—how beautiful is thewhole picture! I see the attitudes of the archer—I hear the twanging of the bow,
&ty%i Pis;, vs-jfn Si pry* oeX.ro o' flfo-TS;.
(3) The text appears to allow for the largest vessels fifty thousand mcdimni, or three thousand tons (sincethe medimnus weighed one hundred and sixty Roman, or one hundred and twenty avoirdupois pounds.) Ihave given a more rational interpretation, by supposing that the Attic style of Procopiul conceals the legaland popular modiusy a sixth part of the nadtmnus. (Hooper's Ancient Measures, p. Ij2, Sec.) A contrary,and indeed a stranger mistake, has crept into an oration of Dinarehus (ennira Demosthcnem, in Heiskc Ora­tor. Grsec. torn. iv. p. 2. p. 34.) By reducing the number of ships from five hundred to fifty, and translatingfuSittm by mtnetor pounds. Cousin has generously allowed five hundred tons for the whole of Uie imperialfleet;—Did he never think ?
(4) I have read of a Greek legislator, who inflicted a double penalty on the crimes committed in a state ofintoxication, but it seems agreed that this ^ras rather a political than a moral law.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. r,


their game without the apprehension of an enemy. On the opposite bank the am­bassadors descried a thousand Armenian horse, who appeared to guard the pas-Sage of the Euphrates. The tent of Belisarius was of the coarsest linen, the sim­ple equipage of a warrior, who disdained the luxury of the east. Around his tent,the nations who marched under his standard were arranged with skilful confusion.The Thracians and Illyrians were posted in the front, the Heruli and Goths^inthe centre; the prospect was closed by the Moors and Vandals, and their loosearray seemed to multiply their numbers. Their dress was light and active: onesoldier carried a whip, another a sword, a third a bow, a fourth perhaps a battle-axe, and the whole picture exhibited the intrepidity of the troops and the vigi­lance of the general. Chosroes was deluded by the address, and awed by thegenius, of the lieutenant of Justinian. Conscious of the merit, and ignorant ofthe force, of his antagonist, he dreaded a decisive battle in a distant country, fromwhence not a Persian might return to relate the melancholy tale. The great kinghastened to repass the Euphrates; and Belisarius pressed his retreat, by affectingto oppose a measure so salutary to the empire, and which could scarcely have beenprevented by an army of a hundred thousand men. Envy might suggest to igno­rance and pride, that the public enemy had been suffered to escape: but the Afri­can and Gothic triumphs are less glorious than this safe and bloodless victory, inwhich neither fortune, nor the valour of the soldiers, can subtract any part of thegeneral's renown. The second removal of Belisarius from the Persian to the Ita­lian war, revealed the extent of his personal merit, which had corrected or sup­plied the want of discipline and courage. Fifteen generals, without concert orskill, led through the mountains of Armenia an army of thirty thousand Romans,inattentive to their signals, their ranks, and their ensigns. Four thousand Persians,intrenched the camp of Dubis, vanquished, almost without a combat, this disor­derly multitude; their useless arms were scattered along the road, and their horsessunk under the fatigue of their rapid flight. But the Arabs of the Roman partyprevailed over their brethren; the Armenians returned to their allegiance; thecities of Dara and Edessa resisted a sudden assault and a regular siege, and thecalamities of war were suspended by those of pestilence. A tacit or formal agree­ment between the two sovereigns, protected the tranquillity of the eastern frontier;and the arms of Chosroes were confined to the Colchian or Lazic war, which hasbeen too minutely described by the historians of the times. (1)
The extreme length of the Euxine sea,(2) from Constantinople to the mouth ofthe Phasis, may be computed as a voyage of nine days, and a measure of sevenhundred miles. From the Iberian Caucasus the most lofty and craggy mountainsof Asia, that river descends with such oblique vehemence, that, in a short space,it is traversed by one hundred and twenty bridges. Nor does the stream becomeplacid and navigable, till it reaches the town of Sarapana, five days' journey fromthe Cyrus, which flows from the same hills, but in a contrary direction, to theCaspian lake. The proximity of these rivers has suggested the practice, or atleast the idea, of wafting the precious merchandise of India down the Oxus, overthe Caspian, up the Cyrus, and with the current of the Phasis into the Euxineand Mediterranean seas. As it successively collects the streams of the plain ofColchos, the Phasis moves with diminished speed, though accumulated weight.At the mouth it is sixty fathoms deep and half a league broad, but a small woody-island is interposed in the midst of the channel: the water, so soon as it has depo­sited an earthy or metallic sediment, floats on the surface of the waves, and is nolonger susceptible of corruption. In a course of one hundred miles, forty ofwhich are navigable for large vessels, the Phasis divides the celebrated region ofColchos,(3) or Mingrelia,(4) which, on three sides, is fortified by the Iberian and
(1) The Lazic war, the contest of Rome and Persia on the Phasis, is tediously spun through many a paceof Proccpius (Persic, lib. ii. c. 15. 17. 28—30.,) Gothic, (lib. iv. c. 7—16.,) and Agathias (lib. 2—4. p. 55—132.111.)
(2) The Periplus, or circumnavigation of the Euxine sea, was described in Latin by Sallnst, and in Greekby Arrian. 1. The former work, which no longer exists, has been restored by the singular diligence of M. deBrasses, first president of the parliament of Dijon (Hist, de la Republique Romaine. torn. ii. lib. iii. p. 199—298.,) who ventures to assume the character of the Roman historian. His description of (lie Emineis ingeni­ously formed of alt the fragments of the original, and of all the Greeks and Latins whom Sallust might copyor by whom he might be copied; and the merit of the execution atones for (he whimsical design. 2. The Peri-plus of Arrian is addressed to the emperor Adrian (in Geograph. Minor. Hudson, torn, i.,) and contains what­ever the governor of Pontus had seen, from Trebizond to Dioscuriat; whatever he had heard from Dioscnrias*o the Danube; and whatever he knew from the Danube to Trebizond.
(3) Besides many occasional hints from the poets, historians, &c. of antiquity, we may consult the geographi-*cal descriptions of Colchos, by Strabo (lib. xi. p. 760—765.) and Pliny (Hist. Natur. 6.5.19, &c.)
(4) I shall quote, and have used, three modern descriptions of Mingrelia and the adjacent countries.. 1. Of







OCR Output








306 THE DECLINE ANB FALL


hair, which falls each year and is renewed, is coarsely manufactured into the gar­ments, the furniture and the tents, of the Bedoweens. In the rainy seasons theyconsume the rare and insufficient herbage of the desert: during the heats of sum­mer and the scarcity of winter, they remove their encampments to the sea-coast,the hills of Yemen, or the neighbourhood of the Euphrates, and have often ex­torted the dangerous license' of visiting the banks of the Nile, and the villages ofSyria and Palestine. The life of a wandering Arab is a life of danger and distress;and though sometimes, by rapine or exchange, he may appropriate the fruits ofindustry, a private citizen in Europe is in the possession of more solid and pleasingluxury, than the proudest emir, who marches in the field at the head of ten thou­sand horse.
Yet an essential difference may be found between the hordes of Scythia and theArabian tribes, since many of the latter were collected into towns, and employedin the labours of trade and agriculture. A part of their time and industry wasstill devoted to the management of their cattle: they mingled, in peace and war,with their brethren of the desert; and the Bedoweens derived from their usefulintercourse, some supply of their wants, and some rudiments of art and know­ledge. A mong the forty-two cities of Arabia, (1) enumerated by Abulfeda, the mostancient and populous were situate in the hafifty Yemen; the towers of Saana,(2)and the marvellous reservoir of Merab,(3) were constructed by the kings of theHomerites; but their profane lustre was eclipsed by the prophetic glories of Me-dina(4) and Mf.cca,(5) near the Red Sea, and at the distance from each other oftwo hundred and seventy miles. The last of these holy places was known to theGreeks under the name of Macoraba; and the termination of the word is expres­sive of its greatness, which has not indeed, in the most flourishing period, exceed­ed the size and populousness of Marseilles. Some latent motive, perhaps of su­perstition, must have impelled the founders, in the choice of a most unpro­mising situation. They erected their habitations of mud or stone, in a plain abouttwo miles long, and one mile broad, at the foot of three barren mountains: the soilis a rock, the water, even of the holy well of Zemzem, is bitter or brackish; thepastures are remote from the city: and grapes are transported above seventy milesfrom the gardens of Tayef, The fame and spirit of the Koreishites, who reignedin Mecca, were conspicuous among the Arabian tribes; but their ungrateful soilrefused the labours of agriculture, and their position was favourable to the enter­prises of trade. By the sea-port of Gedda, at the distance only of forty miles, theymaintained an easy correspondence with Abyssinia; and that Christian kingdomafforded the first refuge to the disciples of Mahomet. The treasures of Africawere conveyed over the peninsula to Gerrha or Katiff, in the province of Bahrein,a city built, as it is said, of rock salt, by the Chaldean exiles:(6) and from thence,with the native pearls of the Persian gulf, they were floated on rafts to the mouthof the Euphrates. Mecca is placed almost at an equal distance, a month's jour­ney, between Yemen on the right, and Syria on-the left hand. The former wasthe winter, the latter the summer, stations of her caravans; and their seasonablearrival relieved the ships of India from their tedious and troublesome navigationof the Red Sea. In the markets of Saana and Merab, in the harbours of Oman
the camel; bat the diet of Mecca, and Medina, was already more luxurious. (Gagnier, Vie de Mabomet, torn.
iii. p. 404.)
(1) Yet Marcian of Heraclea fin Periplo, p. 16. in torn. i. Hudson, Minor. Geograph.) reckons one hundredand sixty-four towns in Arabia Felix. The size of the towns might be small—the faith of the writer might belarge.
(2) It is compared by Abulfeda (in Hudson, torn. iii. p. S4.) to Damascus, and is still the residence of the Imanof Yemen. (Voyages de Niebuhr, torn. i. p. 331—342.) Saana is twenty-four parasangs from Dasar, (Abulfeda,p. 51.) and sixty-eight from Aden. (p. 53.)
(3) Pocock, Specimen, p. 57. Geograph. Nubiensis, p. 52. Moriaba, or Merab, six miles in circumferencewas destroyed by the legions of Augustus, (Plin. Hist. Nat. 6. 32.) and had not revived in the fourteenth cen­tury. (Abulfed. D-script. Arab. p. 58.)
(4) The name of city, Medina, was appropriated x«t> ile-/x«, to Yatreb, (the Latrippa of the GreeksJ tkeseat of the prophet. The distances from Medina are reckoned by Abulfeda in stations, or days'journey of acaravan: (p. 15.) to Bahrein, fifteen; to Bassora. eighteen: to Cusah, twenty; to Damascus or Palestine, twen­ty; to Cairo, twenty-five; to Mecca, ten; from Mecca to Saana, (p. 52.) or Aden, thirty; to Cairo, thirty-onedays, or four hundred and twelve hours; (Shaw's Travels, p. 477.) which, according to the estimate of d'An-ville, (Misures Itineraires, p. 90.) allows about twenty-five English miles for a day's journey. From the landof frankincense (Hadramant. in Yemen, between Aden and Cape Fartasch) to Gaza, jn Syria, Pliny (Hist.Nat. 12. 32.) compiit s sixty-five mansions of camels. These measu res may assist fancy and elucidate tacts.
(5) Our notions of M -cca mnst be drawn from the Arabians. (d'Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientale, p. 368—371. Pocock, Specimen, p. 125—128. Abulfeda, p. 11—40.) As no unbeliever is permitted to enter the city,our travellers are silent; and the short hints of Thevenot, (Voyages du Lavant, part 1. p. 408.) are taken fromthe suspicious mouth of an African renegado. Some Persians counted six thousand houses. (Cbardin, torn.
iv. p. 167.) '
(6) Strabo, lib.xvi. p. 1110. Sec one of these salt-houses near Baswra, in d'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orient, p. 6­







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. fl&


Called to Sicily, to appease a sedition which was kindled during his absence in his owncamp.(l) Disorder and disobedience were the common maladies of the times:the genius to command, and the virtue to obey, resided only in the mind of Beli­sarius.
Although Theodatus descended from a race of heroes, he was ignorant of theart, and averse to the dangers of war. Although he had studied the writings ofPlato and Tully, philosophy was incapable of purifying his mind from the basestpassions, avarice and fear. He had purchased a sceptre by ingratitude and mur­der: at the first menace of an enemy, he degraded his own majesty, and that of anation, which already disdained their unworthy sovereign. Astonished by the re­cent example of Gelimer, he saw himself dragged in chains through the streets ofConstantinople; the terrors which Belisarius inspired, were heightened by the elo­quence of Peter, the Byzantine ambassador; and that bold and subtle advocatepersuaded him to sign a treaty, too ignominious to become the foundation of a lastingpeace. It was stipulated, that, in the acclamations of the Roman people, the nameof the emperor should always be proclaimed before that of the Gothic king; andthat as often as the statue of Theodatus was erected in brass or marble, the divineimage of Justinian should be placed on its right hand. Instead of conferring, theking of Italy was reduced to solicit, the honours of the senate; and the consent ofthe emperor was made indispensable before he could execute, against a priest orsenator, the sentence either of death or confiscation. The feeble monarch resignedthe possession of Sicily; offered, as the annual mark of his dependence, a crown ofgold, of the weight of three hundred pounds; and promised to supply, at the requi­sition of his sovereign, three thousand Gothic auxiliaries for the service of the em­pire. Satisfied with these extraordinary concessions, the successful agent of Jus­tinian hastened his journey to Constantinople; but no sooner had he reached theAlban Villa,(2) than he was recalled by the anxiety of Theodatus; and the dialoguewhich passed between the king and the ambassador deserves to be represented inits original simplicity. " Are you of opinion that the emperor will ratify thistreaty?" Perhaps. "If he refuses, what consequence will ensue?" War. "Willsuch a war be just or reasonable?" Most assuredly: every one should act accord­ing to his character. "What is your meaning?" You are a philosopher—Justi­nian is emperor of the Romans: it would ill become the disciple of Plato to shedthe blood of thousands in his private quarrel: the successor of Augustus should vin­dicate his rights, and recover by arms the ancient provinces of his empire. Thisreasoning might not convince, bu* it was sufficient to alarm and subdue the weak­ness of Theodatus; and he soon descended to his last offer, that for the poor equiva­lent of a pension of 48,000/. sterling, he would resign the kingdom of the Goths andItalians, and spend the remainder of his days in the innocent pleasures of philosophyand agriculture. Both treaties were intrusted to the hands of the ambassador, on thefrail security of an oath, not to produce the second till the first had been positively re­jected. The event may be easily foreseen: Justinian required and accepted the abdi­cation of the Gothic king. His indefatigable agent returned from Constantinople toRavenna, with ample instructions; and a fair epistle, which praised the wisdom andgenerosity of the royal philosopher, granted his pension, with the assurance of suchhonours as a subject and a catholic might enjoy; and wisely referred the final exe­cution of the treaty, to the presence and authority of Belisarius. But in the inter­val of suspense, two Roman generals, who had entered the province of Dalmatia,were defeated and slain by the Gothic troops. From blind and abject despair,Theodatus capriciously rose to groundless and fatal presumption,(3) and dared to-receive with menace and contempt, the ambassador of Justinian, who claimed his-promise, solicited the allegiance of his subjects, and boldly asserted the invio­lable privilege of his own character. The march of Belisarius dispelled this vi­sionary pride; and as the first campaign(4) was employed in the reduction of Sicily,
(1) Proconius (Vandal. lib. ii. c. 14,15.) so clearly relates the return of Belisarius into Sicily (p. 146. editvHoeschelii.) that I am astonished at the strange misapprehension and reproaches of a learned critic. (CRuvres:de la Mothe le Vayer, torn. riii. p. 162,163.)
(2) The ancient Alba was ruined in the first age nf Rome. On the same spot, or at least in the neighbour­hood, successively arose; 1. The villa of Pompey, &e. 2. A camp of the pretorian cohorts. 3. The modern-episcopal city of Albanum or Albano (Procop. Goth. lib. ii. c. 4. Cluver. Ital. Antiq. torn. ii. p. 914.)
(3) A Sibylline oracle was ready to pronounce—Africa capta mundui cum nato peribit; a sentence of por­tentous ambiguity (Gothic lib. i. c. 7..) which has been published in unknown characters by Opsopaeus, an-editor of the oracles. The Pere Maltreat has promised a commentary; but all his promises have been vain and*fruitless.
(4) In his chronology, imitated in some degree from Thucydides, Procopms begins each spring the y*an of







OCR Output








©E THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 289


rous, but the times were more savage, the prize more important, and the chair ofSt. Peter was fiercely disputed by the leading ecclesiastics who aspired to the rankof sovereign. The reign of Hadrian 1.(1) surpasses the measure of past or suc­ceeding ages;(2) the walls of Rome, the sacred patrimony, the ruin of the Lom­bards, and the friendship of Charlemagne, were the trophies of his fame: hesecretly edified the throne of his successors, and displayed in a narrow space thevirtues of a great prince. His memory was revered; but in the next election, apriest of the Lateran, Leo III. was preferred to the nephew and the favourite ofHadrian, whom he had promoted to the first dignities of the church. Their ac­quiescence or Tepentance disguised, above four years, the blackest intention of re­venge, till the day of a procession, when a furious band of conspirators dispersedthe unarmed multitude, and assaulted with blows and wounds the sacred person ofthe pope. But their enterprise on his life or liberty was disappointed, perhaps bytheir own confusion and remorse. Leo was left for dead on the ground: on his re­vival from the swoon, the effect of his loss of blood, he recovered his speech andsight, and this natural event was improved to the miraculous restoration of his eyesand tongue, of which he had been deprived, twice deprived, by the knife of the as­sassins. (3) From his prison, he escaped to the Vatican; the duke of Spoleto hastenedto his rescue, Charlemagne sympathized in his injury, and in his camp of Pader-born in Westphalia accepted or solicited a visit from the Roman pontiff. Leo re­passed the Alps with a commission of counts and bishops, the guards of his safety andthe judges of his innocence; and it was not without reluctance, that the conquerorof the Saxons delayed till the ensuing year the personal discharge of this piousoffice. In his fourth and last pilgrimage, he was received at Rome with the duehonours of king and patrician: Leo was permitted to purge himself by oath ofthe crimes imputed to his charge: his enemies were silenced, and the sacrilegiousattempt against his life was punished by the mild and insufficient penalty of exile.On the festival of Christmas, the last year of the eighth century, Charlemagneappeared in the church of St. Peter; and, to gratify the vanity of Rome, he hadexchanged the simple dress of his country for the habit of a patrician. (4) Afterthe celebration of the holy mysteries, Leo suddenly placed a precious crown onhis head,(5) and the dome resounded with the acclamations of the people,—" Long life and victory to Charles, the most pious Augustus, crowned by God thegreat and pacific emperor of the Romans!" The head and body of Charlemagnewere consecrated by the royal unction: after the example of the Caisars he wassaluted or adored by the pontiff: his coronation-oath represents a promise to main­tain the faith and privileges of the church: and the first fruits were paid in his richofferings to the shrine of the apostle. In his familiar conversation, the emperorprotested his ignorance of the intentions of Leo, which he would have disappointedby his absence on that memorable day. But the preparations of the ceremonymust have disclosed the secret; and the journey of Charlemagne reveals his know­ledge and expectation: he had acknowledged that the imperial title was the objectof his ambition, and a Roman senate had pronounced, that it was the only adequatereward of his merit and services. (6)
His merits ind hopes are summed up in an epitaph of thirty-eight jerscs, of which Charlemagne de-himself the author. (Concil. torn. viii. p. 520.)
Post natrem lacrymans Cars hp hsec carmina scripsi.Tu mibi dulcis amor, te modo plango pater . . .Nomina jungo simul titulis, clarissime, nostraAdrianus, Carolus, res ego, tuque pater.
The poetry might be supplied by Aleuin; but the tears, the most glorious tribute, can only belong to Chariermatrne.
(2) Every new pope is admonished—" Sancte Pater, non videbis annos Petri." twenty-five years. On thewhole series the average is about eight years—a short hope for an ambitious cardinal.
(3) The assurance of Anastasius (torn. iii. pars i. p. 107,198.) is supported by the credulity of some Frenchannalists; but Kginhard, and other writers of the same age* are more natural and sincere. " Unus ei oculuspaullulnm est Isesus," says John the deacon of Naples. (Vit. Episcop. Napol. in Scriptores Muratori, torn. i.pars ii. p. 312.) Theodolphus, a cotemporary bishop of Orleans, observes with prudence, (lib. iii. cann. iii.)
Reddita sunt ? mirum est: rairum est aulhrre nequisse.Est tamen in dubio, hinc inirer an inde magis.
(4) Twice at the request of Hadrian and Leo, he appeared at Rome—longa tunica et chlamyde amictus, etealcramentis quoque Romano more formatis. Eginhard (c. 23. 109—113,) describes, like Suetonius, the Sim* ,plicity of his dress, so popular in the nation; that when Charles the Bald returned to France in a foreign ha­bit, the patriotic dogs barked at the apostate. (Gaillard, Vie de Charlemagne, torn, iv. p, 100.)
(5) See Anastasius (p. 199.) and Eginhard. (c. 28. p. 124—128.) The unction is mentioned by Theophanes,(p. 399.) the oath by Sigonius, (from the Ordo Romanus) and the pope*s adoration more antiquorum princi-pum, by the Annates Bertiniam. (Script. Murator. torn. ii. pars ii. p. 505.)
(8) This great event of the translation or restoration of the empire, is related and discussed by Natalis V« ■
Vol. III. 37







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


Ins laborious studies of grammar and philosophy. (1) Emboldened by. this fami­liar intercourse, Philoponus presumed to solicit a gift, inestimable in his opinion,contemptible in that of the barbarisms; the royal library, which alone among thespoils of Alexandria, had not been appropriated by the visit and the seal of theconqueror. Amrou was inclined to gratify the wish of the grammarian, but hisrigid integrity refused to alienate the minutest object without the consent of thecaliph; and the well-known answer of Omar was inspired by the ignorance of afanatic. " If these writings of the Greeks agree with the book of God, they areuseless, and need not be preserved: if they disagree, they are pernicious, andought to be destroyed." The sentence was executed with blind obedience; the vo­lumes of paper or parchment were distributed to the four thousand baths of thecity; and such was their incredible multitude, that six months were barely suffi­cient for the consumption of this precious fuel. Since the dynasties of Abulpha-ragius(2) have been given to the world in a Latin version, the tale has been re­peatedly transcribed: and every scholar, with pious indignation, has deplored theirreparable shipwreck of the learning, the arts, and the genius of antiquity. Formy own part I am strongly tempted to deny both the fact and the consequences.The fact is indeed marvellous. Read and wonder! says the historian himself:and the solitary report of a stranger who wrote at the end of six hundred yearson the confines of Media, is overbalanced by the silence of two annalists of amore early date, both Christians, both natives of Egypt, and the most ancient ofwhom, the patriarch Eutychius, has amply described the conquest of Alexan­dria. (3) The rigid sentence of Omar is repugnant to the sound and orthodoxprecept of the Mahometan casuists: they expressly declare that the religiousbooks ef the Jews and Christians, which are acquired by the right of war, shouldnever be committed to the flames; and that the works of profane science, histo­rians, or poets, physicians or philosophers, may be lawfully applied to the use ofthe faithful. (4) • A more destructive zeal may perhaps be attributed to the firstsuccessors of Mahomet; yet in this instance, the conflagration would have speedi­ly expired in the deficiency of materials. I shall not recapitulate the disastersof the Alexandrian library, the involuntary flames that were kindled by Cjcsar inhis own defence,(5) or the mischievous bigotry of the Christians, who studied todestroy the monuments of idolatry. (6) But if we gradually descend from theage of the Antonines to that of Theodosius, we shall learn from a chain of co-temporary witnesses, that the royal palace and the temple of Serapis no longercontained the four, or the seven, hundred thousand volumes, which had been as­sembled by the curiosity and magnificence of the Ptolemies. (7) Perhaps thechurch and seat of the patriarchs might be enriched with a repository of books;but if the ponderous mass of Arian and Monophysite controversy were indeed con­sumed in the public baths,(8) a philosopher may allow, with a smile, that it wasultimately devoted to the benefit of mankind. I sincerely regret the more valua­ble libraries which have been involved in the ruin of the Roman empire: but whenI seriously compute the lapse of ages, the waste of ignorance, and the calamitiesof war, our treasures, rather than our losses, are the object of my surprise. Many


(1) Many treatises of this lover of labour (cixcii-avoc) are still extant; but fur readers of the present age, theprinted and unpublished are nearly in the same predicament. Moses and Aristotle are the chief objects of hisverbose commentaries, one of which is dated as early as May 10, A. U. tin. (Fabric, liibliot. Graic. torn. ix. p.458—468.) A modern (John Le Clerc,) who someiimes assumes the same name, was equal to old Philoponus mdiligence, and far superior in good sense and real knowledge.
(2) Abulpharag. Dynast, p. 114. vers. Poeock. Audi quid factum sit eynirare. It would be endless to enu­merate the modems who have wondered and believed, but I may distinguish with honour the rational scepti­cism of Renaudot: (Hist. Alex. Patriarch, p. 170.) historia .... habet aliqnid m.3-t:v ut Arabibus familiareest.
(3) This curious anecdote will be vainly sought in the annals of Eutychius and the Saracenic history of El-macin. The silence of Abulf^da, Mortadi, and a crowd of Moslems, is less conclusise from their ignorance ofChristian literature.
(4) See Iteland, de Jure Mililuri Mnhammedanorum, in his third volume of Dissertations', p. 37. The r- asonsfor not burning the religious books of the Jews or Christians, is derived from the respect that is due to the nameof Ond.
(5) Consult the collections of Frensheiin (Supplement. Livian. e. 12. 43.) anil Usher. Aunal. p. 4tio.) Livyhimself bad styled the Alexandrian library, eh gantiae regum cuiaiqtie egregium opus; a liberal encomium, forwhich he is partly criticised by the narrow stoicism of Seneca, (De l'ranquillitale Animi, e. y.) whose wisdom,on this occasion, deviates into nonsense.
(6) See this History, vol. v. p. 111.
(7) Aulus Gellius (Noctes Atticse, 6. 17.) Ammianas Mareellinus, (22. 16.) and Orosius. (lib. vi. c. 15.) Theyall speak in xhepaet tense, and the words of Ammianus are remarkably strong: fuerunt Bibliothece innume*rabiles: et loquitur monumentoruni veterum concinens fidi s. Sic.
(8) Renaudot answers for version, of the Bible. Hexapla Catena; Patrum, Commentaries, fcc. (p. 170.) OurAlexandrian MS.if it came from Egypt, and not from Constantinople, or mount Athos, (Wetstein, Prolegom.at N. T. p. 8, Sec.) mightpossiOOj be among them.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


than arms or numbers. Be patient till they have loaded themselves with theincumbrance of wealth. This possession of wealth will divide their counsels, andassure your victory." This subtle policy is perhaps a refinement of the Arabianwriters; and the situation of Charles will suggest a more narrow and selfish mo­tive of procrastination; the secret desire of humbling the pride, and wasting theprovinces, of the rebel duke of Aquitain. It is yet more probable, that the delaysof Charles were inevitable and reluctant.. A standing army was unknown underthe first and second race: more than half the kingdom was now in the hands ofthe Saracens: according to their respective situations, the Franks of Neustria andAustrasia were too conscious or too careless of the impending danger; and the vo­luntary aids of the Gepidsc and Germans were separated by a long interval fromthe standard of the Christian general. No sooner had he collected his forces, thanhe sought and found the enemy in the centre of France, between Tours and Poi­tiers. His well conducted march was covered by a range of hills, and Abderameappears to have been surprised by his unexpected presence. The nations of Asia,Africa, and Europe, advanced with equal ardour, to an encounter which wouldchange the history of the world. In the six first days of desultory combat, thehorsemen and archers of the east maintained their advantage: but in the closeronset of the seventh day the orientals were oppressed by the strength and statureof the Germans, who, with stout hearts and iron hands,(l) asserted the civil andreligious freedom of their posterity. The epithet of Martel, the Hammer, whichhas been added to the name of Charles, is expressive of his weighty and irresisti­ble strokes: the valour of Eudes was excited by resentment and emulation; andtheir companions, in the eye of history, are the true peers and paladins of Frenchchivalry. After a bloody field, in which Abderame was slain, the Saracens, in theclose of the evening, retired to their camp. In the disorder and despair of the night,the various tribes of Yemen and Damascus, of Africa and Spain, were provoked toturn their arms against each other: the remains of their host were suddenly dis­solved, and each emir consulted his safety by a hasty and separate retreat. At thedawn of day, the stillness of a hostile camp was suspected by the victorious Chris­tians: on the report of their spies, they ventured to explore the riches of the va­cant tents; but, if we except some celebrated relics, a small portion of the spoilwas restored to the innocent and lawful owners. The joyful tidings were soon dif­fused over the catholic world, and the monks of Italy could affirm and believe thatthree hundred and fifty, or three hundred and seventy-five thousand of the Ma­hometans had been crushed by the hammer of Charles:(2) while no more thanfifteen hundred Christians were slain in the field of Tours. But this incredible taleis sufficiently disproved by the caution of the French general, who apprehendedthe snares and accidents of a pursuit, and dismissed his German allies to their na­tive forests. The inactivity of a conqueror betrays the loss of strength and blood,and the most cruel execution is inflicted, not in the ranks of battle, but on the backsof a flying enemy. Yet the victory of the Franks was complete and final; Aqui­tain was recovered by the arms of Eudes; the Arabs never resumed the conquestof Gaul, and they were soon driven beyond the Pyrenees by Charles Martel and hisvaliant race. (3) It might have been expected that the saviour of Christendomwould have been canonized, or at least applauded, by the gratitude of the clergy,who are indebted to his sword for their present existence. But in the public dis­tress the mayor of the palace had been compelled to apply the riches, or at leastthe revenues, of the bishops and abbots, to the relief of the state and the rewardof the soldiers. His merits were forgotten, his sacrilege alone was remembered,and, in an epistle to a Carlovingian prince, a Gallic synod presumes to declarethat his ancestor was damned; that on the opening of his tomb, the spectators wereaffrighted by a smell of fire and the aspect of a horrid dragon; and that a saint of


(!) Gens Austria membrorum pre-cminentia valida, el gens Germans corde et corpore pracstantissiina, quasiin ictu aeuti maim ferrea et pectore arduo Arabes extinxerunt. (Roderic. Toleian. c. 14.)
(2) These numbers are stated by Paul Warnefrid, the deacon of Aquilcia (de Gestis Langobard. lib. vi. p.921. edit. Grot.) and Anastasius, the librarian of the Unman church, (in Vit. Gregorii II.) who tells o. miracu­lous story of three consecrated sponges, which rendered invulnerable the French soldiers among whom theyhad been shared. It should seem, that in his letters to the pope, Eudes usurped the honour of the victory, forwhich he was chastised by the French annalists, who, with equal falsehood, accuses liim of inviting the Sara­cens.
(3) Narbovtne, and the rest of Septimania, was recovered by Pepin, the son of Charles Martel, A. D. 755.(nsgl,Critics, torn. iii. p. 300.) Thirty-seven years afterward it was pillaged by a sudden inroad of the Arabs,wlio employed the captives in the construction of the mascri of Cordova. (De Guigncs,Hist. des Hum, torn, i-p. 354.)







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


and the arms of the Greeks were idly employed in the reduction of Modena andParma, which were torn from them after the retreat of their transalpine allies.The victorious Autharis asserted his claim to the dominion of Italy. At the footof the Rhaetian Alps, he subdued the resistance, and rifled the hidden treasures ofa sequestered island in the lake of Comum. At the extreme point of Calabria, hetouched with his spear a column on the sea-shore of Rhegium,(l) proclaiming thatancient land-mark to stand the immoveable boundary of his kingdom. (2)
During a period of two hundred years, Italy was unequally divided between thekingdom of the Lombards, and the exarchate of Ravenna. The offices and pro­fessions, which the jealousy of Constantine had separated, were united by the in­dulgence of Justinian; and eighteen successive exarchs were invested, in the de­cline of the empire, with the full remains of civil, of military, and even of ecclesi­astical power. Their immediate jurisdiction, which was afterward consecratedas the patrimony of St. Peter, extended over the modern Romagna, the marshesor valleys of Ferrara and Commachio,(3) five maritime cities from Rimini to An-cona, and a second, inland Pentapolis, between the Adriatic coast and the hills ofthe Apennine. Three subordinate provinces, of Rome, of Venice, and of Naples,which were divided by hostile lands from the palace of Ravenna, acknowledgedboth in peace and war, the supremacy of the exarch. The duchy of Rome ap­pears to have included the Tuscan, Sabine, and Latin conquests, of the first fourhundred years of the city, and the limits may be distinctly traced along the coast,from Civita Vecchia, to Tevracina, and with the course of the Tiber from Ameriaand Narni to the port of Ostia. The numerous islands from Grado to Chiozza,composed the infant dominion of Venice; but the more accessible towns on the con­tinent were overthrown by the Lombards, who beheld with impotent fury, a newcapital rising from the waves. The power of the dukes of Naples was circum­scribed by the bay and the adjacent isles, by the hostile territory of Capua, and bythe Roman colony of Amalphi,(4) whose industrious citizens, by the invention ofthe mariner's compass, have unveiled the face of the globe. The three islands ofSardinia, Corsica, and Sicily, still adhered to the empire; and the acquisition of thefarther Calabria removed the land-mark of Autharis from the shore of Rhegiumto the isthmus of Consentia. In Sardinia, the savage mountaineers preserved theliberty and religion of their ancestors; but the husbandmen of Sicily were chainedto their rich and cultivated soil. Rome was oppressed by the iron sceptre of theexarchs, and a Greek, perhaps a eunuch, insulted with impunity the ruins of the ca­pital. But Naples soon acquired the privilege of electing her own dukes;(5) the inde­pendence of Amalphi was the fruit of commerce; and the voluntary attachment ofVenice was finally ennobled by an equal alliance with the eastern empire. On themap of Italy, the measure of the exarchate occupies a very inadequate space, but itincluded an ample proportion of wealth, industry, and population. The most faith­ful and valuable subjects escaped from the barbarian yoke; and the banners of Pa-via and Verona, of Milan and Padua, were displayed in their respective quartersby the new inhabitants of Ravenna. The remainder of Italy was possessed by theLombards; and from Pavia, the royal seat, their kingdom was extended to theeast, the north, and the west, as far as the confines of the Avars, the Bavarians,and the Franks of Austrasia and Burgundv. In the language of modern geogra­phy, it is now represented by the Terra Firma of the Venetian republic, Tyrol,the Milanese, Piedmont, the coast of Genoa, Mantua, Parma, and Modena, thegrand duchy of Tuscany, and a large portion of the ecclesiastical state from Peru­gia to the Adriatic. The dukes, and at length the princes, of Beneventum sur­vived the monarchy, and propagated the name of the Lombards. From Capua toTarentum, they reigned near five hundred years over the greatest part of the pre­sent kingdom, of Naples. (6)
CO The Columns Rhegina, in the narrowest part of the Paro of Messina, one hundred stadia from Rhe­nium itself, is frequently mentioned in ancient Geography, Cluver. Ital. Antiq. torn. ii. p. 1295. Lucas Hol-stein. Annotat. ad Cluver. p. 301. Wesseling, Itinerar. p. 100.
(2) The Greek historians afford some faint hints of the wars of Italy (Menander, in Encerpt. Legat. p. 124,126 Theophylact, lib. iii. c. 4.) The Latins are more satisfactory; and especially Paul Warnefrid, (lib. iii. 13.34^) who had read the more ancient histories of Secundus and Gregory of Tours. Baronius produces someletters of the popes, &c. and the times are measured by the accurate scale of Pagi and Muratori.
(3) The papal advocates.Zacagni and Fontanini, might justly claim the valley or morass of Comraachio asa part of the exarchate. But the ambition of including Modena, Reggio, Parma, and Placentia, has darkeneda geographical question somewhat doubtful and obscure. Even Muratori, as the servant of the house of Este,is not free from partiality and prejudice.
(4) See Brenchmann, Dissert. I ma de Republica Amalphitana, p. 1—42. ad calcero Hist. Pandect. Florent.(3) Gregor. Magn. lib. iii. epist.23. 25—27.
<6) I have described the state of Italy from the excellent Dissertation of Beretti. Giaanone (Istoria Ci-







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 181


conqueror. (1) The eastern regions of Germany, which had been left vacant bythe emigration of the Vandals, were replenished with the Sclavonian colonists:the same tribes are discovered in the neighbourhood of the Hadriatic and of theBaltic, and with the name of Baian himself, the Illyrian cities of Neyss and Lissaare again found in the heart of Silesia. In the disposition both of his troops andprovinces, the chagan exposed the vassals, whose lives he disregarded,(2) to thefirst assault; and the swords of the enemy were blunted before they encounteredthe native valour of the Avars.
The Persian alliance restored the troops of the east to the defence of .Europe;and Maurice, who had supported ten years the insolence of the chagan, declaredhis resolution to march in person against the barbarians. In the space of twocenturies, none of the successors of Theodosius had appeared in the field, theirlives were supinely spent in the palace of Constantinople; and the Greeks couldno longer understand, that the name of emfieror, in its primitive sense, denotedthe chief of the armies of the republic The martial ardour of Maurice was op­posed by the grave flattery of the senate, the timid superstition of the patriarch,and the tears of the empress Constantina; and they all conjured him to devolve onsome meaner general the fatigues and perils of a Scythian campaign. Deaf totheir advice and entreaty, the emperor boldly advanced(3) seven miles from thecapital; the sacred ensign of the cross was displayed in the front, and Maurice re­viewed, with conscious pride, the arms and numbers of the veterans who hadfought and conquered beyond the Tigris. Anchialus saw the last term of his pro­gress by sea and land; he solicited, without success, a miraculous answer to hisnocturnal prayers; his mind was copfounded by the death of a favourite horse, theencounter of a wild boar, a storm of wind and rain, and the birth of a monstrouschild, and he forgot that the best omen is to unsheathe our sword in the defenceof our country. (4) Under the pretence of receiving the ambassadors of Persia,the emperor returned to Constantinople, exchanged the thoughts of war for thoseof devotion, and disappointed the public hope, by his absence and the choice of hislieutenants. The blind partiality of fraternal love might excuse the promotion ofhis brother Peter, who fled with equal disgrace from the barbarians, from his ownsoldiers, and from the inhabitants of a Roman city. That city, if we may creditthe resemblance of name and character, was the famous Azimuntium,(5; whichhad alone repelled the tempest of Attila. The example of her warlike youthwas propagated to succeeding generations; and they obtained, from the first orthe second Justin, an honourable privilege, that their valour should be always re­served for the defence of their native country. The brother of Maurice attemptedto violate this privilege, and to mingle a patriot band with the mercenaries of hiscamp; they retired to the church, he was not awed by the sanctity of the place;the people rose in their cause, the gates were shut, the ramparts were manned;and the cowardice of Peter was found equal to his arrogance and injustice. Themilitary fame of Commentiolus(6) is the object of satire or comedy rather than ofserious history, since he was even deficient in the vile and vulgar qualification ofpersonal courage. His solemn councils, strange evolutions, and secret orders,always supplied an apology for flight or delay. If he marched against the enemy,the pleasant valleys of mount Hxmus opposed an insuperable barrier; but in hisretreat, he explored, with fearless curiosity, the most difficult and obsolete paths,which had almost escaped the memory of the oldest native. The only bloodwhich he lost was drawn, in a real or affected malady, by the lancet of a surgeon;and his health, which felt with exquisite sensibility the" approach of the barba-
(0 Thii is one of the most probable anil luminous conjectures of the learned count tie Bunt. (Hist, des Pen­nies Barbara, torn. xi. p. 54tJ—568.) The Tzeehi and Serbi are found together near mount Caucasus, in llly-ricum, and on the lower Elbe. Even the wildest traditions of the Bohemians, Sec. afford some colour to hishypothesis.
(2) See Fredegarius, in the historians of France, torn. ii. p. 432. Baian did not conceal his proud insensibili­ty. Or* ToiavTsus (not TorouTouc, according to a foolish emendation,) ittx%htu> t* Pm^'kh »? " **< oypdaoi > *
(3) See the march and return of Maurice, in Theophylact. lib. v. c. 16. lib. vi. c. 1—3. If he were a wri­ter of taste or genius, we might suspect him of an elegant irony: but Theophylact is surely harmless.
(4) 'E'; 0*wvOf apirrei; apuvftrfal srepi irxrfr:. Iliad, ail. 243.
This noble verse, which unites the spirit of a hero with the reason of a sage, may prove that Homer was inevery light superior to bis age and country.
(5) Theophylact, lib. vii. c. 3. On the evidence of this fact, which had not occurred to my memory, thecandid reader will correct and excuse a note in the second volume of this history, which hastens the de­cay of Asirnus, or Azimuntium: another century of patriotism and valour is cheaply purchased by such aconfession.
(6) See the shameful conduct of Commcntiolus, in Theophvlact. lib. ii. c. 10—15; lib. vii. e. 13.14; lib. viii.*. 2. 4.







OCR Output








01? THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 117


revenge embraces the moment, and selects the victim: and the earth often swal­lows the assassin, or the ravisher, in the consummation of their crimes. Superstitioninvolves the present danger with invisible terrors; and if .the image of cteath maysometimes be subservient to the virtue or repentance of individuals, an affrightedpeople is more forcibly moved to expect the end of the world, or to deprecate withservile homage the wrath of an avenging Deity. *
III. Ethiopia and Egypt have been stigmatized in every age, as the originalsource and seminary ot the plague.(l) In a damp, hot, stagnating air, this Afri­can fever is generated from the putrefaction of animal substances, and especiallyfrom the swarms of locusts, not less destructive to mankind in their death than intheir lives. The fatal disease which depopulated the earth in the time of Justi­nian and his successors,(2) first appeared in the neighbourhood of Pelusium, be­tween the Serbonian bog and the eastern channel of the Nile. From thence,tracing as it were a double path, it spread to the east, over Syria, Persia, and theIndies, and penetrated to the west, along the coast of Africa, and over the conti­nent of Europe. In the spring of the second year, Constantinople, during threeor four months, was visited by the pestilence; and Procopius, who observed itsprogress and symptoms with the eyes of a physician,(3) has emulated the skilland diligence of Thucydides in the description of the plague of Athens. (4) Theinfection was sometimes announced by the visions of a distempered fancy, andthe victim despaired as soon as he had heard the menace and felt the stroke of aninvisible spectre. But the greater number, in their beds, in the streets, in theirusual occupation, were surprised by a slight fever; so slight, indeed, that neitherthe pulse nor the colour of the patient gave any signs of the approaching danger.The same, the next, or the succeeding day, it was declared by the swelling of theglands; particularly those of the groin, of the arm-pits, and under the ear; andwhen those buboes or tumours were opened, they were found to contain a coal,or black substance, of the size of a lentil. If they came to a just swelling and sup­puration, the patient was saved by this kind and natural discharge of the morbidhumour. But if they continued hard and dry, a mortification quickly ensued, andthe fifth day was commonly the term of his life. The fever was often accompa­nied with lethargy or delirium; the bodies of the sick were covered with blackpustules or carbuncles, the symptoms of immediate death; and in the constitu­tions too feeble to produce an eruption, the vomiting of blood was followed by amortification of the bowels. To pregnant women the plague was generally mor­tal; yet one infant was drawn alive from his dead mother, and three motherssurvived the loss of their infected foetus. Youth was the most perilous season;and the female sex was less susceptible than the male; but every rank and pro­fession was attacked with indiscriminate rage, and many of those who escapedwere deprived of the use of their speech, without being secure from a return ofthe disorder.(5) The physicians of Constantinople were zealous and skilful: buttheir art was baffled by the various symptoms and pertinacious vehemence of thedisease: the same remedies were productive of contrary effects, and the event ca­priciously disappointed their prognostics of death or recovery. The ortVr of fu­nerals, and the right of sepulchres, were confounded: those who were left withoutfriends or servants, lay unburied in the streets, or in their desolate houses; and amagistrate was authorized to collect the promiscuous heaps of dead bodies to trans­port them by land or water, and to inter them in deep pits beyond the precinctsof the city. Their own danger, and the prospects of public distress, awakenedsome remorse in the minds of the most vicious of mankind; the confidence of
(1) I have read with pleasure Mead's short, but elegant treatise concerning pestilential disorders, the eighthedition. London, 1722.
(2) The great plague which raged in 542, and the following years, (Pagi. Critica, torn. ii. p. SIS.) must hetraced in Procopius, (Persic, lib. ii. c. 22,23.) Agathias {lib. v. p. 153,154.) Eragrius, (lib. iv. e. 29.) Paul Di»-cnnus, (lib.il. c. 4. p. 776,777. (Gregory of Tours, (torn. ii. lib. 4.c. 5. p. 205.) who styles it Lues Inguinaria, andthe Chronicles of Victor Tunnunensis, (p. 9. in Thesaur. Temporum,) of Marcellinus, (p. 54.) and of Theo-phanes (p. 153.)
(3) Dr. Friend (Hist. Medicin. in Opp. p. 416—450. Lond. 1733.) is satisfied that Procopius must have studiedphysic, from his knowledge and use of the technical words. Yet many words that are now scientific, werecommon and popular in tbe Greek idiom.
(4) See Thucydides,lib. ii.e. 47—54. p. 127—133. edit. Duker, and the poetical description of the sameplague by Lucretius, (lib. ti. 1136—1284.) I was indebted to Ilr. Hunter for an elaborate commentary on thispart of Thucydides, a quarto of six hundred pages. (Venet. 1603, apud Juntas,) which was pronounced inSt. Mark's library, by Kabins Paullinus, Utinensis, a physician and philosopher.
(5) Thucydides (c. 51.) affirms that the infection could only be once taken; but Evagrius, who had familyexperience of the plague, observes, that some persons, who had escaped the first, sunk under the second attack;and this repetition is confirmed by Fabiits Paullinus, (p. 588.) I observe that on this head physicians are di­vided: and the nature and operation of the disease may not always be similar.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 35


vived and propagated in the modem schools of jurisprudence. After Rome her­self had been stripped of the imperial purple, the princes of Constantinople as­sumed the sole and sacred sceptre of the monarchy; demanded, as their rightfulinheritance, the provinces which had been subdued by the consuls, or possessedby the Caisars, and feebly aspired to deliver their faithful subjects of the westfrom the usuipation of heretics and barbarians. The execution of this splendiddesign was in some degree reserved for Justinian. During the five first years ofhis reign, he reluctantly waged a costly and unprofitable war against the Persians;till his pride submitted to his ambition, and he purchased, at the price of 440,000/.sterling, the benefit of a precarious truce, which, in the language of both nations,was dignified with the appellation of the endless peace. The safety of the eastenabled the emperor to employ his forces against the Vandals; and the internalstate of Africa afforded an honourable motive, and promised a powerful support,to the Roman arms.(l)
According to the testament of the founder, the African kingdom had lineallydescended to Hilderic, the eldest of the Vandal princes. A mUd disposition in­clined the son of a tyrant, the grandson of a conqueror, to prefer the counsels ofclemency and peace; and his accession was marked by the salutary edict, whichrestored two hundred bishops to their churches, and allowed free profession ofthe Athanasian creed.(2) But the catholics accepted, with cold and transientgratitude, a favour so inadequate to their pretensions, and the virtues of Hildericoffended the prejudices of his countrymen. The Arian clergy presumed to in­sinuate that he had renounced the faith, and the soldiers more loudly complainedthat he had degenerated from the courage of his ancestors. His ambassadorswere suspected of a secret and disgraceful negotiation in tie Byzantine court; andhis general, the Achilles,(3) as he was named, of the Va»dals, lost a battle againstthe naked and disorderly Moors. The public disconte«t was exasperated by Ge-limer, whose age, descent, and military fame, gave lvm an apparent title to thesuccession; he assumed, with the consent of the nation, the reigns of govern­ment; and his unfortunate sovereign sunk without a struggle from the throne to adungeon, where he was striptly guarded, with a faithful counsellor, and his unpo­pular nephew, the Achilles of'the Vandals. But the indulgence which Hilderichad shown to his catholic subjects had powerfully recommended him to the fa­vour of Justinian, who, for the benefit of bis own sect, could acknowledge the useand justice of religious toleration: their alliance, while the nephew of Justin re­mained in a private station, was cemented by the mutual exchange of gifts andletters; and the emperor Justinian asserted the cause of loyalty and friendship.In two successive embassies, he admonished the usurper to repent of his treason,or to abstain, at least, from anv further violence, which might provoke the dis­pleasure of God and of the Romans; to reverence the laws of kindred and suc­cession, and to suffer an infirm old man peaceably to end his days, either on thethrone of Carthage, or in the palace of Constantinople. The passions or even theprudence of Gelimer compelled him to reject these requests, which were urgedin the haughty tone of menace and command; and he justified his ambition in alanguage rarely spoken in a Bvzantine court, by alleging the right of a free peopleto remove or punish their chief magistrate, who had failed in the execution of thekingly office. After this fruitless expostulation, the captive monarch was mostrigorously treated; his nephew was deprived of his eyes, and the cruel Vandal,confident in his strength and distance, derided the vain threats and slow prepara­tions of the emperor of the eas*. Justinian resolved to deliver or revenge hisfriend; Gelimer to maintain his usurpation; and the war was preceded, accordingto the practice of civilized tvitions, by the most solemn protestations that eachparty was sincerely desirous of peace.
The report of an African war was grateful only to the vain and idle populaceof Constantinople, whose poverty exempted them from tribute, and whose co-
(1) The complete series of (lie Vandal war is related by Procopius, in regiilarand elegant narrative, (lib.;.e.9—25. lib. ii. c. 1—13.) and happy would be my lot, could I always tread in the footsteps of stich a guide.From the entire and diligent perusal of the Greek text, I have a right to pronounce that the Latin andFrench versions of Grotitis and Cousin, may not be implicitly trusted: yet the President Cousin has beeo oftenpraised, and Hugo Grotius was the first scholar of a learned acre.
(2) See Kuinart. Hist. Persecur. Vandal, c. xii. p. 589, His best evidence is drawn from the life of Sf. Kul-trcntius, composed by one of his disciples, transcribed in a treat measure in the annals of Baronius, andprinted in several great collections. (Catalog. Bibliot. Bunavitena:, torn. i. vol. ii. p. 1258.)
(3) For what quality of the mind or body? For speed, or be:iuly, or valour.' In what language did the Van-Oals read Homer?—Did he speak German? The Latins had four versions: (Fabric, torn. i. lib. ii. c. 3. p. 297.)yet in spite of the praises of Seneca, (Consol. c. 26.) they appear to have been more successful in imitatingthan in translating the Greek poets. But the name of Achilles might be famous and popular, even amongthe illiterate barbarians.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


'* To the king, or, as he styles himself, the emperor>of the Franks and Lom­bards." When both power and virtue were extinct, they despoiled Lewis II. ophis hereditary title, and, with the barbarous appellation of rex or rega, degradedhim among the crowd of Latin princes. His reply(l) is expressive of his weak­ness: he proves, with some learning, that both in sacred and profane history, thename of king is synonymous with the Greek word basileus: if, at Constantinople,it were assumed in a more exclusive and imperial sense, he claims from his ances­tors, and from the pope, a just participation of the honours of the Roman purple.The same controversy was revived in the reign of the Othos; and their ambassa­dor describes, in lively colours, the insolence of the Byzantine court. (2) TheGreeks affected to despise the poverty and ignorance of the Franks and Saxons;and in their last decline refused to prostitute to the kings of Germany the title ofRoman emperors.
These emperors, in the election of the popes, continued to exercise the powers. which had been assumed by the Gothic and Grecian princes; and the importanceof this prerogative increased with the temporal estate and spiritual jurisdiction ofthe Roman church. In the Christian aristocracy, the principal members of theclergy still formed a senate to assist the administration, and to supply the vacancy,of the bishop. Rome was divided into twenty-eight parishes, and each parish wasgoverned by a cardinal priest or presbyter, a title which, however common andmodest in its origin, has aspired to emulate the purple of kings. Their numberwas enlarged by the association of the seven deacons of the most considerable hos­pitals, the seven palatine judges of the Lateran, and some dignitaries of thechurch. The ecclesiastical senate was directed by the seven cardinal bishops ofthe Roman province, who were less occupied in the superb diocesses of Ostia,Porto, Velitrse, Tusculum#Prxneste, Tibur, and the Sabines, than by their weeklyservice in the Lateran, and their superior share in the honours and authority ofthe apostolic see. On the death of the pope, these bishops recommended a suc­cessor to the suffrage of the college of cardinals, (3) and their choice was ratified orrejected by the applause or clamour of the Roman people. But the election wasimperfect; nor could the pontiff be legally consecrated till the emperor, the advo­cate of the church, had graciously signified his approbation and consent. Theroyal commissioner examined, on the spot, the form and freedom of the proceed­ings: nor was it, till after a previous scrutiny into the qualifications of the candi­dates, that he accepted an oath of fidelity, and confirmed the donations which hadsuccessively enriched the patrimony of St. Peter. In the frequent schisms, therival claims were submitted to the sentence of the emperor, and in a synod of bi­shops he presumed to judge, to condemn, and to punish, the crimes of a guiltypontiff-. Otho I. imposed a treaty on the senate and people, who engaged to pre­fer the candidate most acceptable to his majesty;(4) his successors anticipated orprevented their choice: they bestowed the Roman benefice, like the bishoprics ofCologne or Bamberg, on their chancellors or preceptors: and whatever might be themerit of a Frank or Saxon, his name sufficiently attests the interposition of foreignpower. These- acts of prerogative were most speciously excused by the vices ofa popular election. The competitor who had been excluded by the cardinals ap­pealed to the passions or avarice of the multitude: the Vatican and the Lateranwere stained with blood; and the most powerful senators, the marquises of Tusca­ny and the counts of Tusculum, held the apostolic see in a long and disgracefulservitude. The Roman pontiffs, of the ninth and tenth centuries, were insulted,imprisoned, and murdered, by their tyrants; and such was their indigence after


0) See the epistle in Paralipomena, of the anonymous writer of Salerno, (Script. Ital. torn. ii. pars ii. p.9,43—254. c. 93—107.) whom Baroniua (A. D. 871. no. 51—71.) mistook for Erchempert, when he transcribe*itin his Annals.
(2) Ipse enim vol, non imperatorem id ist Bswt'Xem sua lingua, seel ob mdignationem Psy*, in est regeinnostra vocabat. Liutprand, in Legal, in Script. Ital. torn. ii. pars i. p. 479.) The pope had exhorted Nice-phorus, emperor of the Greeks to make peace with Otho, the august emperor of the Romans^-qua; inscriptiosecundum Graces peccatria et terneraria . . . imperatorem inquiunt, universalem, Romanorum, Auguttum,magnum, solum, Niccphorum. (p. 486.)
(3) The origin and progress of the title of cardinal may be found in Thomassin; (Discipline d'Eglise, tow.i. p. 1261—1298.) Muratori, (Antiquitat. Italia; Medii iEvi, torn. vi. dissert. lxi. p. 159—182.) and Mosheim, (In-stitut. Hist. Eccles. p. 345—347.) who accurately remarks the forms and changes of the election. The cardi­nal bishops, so highly exalted by Peter Damianus, are sunk to a level with the rest of the sacred college.
(4) Firmiter jurantes, nunnuam se papam electuros aut ordinaturos, prseter consensum et electionem Otho-nis et filli sui. (Liutprand, lib. vi. c. 6. p. 476.) This important concession may either supply or confirm tiredecree of the clergy and people of Rome, so fiercely rejected byBaronius, Pagi,and Muratori, (A D. 904.) andso well defended and explained by St. Marc. (Abtege, torn, ii. p. 808—816. tom.1T, p. 1167—H85.) Consult thatblitorical critic, and the Annals of Muratori, for the election and confirmation of each pope.







OCR Output








266 THE BECLINE AND PAIX


I


Roman name, declined the unlawful engagement, and boldly protested against theadoption of a stranger. His patriotism was offensive to the emperor; but he spokethe sentiments of the people, and was removed from the royal presence by an ho­nourable banishment, a second command of the Cilician frontier, with the absolutedisposal of the revenues of Cyprus. In this station, the Armenians again exer­cised his courage, and exposed his negligence; and the same rebel, who baffled allhis operations, was unhorsed and almost slain by the vigour of his lance. ButAndronicus soon discovered a more easy and pleasing conquest, the beautiful Phi-lippa, sister to the empress Maria, and daughter of Raymond of Poitou, the La­tin prince of Antioch. For her sake, he deserted his station, and wasted the sum­mer in balls and tournaments: to his love she sacrificed her innocence, her repu­tation, and the offer of an advantageous marriage. But the resentment of Ma­nuel for this domestic affront, interrupted his pleasures: Andronicus left the indis­creet princess to weep and to repent; and, with a band of desperate adventurers,undertook the pilgrimage of Jerusalem. His birth, his martial renown, and pro­fessions of zeal, announced him as the champion of the cross; he soon captivatedboth the clergy and the king; and the Greek prince was invested with the lord­ship of Berytus, on the coast of Phoenicia. In his neighbourhood resided a youngand handsome queen of his own nation and family, great grand-daughter of theemperor Alexis, and widow of Baldwin III. king of Jerusalem. She visited andloved her kinsman. Theodora was the third victim of his amorous seduction; andher shame was more public and scandalous than that of her predecessors. Theemperor still thirsted for revenge; and his subjects and allies of the Syrian frontier,were repeatedly pressed to seize the person, and put out the eyes, of the fugitive.In Palestine he was no longer safe; but the tender Theodora revealed his dangerand accompanied his flight. The queen of Jerusalem was exposed to the east,his obsequious concubine; and two illegitimate children were the living monumentsof her weakness. Damascus was his first refuge; and, in the characters of thegreat Noureddin and his servant Saladin, the superstitious Greek might learn torevere the virtues of the Mussulmans. As the friend of Noureddin, he visitedmost probably Bagdad, and the courts of Persia; and, after a long circuit roundthe Caspian sea and the mountains of Georgia, he finally settled among the Turksof Asia Minor, the hereditary enemies of his country. The sultan of Colonia af­forded a hospitable retreat to Andronicus, his mistress, and his band of outlaws;the debt of gratitude was paid by frequent inroads in the Roman province of Tre-bizond; and he seldom returned without an ample harvest of spoil and of Chris­tian captives. In the stoiy of his adventures, he was fond of comparing himselfto David, who escaped, by a long exile, the snares of the wicked. But the royalprophet (he presumed to add) was content to lurk on the borders of Judaea, to slayan Amalekite, and to threaten, in his miserable state, the life of the avariciousNabal. The excursions of the Comnenian prince had a wider range; and he hadspread over the eastern world the glory of his name and religion. By a sentenceof the Greek church the licentious rover had been separated from the faithful;but even this excommunication may prove, that he never abjured the professionof Christianity.
His vigilance had eluded or repelled the open and secret persecution of the em­peror; but he was at length ensnared by the captivity of his female companion.The governor of Trebizond succeeded in his attempt to surprise the person ofTheodora: the queen of Jerusalem and her two children were sent to Constanti­nople, and their loss imbittered the tedious solitude of banishment. The fugitiveimplored and obtained a final pardon, with leave to throw himself at the feet ofhis sovereign, who was satisfied with the submission of this haughty spirit. Pros­trate on the ground, he deplored with tears and groans the guilt of his past rebel­lion; nor would he presume to arise unless some faithful subject would drag himto the foot of the throne, by an iron chain with which he had secretly encircledhis neck. This extraordinary penance excited the wonder and pity of the assem­bly; his sins were forgiven by the church and state; but the just suspicion of Ma­nuel fixed his residence at a distance from the court, at Oenoe, a town of Pontus,surrounded with rich vineyards, and situate on the coast of the Euxine. Thedeath of Manuel, and the disorders of the minority, soon opened the fairest fieldfor his ambition. The emperor was a boy of twelve or fourteen years of age,without vigour, or wisdom, or experience; his mother the empress Mary, aban­doned her person and government to a favourite of the Comnenian name; and hisSister, another Mary, whose husband, an Italian, was decorated with the title of







OCR Output








11 THE DECLINE AND FALL


III. That empire, after Home was barbarous, still embraced the nations whomshe had conquered beyond the Hadriatic, and as far as the frontiers of Ethiopiaand Persia. Justinian reigned over sixty-four provinces, and nine hundred andthirty-five cities;(l) his dominions were blessed by nature with the advantages ofsoil, situation, and climate; and the improvements of human art had been perpe­tually diffused along the coast of the Mediterranean and the banks of the Nile,from ancient Troy to the Egyptian Thebes. Abraham(2) had been relieved bythe well-known plenty of Egypt; the same country, a small and populous tract,was still capable of exporting, each year, two hundred and sixty thousand quarters-of wheat for the use of Constantinople;(3) and the capital of Justinian was sup­plied with the manufactures of Sidon, fifteen centuries afterthey had been celebratedin the poems of Homer. (4) The annual powers of vegetation, instead of beingexhausted by two thousand harvests, were renewed and invigorated by skilful hus­bandly, rich manure, and seasonable repose. The breed of domestic animals wasinfinitely multiplied. Plantations, buildings, and instruments of labour and luxu­ry, which are more durable than the term of human life, were accumulated bythe care of successive generations. Tradition preserved, and experience simpli­fied, the humble practice of the arts; society was enriched by the division of la­bour and the facility of exchange; and every Roman was lodged, clothed, andsubsisted by the industry of a thousand hands. The invention of the loom anddistaff has been piously ascribed to the gods. In every age, a variety of animaland vegetable productions, hair, skins, wool, flax, cotton, and at length silk, havebeen skilfully manufactured to hide or adorn the human body; they were stainedwith an infusion of permanent colours; and the pencil was successfully employedto improve the labours of the loom. In the choice of those colours,(5) which im­itate the beauties of nature, the freedom of taste and fashion was indulged; butthe deep purple, (6) which the Phoenicians extracted from a shell-fish, was re­strained to the sacred person and palace of the emperor; and the penalties of trea­son were denounced against the ambitious subjects, who dared to usurp the prero­gative of the throne. (7)
I need not explain that silk(8) is originally spun from the bowels of a caterpillar,and that it composes the golden tomb from whence a worm emerges in the form ofa butterfly. Till the reign of Iustinian, the silk worms, who feed on the leaves ofthe white mulberry tree, were confined to China; those of the pine, the oak, andthe ash, were common in the forests both of Asia and Europe; but as their educa­tion is more difficult, and their produce more uncertain, they were generally ne­glected, except in the little island of Ceos, near the coast of Attica. A thin gauzewas procured from their webs; and Cean manufacture, the invention of a woman,for female use, was long admired both in the east and -at Rome. Whatever sus­picions may be raised by the garments of the Medes and Assyrians, Virgil is themost ancient writer, who expressly mentions the soft wool which was combedfrom the trees of the Seres or Chinese;(9) and this natural error, less marvellous
thousand victims: and the tliirty-five thousand of Theophanes are swelled to forty thousand by the more re­cent Znnaras. Such is the usual progress of exaggeration.
(1) Hierocles, a cotemporary of Justinian, composed his Swfccguo; (Itineraria, p. 631.,) or review of the east­ern provinces and cities, before the year 535. (Wesseling in Pnefat. and Not. ad p. 623, See.)
(2) See the book of Genesis (xii. 10.) and the administration of Joseph. 'Hie annals of the Greeks and He­brews agree in the early ai ts and plenty of Egypt: but this antiquity supposes a long- series of improvements :and Warburton, who is almost stifled by the Hebrew, calls aloud for the Samaritan chronology. (Divine Le­gation, vol. iii. p. 29, &c.)
(3) Eight millions of Uoman modii, besides a contribution of eighty thousand auri, for the expenses of wa­ter-carriage, from which the subject was graciously excused. See the thirteenth edict of Justinian: the num­bers are checked and verified by the agreement of the Greek and Latin texts.
(4) Homer's Iliad, vi. 289. These veils. smA.tt srapjrotxtiket, were the work of the Sidoninn women, llut this-passage is more honourable to the manufactures than to the navigation of Phoenicia, from whence they badbeen imported to Troy in Phrygian bottoms.
(5) See in Ovid (de Arte Amandi, 3. 269, &c.) a poetical list of twelve colours borrowed from flowers, the ele­ments, Sec. But it is almost impossible to discriminate by words all the nice and various shades both of art andnature.
(6) By the discovery of cochineal, &c. we far surpass the colours of antiquity. Their royal purple had astrong smell, and a dark cast as deep as bull's blood.—Otiscuritas rnbens (says Cassiodorus, Var. 1.2.) nigredoaanguinea. The president Goguet (Origiiie des Loix, et des arts, part 2. lib. ii. e. 2. p. 184—215.) will aniussand satisfy the reader. I doubt whether his book,especially in England, ii as well known as it deserves to be.
(7) Historical proofs of this jealousy have been occasionally introduced, und many more might have beenadded; but the arbitrary acts of despotism were justified by the sober and general declarations of law (Codex,Theodosian. lib. x. tit. 21. leg. 3. Codex. Justinian, lib. xi. tit. 8. leg. 5.) An inglorious permission, and neces­sary restriction, was applied to the mimcr., the female dancers (Cod. Theodos. lib. xv. tit. 7. leg. 11.)
(8) In the history of insects (far more wonderful than Ovid's Metamorphoses) the silk-worm holds a conspi­cuous place. The bombyx of the isle of Ceos, as described by Pliny (Hist. Natur. 11. 26,27. with the notes ofthe two learned Jesuits, Hardolrin and Brotier,) may be illustrated by a similar species in China (Memoires surles Chinois, torn. ii. p. 575—lis.:) but our silk-worm, as well as the white mulberry tree, were unknown toTheophrastus and Pliny.
(9) Gcorgic, 2.121. Sirica quando vencrint in mum pianissimo mm icioi suipicor (amen in Julii Ctcsorn







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 333


Sea, the ocean, and the gulf of Persia, were saluted by the acclamations of afaithful people; and the ambassadors who knelt before the throne of Medina, wereas numerous (says the Arabian proverb) as the dates that fall from the maturity ofa palm tree. The nation submitted to the God and the sceptre of Mahomet; theopprobrious name of tribute was abolished, the spontaneous or reluctant obla­tions of alms and tithes were applied to the service of religion; and one hun­dred and fourteen thousand Moslems accompanied the last pilgrimage of theapostle. (1)
When Heraclius returned in triumph from the Persian war, he entertained, atErhesa, one of the ambassadors of Mahomet, who invited the princes and na­tions of the earth to the profession of Islam. On this foundation the zeal of theArabians has supposed the secret conversion of the Christian emperor: the vanityof the Greeks has feigned a personal visit to the prince of Medina, who acceptedfrom the royal bounty a rich domain, and a secure retreat in the province of Sy­ria.^) But the friendship of Heraclius and Mahomet were of short continuance;the new religion had inflamed rather than assuaged the.rapacious spirit of the Sa­racens; and the murder of an envoy afforded a decent pretence for invading, withthree thousand soldiers, the territory of Palestine, that extends to the eastward ofthe Jordan. The holy banner was intrusted to Zeid; and such was the disciplineor enthusiasm of the rising sect, that the noblest chiefs served without reluctanceunder the slave of the prophet. On the event of his decease, Jaafar and Abdal-lah were successively substituted to the command; and if the three should pe­rish in the war, the troops were authorized to elect their general. The threeleaders were slain in the battle of Muta,(3) the first military action which triedthe valour of the Moslems against a foreign enemy. Zeid fell, like a soldier, inthe foremost ranks; the death of Jaafar was heroic and memorable; he lost hisright hand; he shifted the standard to his left; the left was severed from his body;he embraced the standard with his bleeding stumps, till he was transfixed to theground with fifty honourable wounds. " Advance," cried Abdallah, who steppedinto the vacant place, " advance with confidence; either victory or paradise is ourown." The lance of a Roman decided the alternative; but the falling standardwas rescued by Caled, the proselyte of Mecca: nine swords were broken in hishand; and his valour withstood and repulsed the superior numbers of the Chris­tians. In the nocturnal council of the camp he was chosen to command: his skil­ful evolutions of the ensuing day secured either the victory or the retreat of theSaracens: and Caled is renowned among his brethren and his enemies, by the glo­rious appellation of \he Sword of God. In the pulpit, Mahomet described, withprophetic rapture, the crowns of the blessed martyrs; but in private he betrayedthe feelings of human nature: he was surprised as he wept over the daughter ofZeid. " What do I see ?" said the astonished votary. " You see," replied theapostle, "a friend who is deploring the loss of his most faithful friend." Afterthe conquest of Mecca, the sovereign of Arabia affected to prevent the hostile pre­parations of Heraclius; and solemnly proclaimed war against the Romans, withoutattempting to disguise the hardships and dangers of the enterprise. (4) The Mos­lems were discouraged: they alleged the want of money, or horses, or provisions;the season of harvest, and the intolerable heat of the summer: " Hell is much hot­ter," said the indignant prophet. He disdained to compel their service; but on hisreturn he admonished the most guilty, by an excommunication of fifty days. Theirdesertion enhanced the merit of Abubeker, Othman, and the faithful companionswho devoted their lives and fortunes; and Mahomet displayed his banner at thehead of ten thousand horse, and twenty thousand foot. Painful indeed was thedistress of the march: lassitude and thirst were aggravated by the scorching andpestilential winds of the desert: ten men rode by turns on the same camel; andthey were reduced to the shameful necessity of drinking the water from the bellyof that useful animal. In the midway, ten days' journey from Medina and Da-
(1) The last conquest and pilgrimage of Mahomet are contained in Abulfeda(p. 121—133.,) Gagnier (torn,iii. p. 119—219.,) Elmacin (p. 10,11.,) Abulpharagius. (p. 103.) The ninth of the Hegira was styled the Yearof Embassies (Gagnier, Not. ad Abulfed. p. 121.)
(2) Compare the bigoted Al Jannabi (apod Gagnier, torn. i. p. 232—25S.) with the no less bigoted Greeks,Th*ophanes,(p.276—278.) Zonaras (torn. li. lib. 14. p. 86.) and Cedrenus. (p. 421.)
(3) For the battle of Muta, and its consequences, see Abnlfeda (p. 100—102.) and Gagnier (torn. ii. p. 327—343.) KstXtSo; (says Theophanes) ov KiyivTt nxyjiiftav tow ©5Cu.
(4) The expedition to Tabac is recorded by our ordinary historians, Abnlfeda (Vit. Moham. p. 123—127.) andOaenier (Vie de Mahomet, torn. iii. p. 147—163.;) but we have the advantage of appealing to the original evi­dence of the Koran (e. ix. p. 154—165.,) with Sale's learned and rational notes.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 12S


Sawyers, to preserve the constitutions of the pagan emperors from Hadrian toConstantine. The third, which is still extant, was digested in sixteen books bythe order of the young Theodosius, to consecrate the laws of the Christian princesfrom Constantine to his own reign. But the three codes obtained an equal autho­rity in the tribunals; and any act which was not included in the sacred dcposite,might be disregarded by the judge as spurious or obsolete. (1)
Among savage nations, the want of letters is imperfectly supplied by use of visi­ble signs, which awaken attention, and perpetuate the remembrance of any pub­lic or private transaction. The jurisprudence of the first Romans exhibited thescenes of a pantomime; the words were adapted to the gestures, and the slightesterror or neglect in the forms of proceeding was sufficient to annul the substance ofthe fairest claim. The communion of the marriage-life was denoted by the ne­cessary elements of. fire and water:(2) and the divorced wife resigned the bunchof keys, by the delivery of which she had been invested with the government ofthe family. The manumission of a son, or a slave, was performed by turninghim round with a gentle blow on the cheek: a work was prohibited by the castingof a stone; prescription was interrupted by the breaking of a branch; the clenchedfist was the symbol of a pledge or deposite; the right hand was the gift of faith andconfidence. The indenture of covenants was a broken straw; weights and scaleswere introduced into every payment, and the heir who accepted a testament, wassometimes obliged to snap his fingers, to cast away his garments, and to leap anddance with real or affected transport. (3) If a citizen pursued any stolen goodsinto a neighbour's house, he concealed his nakedness with a linen towel, and hidhis face with a mask or basin, lest he should encounter the eyes of a virgin or amatron. (4) In a civil action, the plaintiff touched the ear of his witness, seizedhis reluctant adversary by the neck; and implored, in solemn lamentation, the aidof his fellow-citizens. The two competitors grasped each other's hand as if theystood prepared for combat before the tribunal of the pretor: he commanded themto produce the'object of the dispute; they went, they returned, with measuredsteps, and a clod of earth was cast at his feet to represent the field for which theycontended. This occult science of the words and actions of law was the inheri­tance of the pontiffs and the patricians. Like the Chaldean astrologers, they an­nounced to their clients the days of business and repose; these important trifleswere interwoven with the religion of Numa; and, after the publication of thetwelve tables, the Roman people were still enslaved by the ignorance of judicialproceedings. The treachery of some plebeian officers at length revealed the pro­fitable mystery: in a more enlightened age, the legal actions were derided and ob­served; and the same antiquity which sanctified the practice, obliterated the useand meaning, of this primitive language. (5)
A more liberal art was cultivated, however, by the sages of Rome, who, in astricter sense, may be considered as the authors of the civil law. The alterationof the idiom and manners of the Romans, rendered the style of the twelve tablesless familiar to each rising generation, and the doubtful passages were imperfectlyexplained by the study of legal antiquarians. To define the ambiguities, to cir­cumscribe the latitude, to apply the principles, to extend the consequences, toreconcile the real or apparent contradictions, was a much nobler and more im­portant task; and the province of legislation was silently invaded by the expoun­ders of ancient statutes. Their subtle interpretations concurred with the equityof the pretor, to reform the tyranny of the darker ages: however strange or in­tricate the means, it was the aim of artificial jurisprudence to restore the simpledictates of nature and reason, and the skill of private citizens was usefully em­ployed to undermine the public institutions of their country. The revolution of


(1) Schulting, Jurisprudentia Antc-Tostinianea, p. fiBl—71B. Cnjacins assignee! to Gregory the reigns fromHadrian to Oallienus, and the continuation to his fellow-labourer Hermogenes. This general division may bejust; hut they often trespassed on each othe.-'s ground.
(2) Sean-ola, most probab'.y Cervidius Sesevola the master of Papinian, consider? this acceptance of fireand water as the essence of marriage (Pandect, lib. xxiv. tit. i. leg. txvi. See Heineccius, Hist. J. n. No. 317.)
_ (3) Cicero (de Ofliciis, 3. 19.) may state an ideal case, but St. Ambrose (de Officiis. 3. 2.) appeals to the prac­tice of his own times, which he understood as a lawyer and a magi>tratc. (Schulting ad Ulpian. Fragment,lit. xlii. No. 28. p. 043,644\) I
(4) The fartum lance licioquc conceplura was no longer understood in the time of the Antonines (AulasG11 litis, 16. lo.) The Attic derivation of Heineccius (Antiquitat. Rom. lib. iv. tit. i. No. 13—21.) is supportedby the evidence of Aristophasjes, his scholiast and Pollux.
(5) In his oration for Murena (c. 0—13.,) Cicero turns into ridicule the forms and mysteries of the civilians,which are represented with more candour by Aulus Gellius (Noct. Attic. 20.10.) Gravioa (Opp. p. 265— 367..''and Heineccius (Antiquitat. lib. iv. tit. vi.)







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


in the sunshine of the throne; and in his licentious pleasures, he forgot the safetyboth of the republic and of his family. Of a mild and religious character, he re­spected the sanctity of oaths, the innocence of the youth, the memory of his parents,and the attachment of the people. The studious temper and retirement of Con-stantine disarmed the jealousy of power: his books and music, his pen and his pen­cil, were a constant source of amusement; and if he could improve a scanty allow­ance by the sale of his pictures, if their price was not enhanced by the name of theartist,- he was endowed with a personal talent, which few princes could employ inthe hour of adversity.
The fall of Romanus was occasioned by his own vices and those of his children.After the decease of Christopher, his eldest son, the two surviving brothers quar­relled with each other, and conspired against their father. At the hour of noon,when all strangers were regularly excluded from the palace, they entered hisapartment with an armed force, and conveyed him in the habit of a monk, to asmall island in the Propontis, which was peopled by a religious community. Therumour of this domestic revolution excited a tumult in the city; but Porphyroge-nitus alone, the true and lawful emperor, was the object of the public care; andthe sons of Lecapenus were taught, by tardy experience, that they had achieveda guilty and perilous enterprise for the benefit of their rival. Their sister Hele­na, the wife of Constantine, revealed, or supposed their treacherous design of as­sassinating her husband at the royal banquet. His royal adherents were alarmed;and the two usurpers were prevented, seized, degraded from the purple, and em­barked for the same island and monastery where their father had been so latelyconfined. Old Romanus met them on the beach with a sarcastic smile, and, aftera just reproach of their folly and ingratitude,/presented his imperial colleagueswith an equal share of his water and vegetable diet In the fortieth year of hisreign', Constantine VII. obtained the possession of the eastern world, which heruled, or seemed to ru!e,iiear fifteen years. But he was devoid of that energy ofcharacter which could emerge into a life of action and &lory: and the studies whichhad amused and dignified his leisure, were incompatible with the serious duties ofa sovereign. The emperor neglected the practice, to instruct his son Romanus inthe theory of government; while he indulged the habits of intemperance and sloth,he dropped the reins of the administration into the hands of Helena his wife, and,in the shifting scene of her favour and caprice, each minister was regretted in thepromotion of a more worthless successor. Yet the birth and misfortunes of Con­stantine had endeared him to the Greeks: they excused his failings; they respectedhis learning, his innocence, and charity, his love of justice; and the ceremony ofhis funeral was mourned with the unfeigned tears of his subjects! The body, ac­cording to ancient custom, lay in state in the vestibule of the palace; and the civiland military officers, the patricians, the senate, and the clergy, approached in dueorder to adore and kiss the inanimate corpse of their sovereign. Before theprocession moved towards the imperial sepulchre, a herald proclaimed this awfuladmonition:—" Arise, O king of the world, and obey the summons of the King ofkings!"
The death of Constantine was imputed to poison; and his son Romanus, who de­rived that name from his maternal grandfather, ascended the throne of Constanti­nople. A prince who, at the age of twenty, could be suspected of anticipating hisinheritance, must have been already lost in the public esteem; yet Romanus wasrather weak than wicked; and the largest share of the guilt was transferred to hiswife, Theophano, a woman of base origin, masculine spirit, and flagitious man­ners. The sense of personal glory, and public happiness, the true pleasures ofroyalty, were unknown to the son of Constantine; and while the two brothers, Ni-cephorus and Leo, triumphed over the Saracens, the hours which the emperorowed to his people were consumed in strenuous idleness. In the morning he visit­ed the circus: at noon he feasted the senators; the greater part of the afternoon hespent in the Sfiharisterium, or tennis court, the only theatre of his victories; fromthence he passed over to the Asiatic side of the Bosphorus, hunted and killed fourwild boars of the largest size, and returned to the palace proudly content with thelabours of the day. In strength and beauty he was conspicuous above his equals:tall and straight as a young cypress, his complexion was fair and florid, his eyessparkling, his shoulders broad, his nose long and aquiline. Yet even these per­fections were insufficient to fix the love of Theophano; and, after a reign of fouryears, she mingled for her husband the same deadly draught which she had com­posed for his father. .







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


6istance, that he yielded to the consent of the catholic world. (1) His enmity tothe Byzantine pontiffs(2) was a sense of interest, not a sally of passion: he enviedtheir fortunate station in the sunshine of the imperial court; and he dreaded theirupstart ambition, which oppressed the metropolitans of Europe and Asia, invadedthe provinces of Antioch and Alexandria, and measured their diocess by the limitsof the empire. The long moderation of Atticus, the mild usurper of the throneof Chrysostom, suspended the animosities of the eastern patriarchs; but Cyril wasat length awakened by the exaltation of a rival more worthy of his esteem and ha­tred. After the short and troubled reign of Sisinnius bishop of Constantinople,the factions of the clergy and people were appeased by the choice of the emperor,who, on this occasion, consulted the voice of fame, and invited the merit of astranger. Nestorius, (3) a native of Germanicia, and a monk of Antioch, was re­commended by the austerity of his life, and the eloquence of his sermons; but thefirst homily which he preached before the devout Theodosius, betrayed the acri­mony and impatience of his zeal. " Give me, O Csesar!" he exclaimed, " giveme the earth purged of heretics, and I will give you in exchange the kingdom ofheaven. Exterminate with me, the heretics; and with you, I will exterminatethe Persians." On the fifth day, as if the treaty had been already signed, the pa­triarch of Constantinople discovered, surprised, and attacked a secret conventicleof the Arians: they preferred death to submission; the flames, that were kindledby their despair, soon spread to the neighbouring houses, and the triumph of Nes-torius was clouded by the name of incendiary. On either side of the Hellespont,his episcopal vigour imposed a rigid formulary of faith and discipline; a chronolo­gical error concerning the festival of Easter was punished as an offence againstthe church and state. Lydia and Caria, Sardes and Miletus, were purified withthe blood of the obstinate Quartodecimans; and the edict of the emperor, or ra­ther of the patriarch, enumerates three-and-twenty degrees and denominations inthe guilt and punishment of heresy. (4) But the sword of persecution, whichNestorius so furiously wielded, was soon turned against his own breast. Religionwas the pretence; but, in the judgment of a cotemporary saint, ambition was thegenuine motive of episcopal warfare.(5)
In the Syrian school, Nestorius had been taught to abhor the confusion of thetwo natures, and nicely to discriminate the humanity of his master Christ fromthe divinity of the Lord Jesus. (6) The blessed Virgin he revered as the motherof Christ, but his ears were offended with the rash and recent title of mother ofGod,(7) which had been insensibly adopted since the origin of the Arian contro­versy. From the pulpit of Constantinople, a friend of the patriarch, and after­wards the patriarch himself, repeatedly preached against the use or the abuse ofa word(8) unknown to the apostles, unauthorized by the church, and which couldonly tend to alarm the timorous, to mislead the simple, to amuse the profane, andto justify, by a seeming resemblance, the old geneology of Olympus. (9) In his


(1) He was deaf to the entreaties of Atticus of Constantinople, and of Isidore of Petusuim, and yielded only(if we may believe Nicepborns, lib. xiv. c. IS.) to the personal intercession of the Virgin. Tet in his last yearshe still muttered, that John Chrysostom had been justly condemned. (Tillemom, Mem. Eccles. torn. xiv. p.278—282. Baronius, Annal. Eccles. A. D. 412. No. 46—64.)
(2) See tfieir characters in the history of Socrates, (lib. vii. c. 25—28.) their power and pretensions, in the hugecompilation of Thomassin. (Discipline de l*Eglise, torn. i. p. 80—91.)
(3) His elevation and conduct are described by Socrates, (lib. vii.c. 29—31.)and Marcellinus seems to haveapplied the loquentise satis, sapientise parom, of Sallust.
(4) Cod. Theodos. lib. xvi. tit v. leg. 65. with the illustrations of Baronius. (A. D. 428. No. 25, &c.) Gode-froy (ad locum.) and Pagi. f Critica, torn, ii, p. 208.)
(5) Isidore of Pelusium. (lib. iv. epist. 57.) His words are strong and scandalous—ri fl*<ywe££i?, a xse» vuv srepisrpxyftx 01 soy x»» ttftrrrev SmQwveiv TrpmrTraiQumti utto $i*jtp£i4; txl2ML%i\mutvQi. Isidore is a saint, but he ne­ver became a bishop; and I half suspect, that the pride of Diogenes trampled on the pride of Plato.
(8) La Croze (Christianisme des Indes. tom.i.p.44—53.) Thesaurus Epistolicus La Crozianus, tons, iii.p.276—280.) has detected the use of o Simnrn;, and, o xopiou; Itiirous, which, in the fourth, fifth, and sixth cemu-ries, discriminate the school of Diodorus of Tarsus and his Nestorian disciples.
(7) 0sto)cous— Despara: as in zoology we familiarly speak of oviparous and viviparous animals. It is noteasy to fix the invention of this word, which La Croze (Christianisme des Indes, torn. i. p. 16.) ascribes to Ettse-bius of Csesarea and the Arians. The orthodox testimonies are produced by Cyril and Petavim: (Dogmat. Theo-log. torn. v. lib. v. c. 15. p. 254, &c.) but the veracity of the saint is questionable, and the epithet of flsoroxos soeasily slides from the margin to the text of a catholic MS.
(8) Basnage, in his Histoire de l'Eglise, a work of controversy (torn. i. p. 505.) justifies the mother, by theblood of God. (Acts xx. 28. with Milt's various readings.) But the Greek MSS. are far from unanimous; andthe primitive style of the blood of Christ is preserved in the Syriac version, even in those copies which wereused by the Christians of St. Thomas on the coast of Malabar. (La Croze, Christianisme des Indes, torn. i. p.347.) The jealousy of the Nestorians and Monopysites has guarded the purity of their text.
(9) The pagans of Egypt already laughed at the new Cybele of the Christians; (Isidor. lib. i. epist. 54.) a let­ter was forged in the name of Hypatia, to ridicule the theology of her assassin. Synodicon, c. 216. in 4 torn.Concil. p. 484.) In the article of Nutoritu, Bayte has scattered some loose philosophy on the worship of theVirgin JSsrr.







OCR Output








366 THE DECLINE AND FALL


column was sustained on the broad and sinewy back of the gigantic slave. Thsforemost in this painful ascent could grasp and climb the lowest part of the battle­ments; they silently stabbed and cast down the sentinels; and the thirty brethrenrepeating a pious ejaculation, "O apostle of God, help and deliver us!" were suc­cessively drawn up by the long folds of their turbans. With bold and cautious foot­steps, Dames explored the palace of the governor, who celebrated in riotous mer­riment, the festival of his deliverance. From thence returning to his companions,he assaulted on the inside the entrance of the castle. They overpowered theguard, unbolted the gate, let down the drawbridge, and defended the narrow pass,till the arrival of Caled, with the dawn of day, relieved their danger and assuredtheir conquest. Youkinna, a formidable foe, became an active and useful prose­lyte; and the general of the Saracens expressed his regard for the most humblemerit, by detaining the army at Aleppo till Dames was cured of his honourablewounds. The capital of Syria was still covered by the castle of Azaz and the ironbridge of the Orontes. After the loss of these important posts, and the defeat ofthe last of the Roman armies, the luxury of Ahtioch(l) trembled and obeyed.Her safety was ransomed with three hundred thousand pieces of gold; but thethrone of the successors of Alexander, the seat of the Roman government in theeast, which had been decorated by Cssar with the titles of free, and holy, and in­violate, was degraded under the yoke of the caliphs to the secondary rank of aprovincial town. (2)
In the life of Heraclius, the glories of the Persian war are clouded on eitherhand by the disgrace and weakness of his more early and his later days. Whenthe successors of Mahomet unsheathed the sword of war and religion, he was as­tonished at the boundless prospect of toil and danger; his nature was indolent, norcould the infirm and frigid age of the emperor be kindled to a second effort. Thesense of shame, and the importunities of the Syrians, prevented his hasty depar­ture from the scene of action; but the hero was no more; and the loss of Damascusand Jerusalem, the bloody fields of Aiznadin and Yermuk, may be imputed insome degree to the absence or misconduct of the sovereign. Instead of defendingthe sepulchre of Christ, he involved trre church and state in a metaphysical contro­versy for the unity of his will; and while Heraclius crowned the offspring of his se­cond nuptials, he was tamely stripped of the most valuable part of their inheritance.In the cathedral of Atitioch, in the presence of the bishops, at the foot of the cru­cifix, he bewailed the sins of the prince and people; but his confession instructed theworld, that it was in vain, and perhaps impious, to resist the judgment of God.The Saracens were invincible in fact, since they were invincible in opinion; and thedesertion of Youkinna, his false repentance and repeated perfidy might justify thesuspicion of the emperor, that he was encompassed by tr aitors and apostates, whoconspired to betray his person, and their country to the enemies of Christ. In thehour of adversity, his superstition was agitated by the omens and dreams of a fall­ing crown; ami, after bidding an eternal farewell to Syria, he secretly embarkedwith a few attendants, and absolved the faith of his subjects. (3) Constantine, hiseldest son, had been stationed with forty thousand men at Crcsarea, the civil metro­polis of the three provinces of Palestine. But his private interest recalled him tothe Byzantine court; and, after the flight of his father, he felt himself an unequalchampion to the united force of the caliph. His vanguard was boldly attacked bythree hundred Arabs, and a thousand black slaves, who, in the depth of winter,had climbed the snowy mountains of Libanus. and who were speedily followed bythe victorious squadrons of Caled himself. From the north and south the troopsof Antioch and Jerusalem advanced along the sea-shore, till their banners werejoined under the walls of the Phoenician cities: Tripoli and Tyre were betrayed;and a fleet of fifty transports, which entered with distrust the captive harbours,
(1) Till* date of the conquest of Antioch by the Arabs is of some importance. By comparing the years of the■wont! in the chronography of Thi'ophanes with the years of the Hegira in the history of Rlmncin. sve shaM de­termine, that it was taken between January 23 and September 1, of the year of Christ 638 (Paei, Critics, in Ba­ron. Annul, torn. ii. p. 812, 313.) At Wakidi;Oekley, vo'. i. p. 314.) assigns that event to Tuesday, AsigustSl,an inconsistent date; sinee Easier fell that year on April 5, the 21st of August must have been a Fridft). (Seethe Tables of the Al t do Verifier les Dates.)
(2) His bounteous edict, which tempted the grateful city to assume the victory of Pharsalia for a perpetual
era, U given iv AvTic%i»:i r>; /tsiTsewsA.;!, <(f* six. ao-uXcu, xzi rturcie/**, z»i *f%eva->i xxt jrS5najpy*iviI rtfg emtrejuie.
John Melala.in Chron. p. 91. edit. Venet. We may distinguish his authentic information of domestic factsfrom his gross ignorance of general history.
£3) See Ockley (vol. i. p. 308—312.,) who laughs at the credulity of his author. When Heraclius bade fare­well to Syria, Vale Syria et ultimuni vale, he prophesied that the Romans sliould nesier re-enter the provincetill the birth of an inauspicious child, the future scourge of the entire. Abttlfeda, p. 69. I am perfectlv igoc*rant of the mysti*. tenie, or nonsense, of this prediction. ■ .1







OCR Output








10 THE DECLINE AND FALL t


band, who, in the room of a theatrical prostitute, might have selected the purestand most noble virgin of the cast.(l)
II. A material difference may be observed in the games of antiquity; the mosteminent of the Greeks were actors, the Romans were merely spectators. TheOlympic stadium was open to wealth, merit, and ambition; and if the candidatescould depend on their personal skill and activity, they might pursue the footstepsof Diomede and Menelaus, and conduct their own horses in the rapid career. (2)Ten, twenty, forty chariots were allowed to start at the same instant; a crown ofleaves was the reward of the victor; and his fame, with that of his family andcountry, was chanted in lyric strains more durable than monuments of brass andmarble. But a senator, or even a citizen, conscious of his dignity, would haveblushed to expose his person or his horses in the circus of Rome. The gameswere exhibited at the expense of the republic, the magistrates, or the emperors;but the reins were abandoned to servile hands; and if the profits of a favouritecharioteer sometimes exceeded those of an advocate, they must be considered asthe effects of popular extravagance, and the high wages of a disgraceful profes­sion. The race, in its first institution, was a simple contest of two chariots, whosedrivers were distinguished by white and red liveries; two additional colours a lightgreen, and a cerulean blue, were afterward introduced; and as the races were re­peated twenty-five times, one hundred chariots contributed in the same day tothe pomp of the circus. The four factions soon acquired a legal establishment,and a mysterious origin, and their fanciful colours were derived from the variousappearances of nature in the four seasons of the year; the red dog-star of summer,the snows of winter, the deep shades of autumn, and the cheerful verdure of thespring. (3) Another interpretation preferred the elements to the seasons, and thestruggle of the green and blue was supposed to represent the conflict of the earthand sea. Their respective victories announced either a plentiful harvest, or aprosperous navigation, and the hostility of the husbandmen and mariners wassomewhat less absurd than the blind ardour of the Roman people, who devotedtheir lives and fortunes to the colour which they espoused. Such folly was dis­dained and indulged by the wisest princes; but the names of Caligula, Nero, Vi-tellius, Verus, Commodus, Caracaila, and Elagabalus, were enrolled in the blue,or green factions of the circus; they frequented their stables, applauded their fa­vourites, chastised their antagonists, and deserved the esteem of the populace, bythe natural or affected imitation of their manners. The bloody and tumultuouscontest continued to disturb the public festivity, till the last age of the spectaclesof Rome; and Theodoric, from a motive of justice or affection, interposed his au­thority to protect the greens against the violence of a consul and a patrician, whowere passionately addicted to the blue faction of the circus. (4)
Constantinople adopted the follies, though not the virtues of ancient Rome; andthe same factions which had agitated the circus, raged with redoubled fury in thehippodrome. Under the reign of Anastasius, this popular phrenzy was inflamedby religious zeal: and the greens, who had treacherously concealed stones anddaggers under baskets of fruit, massacred, at a solemn festival, three thousand oftheir blue adversaries. (5) From the capital this pestilence was diffused into theprovinces and cities of the east, and the sportive distinction of two colours pro­duced two strong and irreconcilable factions, which shook the foundations of afeeble government. (6) The popular dissensions, founded on the most serious in­terest, or holy pretence, have scarcely equalled the obstinacy of this wanton dis­cord, which invaded the peace of families, divided friends and brothers, and


(1) Ai she persecuted the popei, and rejected a council, Bamnius exhausts the names of Ere, Dalila, Hero*dias, &c, after which he has recourse to his infernal dictionary; civis inferni—alumna da-monura—aatanicoagitata spiritu—Kstro percita diabolico, 8c c. &c. (A. D. 548. No. 24.)
f2) Read and feel the twenty-third hook of the Iliad, a living picture of manners, passions, and the wholeform and spirit of the chariot-race. West's Dissertation on the Olympic Games, (sect. aii. 17.) affords muchcuriocs and authentic information.
(3) The four colours,aibati, ruMnti,pnwnu veneti, represent the four seasons, according to Cassiodorus(Var. hi. 51.) who lavishes much wit and eloquence on this theatrical mystery. Of these colours, the threefirst may be fairly translated, whtie, rev/, and green* Venetus is explained by eteruleus, a word various andvague: it is properly the sky reflected in the sea; but custom and convenience may allow blue as an equivalent(Robert Stephan. sub voce. Spence's Polymetis, p. 228.)
(4) See Onuphrius Panvinsns de Ludis Ctrcensibus, lib. i. c. 10, II. the seventeenth Annotation on Mascou'sHistory of the Germans, and Aleman. ad c. 7.
(5) Marcellin. in Chron. p. 47. Instead of the vulgar word Mrtero, he nses the more exquisite terms of ctcru-lea and carealit. Baronius (A. D. 501. No. iv. o.) is satisfied that the blues were orthodox; but Tillemont isangry at the supposition, and will not allow any ntartyrs in a playhouse. (Hist, des Emp. torn. vi. p. 554.)
(6) See Procopius, Persic lib. i. c. 24. In describing the vices of the factions and of the government, thepublic is not more favourable than the secret historian. Aleman. (p. 26.) has quoted a fine passage from Gre­gory Nazianzen, which proves the inveteracy of the evil.







OCR Output








228 THE DECLINE AND FALL


sion of the Portuguese, the Nestorian creed is freely professed on the coast of Ma­labar. - The trading companies of Holland and England are the friends of tolera­tion; but if oppression be less mortifying than contempt, the Christians of St.Thomas have reason to complain of the cold and silent indifference of their bre­thren of Europe. (1)
II. The history of the Monophysites is less copious and interesting than that ofthe Nestorians. Under the reigns of Zeno and Anastasius, their artful leaderssurprised the ear of the prince, usurped the thrones of the east, and crushed onits native soH the school of the Syrians. The rule of the Monophysite faith #asdefined with exquisite discretion by Severus, patriarch of Antioch: he condemned,in the style of the Henoticon, the adverse heresies of Nestorius and Eutyches,maintained against the latter the reality of the body of Christ, and constrained theGreeks to allow that he was a liar who spoke the truth. (2) But the approxima­tion of ideas could not abate the vehemence of passion: each party was the moreastonished that their blind antagonist could dispute on so trifling a difference; thetyrant of Syria enforced the belief of his creed, and his reign was polluted withthe blood of three hundred and fifty monks, who were slain, not perhaps withoutprovocation or resistance, under the walls of Apamea.(3) The successor of Anas­tasius, replanted the orthodox standard in the east: Severus fled into Egypt: andhis friend the eloquent Xenaias,(4) who had escaped from the Nestorians of Per­sia, was suffocated in his exile by the Melchites of Paphlagonia. Fifty-four bi­shops were swept from their thrones, eight hundred ecclesiastics were cast intoprison,(5) and, notwithstanding the ambiguous favour of Theodora, the orientalflocks, deprived of their shepherds, must insensibly have been either famished orpoisoned. In this spiritual distress, the expiring faction was revived, and united,and perpetuated, by the labours of a monk; and the name of James Baradseus(6)has been preserved in the appellation of Jacobites; a familiar sound, which maystartle the ear of an English reader. From the holy confessors in their prison ofConstantinople, he received the powers of bishop of Edessa, and apostle of theeast, and the ordination of fourscore thousand bishops, priests, and deacons, is de­rived from the same inexhaustible source. The speed of the zealous missionary•was promoted by the fleetest dromedaries of a devout chief of the Arabs; the doc­trine and discipline of the Jacobites were secretly established in the dominions ofJustinian; and each Jacobite was compelled to violate the laws and to hate theRoman legislator. The successors of Severus, while they lurked in convents, orvillages, while they sheltered their proscribed heads in the caverns of hermits, orthe tents of the Saracens, still asserted, as they now assert, their indefeasible rightto the title, the rank, and the prerogatives, of the patriarch of Antioch: under themilder yoke of the infidels, they reside about a league from Merdin, in the plea­sant monastery of Zapharan, which they have embellished with cells, aqueducts,and plantations. The secondary, though honourable, place is filled by the ma-fihrian, who, in his station at Mosul itself, defies the Nestorian catholics, with whomhe contests the supremacy of the east. Under the patriarch, and the maphrian,one hundred and fifty archbishops and bishops have been counted in the different


(1) Concerning the Christians of St. Thomas, see Assemannus, Biblioth. Orient, torn. iv. p. 391—405^435—451. Geddes's Church History of Malabar; and, above all, La Croze, Histoire du Christianhrme des Isjpes, <ntwo Tols. 12mo. La Haye, 1758, a learned and agreeable work. They have drawn from the same source, thePortuguese, and Italian narratives; and the prejudices of the Jesuits ate sufficiently corrected by those of theprotestants. >
(2) O*ov e*7T£ik ^imxkiiSk is the expression of Theodore in his treatise on the incarnation, p. 245. 347. as he isquoted by La Croze, (Hist, du Christianisme d'Ethiope et d'Armenie,p. 35.) who exclaims, perhaps too hastily,°* Quel pitoyable raissonement J" Renaudot has touched (Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p. 127—138.) the oriental ac­count of Severus: and his authentic creed may be found in the epistle of John the Jacobite, patriarch of An­tioch, in the tenth century, to his brother Mennas of Alexandria. (Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, torn. ii. p. 132
(3) Epist. Archimandritarum et Monachorum Syrite Secundfie ad Papain Hormisdam. Concil. torn. v. p. 508—602. The courage of St. Sabas, ut leo animosus, will justify the suspieion that the arms of these monksvere not always spiritual or defensive. (Baronius, A. D. 513. No. 7, ice.)
(4) Assemanni (Bibliot. Orient, torn. ii. p. 10—46.) and La Croze (Christianisme d'Ethiope, p. 36—40.) willsupply the history of Xenaias or Philoxenus, bishop of Mabug, or Hierapolis, in Syria. He was a perfect mas­ter of the Syriae language, and the author or editor of a version of the New Testament.
(5) The names and titles of $fty-four bishops, who were exiled by Justin, are preserved in the Chronicle ofDionysius. (apud Asseman. torn. ii. p. 54.) Severus was personally summoned to Constantinople—for his trial,says Liberatus, (Brev. c. 19.)—that his tongue might be cut out, says Eragrius. (lib. iv. c. 4.) The prudent pa­triarch did not stay to examine the difference. This ecclesiastical revolution is fixed, by Pagi in the month of


* (6) The obscure history of James, or Jacobus Raradeeus, or Zanzalus,may be gathered from Eutychitu, (An-nal. torn. IS. p. 144.147.) Renaudot, (Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p. 133.) and Assemannus, (Bibliot. Onent. torn. i.
S>. 424. torn. ii. p. 62—69.324—332. p. 414. torn. hi. p. 385—383.) He seems to be unknown to the Greeks TUeaconites themselves had rather deduce their name and pedigree lrora St, James the apostle.


 







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


prince of the Lombards disdained the ancient glories of Milan; and Pavia, duringsome ages, was respected as the capital of the kingdom of Italy. (1)
The reign of the founder was splendid and transient; and before he could regu­late his new conquests, Alboin fell a sacrifice to domestic treason and female re­venge. In a palace near Verona, which had not been erected for the barbarians,he feasted the companions of his arms; intoxication was the reward of valour, andthe king himself was tempted by appetite, or vanity, to exceed the ordinary mea­sure of his intemperance. After draining many capacious bowls of Rhxtian orFalernian wine he called for the skull of Cunipund, the noblest and most preciousornament of his sideboard. The cup of victory was accepted with horrid applauseby the circle of the Lombard chiefs. * " Fill it again with wine, (exclaimed theinhuman conqueror,) fill it to the brim; carry this goblet to the queen, and requestin my name that she would rejoice with her father." In an agony of grief andrage, Rosamond had strength to utter, Let the will of my Lord be obeyed! and,touching it with her lips, pronounced a silent imprecation, that the insult shouldbe washed away in the blood of Alboin. Some indulgence might be due to the re­sentment of a daughter, if she had not already violated the duties of a wife. Im­placable in her enmity, or inconstant in her love, the queen of Italy had stoopedfrom the throne to the arms of a subject, and Helmichis, the king's armour-bearer,was the secret minister of her pleasure and revenge. Against the proposal ofthe murder he could no longer urge the scruples of fidelity or gratitude; but Hel­michis trembled, when he revolved the, danger, as well as the guilt, when he re­collected the matchless strength and intrepidity of a warrior, whom he had so of­ten attended in the field of battle. He pressed and obtained that one of the bra­vest champions of the Lombards should be associated to the enterprise; but nomore than a promise of secrecy could be drawn from the gallant Peredeus; andthe mode of seduction employed by Rosamond betrays her shameless insensibilityboth, to honour and love. She supplied the place of one of her female attendants,who was beloved by Peredeus, and contrived some excuse for darkness and silenceytill she could inform her companion that he had enjoyed the queen of the Lom­bards, and that his own death, or the death of Alboin, must be the consequence ofsuch treasonable adultery. In this alternative, he chose rather to be the accomplicethan the victim of Rosamond,(2) whose Undaunted spirit was incapable of fear orremorse. She expected, and soon found, a favourable moment, when the king,oppressed with wine, had retired from the table to his afternoon slumbers. Hisfaithless spouse was anxious for his health and repose: the gates of the palacewere shut, the arms removed, the attendants dismissed, and Rosamond, after lull­ing him to rest by her tender caresses, unbolted the chamber-door, and urged thereluctant conspirators to the instant execution of the deed. On the first alarm,the warrior started from his couch; his sword, which he attempted to draw, hadbeen fastened to the scabbard by the hand of Rosamond; and a small stool, hisonly weapon, could not long protect him irom the spears of the assassins. Thedaughter of Cuniraund smiled in his fall: his body was buried under the staircaseof the palace, and the grateful posterity of the Lombards revered the tomb andthe memory of their victorious leader.
The ambitious Rosamond aspired to reign in the name of her lover; the city andpalace of Verona were awed by her power, and a faithful band of her nativeGepida: was prepared to applaud the revenge, and to second the wishes of theirsovereign. But the Lombard chiefs, who fled in the first moments of consterna­tion and disorder, had resumed their courage and collected their powers; and thenation, instead of submitting to her reign, demanded with unanimous cries, thatjustice should be executed on the guilty spouse and the murderers of their king.She sought a refuge among the enemies of her country, and a criminal who de­served the abhorrence of mankind was protected by the selfish policy of the ex­arch. With her daughter, the heiress of the Lombard throne, her two lovers,her trusty Gepidse, and the spoils of the palace of Verona, Rosamond descendedthe Adige, and the Po, and was transported by a Greek vessel to the safe harbour■of Ravenna. Longinus beheld with delight the charms and the treasures of the
(0 Tor the conniieit of Italy, see the original material, of Paul,(lib. ii. e. 7—10.12. 14. 25—27.) the elo­quent narrative of Suramin, (torn. ii. de Regno Italise, lib. i. p. 15—19.) and the correct and critical review orMuraturi,(Annali d'ltaliai, torn. v. p. 164—1800
(2) The classical reader will recollect the wife and murder of Candanles, so agreeably told in the first bookof Herodotus. The choice of Gyges, a*j)--iT»i «utoc jripiiiiw, may serve as the excuse of Peredeus; and finesoft insinuation of an odious Idea has been imitated by the best writers of antiquity. (GrseTitu, afl Ciceron.'Orat. pro Milone, e. 10.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 41


An order was despatched to his brother Ammatas, to collect all the forces of Car­thage, and to encounter the van of the Roman array at the distance of ten milesfrom the city: his nephew Gibamund, With two thousand horse was destined toattack their left, when the monarch himself, who silently followed, should chargetheir rear, in a situation which excluded them from the aid, or even the view, oftheir fleet. But the rashness of Ammatas was fatal to himself and his country.He anticipated the hour of attack, outstripped his tardy followers, and was piercedwith a mortal wound, after he had slain with his own hand twelve of his boldestantagonists. His Vandals fled to Carthage; the highway, almost ten miles, wasstrewed with dead bodies; and it seemed incredible, that such multitudes couldbe slaughtered by the swords of three hundred Romans. The nephew of Geli-mer was defeated, after a slight combat, by the six hundred Massagetx: they didnot equal the third part of his numbers: but each Scythian was fired by the ex­ample of his chief, who gloriously exercised the privilege of his family, by ridingforemost and alone to shoot the first arrow against the enemy. In the meanwhile,Gelimer himself, ignorant of the event, and misguided by the windings of thehills; inadvertently passed the Roman army, and reached the scene of action■where Ammatas had fallen. He wept the fate of his brother and of Carthage,charged with irresistible fury the advancing squadrons, and might have pursued,and perhaps decided the victory, if he had not wasted those inestimable momentsin the discharge of a vain, though pious, duty to the dead. While his spirit wasbroken by this mournful office, he heard the trumpet of Belisarius, who, leavingAntonina and his infantry in the camp, pressed forward with his guards and theremainder of the cavalry to rally his flying troops, and to restore the fortune ofthe day. Much room could not be found in this disorderly battle for the talentsof a general; but the king fled before the hero: and the Vandals, accustomed onlyto a Moorish enemy, were incapable of withstanding the arms and discipline ofthe Romans. Gelimer retired with hasty steps towards the desert of Numidia;but he had soon the consolation of learning, that his private orders for the execu­tion of Hilderic and his captive friends had been faithfully obeyed. The tyrant'srevenge was useful only to his enemies. The death of a lawful prince excited thecompassion of his people; his life might have perplexed the victorious Romans;and the lieutenant of Justinian, by a crime of which he was innocent, was re­lieved from the painful alternative of forfeiting his honour or relinquishing his con­quests.
As soon as the tumult had subsided, the several parts of the army informedeach other of the accidents of the day; and Belisarius pitched his camp on thefield of victory, to which the tenth mile-stone from Carthage had applied the La­tin appellation of decimus. From a wise suspicion of the stratagems and resourcesof the Vandals, he marched the next day in order of battle, halted in the eveningbefore the gates of Carthage, and allowed a night of repose, that he might not,in darkness and disorder, expose the city to the license of the soldiers, or the sol­diers themselves to the secret ambush of the city. But as the fears of Belisarius■were the result of calm and intrepid reason, he was soon satisfied that hemight confide, without danger, in the peaceful and friendly aspects of the capital.Carthage blazed with innumerable torches, the signals of the public joy; thechain was removed that guarded the entrance of the port; the gates were thrownopen,, and the people, with acclamations of gratitude, hailed and invited theirRoman deliverers. The defeat of the Vandals, and the freedom of Africa, wereannounced to the city on the eve of St. Cyprian, when the churches were al­ready adorned and illuminated for the festival of the martyr, whom three centu­ries of superstition had almost raised to a local deity. The Arians, conscious thattheir reign had expired, resigned the temple to the catholics, who rescued theirsaint from profane hands, performed the holy rites, and loudly proclaimed the creedof Athanasius and Justinian. One awful hour reversed the fortunes of the con­tending parties. The suppliant Vandals, who had so lately indulged the vices ofconquerors, sought an humble refuge in the sanctuary of the church: while themerchants of the east were delivered from the deepest dungeon of the palace bytheir affrighted keeper, who implored the protection of his captives, and showedthem through an aperture in the wall, the sails of the Roman fleet. After theirseparation from the army, the naval commanders had proceeded with slow cau­tion along the coast, till they reached the Hermacan promontory, and obtained thefirst intelligence of the victory of Belisarius. Faithful to his instructions, theywould have cast anchor about twenty miles from Carthage, if the more skilful sea-
vol. nr. e







OCR Output








36 THE DECLINE AND FALL


wardice was seldom exposed to military service. But the wiser citizens, whojudged of the future by the past, revolved in their memory the immense loss, bothof men and money, which the empire had sustained in the expedition of Basilis-cus. The troops, which after five laborious campaigns had been recalled fromthe Persian frontier, dreaded the sea, the climate, and the arms of an unknownenemy. The ministers of the finances computed, as far as they might compute,the demands of an African war; the taxes which must be found and levied to sup­ply those insatiate demands; and the danger, lest their own lives, or at least theirlucrative employments, should be made responsible for the deficiency of the sup­ply. Inspired by such selfish motives, (for we may not suspect him of any zealfor the public good,) John of Cappadocia ventured to oppose in full council the in­clinations of his master. He confessed, that a victory of such importance couldnot be too dearly purchased; but he represented in a grave discourse the certain,difficulties and the uncertain event. You undertake (said the prefect) to besiegeCarthage by land; the distance is not less than one hundred and forty days| jour­ney; on the sea, a whole year(l) must elapse before you can receive any intelli­gence from your fleet. If Africa should be reduced, it cannot be preserved with­out the additional conquest of Sicily and Italy. Success will impose the obliga­tion of new labours; a single misfortune will attract the barbarians into the heartof your exhausted empire. Justinian felt the weight of this salutary advice, hewas confounded by the unwonted freedom of, an obsequious servant; and the de­sign of the war would perhaps have been relinquished, if his courage had notbeen revived by a voice which silenced the doubts of profane reason. " I haveseen a vision (cried m artful or fanatic bishop of the east.) "It is the will ofHeaven, O emperor; f*at you Should not abandon your holy enterprise for the de­liverance of the African church. The god of battles will inarch before yourstandard, and disperse ymr enemies, who are the enemies of his, Son." Theemperor might be tempted, and his counsellors were constrained, to give creditto this seasonable revelation: but they derived more rational hope from the re­volt, which the adherents of Hilderic or Athanasius had already excited on theborders of the Vandal monarchy. Prudentius, an African subject, had privately-signified his royal intentions, and a small military am restored the province ofTripoli to the obedience of the Romans. The government of Sardinia had beenintrusted to Godas, a valiant barbarian; he suspended the payment of tribute, dis­claimed his allegiance to the usurper, and gave audience to the emissaries of Jus­tinian, who found him master of that fruitful island, at the head of his guards,and proudly invested with the ensigns of royalty. The forces of the Vandalswere diminished by discord and suspicion; the Roman armies were animated bythe spirit of Belisarius; one of those heroic names which are familiar to every ageand to every nation.
The Africanus of new Rome was born, and perhaps educated, among the Thra-cian peasants,(2) without any of those advantages which had formed the virtues ofthe elder and the younger Scipio; a noble origin, liberal studies, and the emulationof a free state. The silence ot a loquacious secretary may be admitted, to provethat the youth of Belisarius could not afford any subject of praise; he served most as­suredly, with valour and reputation, among the private guards of Justinian; andwhen his patron became emperor, the domestic was promoted to military com­mand. After a bold inroad into Persarmenia, in which his glory was shared by acolleague, and his progress was checked by an enemy, Belisarius repaired to theimportant station of Dara, where he first accepted the service of Procopius, thefaithful companion, and diligent historian, of his exploits. (3) The Mirranes ofPersia advanced, with forty thousand of her best troops, to raise the fortificationsof Dara: and signified the day and the hour on which the citizens should preparea bath for his refreshment after the toils of victory. He encountered an adver­sary equal to himself, by the new title of general of the east; his superior in thescience of war, but much inferior in the number and quality of his troops, whichamounted only to twenty-five thousand Romans and strangers, relaxed in their
(1) A Year—absurd exaggeration! The conquest or Africa may be dated A. D. S33. September 14: it ia cele­brated by Justinian in the preface to his Institutes, which were published November 21, of the same year. In­cluding the voyage and return, such a computation might he truly applied to our Indian empire.
(2) Qpturo Si 5 BiMa-etpio; (x rijuuns; n 8p*jewvrs xstt Ix*.upj»w ftirx^v xsitkj. Procop. Vandal, lib. i. c»M.) Aleraan. (Not. ad Aneedot. p. J.) an Italian, could easily reject the German vanity of Giphanius andVeljeruj, who wished to claim the herot but his Gcrmania, a metropolis of Thrace, I cannot find in any civilor ecclesiastical list of the provinces and cities.
,..<3! The two first Persian campaigns of Belisarius, are fairly and copiously related by his secretary. (Persiclib. J. c 12—18.)







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


law, unless he bestows a tenth of his revenue; and if his conscience accuses him offraud or extortion, the tenth under the idea of restitution, is enlarged to a.tfifth.(V)Benevolence is the foundation of justice, since we are forbid to injure those whom■we are bound to assist. A prophet may reveal the secrets of heaven and of futu­rity; but in his moral precepts he can only repeat the lessons of our own hearts.
. The two articles of belief, and the four practical duties of Islam, are guardedby rewards and punishments; and the faith of the Mussulman is devoutly fixed onthe event of the judgment and the last day. The prophet has not presumed todetermine the moment of that awful catastrophe, though he darkly announces thesigns, both in heaven and earth, which will precede the universal dissolution, whenlite shall be destroyed, and the order of creation shall be confounded in the primi­tive chaos. At the blast of the trumpet, new worlds will start into being; angels,genii, and men, will arise from the dead, and the human soul will again be unitedto the body. The doctrine of the resurrection was first entertained by the Egyp­tians;^) and their mummies were embalmed, their pyramids were constructed,to preserve the ancient mansion of the soul, during a period of three thousandyears. But the attempt is partial and unavailing; and it is with a more philoso­phic spirit that Mahomet relies on the omnipotence of the Creator, whose wordcan re-animate the breathless clay, and collect the innumerable atoms, that nolonger retain their form or substance. (3) The intermediate state of the soul it ishard to decide; and those who most firmly believe her immaterial nature, are ata loss to understand how she can think or act without the agency of the organsof sense..
The re-union of the soul and body will be followed by the final judgment ofmankind; and in his copy of the Magian picture, the prophet has too faithfullyrepresented the forms of proceeding, and even the slow and successive operationsof an earthly tribunal. By his intolerant adversaries he is upbraided for extend­ing, even to themselves, the hope of salvation; for asserting the blackest heresy,that every man who believes in God, and accomplishes good works, may expect inthe last day a favourable sentence. Such rational indifference is ill adapted to thecharacter of a fanatic; nor is it probable that a messenger from heaven should de­preciate the value and necessity of his own revelation. In the idiom of the Ko­ran,^) the belief of God is inseparable from that of Mahomet; the good worksare those which he has enjoined; and the two qualifications imply the professionof Islam, to which all nations and all sects are equally invited. Their spiritualblindness, though excused by ignorance and crowned with virtue, will be scourgedwith everlasting torments; and the tears which Mahomet shed over the tomb ofhis mother," for whom he was forbidden to pray, display a striking contrast of hu­manity and enthusiasm.(5) The doom of the infidels is common: the measure oftheir guilt and punishment is determined by the degree of evidence which theyhave rejected, by the magnitude of the errors which they have entertained: theeternal mansions of the Christians, the Jews, the Sabians, the Magians, and theidolaters, are sunk below each other in the abyss; and the lowest hell is reservedfor the faithless hypocrites who have assumed the mask of religion. After thegreater part of mankind has been condemned for their opinions, the true believersonly will be judged by their actions. The good and evil of each Mussulman willbe accurately weighed in a real or allegorical balance, and a singular mode of com­pensation will be allowed for the payment of injuries: the aggressor will refund anequivalent of his own good actions for the benefit of the person whom he haswronged; and if he should be destitute of any moral property, the weight of his sinswill be loaded with an adequate share of the demerits of the sufferer. According as
(1) Thejealousy of Maracci (Prodromus, part iv. p. 33.) prompts him to enumerate the more liberal alms ofthe catholics of Rome. Fifteen great hospitals are open to many thousand patients and pilgrims, fifteen hun­dred maidens are annually portioned, fifty-six charity schools are founded for both sores, one hundred andtwenty confraternities relieve the wants of their brethren, &c. The benevolence of London is still more ex­tensive: hut I am afraid that much more is to he ascribed to the humanity, than to the religion, of the people.j«v ™ C'io- »• c. 123.), and our learned countryman, Sir John Marsham (Canon. Chronicus, p.
■ j if of the same writer (p. 254—274.) is an elaborate sketch of the infernal regions, as they werepainted by the fancy of the Egyptians and Greeks, of the poets and philosophers of antiquity.
(3) The Koran (c. ii. p. 259, fee. of Sale, p. 32, of Maracci, p. 97.) relates an ingenious miracle, which satis­fied the curiosity, and confirmed the faith,of Abraham.
(4) The candid Reiand has demonstrated, that Mahomet damns all unbelievers (de Religion. Moharo. p.128-143.) that devils will not be finally saved (p. 196—199.) that paradise will not solely consist oi'cornortal de­lights, (p. 199—205.), and that women'i souls are immortal (p. 205-209.)
(5) Al Beidawi, apud Sale, Koran, c. is. p. 164. The refusal to pray lor an unbelieving kindred, is justified,according to Mahomet.by the duty ofa prophet, and the example of Abraham, who reprobated his own fatheras an enemy ot God. Yet Abrabam, (he adds, c. is. v. 116. Maracci, torn. ii. p. 317.), fuit sane pius, mitis.







OCR Output








146 THE DECLINE AND FALL


pie interest was condemned by the clergy of the east and west:(l) but the senseof mutual benefit, which had triumphed over the laws of the republic, have re­sisted, with equal firmness, the decrees of the church, and even the prejudices ofmankind. (2)
3. Nature and society impose the strict obligation of repairing an injury; andthe sufferer by private injustice, acquires a personal right and a legitimate action.If the property of another be intrusted to our care, the requisite degree of caremay rise and fall according to the benefit which we derive from such temporarypossession; we are seldom made responsible for inevitable accident, but the con­sequences of a voluntary fault must always be imputed to the author. (3) A Ro­man pursued and recovered his stolen goods by a civil action of theft; they mightpass through a succession of pure and innocent hands, but nothing less than a pre­scription of thirty years could extinguish his original claim. They were restoredby the sentence of the pretor, and the injury was compensated by double, or three­fold, or even quadruple damages, as the deed had been perpetrated by secretfraud or open rapine, as the robber had been surprised in the fact, or detected bya subsequent research. The Aquilian law(4) defended the living property of acitizen, nis slaves and cattle, from the stroke of malice or negligence: the highest ■price was allowed that could be ascribed to the domestic animal at any moment ofthe year preceding his death, a similar latitude of thirty days was granted on thedestruction of any other valuable effects. A personal injury is blunted or sharp­ened by the manners of the times and the sensibility of the individual: the painor disgrace of a word or blow cannot easily be appreciated by a pecuniary equi­valent. The rude jurisprudence of the decemvirs had confounded all hasty insults,which did not amount to the fracture of a limb, by condemning the aggressor tothe common penalty of twenty-five asses. But the same denomination of moneywas reduced, in three centuries, from a pound to the weight of half an ounce; andthe insolence of a wealthy Roman indulged himself i» the cheap amusement ofbreaking and satisfying the law of the twelve tables. Veratius ran through thestreets striking on the face the inoffensive passengers, and his attendant purse-bearer immediately silenced their clamours by the legal tender of twenty-fivepieces of copper, about the value of one shilling. (5) The equity of thepretorsexamined and estimated the distinct merits of each particular complaint. In theadjudication of civil damages, the magistrate assumed a right to consider the va­rious circumstances of time and place, of age and dignity, which may aggravatethe shame and sufferings of the injured person; but if he admitted the idea of afine, a punishment, an example, he invaded the province, though, perhaps, hesupplied the defects, of the criminal law.
The execution of the Alban dictator, who was dismembered by eight horses, isrepresented by Livy as the first and last instance of Roman cruelty in the punish­ment of the most atrocious crimes. (6) But this act of justice, or revenge, was in^flicted on a foreign enemy in the heat of victory, and at the command of a singleman. The twelve tables afforded a more decisive proof of the national spirit, sincethey were framed by the wisest of the senate, and accepted by the free voices ofthe people; yet these laws, like the statutes of Draco,(7) are written in charactersof blood.(8) They approve the inhuman and unequal principle of retaliation; andthe forfeit of an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, a limb for a limb, is rigorously
(1) The fathen are unanimous, (Barbeyrac, Morale des Peres, p. 144, fkc.) Cyprian, Lactantius, Basil, Chry--sostom (see his frivolous arguments in Noodt, lib. i. c. 7. p. 188.,) Gregory of Nyssa, Ambrose, Jerome, Augus­tus, ana a host of councils and casuists.
(2) Cato, Seneca, Plutarch, have loudly condemned the practice or abuse of usury. According to the ety­mology of foenus and toko;, the principal is supposed to generate the interest: a breed of barren metal, ex­claimed Shakspeare—and the stage is the echo of the public voice.
(3) Sir William Jones has given an ingenious and rational Essay on the Law of Bailment. (London, 1781,p. 127. in8vo.) He is perhaps the only lawyer equally conversant with the year-books of Westminster, theCommentaries of Ulpian, the Attic pleadings of Isseus, and the sentences of Arabian and Persian cadhis.
(4) Noodt (Opp. torn. i. p. 137—172.) has composed a separate treatise, ad Legem Aquiliam (Pandect, lib. ix.tit. 2.)
(i) Aulus Gellius, (Noct. Attic, xx. 1.) borrowed his story from the Commentaries of Q. Labeo on the twelvetables.
(6) The narrative of Livy (1.28.) is weighty and solemn.' At tu dictis Albane maneres is a harsh reflection,unworthy of Virgil's humanity, (£neid. viii. 643.) Heyne, with his usual good taste, observes that the subjectwas too horrid for the shield of tineas, (torn. iii. p. 229.)
(7) The age of Draco (Olympiad, xxxix. 1.) is fixed by Sir John Marsham (Canon Chronicus, p. 503—59ft.)and Corsini (Fasti Attici. torn. iii. p. 62.) For his laws, see the writers on the government of Athens, Sigo-nius, Meursius, Potter, &c.
(8) The eighth, the deHctis, of the twelve tables is delineated by Gravina (Opp. p. 292,293. with a Commen­tary, p. 214—230s) Aulus Gellius, 20.1.) and the Collatio Legum Mosajcarum et Romanarum afford much*original information.







OCR Output








44 , THE DECLINE AND FALL


ger, Belisarius passed an apprehensive night in the field of victory: at the dawn ofday, he planted his standard on a hill, recalled his guards and veterans, and gra­dually restored the modestv and obedience of the camp. It was equally the con­cern of the Roman general to subdue the hostile, and to save the prostrate barba­rian; and the suppliant Vandals, who could be found only in churches, were pro­tected by his authority, disarmed, and separately confined, that they might neither• disturb the public peace, nor become the victims of popular revenge. After des­patching a light detachment to tread the footsteps of Gelimer, he advanced withhis whole army, about ten days' march, as far as Hippo Regius, which no longerpossessed the relics of St. Augustin.(l) The season, and the certain intelligencethat the Vandals had fled to the inaccessible country of the Moors, determined Be­lisarius to relinquish the vain pursuit, and to fix his winter quarters at Carthage.From thence he despatched his principal lieutenant, to inform the emperor, thatin the space of three months he had achieved the conquest of Africa.
Belisarius spoke the language of truth. The surviving Vandals yielded, with­out resistance, their arms and their freedom: the neighbourhood of Carthage sub­mitted to his presence; and the more distant provinces were successively subduedby the report of his victory. Tripoli was confirmed in her voluntary allegiance;Sardinia and Corsica surrendered to an officer, who carried, instead of a sword,the head of the valiant Zano; and the isles of Majorca, Minorca, and Yvica, con­sented to remain an humble appendage of the African kingdom. Csesarea, a royalcity, which in looser geography may be confounded with the modern Algiers, wassituate thirty days' march to the westward of Carthage: by land, the road was in­fested by the Moors; but the sea was open, and the Romans were now masters ofthe sea. An active and discreet tribune sailed as far as the straits, where he oc­cupied Septem or Ceuta,(2) which rises opposite to Gibraltar on the African coast;that remote place was afterward adorned and fortified by Justinian; and he seemsto have indulged the vain ambition of extending his empire to the columns of Her­cules. He received the messengers of victory at the time when he was preparingto publish the pandects of the Roman law; and the devout or jealous emperor cele­brated the divine goodness, and confessed, in silence, the merit of his successfulgeneral.(3) Impatient to abolish the temporal and spiritual tyranny of the Van-'dals, he proceeded, without delay, to the full establishment of the catholic church.Her jurisdiction, wealth, and immunities, perhaps the most essential part of epis­copal religion, were restored and amplified with a liberal hand; the Arian worshipwas suppressed; the Donatist meetings were proscribed;(4) and the synod of Car­thage, by the voice of two hundred and seventeen bishops, (5) applauded the justmeasure of retaliation. On such an occasion, it may not be presumed, that manyorthodox prelates were absent; but the comparative smallness of their number,which in ancient councils had been twice or even thrice multiplied, most clearlyindicates the decay both of the church and state. While Justinian approved him­self the defender of the faith, he entertained an ambitious hope, that his victoriouslieutenant would speedily enlarge the narrow limits of his dominion to the spacewhich they occupied before the invasion of the Moors and Vandals; and Belisariuswas instructed to establish five dukes or commanders in the convenient stations ofTripoli, Leptis, Cirta, Casarea, and Sardinia, and to compute the military forceof fialatines or borderers that might be sufficient for the defence of Africa. Thekingdom of the Vandals was not unworthy of the presence of a pretorian prefect;and four consulars, three presidents, were appointed to administer the seven pro-
(1) The relics of St. Augustin were carried by tlie African bishops to their Sardinian exile: (A. D. 500) andit was believed in the eighth century, that I.iutprand, king of the Lombards, transported them (A. D. 721.)from Sardinia to Pavia. In the year 1695, the Angusrin friars of that city found a brick arch, marble coffin,silver case, silk wrapper, bones, blood, fee, and perhaps an inscription of Agostino, in Gothic letters. Butthis useful discovery has been disputed by reason and jealousy. (Baronint, Annaj. A. D. 735. no. 2—9. Til-leniont, Mem. Eccles. torn. xiii. p. 944. Montfaucon, Diarium Ital. p. 26—30. Muratori. Antiq. Ital. Medii.M,r\. torn. v. dissert. 58. p. 9. who had composed a separate treatiie before the decree of the bishop of Pavia,and pope Benedict XIII.)
(2) T» tji,- *roXmi«; ^-pcot^ia, is the expression of Procopius (de Edific. lib. vi. c. 7.) Ceuta, which has beendefaced by the Portuguese, nourished in nobles and palaces, in agriculture and manufactures, under the moreprosperous reign of the Arabs (I'Afriquede Marmol. torn. ii. p. 236.)
(3) Sec the second and third preambles to the Digest, or pandects, promulgated A. D. 533, December 16. Tothe titles of Vandalicus and jtfricanvs, Justinian, or rather Belisarius, had acquired a just claim: Gothicut waspremature, and_Francicus faise, and offensive to a great nation.
(4) See the original acts in Baronius, (A. D. 535. no. 21—54.) The emperor applauds his own clemency tothe heretics, cum sufficiat eis vivere.
(5) Dupin (Geograph. Sacra. Afrioarra, p. 59. ad Optat. Milev.) observes and bewails this episcopal decay.In the more prosperous age of the church, he had noticed six hundred and ninety bishoprics: but howeverminute were the diocesses, it is not probable that they all existed at the same time.







OCR Output








H THE DECLINE AND FALL


long vigils and abstemious diet. When his first transports had subsided, she stillmaintained the same ascendant over his mind, by the more solid merit of temperand understanding. Justinian delighted to ennoble and enrich the object of hisaffection; the treasures of the east were poured at her feet, and the nephew ofJustin was determined, perhaps by religious scruples, to bestow on his concubinethe sacred and legal character of a wife. But the laws of Rome expressly pro­hibited the marriage of a senator with any female who had been dishonoured by aservile origin or theatrical profession: the empress Lupicina, or Euphemia, a bar­barian of rustic manners, but of irreproachable virtue, refused to accept a prosti­tute for her niece: and even Vigilantia, the superstitious mother of Justinian,though she acknowledged the wit and beauty of Theodora, was seriously appre­hensive, lest the levity and arrogance of that artful paramour might corrupt thepiety and happiness of her son. These obstacles were removed by the inflexibleconstancy of Justinian. He patiently expected the death of the empress; he de­spised the tears of his mother, who soon sunk under the weight of her affliction,and a law was promulgated in the name of the emperor Justin, which abolishedthe rigid jurisprudence of antiquity. A glorious repentance (the words of theedict) was left open for the unhappy females who had prostituted their persons onthe theatre, and they were permitted to contract a legal union with the most illus­trious of the Romans. (1) This indulgence was speedily followed by the solemnnuptials of Justinian and Theodora; her dignity was gradually exalted with thatof her lover; and, as soon as Justin had invested his nephew with the purple, thepatriarch of Constantinople placed the diadem on the heads of the emperor andempress of the east. But the usual honours which the severity of Roman mannershad allowed to the wives of princes, could not satisfy either the ambition of The­odora, or the fondness of Justinian. He seated her on the throne as an equal andindependent colleague in the sovereignty of the empire, and an oath of allegiancewas imposed on the governors of the provinces in the joint names of Justinianand Theodora. (2) The eastern world fell prostrate before the genius and fortuneof the daughter of Acacius. The prostitute who, in the presence of innumerablespectators had polluted the theatre of Constantinople, was adored as a queen inthe same city, by grave magistrates, orthodox bishops, victorious generals, andcaptive monarchs. (3)
Those who believe that the female mind is totally depraved by the loss of chas­tity, will eagei-ly listen to all the invectives of private envy or popular resentment,which have dissembled the virtues of Theodora, exaggerated her vices, and con­demned with rigour the venal or voluntary sins of the youthful harlot. From amotive of shame or contempt, she often declined the servile homage of the multi­tude, escaped from the odious light of the capital, and passed the greatest part ofthe year in the palaces and gardens which were pleasantly seated on the sea-coastof the Propontis and the Bosphorus. Her private hours were devoted to the pru­dent as well as grateful care of her beauty, the luxury of the bath and table, andthe long slumber of the evening and the morning. Her secret apartments wereoccupied by the favourite women and eunuchs, whose interests and passions sheindulged at the expense of justice; the most illustrious personages of the statewere crowded into a dark and sultry antichamber, and when at last, after a tediousattendance, they were admitted to kiss the feet of Theodora, they experienced,as her humour might suggest, the silent arrogance of an empress, or the capriciouslevity of a comedian. Her rapacious avarice to accumulate an immense treasure,may be excused by the apprehension of her husband's death, which could leaveno alternative between ruin arid the throne; and fear as well as ambition might ex­asperate Theodora against two generals, who, during a malady of the emperor,had rashly declared that they were not disposed to acquiesce in the choice of thecapital. But the reproach of cruelty, so repugnant even to her softer vices, hasleft an indelible stain on the memory of Theodora. Her numerous spies observed,and zealously reported, every action, word, or look, injurious to their royal mistress.
(1) See the old law in Justinian's Code, (lib. v. tit. 5. leg. vii. tit. 27.lee. 1.) tinder the years 336 and 454. Tirenew edict (about the year 5S1 or 523. Aleman. p. 38.96.) very awkwardly repeals no more than the clause ofmulieres sccnkcc, libertinse, tabernarias. See the novels 89 and 117, and a Greek rescript from Justinian to thebishops. (Aleman. p. 41.)
f2)Iswear by the Father, 8cc, by the Virgin Mary, by the four Gospels, quae in tnanitrus teneo, and by'theholy archangels Michael and Gabriel, puram conscientiam germamimque serviiium me servatarom, sacratini-mis DDNN. Justiniano et Theodoras conjugi ejus (novel, viii. tit. 3.) Would the oath have been binding ia fa­vour of the widow? Communes tituli et trinmphi, Sec. (Aleman. p. 47,48.)
(3) M Let greatness own her, and she's mean no more." &c.
Without Warburton's critical telescope, I should never have seen, ia the general picture of triumphant vice,any personal allusion to Theodora.







OCR Output








314 THE DECLINE AND FALL


sects whom they oppressed successively retired beyond the limits of the Romatfempire; the Marcionites and the Manichseans dispersed their fantastic opinions'and apocryphal gospels; the churches of Yemen, and the princes of Hira and Gas-san, were instructed in a purer creed by the Jacobite and Nestorian bishops. (1)The liberty of choice was presented to the tribes; each Arab was free to elect orto compose his private religion; and the rude superstition of his house was mingledwith the sublime theology of saints and philosophers. A fundamental article offaith was inculcated by the consent of the learned strangers; the existence of onesupreme God, who is exalted above the powers of heaven and earth, but who hasoften revealed himself to mankind by the ministry of his angels and prophets, andwhose grace or justice has interrupted, by seasonable miracles, the order of na­ture. The most rational of the Arabs acknowledged his power, though they ne­glected his worship;(2) and *it was habit rather than conviction that still attachedthem to the relics of idolatry. The Jews and Christians were the people of thebook: the Bible was already translated into the Arabic language;(3) and the vo­lume of the Old Testament was accepted by the concord of these implacable ene­mies. In the story of the Hebrew patriarchs, the Arabs were pleased to discoverthe fathers of their nation. They applauded the birth and promises of Ismael; re­vered the faith and virtue of Abraham; traced his pedigree and their own to thecreation of the first man, and imbibed, with equal credulity, the prodigies of theholy text, and the dreams and traditions of the Jewish rabbis.
The base and plebeian origin of Mahomet is an unskilful calumny of the Chris­tians,^) who exalt instead of degrading the merit of their adversary. His descentfrom Ismael was a national privilege or fable; but if the first steps of the pedigree(5)are dark and doubtful, he could produce many generations of pure and genuine no­bility: he sprung from the tribe of Koreish and the family of Hashem, the mostillustrious of the Arabs, the princes of Mecca, and the hereditary guardians of theCaaba. The grandfather of Mahomet was Abdol Motalleb, the son of Hashem,a wealthy and generous citizen, who relieved the distress of famine with the sup­plies of commerce. Mecca, which had been fed by the liberality of the father,was saved by the courage of the son. The kingdom of Yemen was subject to theChristian princes of Abyssinia: their vassal Abrahah was provoked by an insultto avenge the honour of the cross; and the holy city was invested by a train of ele­phants and an army of Africans. A treaty was proposed; and in the first audience,the grandfa ther of Mahomet demanded the restitution of his cattle. " And why,"said Abrahah, " do you not rather implore my clemency in favour of your temple,which I have threatened to destroy?"—" Because," replied the intrepid chief, " thecattle is my own: the Caaba belongs to the gods, and they will defend their housefrom injury and sacrilege." The want of provisions, or the valour of the Koreish,compelled the Abyssinians to a disgraceful retreat: their discomfiture has beenadorned with a miraculous flight of birds, who showered down stones on the headsof the infidels; and the deliverance wSs long commemorated by the era of the ele­phant. (6) The glory of Abdol Motalleb was crowned with domestic happiness,
(1) The state of the Jews and Christians in Arabia is described bv Pocoek from Sharestani, &c. (Specimen,
S. 60. 134, &c.) Hottinger (Hist. Orient, p. 212—238.) d'Herbelot (Bihliot. Orient, p. 474—479.) Basnage(Hist,es .luifs, torn. vii. p. 185. lorn. viii. p. 280.) and Sale's Preliminary Discourse, p. 22, &c. 33, Sec.)
(2) In their offerings, it was a maxim to defraud God for the profit of the idol, not a more potent, but a moreirritable, patron (Poeock, Specimen, p. 108,109.)
(3) Our versions now extant, whether Jewish or Christian, appear more recentthan the Koran; but the ex­istence ot a prior translation may be fairly inferred,—!. From the perpetual practice of the synagogue, of ex­pounding the Hebrew lesson by a paraphrase in the vulgar tongue of the country. 2. From the Analogy ofthe Armenian, Persian, Ethiopic versions, expressly quoted by the fathers of tbefiflh century, who assert, thatthe scriptures were translated into all Ihe barbaric languages, (Walton, Prolegomena ad Biblia Polyglot, p. 34.03—97. Simeon, Hist. Critique dn V. et du N. Testament, torn. i. p. 180,181,282—286,293. 305,306. tom.iv.p.206.) r ,
(4) In en conveniunt omnes nt plebeio villiqne genere ortum, &c. (Hottinger, Hist. Orient, p. 146.) YetTheophanes, the most ancient of the Greeks, and the father of many a lie, confesses that Mahomet was of therace of Ismael, •» joks, ytmm* T«; ox,; (Chronograph, p. 277.)
(5) Abulf'da (in Vit. Mohammed, c. i. ii..) and Gagnier Vie de Mahomet, p. 25—97.) describe the popular andapproved genealogy or the prophet. At Mecca, I would riot dispute its authenticity: at Lausanne, I will ventureto observe, 1. That J ram Ismael to Mahomet, a period of two thousand live hundred years, they reckon thirty,instead of seventy-fire generations. 2. That the modern Bedoweens are ignorant of their history and carelessof then-pedigree, (Voyage d'Arvieux, p. 130.133.)
(6) The scene of this history, or fable, is contained in the one hundred and fifth chapter of the Koran, andGagnier (m Praefat. adV,t. Moham. p. 18, &e.) has translated the historical narrative of Abulreda, which rosybe illustrated from d Herbelot, (Biblmt. Orientate, p. 12.) and Pocock, (Specimen, p. 64.) Prideaux, (LifeofMahomet, p. 48.) calls it a lie of the coinage of Mahomet; hut Sale, (Koran, p. 501—503.) who is half a Mussul­man, attackl the inconsistent faith of the doctor for believing the miracles of the Delphic Apollo. ~ '(Alcoran, torn. i. part 2. p. 14. torn. ii. p. 823.) ascribes the miracle to the devil, and extorts from the Ma]the confession, that God would not have defended against the Christians the idols of the Caaba.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


attested by the seals of twelve interpreters. The liberty of commerce and reli­gion was fixed and defined; the allies of the emperor and the great king were in­cluded in the same benefits and obligations; and the most scrupulous precautionswere provided to prevent or determine the accidental disputes that might arise onthe confines of two hostile nations. After twenty years of destructive thoughfeeble war, the limits still remained without alteration; and Chosroes was persuadedto renounce his dangerous claim to the possession or sovereignty of Colchos and itsdependant states. Rich in the accumulated treasures of the east, he extorted fromthe Romans an annual payment of thirty thousand pieces of gold; and the smallnessof the sum revealed the disgrace of a tribute in its naked deformity. In a previousdebate, the chariot of Sesostris, and the wheel of fortune, were applied by one of theministers of Justinian, who observed, that the reduction of Antioch, and some Sy­rian cities, had elevated beyond measure the vain and ambitious spirit of the bar­barian. " You are mistaken," replied the modest Persian: "thekin^ of kings,the lord of mankind, looks down with contempt on such petty acquisitions; andof the ten nations, vanquished by his invincible arms, he esteems the Romans asthe least formidable. "(1) According to the orientals, the empire of Nushirvan ex­tended from Ferganah in Transoxiana to Yemen or Arabia Felix. He subdued therebels of Hyrcania, reduced the provinces of Cabul and Zablestan on the banks ofthe Indus, broke the power of the Euthalites, terminated by an honourable treatythe Turkish war, and admitted the daughter of the great khan into the number ofhis lawful wives. Victorious and respected among the princes of Asia, he gaveaudience, in his palace of Madain, or Ctesiphon, to the ambassadors of the world.Their gifts or tributes, arms, rich garments, gems, slaves, or aromatics, were hum­bly presented at the foot of his throne; and he condescended to accept from the kingof India, ten quintals of the wood of aloes, a maid seven cubits in height, anda carpet softer than silk, the skin, as it was reported, of an extraordinary ser­pent (2)
Justinian had been reproached for his alliance with the Ethiopians, as if he at­tempted to introduce a people of savage negroes into the system of civilized soci­ety. But the friends of the Roman empire, the Axumites, or Abyssinians, maybe always distinguished from the original natives of Africa. (3) The hand of na­ture has flattened the noses of the negroes, covered their heads with shaggy wool,and tinged their skin with inherent and indelible blackness. But the olive com­plexion of the Abyssinians, their hair, shape, and features, distinctly mark themas a colony of Arabs; and this descent is confirmed by the resemblance of lan­guage and manners, the report of an ancient emigration, and the narrow intervalbetween the shores of the Red Sea. Christianity had raised that nation abovethe level of African barbarism;(4) their intercourse with Egypt, and the succes­sors of Constantine,(5) had communicated the rudiments of the arts and sciences;their vessels traded to the isle of Ceylon, (6) and seven kingdoms obeyed the Ne­gus or supreme prince of Abyssinia. The independence of the Homerites, whoreigned in the rich and happy Arabia, was first violated by an Ethiopian conque­ror; he drew his hereditary claim from the queen of Sheba,(7) and his ambition■was sanctified by religious zeal. The Jews, powerful and active in exile, had se­duced the mind of Dunaan, prince of the Homerites. They urged him to retali­ate the persecution inflicted by the imperial laws on their unfortunate brethren:some Roman merchants were injuriously treated; and several Christians of Ne-
(1) The negotiations And treaties between Justinian and Chosroes are copiously explained byProeopius(Persic, lib. ii. c. 10.13. 28—28. Gothic, lib. iL c. 11—15.;) Agathias (lib. iv. p. 141.142..) and Menander (inExcerpt. Legat. p. 132-147.) Consult Barbeyrac, Hist, des Anciens Traites, torn. ii. p. 154.161—184. 193.200.
(2) D'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orient, p. 680,681. 294,295.


e colony of
- ,-, --- .— , — , j the nestoa
of the adjacent and similar regions.
(4) The Portuguese missionaries, Alvarez, (Ramutio, torn. i. fol. 204. rect. 274. vers.;) Rermude/. (Pnrchas'sPilpims, vol.ii. lib. v.c.7.p. 1149—US8.0 Lobo (Relation, &c. par. M. le Grand, with fifteen Dissertations!Pa™, 1728.,) and Tellcz (Relations de Thevenot. part 4.,) could only relate of modern Abyssinia what theyhad seen or Invented. The erudition of Ludolpliui (Hist. £ihiopica, Francofurt. 1681. Commentariiii, 1691.Appendix, 1694 > in twenty-fire languages, conld add little concerning its ancient history. Yet the tame of
* o£r **lll,t"aeus' the conqueror of Yemen, is celebrated in national songs and legends.
(5) The negotiations of Justinian with the Axumites, or Ethiopians, are recorded by Procoplus (Persic, lib.i. c. 19,20,) and John Malala (torn. ii. p. 163-165.193—196.) The historian of Antioch quotes the original


narrative of the ambassador Nonnolus, of which Phofius (Bibliot. cod. 3.) lias preserved a curious extract.
(«)The trade of the Axumites to the coast of India and Africa, and the isle of Ceylon, is curiously repre­sented by Cosmas Indicopleustes (Topograph. Christian, lib. ii. p. 132. 138-140. lib, xi» p. 338,339.)
(7; Ludolplt. Hist, et Comment. *thiop. lib. ii. c. 3.







OCR Output








TO THE DECLINE AND FALL


anxious curiosity the letter which contained the sentence of his fate. " You can­not be ignorant how much you have deserved my displeasure. I am not insensi­ble of the services of Antonina. To her merits and intercession I have grantedyour life, and permit you to retain a part of your treasures, which might be justlyforfeited to the state. Let your gratitude, where it is due, be displayed, not inwords, but in your future behaviour." I know not how to believe or to relate thetransports which the hero is said to have received this ignominious pardon. Hefell prostrate before his wife, he kissed the feet of his saviour, and he devoutly pro­mised to live the grateful and submissive slave of Antonina. A fine of one hundredand twenty thousand pounds sterling Was levied on the fortunes of Belisarius; andwith the office of count, or master of the royal stable, he accepted the conduct ofthe Italian war. At his departure from Constantinople, his friends, and even thepublic, were persuaded that as soon as he regained his freedom, he would renouncehis dissimulation; and that his wife, Theodora, and perhaps the emperor himself,would be sacrificed to the just revenge of a virtuous rebel. Their hopes were de­ceived; and the unconquerable patience and loyalty of Belisarius appear either be­low or above the character of a man.(1)


CHAPTER XLII.
SUUe of the Barbaric world.—Establishment of the Lombards on the Danube.—Tribes and. inroads of the Sclavonians.—Origin, empire, and embassies of the Turks.—The flight' of the Avars.—Chosroes I. or Nushirvan, king of Persia.—His prosperous reign andtears with the Romans.—The Cholchian or Lazicwar.—The Ethiopians.
Our estimate of personal merit is relative to the common faculties of mankind.The aspiring efforts of genius, or virtue, either in active or speculative life, aremeasured, not so much by their real elevation, as by the height to which they as­cend above the level of their age or country; and the same stature, which in apeople of giants would pass unnoticed, must appear conspicuous in a race of pigmies.Leonidas, and his three hundred companions, devoted their lives at Thermopylse;but the education of the infant, the boy, and the man, had prepared,-and almostensured, this memorable sacrifice; and each Spartan would approve, rather thanadmire, an act of duty, of which himself and eight thousand of his fellow-citizenswere equally capable. (2) The great Pompey might inscribe on his trophies, thathe had defeated in battle two millions of enemies, and reduced fifteen hundred ci­ties from the lake Mseotis to the Red Sea;(3) but the fortune of Rome flew beforehis eagles; the nations were oppressed by their own fears, and the invincible le­gions which he commanded, had been formed by the habits of conquest, and thediscipline of ages. In this view, the character of Belisarius may be deservedlyplaced above the heroes of the ancient republics. His imperfections flowed fromthe contagion of the times; his virtues were his own, the free gift of nature or re­flection; he raised himself without a master or a rival; and so inadequate were thearms committed to his hand, that his sole advantage was derived from the prideand presumption of his adversaries. Under his command, the subjects of Justinianoften deserved to be called Romans: but the unwarlike appellation of Greeks wasimposed as a term of reproach by the haughty Goths, who affected to blush, thatthey might dispute the kingdom of Italy with a nation of tragedians, pantomimes,andpirates. (4) The climate of Asia has indeed been found less congenial than thatof Europe, to military spirit: those populous Countries were enervated by luxury,despotism, and superstition; and the monks were more expensive and more nume­rous than the soldiers of the east. The regular force of the empire had once
(1) The continuator of t!ie chronicle of Marecllimis gives, in a few decent words, the substance of the An­ecdotes.—Belisarius de Oriente evocatu's, in offensam periculumque incurren* grave, et invidise subjacens, rur-sus remiutur in ltaliam. (p. 54.)
(2) It will tie a pleasure, not a task, to mad Herodotus (lib. vii. c.104. 134. p. 550. 61S.) The conversation ofXerxes and Dentaratus at Thermnpytse, is one of the most interesting; and moral scenes in history. It wasthe torture of the royal Spartan to behold, with anguish and remorse, the virtue of his country.
(3) See this proud inscription in Pliny. (Hist. Natur. vii. 27.) Few men have more exquisitely tasted ofglory and disgrace, nor could Juvenal (Satir. 10.) produce a more striking example of the vicissitudes of for­tune, and the vanity of human wishes.
(4) Tpxtxou; if n» w srpoTip* cv^tvsc (j IraXwu r.xorrx tlSw, oti //ij TpxyvSo-j;, *** vaurw; A.»»o?uT«;.
This last epithet of Procopius is too nobly translated by pirates: naval thieves are the proper words: strippers■of garments, either for injury or insult. (Demosthenes contra Conrfn. inKeiske Orator. Grecian), ii, p. 1354.)







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


be applied to the slaughter of unbelievers; and he piously laboured to establishwith fire and sword the unity of the Christian faith.(l)
With these sentiments, it was incumbent on him, at least, to be always in theright. In the first years of his administration, he signalized his zeal as the disci­ple and patron of orthodoxy: the reconciliation of the Greeks and Latins es­tablished the tome of St. Leo, as the creed of the emperor and the empire; theNestorians and Eutychians were exposed, on either side, to the double edge ofpersecution; and the four synods of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedony■were ratified by the code of a catholic lawgiver. (2) But while Justinian strove tomaintain the uniformity of faith and worship, his wife Theodora, whose viceswere not incompatible with devotion, had listened to the Monophysite teachers;and the open or clandestine enemies of the church revived and multiplied at thesmile of their gracious patroness. The capital, the palace, the nuptial bed, weretorn by spiritual discord: yet so doubtful was the sincerity of the royal consorts,that their seeming disagreement was imputed by many to a secret and mischievousconfederacy against the religion and happiness of their people. (3) The famousdispute of the three chapters,(4) which has filled more volumes than it de­serves lines, is deeply marked with this subtle and disingenuous spirit. It wasnow three hundred years since the body of Origen(5) had been eaten by theworms: his soul, of which he held the pre-existence, was in the hands of its Cre­ator, but his writings were eagerly perused by the monks of Palestine. In thesewritings, the piercing eye of Justinian descried more than ten metaphysical errors;and the primitive doctor, in the company of Pythagoras and Plato, was devotedby the clergy to the eternity of hell-fire, which he had presumed to deny. Underthe cover of this precedent, a treacherous blow was aimed at the council ofChalcedon. The fathers had listened without impatience to the praise of Theo­dore of Mopsuestia;(6) and their justice or indulgence had restored both Theo-doret of Cyrrhus, and Ibas of Edessa, to the communion of the church. But thecharacters of these oriental bishops were tainted with the reproach of heresy; thefirst had been the master, the two others were the friends of Nestorius: their mostsuspicious passages were accused under the title of the three chapters; and thecondemnation of their memory must involve the honour of a synod, whose name waspronounced with sincere or affected reverence by the catholic world. If thesebishops, whether innocent or guilty, were annihilated in the sleep of death, theywould not probably be awakened by the clamour, which after a hundred yearswas raised over their grave. If they were already in the fangs of the demon,their torments could neither be aggravated nor assuaged by human industry. Ifin the company of saints and angels they enjoyed the rewards of piety, they musthave smiled at the idle fury of the theological insects who still crawled on thesurface of the earth. The foremost of these insects, the emperor of the Romans,darted his sting, and distilled his venom, perhaps without discerning the true mo­tives of Theodora and her ecclesiastical faction. The victims were no longersubject to his power, and the vehement style nf his edicts could only proclaimtheir damnation, and invite.the clergy of the east to join in a full chorus of cursesand anathemas. The east, with some hesitation, consented to the voice of hersovereign.- the fifth general council, of three patriarchs and one hundred and sixty-five bishops, was held at Constantinople; and the authors as well as the defenders,


(1) The expression of Procopius is remarkable: co yap ot $Soxai e>ovi; utGpwrmv f*vai, wye p* r*; kutou Josh;
TtA-nmoms rvjgotiv ovrtg. Anecdot. c. 13.
(2) See the Chronicle of Victor, p. 328, and the original evidence of the lavs of Justinian. During the firstyears of his reign, Baronius himself is in extreme good humour with the emperor, who courted the popes,till he got them into bis power.
(3) Procopius, Anecdot. e. 13. Evagrius, lib. iv. c. 10. If the ecclesiastical never read the sacred historian,their common suspicion proves at least the general hatred.
(4) On the subject of the three chapters, the original acts of the fifth general council of Constantinoplesupply much useless though authentic knowledge. (Concil. torn. vi. p. t—419.) The Greek Evagrius is lesscopious and correct (lib. iv. c. 38.) than the three zealous Africans, Facundus, (in his twelve books de tribustapitutca, which are most enrrectly published by Sirmond) Liberatus, (in his Breviarum, c. 22—24.) and VictorTunnensis in his Chronicle, (m torn, i. Antiq. Lect. Canisii. p. 330—S34.) The Liber Pontificalis, or Anasta-sius (in Vigilio, Pelagio, &c.) is original Italian evidence. The modern reader will derive lorae informationfrom Dupin (Bibliot, Eccles. torn. v. p. 189—207.) and Basnage; (Hist, de 1'Eglise, torn. i. p. 519—541.( yet thelatter is too firmly resolved to depreciate the authority and character of the pones.
(5) Ongen had indeed too great a propensity to imitate the irt.au and fu«ri6ii« of the old philosophers.(Justinian ad Mennam, in Concil. torn. vi. p. 356.) His moderate opinions were too repugnant to the zeal ofthe church, and he was found guilty of the heresy of reason.
(8) Basnage (Prefat. p. 11—14. ad torn. i. Antiq. Lect. Canis.) has fairly weighed the guilt and innocence ofineoaoreot Mopinestia. If he composed ten thousand volumes, as many errors would be a charitable al­lowance. In all the subsequent catalogues of heresiarchs, he alone, without his two brethren, is ' " ' 'and it is the duty of Aiseman (Bibliot. Orient, torn. iv. p. 203—207.) to justify the sentence.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


holy, holy. Lord God of Hosts! is supposed, by the Greeks, to be the identicalhymn which the angels and cherubim eternally repeat before the throne ofGod, and which, about the middle of the fifth century, was miraculously rerealedto the church of Constantinople. The devotion of Antioch soon added, who wascrucifiedfor us! and this grateful address, either to Christ alone, or to the wholeTrinity, may be justified by the rules of theology, and has been gradually adoptedby the catholics of the east and west. But it had been imagined by a Monophy-site bishop;(l) the gift of an enemy was at first rejected as a dire and dangerousblasphemy, and the rash innovation had nearly cost the emperor Anastasius histhrone and his life. (2)
The people of Constantinople were devoid of any rational principles of freedom;but they held as a lawful cause of rebellion, the colour of a livery in the races, orthe colour of a mystery in the schools. The Trisagion, with and without this ob­noxious addition, was chanted in the cathedral by two adverse choirs, and, whentheir lungs were exhausted, they had recourse to the more solid arguments ofsticks and stones: the aggressors were punished by the emperor, and defended bythe patriarch; and the crown and the mitre were staked on the event of this mo­mentous quarrel. The streets were instantly crowded with innumerable swarmsof men, women, and children; the legions of monks, in regular array, marched,and shouted, and fought at their head,—" Christians! this is the day of martyr­dom; let us not desert our spiritual father; anathema to the Manichscan tyrant; heis unworthy to reign." Such was the catholic cry; and the galleys of Anastasiuslay upon their oars before the palace, till the patriarch had pardoned his penitent,and hushed the waves of the troubled multitude. The triumph of Macedoniuswas checked by a speedy exile; but the zeal of his flock was again exasperatedby the same question,— Whether one of the Trinity had been crucified? On thismomentous occasion, the blue and green factionsof Constantinople suspended theirdiscord, and the civil and military powers were annihilated in their presence. Thekeys of the city, and the standards of their guards, were deposited in the forumof Constantine, the principal station and camp of the faithful. Day and nightthey were incessantly busied either in singing hymns to the honour of their god,or in pillaging and murdering the servants of their prince. The head of his fa­vourite monk, the friend, as they styled him, of the enemy of the holy Trinity,was borne aloft on a spear; and the fire-brands, which had been darted against he­retical structures, diffused the undistinguishing flames against the most orthodoxbuildings. The statues of the emperor were broken, and his person was concealedin a suburb, till at the end of three days he dared to implore the mercy of his sub­jects. Without his diadem, and in the posture of a suppliant, Anastasius appearedon the throne of the circus. The catholics, before his face, rehearsed their ge­nuine Trisagion; they exulted in the offer which he proclaimed by the voice ofa herald, of abdicating the purple; they listened to the admonition, that since allcould not reign, they should previously agree in the choice of a sovereign; andthey accepted the blood of two unpopular ministers, whom their master withouthesitation, condemned to the lions. These furious but transient seditions were en­couraged by the success of Vitalian, who, with an army of Huns and Bulgarians,for the most part idolaters, declared himself the champion of the catholic faith.In this pious rebellion he depopulated Thrace, besieged Constantinople, extermi­nated sixty-five thousand of his fellow-Christians, till he obtained the recall ofthe bishops, the satisfaction of the pope, and the establishment of the council ofChalcedon, an orthodox treaty, reluctantly signed by the dying Anastasius, andmore faithfully performed by the uncle of Justinian. And such was the event ofthe first of the religious wars, which have been waged in the name and by the dis­ciples, of the God of Peace. (3)


(1) Peter Gnapheus, the fuller (a trade which he bad exercised in hia monaitery.) patriarch of Antioch. Histedious story is discussed in the Annals of Pagi, A. D. 477—490.) and a dissertation of M. de Valois at the end iof his Evagrius.
(2) The troubles under the reign of Anastasius must be gathered fi om the chronicles of Victor, Marcellinus,and Theophanes. As the last was not published in the time of Baronius, his critic Fagi is more copious, uwell as more correct.
(3) The general history, from the council of Chalcedon to the death of Anastasius, may be found in theBreviary of Liberatus, (c. 14—19.) the second and third books of Evaerius, the Abstract of the two book, ofTheodore the Reader, the Acts of th>- Synods, and the Epistles of the Popes. (Conol. torn, v.) The series itcontinued with some disorder in the fifteenth and sixteenth tomes of the Memoires Ecclesiastiques of Tille-mont. And here I must take leas'* for ever of that incomparable guide—whose bigotryis overb&lanced by themerits of tradition, diligence, veracity, and scrupulous minuteness. He was prevented by death from'com-pleting, as he designed, the sixth cenluiy of the church and enjph-e.
Vbr,. III. 28







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


bards through unknown regions and marvellous adventures. About the time ofAugustus and Trajan, a ray of historic light breaks on the darkness of their anti­quities, and they are discovered, for the first time!, between the Elbe and the Oder.Fierce, beyond the example of the Germans, they delighted to propagate the tre-mendous belief, that their heads were formed like the heads of dogs, and that theydrank the blood of their enemies whom they vanquished in battle. The smallnessof their numbers was recruited by the adoption of their bravest slaves; and alone,amidst their powerful neighbours, they defended by arms their high-spirited inde­pendence. In the tempests of the north, which overwhelmed so many names andnations, this little bark of the Lombards still floated on the surface: they graduallydescended towards the south and the Danube; and at the end of four hundred yearsthey again appear with their ancient valour and renown. Their manners werenot less ferocious. The assassination of a royal guest was executed in the pre­sence, and by the command, of the king's daughter, who had been provoked bysome words of insult, and disappointed by his diminutive stature; and a tribute, theprice of blood, was imposed on the Lombards, by his brother, the king of the He-ruli. Adversity revived a sense of moderation and justice, and the insolence ofconquest was chastised by the signal defeat and irreparable dispersion of the Heru-li, who were seated in the southern provinces of Poland.(l) The victories of theLombards recommended them to the friendship of the emperors; and at the soli­citation of Justinian, they passed the Danube, to reduce, according to their treaty,the cities of Noricum and the fortresses of Pannonia. But the spirit of rapine soontempted them beyond these ample limits; they wandered along the coast of theHadriatic as far as Dyrrachium, and presumed, with familiar rudeness, to enterthe towns and houses of their Roman allies, and to seize the captives who had es­caped from their audacious hands. These acts of hostility, the sallies, as it mightbe pretended, of some loose adventurers, were disowned by the nation, and excusedby the emperor; but the arms of the Lombards were more seriously engaged by acontest of thirty years, which was terminated only by the extirpation of the Gepi-dae. The hostile nations often pleaded their cause before the throne of Constanti­nople; and the crafty Justinian, to whom the barbarians were almost equally odious,renounced a partial and ambiguous sentence, and dexterously protracted the wary slow and ineffectual succours. Their strength was formidable, since the Lom­bards, who sent into the field several myriads of soldiers, still claimed, as theweaker side, the protection of the Romans. Their spirit was intrepid; yet such isthe uncertainty of courage, that the two armies were suddenly struck with a pa­nic: they fled from each other, and the rival kings remained with their guards inthe midst of an empty plain. A short truce was obtained; but their mutual resent­ment again kindled; and the remembrance of their shame rendered the next en­counter more desperate and bloody. Forty thousand of the barbarians perished inthe decisive battle, which broke the power of the Gepidsc, transferred the fearsand wishes of Justinian, and first displayed the character of Alboin, the youthfulprince of the Lombards, and the future conqueror of Italy. (2)
The wild people, who dwelt or wandered in the plains of Russia, Lithuania, andPoland, might be reduced, in the age of Justinian, under the two great families ofthe Bulgarians(S) and the Sclavonians. According to the Greek writers,the former, who touched the Euxine and the lake of Msotis, derived from theHuns their name or descent; and it is needless to renew the simple and well-known picture of Tartar manners. They were bold and dexterous archers, whodrank the milk, and feasted on the flesh of their fleet and indefatigable horses;whose flocks and herds followed, or rather guided, the motions of their rovingcamps; to whose inroads no country was remote or impervious, and who werepractised in flight, though incapable of fear. The nation was divided into twopowerful and hostile tribes, who pursued each other with fraternal hatred. Theyeagerly disputed the friendship, or rather the gifts of the emperor; and the dis-
(1) Two facts in the narrative of Paul Diaconns (lib. i. c. 20.) arc expressive of national manners.—1. Dumttdtabuhtm luderet—while he played at draughts. 2. Camporum viridantia Una. Toe cultivation of flax sup­poses property, commerce, agriculture, and manufactures.
t (2) I have used, without undertaking to reconcile the facts in Proeopius (Goth. lib. it. c. 14. lib. iii. e. 33,34.lib. iv. c. 18—25.) Paul Diaconns (de Geslis Langobard lib. i. c. 1—23. in Muratori, Script, Rerum Itaticarum,torn. i. p. 405—419.,) and Jornandes (de Success. Regnorum, p. 242.) The patient reader may draw some lightfrom Mascou(Hist. of the Germans, and Annotat. 23.) and de Buat (Hist, des Peuplei, See. torn. 9—11.)
(3) I adopt the appellation of Bulgarians, from Ennodiui (in Panegyr, Theodorici, Opp. Sirmoud, torn. i.p. 1598, 1599.,) Jornandes. (de Rebus Gclicis, c. v. p. 194. et de Regn. Succ* stione, p. 242..) Theuphanes (p.185., and the Chronicles of Catsiodunis and Marcellinus. The name of Huns is too vague; the tribes of theCutturgurians and Utturgurians are too minute and too harsh.







OCR Output








MA THE DECLINE AND FALL


of the church. Their votaries have exhausted the bitterness of religious gall, ihtheir portrait of this spotted panther', this antichrist, this flying dragon of the ser­pent's seed, who surpassed the vices of Elagabalus and Nero. His reign was along butchery of whatever was most noble, or holy, or innocent, in his empire. Inperson, the emperor assisted at the execution of his victims, surveyed their ago­nies, listened to their groans, and indulged, without satiating his appetite for blood:a plate of noses was accepted as a grateful offering, and his domestics were often


pollution of his baptismal font. The infant might be excused; but the manlypleasures of Copronymus degraded him below the level of a brute; his lust con­founded the eternal distinctions of sex and species; and he seemed to extract someunnatural delight from the objects most offensive to human sense. In his religion,the Iconoclast was a heretic, a Jew, a Mahometan, a pagan, and an atheist; and hisbelief of an invisible power could be discovered only in his magic rites, human vic­tims, and nocturnal sacrifices to Venus and the demons of antiquity. His life wasstained with the most opposite vices, and the ulcers which covered his body, anti­cipated before his death the sentiment of hell tortures. Of these accusations,which I have so patiently copied, a part is refuted by its own absurdity; and in theprivate anecdotes of the life of princes, the lie is more easy as the detection ismore difficult. Without adopting the pernicious maxim, that were much is al­leged, something must be true, I can, however, discern that Constantine V, wasdissolute and cruel. Calumny is more prone to exaggerate than to invent; and herlicentious tongue is checked in some measure by the experience of the age andcountry to which she appeals. Of the bishops and monks, the generals and ma­gistrates, who are said to have suffered under his reign, the numbers are recorded,the names were conspicuous, the execution was public, the mutilation visible andpermanent. The catholics hated the person and government of Copronymus;but even their hatred is a proof of their oppression. They dissemble the provo­cations which might excuse or justify his rigour; but even these provocations mustgradually inflame his resentment, and harden his temper in the use or the abuseof despotism. Yet the character of the fifth Constantine was not devoid of merit,nor did his government always deserve the curses or the contempt of the Greeks.From the confession of his enemies, I am informed of the restoration of an ancientaqueduct, of the redemption of two thousand five hundred captives, of the uncom­mon plenty of the times, and of the new colonies with which he repeopled Constan­tinople and the Thracian cities. They reluctantly praise his activity and courage;he was on horseback in the field at the head of his legions; and although thefortune of his arms was various, he triumphed by sea and land, on the Euphratesand the Danube, in civil and barbarian war. Heretical praise must be cast intothe scale, to counterbalance the weight of orthodox invective. The Iconoclastsrevered the virtues of the prince: forty years after his death, they still prayedbefore the tomb of the saint. A miraculous vision was propagated by fanaticismor fraud; and the Christian hero appeared on a milk-white steed brandishing hislance against the pagans of Bulgaria: " an absurd fable," says the catholic histo­rian, " since Copronymus is chained with the demons in the abyss of hell."
Leo IV. the son of the fifth, and the father of the sixth Constantine, was of afeeble constitution both of mind and body, and the principal care of his reign wasthe settlement of the succession. The association of the young Constantine wasurged by the officious zeal of his subjects: and the emperor, conscious of his de­cay, complied, after a prudent hesitation, with their unanimous wishes. Theroyal infant, at the age of five years, was crowned with his mother Irene; and thenational consent was ratified by every circumstance of pomp and solemnity, thatcould dazzle the eyes, or bind the conscience of the Greeks. An oath of fidelitywas administered in the palace, the church, and the hippodrome, to the severalorders of the state, who abjured the holy names of the son and mother of God.*' Be witness, u Christ! that we will watch over the safety of Constantine the sonof Leo, expose our lives in his service, and bear true allegiance to his person andposterity." They pledged their faith on the wood of the true' cross, and the actof their engagement was deposited on the altar of St. Sophia. The first to swear,and the first to violate their oath, were the five sons of Copronymus by a secondmarriage; and the story of these princes is singular and tragic. The tight of pri­mogeniture excluded them from the throne; the injustice of their elder brotherdefrauded them of a legacy of about two millions sterling; some vain titles werenot deemed a sufficient compensation for wealth and power; and they repeatedly


 


surname was derived from his







OCR Output








80 THE DECLINE AND FALL


was saved and dismissed by the compassion of a veteran general; and this act ofhumanity, which was revealed by his son, overbalanced the merit of reducingtwelve nations to the obedience of Persia. The zeal and prudence of Mebodeshad fixed the diadem on the head of Chosroes himself; but he delayed to attendthe royal summons, till he had performed the duties of a military review: he wasinstantly commanded to repair to the iron tripod, which stood before the gate ofthepalace.(l) where it was death to relieve or approach the victim; and Mebodeslanguished several days before his sentence was pronounced, by the inflexiblepride and calm ingratitude of the son of Kobad. But the people, more especiallyin the east, are disposed to forgive, and even to applaud, the cruelty which strikesat the loftiest heads: at the slaves of ambition, whose voluntary choice has ex­posed them to live in the smiles, and to perish by the frown, of a capricious mo­narch. In the execution of the laws which he had no temptation to violate; inthe punishment of crimes which attacked his own dignity, as well as the hap­piness of individuals; Nushirvan, or Chosroes, deserved the appellation of just.His government was firm, rigorous, and impartial. It was the first labour of hisreign to abolish the dangerous theory of common or equal possessions: the landsand women which the sectaries of Mazdak had usurped, were restored to theirlawful owners; and the temperate chastisement of the fanatics or impostors con­firmed the domestic rights of society. Instead of listening with blind confidenceto a favourite minister, he established four viziers over the four great provinces ofhis empire, Assyria, Media, Persia, and Bactriana. In the choice of judges,prefects, and counsellors, he strove to remove the mask which is always wornin the presence of kings; he wished to substitute the natural order ef talents forthe accidental distinctions of birth and fortune; he professed, in specious lan­guage, his intention to prefer those men who carried the poor in their bosoms,and to banish corruption from the seat of justice, as dogs were excluded from thetemples of the Magi. The code of laws of the first Artaxerxes was revived andpublished as the rule of the magistrates; but the assurance of speedy punishmentwas the best security of their virtue. Their behaviour was inspected by athousand eyes; their words were overheard by a thousand ears, the secret orpublic agents of the throne; and the provinces, from the Indian to the Arabianconfines, were enlightened by the frequent visits of a sovereign, who affected toemulate his celestial brother in his rapid and salutary career. Education and agri­culture he viewed as the two objects most deserving of his care. In every city ofPersia, orphans and the children of the poor were maintained and instructed atthe public expense; the daughters were given in marriage to the richest citizensof their own rank; and the sons, according to their different talents, were em­ployed in mechanic trades, or promoted to more honourable service. The desert­ed villages were relieved by his bounty; to the peasants and farmers, who werefound incapable of cultivating their lands, he distributed cattle, seed, and the in­struments of husbandry; and the rare and inestimable treasure of fresh water wasparsimoniously managed, and skilfully dispersed over the arid territory of Per­sia. (2) The prosperity of that kingdom was the effect and the evidence of hisvirtues: his vices are those of oriental despotism; but in the long competition be­tween Chosroes and Justinian, the advantage both of merit and fortune is almostalways on *he side of the barbarian. (3)
To the praise of justice, Nushirvan united the reputation of knowledge; andthe seven Greek philosophers, who visited this court, were invited and deceivedby the strange assurance, that a disciple of Plato was seated on the Persian throne.Did they expect that a prince, strenuously exercised in the toils of war and go­vernment, should agitate, with dexterity like their own, the abstruse and profoundquestions which amused the leisure of the schools of Athens? Could they hopethat the precepts of philosophy should direct the life, and control the passions, ofa despot, whose infancy had been taught to consider Ma absolute and fluctuating
(1) Procopius,Persic.lib. i. e. 23. Brisson de Regn. Fen. p. 494. The frate of the palace of Ispahan is, orwas. the fatal scene of disgrace or death. (Chardin, Voyage cn Perse, torn. iv. p. 312,313.)
(2) In Persia, the prince of the waters is an officer of state. The number of wells and subterraneous chan­nels is much diminished,and with it the fertility of the soil: four hundred wells have been recently lost nearTauris, and forty-two thousand were once reckoned in the province of Khorasan (Chardin, torn. iii. p. 99,100,Tavernier, torn. i. p. 466.)
(3) The character and Kovernraent of Nushirvan isrepresented sometimes in the words of d'Herbelot (Bibliot.Orient.p. 680, &c. from Kbondemii-,) Eutyehius (Annal. torn. ii. p. 179,180.—very rich.) Abulpharagius (Uy-iiast.yii.p.94,95.—very poor,) Tarikh Schikard (p. 144-150.,) Texeira (in Stevens, lib. i. c. 35.,) Asseman.(Bibhot, Orient, torn. iii. p. 404—410..) and the Abbe Fourmont (His* de i'Acad. des Inscriptions, totps vik p.f 2J-»314,,) who has translated a spurious of genuine testament of N usliii vau.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 15


than the truth, was slowly corrected by the knowledge of a valuable insect, thefirst artificer of the luxury of nations. That rare and elegant luxury was cen­sured in the reign of Tiberius, by the gravest of the Romans; and Pliny, in af­fected though forcible language, has condemned the thirst of gain, which exploredthe last confines of the earth, for the pernicious purpose of exposing to the publiceye naked draperies and transparent matrons. (1) A dress, which showed theturn of the limbs, and colour of the skin, might gratify vanity, or provoke desire;the silks, which had been closely woven in China, were sometimes unravelled bythe Phoenician women, and theprecious materials were multiplied by a looser tex­ture, and the intermixture of linen threads.(2) Two hundred years after the ageof Pliny, the use of pure or even of mixed silks was confined to the female sex, tillthe opulent citizens of Rome and the provinces were insensibly familiarized withthe example of Elagabalus, the first who, by this effeminate habit, had sulliedthe dignity of an emperor and a man. Aurelian complained that a pound of silk,sold at Rome for twelve ounces of gold; but the supply increased with the de­mand, and the price diminished with the supply. If accident or monopoly some­times raised the value even above the standard of Aurelian, the manufacturers ofTyre and Berytus were sometimes compelled, by the operation of the same causes,to content themselves with a ninth part of that extravagant rate. (3) A law wasthought necessary to discriminate the dress of comedians from that of senators;and of the silk exported from its native country, the far greater part was consumedby the subjects of Justinian. They were still more intimately acquainted with ashell-fish of the Mediterranean, surnamed the silk-worm of the sea; the finewool or hair by which the mother-of-pearl affixes itself to the rock, is now manu­factured for curiosity rather than use; and a robe obtained from the same singular'materials, was the gift of the Roman emperor to the satraps of Armenia. (4)
A valuable merchandise of small bulk is capable of defraying the expense ofland carriage; and the caravans traversed -the whole latitude of Asia in two hun­dred and forty-three days from the Chinese ocean to the sea-coast of Syria. Silkwas immediately delivered to the Romans by the Persian merchants, (5) who fre­quented the fairs of- Armenia and Nisibis: but this trade, which in the intervals oftruce was oppressed by avarice and jealousy, was totally interrupted by the longwars of the rival monarchies. The great king might proudly number Sogdiana,and even Serica, among the provinces of his empire; but his real dominion wasbounded by'the Oxus, and his useful intercourse with the Sogdoites beyond theriver depended on the pleasure of their conquerors, the white Huns, and the Turks,who successively reigned over that industrious people. Yet the most savage do­minion has not extirpated the seeds of agriculture and commerce, in a regionwhich is celebrated as one of the four gardens of Asia; the cities of Samarcandand Bochara are advantageously seated for the exchange of its various productions;and their merchants purchased from the Chinese(6) the raw or manufacturedsilk which they transported into Persia for the use of the Roman empire. In thevain capital of China, the Sogdian caravans were entertained as the suppliant em­bassies of tributary kingdoms, and if they returned in safety, the bold adventurewas rewarded with exorbitant gain. But the difficulty and perilous march fromSamarcand to the first town of Shensi, could not be performed in less than sixty,
-sbvo, nam ante non invenio, says Jwt'ii L'piius (Excursus 1. ad Tacit. Annal. 2.32.) See Dion Cassius (lib-xliii. p. S58. edit.) Hcimar, and PamaiiS u (lib. 'i. p. 519. J the first who describes, however strangely, the Se-rie insect.
(1) Tarn longinquo crue petitur,ut in publico matrona translucent nt denudet fceminas Testis (Plin.
vi. 20. xi. 21.) Varro and publtus Syrus had already played on the Toga rentrea, ventus texilis, and nebulalinea (Horat. Sermon. 1,2.101. with the notes of Torrentius and Dacier.)
(2) On the texture, colours, names, and use of the silk, half silk, and lineo garments of antiquity, see theprofound, diffuse, and obscure researches of the great Salmasius (in Hist. August, p. 127. 309,310.339.341, 342.344. 388—391.395. 513.,) who was ignorant of the most common trades of Dijon or Leyden.
(3) ^Flavins Vopiscus in Aurelian. c 45. in Hist. August, p. 224. See Saimasius ad Hist. Aug. p. 392. andPlmian Excrcitat. in Solinum, p. 694,695. The Anecdotes of Procopius (c. 25.) state a partial and imperfectrate of the price of silk in the time of Justinian.
(4) Procopius de Edif. lib. iii. c. 1. These pinnts de mer are found near Smyrna, Sicily, Corsica, and Minor,ca: and a pair of gloves of their silk was presented to Pope Benedict XIV.
(5) Procopius Persic lib. i. c. 20. lib. ii. c. 25. Gothic. Iib.iv.c. 17. Menander in Excerpt. Legat. p. 107. Ofthe Parthian or Persian empire, Isidore of Charax (in Stathrais Parthicis, p. 7,8. in Hudson, Geograph. Mi­nor, torn, ii.) has marked the roads, and Ammianus Marceilinus (lib. xxiii. c. 6. p. 400.) has enumerated theprovinces.
(6) 'f he blind admiration of the Jesuits confounds the different periods of the Chinese history. They aremore critically distinguished by M. de Guignes (Hist, des Hum. torn. i. parti, in the Tables, part 2. in theGeogi-aphy;MemoiresdePAcademiedes Inscriptions, torn. 33. 36. 42,4S.)who discovers the gradual progressof the truth of the annals, and the extent of the monarchy, till the Christian era. He had searched with a cu­rious eye, the connexions of the Chinese with the nations of the west: but these connexions are slight, casual,and obscure; nor did the Romans entertain a suspicion that the Seres or Sinie possessed an empire not inferior»their own.







OCR Output








20 THE DECLINE AND FALL


tracted, and the heavy interest which he paid. A sense of the disgrace and mis*chief of this venal practice, at length awakened the slumbering virtue of Justinian jand he attempted, by the sanction of oaths(l) and penalties, to guard the integrityof his government: but at the end of a year of perjury, his rigorous edict was sus­pended, and corruption licentiously abused her triumph over the importance of thelaws. VI. The testament of Eulalius, count of the domestics, declared the empe­ror his sole heir, on condition, however, that he should discharge his debts and le­gacies, allow to his three daughters a decent maintenance, and bestow each of themin marriage, with a portion of ten pounds of gold. But the splendid fortune of Eu­lalius had been consumed by fire; and the inventory of his goods did not exceed thetrifling sum of five hundred and sixty-four pieces of gold. A similar instance inGrecian history, admonished the emperor of the honourable part prescribed forhis imitation. He checked the selfish murmurs of the treasury, applauded theconfidence of his friend, discharged the legacies and debts, educated the three vir­gins under the eye of the empress Theodora, and doubled the marriage-portionwhich had satisfied the tenderness of their father. (2) The humanity of a prince(for princes cannot be generous) is entitled to some praise; yet even in this act ofvirtue we may discover the inveterate custom of supplanting the legal or naturalheirs, which Procopius imputes to the reign of Justinian. His charge is supportedby eminent names and scandalous examples; neither widows nor orphans werespared; and the art of soliciting, or extorting, or supposing testaments, was benefi­cially practised by the agents of the palace. This base and mischievous tyrannyinvades the security of private life; and the monarch, who has indulged an appe­tite for gain, will soon be tempted to anticipate the moment of succession, to inter­pret wealth as an evidence of guilt, and to proceed, from the claim of inheritance,to the power of confiscation. VII. Among the forms of rapine, a philosopher maybe permitted to name the conversion of pagan or heretical riches to the use of thefaithful; but in the time of Justinian this holy plunder was condemned by the sec­taries alone, who became the victims of his orthodox avarice. (3)
Dishonour might be ultimately reflected on the character of Justinian; buttouch of the guilt, and still more of the profit, was intercepted by the ministers,who were seldom promoted for their virtues, and not ahvavs selected for their ta­lents. (4) The merits of Tribonian the questor will hereafter be weighed in thereformation of the Roman law; but the economy of the east was subordinate tothe pretorian prefect, and Procopius has justified his anecdotes by the portrait■which he exposes in his public history, of the notorious vices of John of Cappa-docia.(5) His knowledge was not borrowed from the schools,(6) and his stylewas scarcely legible; but he excelled in the powers of native genius, to suggestthe wisest counsels* and to find expedients in the most desperate situations. Thecorruption of his heart was equal to the vigour of his understanding. Althoughhe was suspected of magic and pagan superstition, he appeared insensible to thefear of God or the reproaches of man; and his aspiring fortune was raised on thedeath of thousands, the poverty of millions, the ruin of cities, and the desolationof provinces. From the dawn of light to the moment of dinner, he assiduouslylaboured to enrich his master and himself at the expense of the Roman world;the remainder of the day was spent in sensual and obscene pleasures, and the si­lent hours of the night were interrupted by the perpetual dread of the justice ofan assassin. His abilities, perhaps his vices, recommended him to the lastingfriendship of Justinian: the emperor yielded with reluctance to the fury of thepeople; his victory was displayed by the immediate restoration of their enemy;and they felt above ten years, under his oppressive administration, that he wasstimulated by(revenge, rather than instructed by misfortune. Their murmursserved only to fortify the resolution of Justinian; but the prefect, in the insolenceof favour, provoked the resentment of Theodora, disdained a power, before which
(1) The oath is conceived in the most Formidable words (Novell, vlii. lit. 3.) Tlie defaulters imprecate ohthemselves, quicquid habent telorum armamentaria cceli: the part of Judas, the leptosy of Gehazi, the tremorof Cain, etc. besides all temporal pains.
(2) A similar or more generous aet of friendship, is related by Lucian of Eudamidat of Corinth, (in Toxarec. 22,23. torn. ii. p. 530.) and the story has produced an ingenious, though feeble comedy of Fontenelle.
(3) John Malafa, torn. ii. p. 101—103.
(4) One of these, Anatnlius, perished in an earthquake—doubtless a judgment! The complaints and ehr-Tnours of the people in Agathias, (lib. v. p. 146, 147.) are almost an echo of the anecdote. The aliena pecu-nia reddendanf Coripput, (lib. ii. 381, fee.,) is not very honourable to Justinian's memory.
(5) See the history and character of John of Cappadocia io Procopius. (Persic. lib. i. c. 24,2J. lib. ii. c. 30.Vandal, lib. i. c. 13. Anccdot. c. ii. 17.22.) The agreement of the history and anecdotes is a mortal wound tothe reputation of the prefect.
(6) Ov yup mKKa o<jfcv £; yfZfipx-rijiov; (pciTaJV £«x5jv cti fa ypxp.uxTx, xzi t«'jtcs xxhx xsxws yoa^ai—a forci­ble expression.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


ture.(l) Twenty-two satraps, they styled themselves patriots, were tempted bythe wealth and honours of a new reign: to the soldiers, the heir of Chosroes pro­mised an increase of pay, to the Christians, the free exercise of their religion; tothe captives, liberty and rewards: and to the nation an instant peace and the re­duction of taxes. It was determined by the conspirators that Siroes, with the en­signs of royalty, should appear in the camp; and if the enterprise should fail, hisescape was contrived to the imperial court. But the new monarch was salutedwith unanimous acclamations; the flight of Chosroes (yet where could he havefled?) was rudely arrested, eighteen sons were massacred before his face, and hewas thrown into a dungeon where he expired on the fifth day. The Greeks andmodern Persians minutely describe how Chosroes was insulted, and famished, andtortured, by the command of an inhuman son, who so far surpassed the exampleof his father; but at the time of his death, what tongue would relate the story ofthe parricide? what eye could penetrate into the loiver of darkness? According tothe faith and mercy of his Christian enemies, he sunk without hope into a stilldeeper abyss;(2) and it will not be denied, that tyrants of every age and sect arethe best entitled to such infernal abodes. The glory of the house of Sassan ended•with the life of Chosroes; his unnatural son enjoyed only eight months the fruit ofhis crimes; and in the space of four years the regal title was assumed by nine can­didates, who disputed, with the sword or dagger, the fragments of an exhaustedmonarchy. Every province, and each city of Persia, was the scene of independ­ence, of discord, and of blood, and the state of anarchy prevailed about eightyears longer, till the factions were silenced and united under the common yoke ofthe Arabian caliphs. (3) *
As soon as the mountains became passable, the emperor received the welcomenews of the success of the conspiracy, the death of Chosroes, and the elevation ofhis eldest son to the throne of Persia. The authors of the revolution, eager to dis-
Elay their merits in the court or camp of Tauris, preceded the ambassadors ofiroes, who delivered the letters of their master to his brother the emperor of theRomans. (4) In the language of the usurpers of every age, he imputes his owncrimes to the Deity, and, without degrading his equal majesty, he offers to recon­cile the long discord of the two nations, by a treaty of peace and alliance more du­rable than brass or iron. The conditions of the treaty were easily defined andfaithfully executed. In the recovery of the standards and prisoners which hadfallen into the hands of the Persians, the emperor imitated the example of Augus­tus: their care of the national dignity was celebrated by the poets of the times, butthe decay of genius may be measured by the distance between Horace and Georgeof Pisidia; the subjects and brethren of Heraclius were redeemed from persecu­tion, slavery, and exile; but instead of the Roman eagles, the true wood of theholy cross was restored to the importunate demand of the successor of Constan-tine. The victor was not ambitious of enlarging the weakness of the empire; theson of Chosroes abandoned without regret the conquests of his father; the Per­sians who evacuated the cities of Syria and Egypt were honourably conducted tothe frontier, and a war which had wounded the vitals of the two monarchies, pro­duced no change in their external and relative situation. The return of Hera­clius from Tauris to Constantinople was a perpetual triumph; and after the ex­ploits of six glorious campaigns, he peaceably enjoyed the sabbath of his toils.After a long impatience, the senate, the clergy, and the people, went forth to meet"their hero, with tears and acclamations, with olive branches and innumerablelamps: he entered the capital in a chariot drawn by four elephants; and as soon asthe emperor could disengage himself from the tumult of public joy, he tastedmore genuine satisfaction in the embraces of his mother and his son. (5)


(1) The authentic narrative of the fall of Choiroes is contained in the letters of Heraclius, (Chron. Paschal,p. 398.) and the history of Theophanes (p. 271.)
(3) On the first rumour of the death of Chosroeu, an Heracliad in two cantos was instantly published at-Constantinople by George of Pisidia, p. 97—103.) A priest and a poet might very properly exult in the dam­nation of the public enemy: (eptit-uu iv T«pT«p*>, r. 50.) but such mean revenge is unworthy of a king and a


conqueror; and I am sorry to find so much black superstition (&sop*x*j Xstmiu esrera x*i urruy** Turin *'s r»xMTM^dovia .... it; to Tup axsToto-Sto-Tov, Sec.) in the letter of Heraclius: he almost applauds the parricideof Siroes as an act of piety and justice. -
(3) The best oriental accounts of this last period of 'torn. ii. p. 151— 250 ) who dissembles the parricide of SiAssemamii, Bibliothee. Oriental, torn. Hi. p. 415—420.
(4) The letter of Siroes in the Paschal Chronicle, (p. 402.) unfortunaiThe treaty appears in its execution in the histories of Theophanes ant
(5) The burden of Coraeille's song,
" Montrez Heraclius au peupte qui I'attenrl.'


of Siroes as an act of piety and justice.(3) The best oriental accounts of this last period of the Satsanian kings are found in Eutychius, (AnnaLm. ii. p. 251—250 ) who dissembles the parneide of Siroes; d'Herbelot, (Qibhotheque Orientate, p. 789.) and
itely ends before he proceeds toand Nicephorus.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 305


site to the realm of Persia. The kingdom of Yemen displays the limits, or atleast the situation of Arabia Felix: the name of Neged is extended over the inlandspace; and the birth of Mahomet has illustrated the province of Hejaz along thecoast of the Red Sea.(l)
The measure of population is regulated by the means of subsistence; and the in­habitants of this vast peninsula might be outnumbered by the subjects of a fertileand industrious province. Along the shores of the Persian gulf, of the ocean, andeven of the Red Sea, the Icthyofihagi,(2) or fish-eaters, continued to wander inquest of their precarious food. In this primitive and abject state, which ill de­serves the name of society, the human brute without art or laws, almost withoutsense or language, is poorly distinguished from the rest of the animal creation.Generations and ages might roll away in silent oblivion, and the helpless savagewas restrained from multiplying his race, by the wants and pursuits which con­fined his existence to the narrow margin of the sea-coast. But at an early periodof antiquity the great body of the Arabs had emerged from this scene of misery;and as the naked wilderness could not maintain a people of hunters, they rose atonce to the more secure and plentiful condition of the pastoral life. The same life isuniformly pursued by the roving tribes of the desert, and in the portrait of themodern Bedovieens, we may trace the features of their ancestors, (3) who, in theage of Moses or Mahomet dwelt under similar tents, and conducted their horses,and camels, and sheep, to the same springs and pastures. Our toil is lessened,and our wealth is increased, by our dominion over the useful animals: and theArabian shepherd had acquired the absolute possession of a faithful friend -and alaborious slave. (4) Arabia, in the opinion of the naturalist, is the genuine andoriginal country of the horse; the climate most propitious, not indeed to the size,but to the spirit and swiftness, of that generous animal. The merit of the Barb,the Spanish, and the English breed, is derived from a mixture of Arabian blood ;(5)the Bedoweens preserve, with superstitious care, the honours and the memory ofthe purest race; the males are sold at a high price, but the females are seldomalienated: and the birth of a noble foal was esteemed among the tribes as a subjectof joy and mutual congratulation. These horses are educated in the tents, amongthe children of the Arabs, with a tender familiarity, which trains them in the ha­bits of gentleness and attachment. They are accustomed only to walk and to gal­lop: their sensations are not blunted by the incessant abuse of the spur and thewhip: their powers are reserved for the moments of flight and pursuit; but nosooner do they feel the touch of the hand or the stirrup, than they dart away withthe swiftness of the wind; and if their friend be dismounted in the rapid career,they instantly stop till he has recovered his seat. In the sands of Africa and Ara­bia, the camel is a sacred and precious gift. That strong and patient beast of bur­den can perform, without eating and drinking, a journey of several days; and a re­servoir of fresh water is preserved in a large bag, a fifth stomach of the animal,whose body is imprinted with the marks of servitude; the larger breed is capableof transporting a weight of a thousand pounds, and the dromedary, of a lighter,and more active frame, outstrips the fleetest courser in the race. Alive or dead,almost every part of the camel is serviceable to man; her milk is plentiful and nu­tritious: the younger and tender flesh has the taste of veal:(6) a valuable salt isextracted from the urine: the dung supplies the deficiency of fuel; and the lonjj
(1) Consult, penile, and study the Specimen Historia Arebum of Pncock! (Oxon. 1650, in 4to.) The thirtypages of text and version are extracted from the Dynasties of Gregory Abulpharagius, which Pocock after­wards translated: (Oxon. 1663, in 4to.) the three hundred and fifty-eight notes from a classic and originalwork on the Arabian antiquities.
(2) Arrian remarks the Icthvophagi of the coast of Hejaz. (Periplns Maris Erythrsei, p. 12.) and beyondAden. (p. 15.) It seems probable that the shores of the Red Sea, (in the largest sense) were occupied by thesesavages in the time, perhaps, of Cyrus; but I can hardly believe that any cannibals were left among the sa,vages in the reign of Justinian. (Proeop. de Bell. Persic, lib. i. c. 19.)
(3) See the Specimen Historian Arnbum of Pocock, p. 2. 5. 86, _&c. The journey of M. d'Arvieux, in 1664,to the camp of the emir of mount Carme), (Voyage de la Palestine, Amsterdam. 1718.) exhibits a pleasing nndoriginal picture of the life of the Bedoweens, which may be illustrated from Niebubr (Description de l'Arabie,p. 327—344.) and Volney, (torn. i. p. 343—335.) the last and most judicious of our Syrian travellers.
(4) Read (it is no unpleasant task) the incomparable articles of* the horse, and the cnmel, in the Natural His­tory of M. de Buffon.
(5) For the Arabian horses, see d'Arvieux (p. 159—173.) and Nicbuhr. (p. 142—144.) At the end of thethirteenth century, the. bones of Naged were esteemed sure-footed, those of Yemen strong and serviceable,those of Hejaz most noble. The horses of Europe, the tenth and last class, were generally despised, as havingtoo much body and too little spirit: d'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orient. p#339.) their strength was requisite to bear theweight of the knight and his armour.
(6) Qui carnibus camelorura vesci solent odii tenaces sunt, was the opinion of an Arabian physician. (Po­cock, Specimen, p. 88.) Mahomet himself, who was fond of milk, prefers the cow, and does not even menttvn
V<je. III. 39







OCR Output








68 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Thracian youth. Tkeodosius had been educated in the Eunomian heresy; the;African voyage was consecrated by the baptism and auspicious name of the firstsoldier who embarked; and the proselyte was adopted into the family of his spi­ritual parents.(l) Belisarius and Antonina. Before they touched the shores ofAfrica, this holy kindred degenerated into sensual love; and as Antonina1 soonoverleaped the bounds of modesty arid caution, the Roman general was alone ig­norant of his own dishonour. During their residence at Carthage, he surprisedthe two lovers in a subterraneous chamber, solitary, warm, and almost naked)Anger flashed from his eyes. With the helfi of this young man (said the unblushingAntonina,) Iiuas secreting our most precious effects from the knowledge of Justi­nian. The youth resumed his garments, and the pious husband consented to dis­believe the evidence of his own senses. From this pleasing and perhaps volunta­ry delusion, Belisarius was awakened at Syracuse, by the officious information ofMacedonia: and that female attendant, after requiring an oath, for her security,produced two chamberlains, who, like herself, had often beheld the adulteries ofAntonina. A hasty flight into Asia saved Theodosius from the justice of an in­jured husband, who had signified to one of his guards the order of his death; butthe tears of Antonina, and her artful seduction, assured the credulous hero of herinnocence; and he stooped, against his faith and judgment, to abandon those im­prudent friends who had presumed to accuse or doubt the chastity of his wife.The revenge of a guilty woman is implacable and bloody: the unfortunate Mace­donia, with the two witnesses, were secretly arrested by the minister of her cru­elty: their tongues were cut out, their bodies were hacked into small pieces, andtheir remains were cast into the sea of Syracuse. A rash, though judicious say­ing of Constantino, "I would sooner have punished the adultress than the boy,"was deeply remembered by Antonina: and two years afterward, when despair hadarmed that officer against his general, her sanguinary advice decided and hastenedhis execution. Even the indignation of Photius was not forgiven by his mother;the exile of her son prepared the recall of her lover; and Theodosius condescend­ed to accept the pressing and humble invitation of the conqueror of Italy. In theabsolute direction of his household, and in the important commissions of peace andwar,(2) the favourite youth most rapidly acquired a fortune of four hundred thou­sand pounds sterling; and, after their return to Constantinople, the passion of An­tonina, at least, continued ardent and unabated. But fear, devotion, and lassitude,perhaps, inspired Theodosius with more serious thoughts. He dreaded the busyscandal of the capital, and the indiscreet fondness of the wife of Belisarius; es­caped from her embraces, and retiring to Ephesus, shaved his head, and took re­fuge in the sanctuary of a monastic life. The despair of the new Ariadne couldscarcely have been excused by the death of her husband. She wept, she tore herhair, she filled the palace with her cries; " she had lost the dearest of friends, atender, a faithful, a laborious friend!" But her warm entreaties, fortified by theprayers of Belisarius, were insufficient to draw the holy monk from the solitudeof Ephesus. It was not till the general moved forward for the Persian war, thatTheodosius could be tempted to return to Constantinople; and the short intervalbefore the departure of Antonina herself was boldly devoted to love and pleasure.
A philosopher may pity and forgive the infirmities of female nature, from whichhe receives no real injury; but contemptible is the husband who feels, and yet en­dures, his own infamy in that of his wife. Antonina pursued her son with impla­cable hatred; and the gallant Photius(3) was exposed to her secret persecutions illthe camp beyond the Tigris. Enraged by his own wrongs, and by the dishonour ofhis blood,he castaway in his turn the sentiments of nature, and revealed to Belisa­rius the turpitude of a woman who Uad violated all the duties of a mother and a wife.From the surprise and indignation of the Roman general, his former credulity, ap­pears to have been sincere: he embraced the knees of the son of Antonina, adjuredhim to remember his obligations rather than his birth, and confirmed at the altartheir holy vows of revenge and mutual defence. The dominion of Antonina wasimpaired by absence; and when she met her husband, on his return from the Per­sian confines, Belisarius, in his first and transient emotions, confined her person,
(1) Compare the Vandalic War (lib. i. c. 12.) with ilic Anecdoler, (c. l.)and Alemannus, (p. 2,3.) Thftmode of baptismal adoption was revived by Leo the philosopher.
(2) In November, 537, Photius arrested the pope. (Liberat. Brer. c. 22. Pagi. torn. ii. p. 562.) About theend of 539, Belisarius sent Thendosins—rov rn ctxix rtj aurcu i^tirruir*—on an important and lucrative commis--sion ijo Ravenna. (Goth. lib. ii. c. 18.)
(3) Theoplian« (Chronograph, p. 204.) styles him P/iotinui, the son-in-law of Fel'uarius: and he is copiedby the Historia Miscella and Anastasiui.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


more especially those of Thrace and Asia, were unwilling to depose their patri­arch for the use or even the abuse of this lawful jurisdiction. They embraced theknees of Dioscorus, as he stood with a threatening aspect on the footstool of histhrone, and conjured him to forgive the offences, and to respect the dignity, of hisbrother. " Do you mean to raise a sedition ?" exclaimed the relentless tyrant," Where are the officers ?" At these words, a furious multitude of monks andsoldiers, with staves and swords, and chains, burst into the church: the tremblingbishops hid themselves behind the altar, or under the benches, and as they werenot inspired with the zeal of martyrdom, they successively subscribed a blank pa-er, which was afterward filled with the condemnation of the Byzantine pontiff,lavian was instantly delivered to the wild beasts of this spiritual amphitheatre:the monks were stimulated by the voice and example of Barsumas to avenge the in­juries of Christ: it is said that the patriarch of Alexandria reviled, and buffeted, andkicked, and trampled his brother of Constantinople :(1) it is certain, that the vic­tim, before he could reach the place of his exile, expired, on the third day, ofthe wounds and bruises which he had received at Ephesus. This second synodhas been justly branded as a gang of robbers and assassins; yet the accusers of Di­oscorus would magnify his violence, to alleviate the cowardice and inconstancy oftheir own behaviour.
The faith of Egypt had prevailed: but the vanquished party was supported bythe same pope who encountered without fear the hostile rage of Attila and Gen-seric. The theology of Leo, his famous tome or epistle on the mystery of the incar­nation, had been disregarded by the synod of Ephesus; his authority, and that ofthe Latin church, was insulted in his legates, who escaped from slavery and deathto relate the melancholy tale of the tyranny of Dioscorus and the martyrdom ofFlavian. His provincial synod annulled the irregular proceedings of Ephesus; butas this step was itself irregular, he solicited the convocation of a general council inthe free and orthodox provinces of Italy. From his independent throne, the Ro­man bishop spoke and acted without danger, as the head of the Christians, andhis dictates were obsequiously transcribed by Placidia and her son Valentinian;who addressed their eastern colleague to restore the peace and unity of the church.But the pageant of oriental royalty was moved with equal dexterity by the handof the eunuch; and Theodosius could pronounce, without hesitation, that thechurch was already peaceful and triumphant, and that the recent flame had beenextinguished by the just punishment of the Nestorians. Perhaps the Greekswould be still involved in the heresy of the Monophysites, if the emperor's horsehad not fortunately stumbled; Theodosius expired, his orthodox sister, Pulcheria,with a nominal husband, succeeded to the throne; Chrysaphius was burnt, Dios­corus was disgraced, the exiles were recalled, and the tome of Leo was subscribedby the oriental bishops. Yet the pope was disappointed in his favourite project of aLatin council: he disdained to preside in the Greek synod, which was speedily assem­bled at Nice in Bithynia; his legates required, in a peremptory tone, the presence ofthe emperor: and the wary fathers were transported to Chalcedon under the im­mediate eye of Marcian and the senate of Constantinople. A quarter of a milefrom the Thracian Bosphorus, the church of St. Euphemia was built on the sum­mit of a gentle though lofty ascent: the triple structure was celebrated as a pro­digy of art, and the boundless prospect of the land and sea might have raised themind of a. sectary to the contemplation of the God of the universe. Six hundredand thirty bishops were ranged in order in the nave of the church; but the patri­archs of the east were preceded by the legates, of whom the third was a simplepriest: and the place of honour was reserved for twenty laymen of consular or se-natorian rank. The gospel was ostentatiously displayed in the centre, but the ruleof faith was defined by the papal and imperial ministers; who moderated thethirteen sessions of the council of Chalcedon. (2) Their partial interposition si-
(1) E*.s>-s Si (Eusebius, biihop of Dorylseum) to, OXw3*xvov *»* J;i*jein's sevatpsSHv*' irps^Aiatrxopov oiSwpsvcvti Kgi xaxni^ufvcv: and this testimony of Evagrius (lib. ii. c. 2.) is amplified by the historian Zonaras, (torn.
11. lib. xiti. p. 44.) who affirms that Dioscorus kicked like a wild ass. But the language of Liberotus (Brer. c.
12. in Ceneil. torn. Ti. p. 438,) is more cautious; and the Acts of Chalcedon, which lavishthe names of homi­cide, Cain, &c. do not justify so pointed a charge. The monk Banuraas is more particularly accused—
tow naxwpiov 4>iUuiavov mwto; ,o-ti)«s Koti iMys, fl-pa^of. (Concil. torn. iv. p. 1423.)
(') The acts of the Council of Chalcedon, (Concil. torn. iv. p. 761—2071.) comprehend those of Ephesus,(p.890—1189.) which air>in comprise the synod of Constantinople under Flarian; (p. 930—1072.) and it requiressome attention to disengage this double involution. The whole business of Eutyches, Flavian and Dioscorusis related by Evagrius (lib. i. c 9. 12. and lib. ii. c 1—4.) and Liberatus. (Brev. c. 11—14. Once more, and al­most for the last time, I appeal to the diligence of Tilleraont,(Mem. Eccles. torn. xv. p. 479—719.) The an­nals of Baroniw and Pagi will accompany me much farther on my long and laborious journey.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. .">r


discipline, and humbled by recent disasters. As the level plain of Dara refusedall shelter to stratagem and ambush, Belisarius protected his front with a deeptrench, which was prolonged at first in perpendicular, and afterward in parallellines, to cover the wings of cavalry, and advantageously posted to command theflanks and rear of the enemy. When the Roman centre was shaken, their well-timed and rapid charge decided the conflict: the standard of Persia fell; the im­mortals fled; the infantry threw away their bucklers, and eight thousand of the van­quished were left on the field of battle. In the next campaign, Syria was inva­ded on the side of the desert; and Belisarius with twenty thousand men, hastenedfrom Dara to the relief of the province. During the whole summer, the designsof the enemy were baffled by his skilful dispositions: he pressed their retreat, oc­cupied each night their camp of the preceding day, and would have secured abloodless victory, if he could have resisted the impatience of his own troops. Theirvaliant promise was faintly supported in the hour of battle; the right wing was ex­posed by the treacherous or cowardly desertion of the Christian Arabs; the Huns,a veteran band of eight hundred warriors, were oppressed by superior numbers;the flight of the Isaurians was intercepted; but the Roman infantry stood firm onthe left, for Belisarius himself, dismounting from his horse, showed them that in­trepid despair was their only safety. They turned their backs to the Euphrates,and their faces to the enemy; innumerable arrows glanced without effect from,the compact and shelving order of their bucklers; an impenetrable line of pikes,was exposed to the repeated assaults of the Persian cavalry, and, after a resistanceof many hours, the remaining troops were skilfully embarked under the shadowof the night. The Persian commander retired with disorder and disgrace, to an­swer a strict account of the lives of so many soldiers which he had consumed in abarren victory. But the fame of Belisarius was not sullied by a defeat, in whichalone he had saved his army from the consequences of their own rashness: theapproach of peace relieved him from the guard of the eastern frontier, and hisconduct in the sedition of Constantinople amply discharged his obligations to theemperor. When the African war became the topic of popular discourse and se­cret deliberation, each of the Roman generals was apprehensive, rather than am­bitious, of the dangerous honour; but as soon as Justinian had declared his pre­ference of superior merit, their envy was rekindled by the unanimous applausewhich was given to the choice of Belisarius. The temper of the Byzantine courtmay encourage a suspicion, that the hero was darkly assisted by the intrigues ofhis wife, the fair and subtle Antonina, who alternately enjoyed the confidence, andincurred the hatred, of the empress Theodora. The birth of Antonina was igno­ble; £he descended from a family of charioteers; and her chastity has been stainedwith the foulest reproach. Yet she reigned with long and absolute power overthe mind of her illustrious husband: and if Antonina disdained the merit of con­jugal fidelity, she expressed a manly friendship to Belisarius, whom she accom­panied with undaunted resolution in all the hardships and dangers of a militarylife.(l)
The preparations for the African war were not unworthy of the last contest be­tween Rome and Carthage. The pride and flower of the army consisted of theguards of Belisarius, who, according to the pernicious indulgence of the times, de­voted themselves by a particular oath of fidelity to the service of their patron.Their strength and stature, for which they had been curiously selected, the good­ness of their horses and armour, and the assiduous practice of all the exercises ofwar, enabled them to act whatever their courage might prompt; and their couragewas exalted by the social honour of their rank, and the personal ambition of favourand fortune. Four hundred of the bravest of the Heruli marched under the bannerof the faithful and active Pharas; their untractable valour was more highly prizedthan the tame submission of the Greeks and Syrians; and of such importance wasit deemed to procure a re-enforcement of six hundred Massageta:, or Huns, thatthey were allured by fraud and deceit to engage in a naval expedition. Fivethousand horse and ten thousand foot were embarked at Constantinople for theconquest of Africa; but the infantry, for the most part levied in Thrace and Isau-ria, yielded to the more prevailing use and reputation of the cavalry; and the Scy­thian bow was the weapon on which the armies of Rome were now reduced toplace their principal dependence. From a laudable desire to assert the dignity ofhis theme, Procopius defends the soldiers of his own time against the morose cri­tics, who confined that respectable name to the heavy-armed warriors of antiquity,


;0 See the birth and character of Antonina, in the Anecdotes, c. 1. and tlie notes of Alemanm, p, 3.







OCR Output








24S THE DECLINE; AND FALL


A memorable reverse of fortune was displayed in Michael II. who, from a defectin his speech, was surnamed the Stammerer. He was snatched from the fieryfurnace to the sovereignty of an empire; and as in the tumult a smith couldnot readily be found, the fetters remained on his legs several hours after he wasseated on the throne of the Caesars. The royal blood which had been the priceof his elevation, was unprofitably spent; in the purple he retained the ignoblevices of his origin; and Michael lost his provinces with as supine indifference as ifthey had been the inheritance of his fathers. His title was disputed by Thomas,the last of the military triumvirate, who transported into Europe fourscore thou­sand barbarians from the banks of the Tigris, and the shores of the Caspian. Heformed the siege of Constantinople; but the capital was defended with spiritualand carnal weapons; a Bulgarian king assaulted the camp of the orientals, andThomas had the misfortune or the weakness to fall alive into the power of theconqueror. The hands and feet of the rebel were amputated; he was placed onan ass, and, amidst the insults of the people, was led through the streets, whichhe sprinkled with his blood. The depravation of' manners, as savage as theywere corrupt, is marked by the presence of the emperor himself. Deaf to thelamentations of a fellow-soldier, he incessantly pressed the discovery of more ac­complices, till his curiosity was checked by the question of an honest or guiltyminister:—'«Would you give credit to an enemy against the most faithful of yourfriends ?" After the death of his first wife, the emperor, at the request of the se­nate, drew from her monastery Euphrosyne, the daughter of Constantine VI.Her august birth might justify a stipulation in the marriage-contract, that herchildren should equally share the empire with their elder brother. But the nup­tials of Michael and Euphrosyne were barren; and she was content with the titleof mother of Theophilus, his son and successor.
The character of Theophilus is a rare example in which religious zeal has al­lowed, and perhaps magnified, the virtues of a heretic, and a persecutor. His valourwas often felt by the enemies, and his justice by the subjects, of the monarchy; butthe valour of Theophilus was rash and fruitless, and his justice arbitrary and cruel.He displayed the banner of the cross against the Saracens; but his five expedi­tions were concluded by a signal overthrow; Amorium, the native city of his an­cestors, was levelled with the ground, and from his military toils, he derived onlythe surname of the Unfortunate. The wisdom of a sovereign is comprised inthe institution of laws and the choice of magistrates, and while he seems withoutaction, his civil government revolved round his centre with the silence and orderof the planetary system. But the justice of Theophilus was fashioned on the mo­del of the oriental despots, who, in personal and irregular acts of authority, con­sult the reason or passion of the moment without measuring the sentence bythe laws, or the penalty by offence. A poor woman threw herself at the empe­ror's feet to complain of a powerful neighbour, the brother of the empress, whohad raised his palace-wall to such an inconvenient height, that her humbledwelling was excluded from light and air! On the proof of the fact, instead ofgranting, like an ordinary judge, sufficient or ample damages to the plaintiff, thesovereign adjudged to her use and benefit the palace and the ground. Nor wasTheophilus content with this extravagant satisfaction; his zeal converted a civiltrespass into a criminal act; and the unfortunate patrician was stripped andscourged in the public place of Constantinople. For some venial offences, somedefect of equity or vigilance, the principal ministers, a prefect, a questor, a cap­tain of the guards, were banished or mutilated, or scalded with boiling pitch, orburnt alive in the hippodrome; and as these dreadful examples might be the ef­fects of error or caprice, they must have alienated from his service the best andwisest of the citizens. But the pride of the monarch was flattered in the exerciseof power, or, as he thought, of virtue; and the people, safe in their obscurity, ap­plauded the danger and debasement of their superiors. This extraordinary ri­gour was justified, in some measure, by its salutary consequences; since, after ascrutiny of seventeen days, not a complaint or abuse could be found in the courtor city; and it might be alleged that the Greeks could be ruled only with a rod ofiron, and that the public interest is the motive and law of the supreme judge. Yetin the crime, or the suspicion of treason, that judge is of all others the mostcredulous and partial. Theophilus rrfight inflict a tardy vengeance on the assas­sins of Leo and the saviours of his father; but he enjoyed the fruits of their crime;and his jealous tyranny sacrificed a brother and a prince to the future safety of hislife. A Persian or the race of the SaSsanides died in poverty and exile at Cor.­







OCR Output








110 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Trent and Verona. The banners of Narses soon approached the Vulturnus, andthe eyes of Italy were anxiously fixed on the event of this final contest. Perhaps thetalents of the Roman general were most conspicuous in the calm operations whichprecede the tumult of a battle. His skilful movements intercepted the subsist­ence of the barbarian, deprived him of the advantage of the bridge and river,and, in the choice of the ground and moment of action, reduced him to comply■with the inclination of his enemy. On the morning of the important day, whenthe ranks were already formed, a servant, for some trivial fault, was killed by hismaster, one of the leaders of the Heruli. The justice or passion of Narses wasawakened: he summoned the offender to his presence, and, without listening tohis excuses, gave the signal to the minister of death. If the cruel master hadnot infringed the laws of his nation, this arbitrary execution was not less unjust,than it appears to have been imprudent. The Heruli felt the indignity; theyhalted: but the Roman general, without soothing their rage, or expecting theirresolution, called aloud, as the trumpets sounded, that unless they hastened to oc­cupy their place, they would lose the honour of the victory. His troops were dis­posed in a long front, the cavalry on the wings; in the centre, the heavy-armedfoot; the archers-and slingers in the rear. The Germans advanced in a sharppointed column, of the form of a triangle or solid wedge. They pierced the feebleceptre of Narses, who received them with a smile into the fatal snare, and directedhis wings of cavalry insensibly to wheel on their flanks and encompass the rear.The hosts of the Franks and Alemanni consisted of infantry: a sword and bucklerhung by their side, and they used, as their weapons of offence, a weighty hatchet,and hooked javelin, which were only formidable in close combat, or at a short dis­tance.^) The flower of the Roman archers, on horseback, and in complete ar­mour, skirmished without peril round this immoveable phalanx; supplied by ac­tive speed the deficiency of number; and aimed their arrows against a crowd ofbarbarians, who instead of a cuirass and helmet, were covered by a loose garment.of fur or linen. They paused, they trembled, their ranks were confounded, andin the decisive moment the Heruli, preferring glory to revenge, charged with ra­pid violence the head of the column. Their leader, Sindbal, and Aligern, theGothic prince, deserved the prize of superior valour; and their example incitedthe victorious troops to achieve with swords and spears the destruction of the ene­my. Buccelin, and the greatest part of his army, perished on the field of battle,in the waters of Vulturnus, or by the hands of the enraged peasants; but it mayseem incredible that a victory,(2) which no more than five of the Alemanni sur­vived, could be purchased with the loss of fourscore Romans. Seven thousandGoths, the relics of the war, defended the fortress of Campsa till the ensuingspring; and every messenger of Narses announced the reduction of the Italian ci­ties, whose names were corrupted by the ignorance or vanity of the Greeks. (3)After the battle of Casilinum, Narses entered the capital; the arms and treasuresof the Goths, the Franks and Alemanni, were displayed; his soldiers, with gar­lands in their hands, chanted the praises of the conqueror; and Rome, for the lasttime, beheld the semblance of a triumph.
After a reign of sixty years, the throne of the Gothic kings was filled by the ex­archs of Ravenna, the representatives in peace and war of the emperor of the Ro­mans. Their jurisdiction was soon reduced to the limits of,a narrow province:but Narses himself, the first and most powerful of the exarcfis",- administered aboutfifteen years the entire kingdom of Italy. Like Belisarius, he had deserved thehonours of envy, calumny, and disgrace: but the favourite eunuch still enjoyedthe confidence of Justinian, or the leader of a victorious army awed and repressedthe ingratitude of a timid court. Yet it was not by weak and mischievous indul­gence that Narses secured the attachment of his troops. Forgetful of the past,and regardless of the future, they abused the present hour of prosperity and peace.The cities of Italy resounded with the noise of drinking and dancing: the spoils ofvictory were wasted in sensual pleasures; and nothing (says Agathias) remained,unless to exchange their shields and helmets for the soft lute and capacious hogs-
(1) Pere Daniel (Hist, dela Milice Fnwcoise, torn. i. p. 17—21.) has exhibited a fanciful representation sfthis battle, somewhat in the manner of the chevalier Folard.the once famous editor of Polybiul, who fashionedto his own habits and opinions all the military operations of antiquity.
(2) Agathias (lib. ii. p. 47.) has produced a Greek epirram of six lines on this victory of Narses, which is fa-,vourably compared to the battles of Marathon aud Plataea. The_ chief difference is indeed in their conse­quences—so triviaMn the former instance—so permanent and glorious in the latter.
(3) The Beroi and Brincas of Theophanes, or his transcriber (p. 201.) mast be read or understood Veronaand Brixia,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


ages of the Jacobite church; but the order of the hierarchy is relaxed or dis­solved, and the greater part of their diocesses is confined to the neighbourhood ofthe Euphrates and the Tigris. The cities of Aleppo and Amida, which arc oftenvisited Dy the patriarch, contain some wealthy merchants and industrious mecha­nics, but the multitude derive their scanty sustenance from their daily labour: andpoverty, as well as superstition, may impose their excessive fasts,—five annuallents, during which both the clergy and laity abstain not only from flesh or eggs,but even from the taste of wine, of oil, and of fish. Their present numbers areesteemed from fifty to fourscore thousand souls, the remnant of a populous church,which has gradually decreased under the oppression of twelve centuries. Yet inthat long period, some strangers of merit have been converted to the Monophysitefaith, and a Jew was the father of Abulpharagius,(l) primate of the east, so trulyeminent both in his life and death. In his life he was an elegant writer of the Sy-riac and Arabic tongues, a poet, physician, and historian, a subtle philosopher, anda moderate divine. In his death, his funeral was attended by hii rival the Nesto-rian patriarch, with a train of Greeks and Armenians, who forgot their disputes,and mingled their tears over the grave of an enemy. The seel which was ho­noured by the virtues of Abulpharagius, appears, however, to sink below the le­vel of their Nestorian brethren. The superstition of the Jacobites is more abject,their fasts more rigid, (2) their intestine divisions are more numerous, and their doc­tors, (as far as I can measure the degrees of nonsense) are more remote from theprecincts of reason. Something may possibly be allowed for the rigour of the Mono­physite theology;(3) much more for the superior influence of the monastic order,in Syria, in Egypt, in Ethiopia, the Jacobite monks have ever been distinguishedby the austerity of their penance and the absurdity of their legends. Alive ordead they are worshipped as the favourites of the Deity; the crosier of bishopand patriarch is reserved for their venerable hands; and they assume the govern­ment of men, while they are yet reeking with the habits and prejudices of thecloister.
III. In the style of the oriental Christians, the Monothelites of every age aredescribed under the appellation of Maronites,(4) a name which has been insensi­bly transferred from a hermit to a monastery, from a monastery to a nation. Ma-ron, a saint or savage of the fifth century, displayed his religious madness in Sy­ria; the rival cities of Apamea and Emesa, disputed his relics, a stately churchwas erected on his tomb, and six hundred of his disciples united their solitary cellson the banks of the Orontes. On the controversies of the incarnation, they nicelythreaded the orthodox line between the sects of Nestorius and Eutyches: but theunfortunate question of one will or operation in the two natures of Christ was ge­nerated by their curious leisure. Their proselyte, the emperor Heraclius, wasrejected as a Maronite from the walls of Emesa: he found a refuge in the monas­tery of his brethren; and their theological lessons were repaid with the gift of aspacious and wealthy domain. The name and doctrine of this venerable schoolwere propagated among the Greeks and Syrians, and their zeal is expressed byMacarius, patriarch of Antioch, who declared before the synod of Constantinople,that sooner than subscribe the two wills of Christ, he would submit to be hewnpiecemeal, and cast into the sea.(5) A similar or a less cruel mode of persecutionsoon converted the unresisting subjects of the plain, while the glorious title ofMardaites,{6) or rebel, was bravely maintained by the hardy natives of mount
(1) The aeeount of hit person and writings is perhaps the most curious article in the Bihliotheca of Asseman-nns.(tom. it. p. 244—321. under the name of Gregorius Bar-Hebratus.) La Craze (Christianisme d'Ethiope, p.53—63.) ridicules the prejudice of the Spaniards against the Jewish blood, which secretly defiles their churchaad state.
(3) This excessive abstinence is censured by La Croze, (p. 353.) and even by the Syrian Astemaonus, (tots* i.p. 226. torn. ii. p. 364, 305.)
(3) The state of the Monophysites is excellently illustrated in a dissertation at the beginning of the secondvolume of Assemannus, which contains one hundred and foity-two pages. The Syriac Chronicle of GregoryBar-Hebrseus, or Abulpharagius, (Bibliot. Orient, lorn, ii. p. 321—463.) pursues the double series of the Nes­torian catholics and the maphrians of the Jacobites. »
(4) The synonymous use of the two words may be proved from Eutychins, (Annal. torn. ii. p. 491. 207.332.)and many similar passages which may be found in the methodical table of Pocoek. He was not actuated byany prejudice against the Maronites of the tenth century; and we may believe a Melchite, whose testimony uconfirmed by the Jacobins and Latins.
_ (5) Coneil. torn. vii. p. 780. The Monothelite cause was supported with firmness and subtlety by Constan-tine, a Syrian priest of Apamea (p. 1040, &c.)
(6) Theophanes (Chron. p. 295,296.300.302.306.) and Cedrenus (p. 437.440.) relates the exploits of the Mar-daites: the name (Mard. in Syriac rebellavit) is explained by La Roque, Voyage de la Syrie, torn. ii. p. 53.) thedates are fixed byPagi,(A. D. 676. No. 4—14. A. 0.685. No. 3,4.) and even the obscure story of the patriarchJohn Maron (Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, torn, i.p.496—520.) illustrates from the year 6S6 tp 707. the troubles cfMount Lihanos.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


CHAPTER XLVIII.


Flan of the remainder of the work.—Succession and characters of the Greek emperors ofConstantinople, from the time of Heraclius to the Latin conquest.
I have now deduced from Trajan to Constantine, from Constantine to Hera­clius, the regular series of the Roman emperors; and faithfully exposed the pros­perous and adverse fortunes of their reigns. Five centuries of the decline and fall6f the empire have already elapsed; but a period of more than eight hundredyears still separates me from the term of my labours, the taking of Constantinopleby the Turks. Should I persevere in the same course, should I observe the samemeasure, a prolix and slender thread would be spun through many a volume, norwould the patient reader find an adequate reward of instruction or amusement.At every step as we sink deeper in the decline and fall of the eastern empire, theannals of each succeeding reign would impose a more ungrateful and melancholytask. These annals must continue to repeat a tedious and uniform tale of weak­ness and misery; the natural connexion of causes and events would be broken byfrequent and hasty transitions, and a minute accumulation of circumstances mustdestroy the light and effect of those general pictures which compose the use andornament of a remote history. From the time of Heraclius, the Byzantine thea­tre is contracted and darkened: the line of empire, which had ,been defined bythe laws of Justinian and the arms of Belisarius, recedes on all sides from our view:the Roman name, the proper subject of our inquiries, is reduced to a narrow cor­ner of Europe, to the lonely suburbs of Constantinople; and the fate of the Greekempire has been compared to that of the Rhine, which loses itself in the sands,before its waters can mingle with the ocean. The scale of dominion, is dimi­nished to our view by the distance of time and place: nor is the loss of externalsplendour compensated by the nobler gifts of virtue and genius. In the last mo-4 ments of her decay, Constantinople was doubtless more opulent and populous thanAthens at her most flourishing era, when a scanty sum ot six thousand talents, ortwelve hundred thousand pounds sterling, was possessed by twenty-one thousandmale citizens of an adult age. But each of these citizens was a freeman who daredto assert the liberty of his thoughts, words, and actions; whose person and proper­ty were guarded by equal law; and who exercised his independent vote in thegovernment of the republic. Their numbers seem to be multiplied by the strongand various discriminations of character: under the shield of freedom, on thewings of emulation and vanity, each Athenian aspired to the level of the nationaldignity: from this commanding eminence, some chosen spirits soared beyond thereac\i of a vulgar eye; and the chances of superior merit in a great and populouskingdom, as they are proved by experience, would excuse the computation ofimaginary millions. The territories of Athens, Sparta, and their allies, do notexceed a moderate province of France or England: but after the trophies of Sa-lamis and Platiea, they expand in our fancy to the gigantic size of Asia whichhad been trampled under the feet of the victorious Greeks. But the subjects ofthe Byzantine empire, who assume and dishonour the names both of Greeksand Romans, present a dead uniformity of abject vices, which are neither soft­ened by the weakness of humanity, nor animated by the vigour of memorablecrimes. The freemen of antiquity might repeat with generous enthusiasm thesentence of Homer, that on the first day of his servitude, the captive is deprivedof one-half of his manly virtue. But the poet had only seen the effects of civil ordomestic slavery, nor could he foretel that the second moiety of manhood must beannihilated by the spiritual despotism, which shackles, not only the actions, buteven the thoughts, of the prostrate votary. By this double yoke, the Greekswere oppressed under the successors of Heraclius, the tyrant; a law of eternaljustice was degraded by the vices of his subjects; and on the throne, in the camp,in the schools, we search, perhaps with fruitless diligence, the names and charac­ters that may deserve to be rescued from oblivion. Nor are the defects of thesubjects compensated by the skill and variety of the painters. Of a space ofeight hundred years, the four first centuries are overspread with a cloud inter­rupted by some faint and broken rays of historic light: in the lives of the empe­







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 177


fate of his father, to confine the traitors who had been released from their chains,to deposite in some holy place the diadem which he had usurped, and to acceptfrom his gracious benefactor the pardon of his faults and the government of a pro­vince. The rebel might not be proud, and the king most assuredly was not hum­ble; but the one was conscious of his strength, and the other was sensible of hisweakness; and even the modest language of his reply still left room for treaty andreconciliation. Chosroes led into the field the slaves of the palace and the popu­lace of the capital: they beheld with terror the banners of a veteran army; theywere encompassed and surprised by the evolutions of the general; and the satrapswho had deposed Hormouz, received the punishment of their revolt, or expiatedtheir first treason by a second and more criminal act of disloyalty. The life andliberty of Chosroes were saved, but he was reduced to the necessity of imploringaid or refuge in some foreign land: and the implacable Bindoes, anxious to securean unquestionable title, hastily returned to the palace, and ended with a bow-string,the wretched existence of the son of Nushirvan.(l)
While Chosroes despatched the preparations of his retreat, he deliberated withhis remaining friends, (2) whether he should lurk in the valleys of mount Cauca­sus, or fly to the tents of the Turks, or solicit the protection of the emperor. Thelong emulation of the successors of Artaxerxes and Constantine increased his re­luctance to appear as a suppliant in a rival court; but he weighed the forces of theRomans, and prudently considered, that the neighbourhood of Syria would renderhis escape more easy, and the more effectual. Attended only by his concubines,and a troop of thirty guards, he secretly departed from the capital, followed thebanks of the Euphrates, traversed the desert, and hatted at the distance of tenmiles from Circesium. About the third watch of the night, the Roman prefectwas informed of his approach, and he introduced the royal stranger to the fortressat the dawn of day. From thence the king of Persia was conducted to the morehonourable residence of Hierapolis; and Maurice dissembled his pride, and dis­played his benevolence, at the reception of the letters and ambassadors of thegrandson of Nushirvan. They humbly represented the vicissitudes of fortune andthe common interest of princes, exaggerated the ingratitude of Bahram, the agentof the evil principle, and urged, with specious argument, that it was for the ad­vantage of the Romans themselves to support the two monarchies which balancethe world, the two great luminaries by whose salutary influence it is vivified andadorned. The anxiety of Chosroes was soon relieved by the assurance, that theemperor had espoused the cause of justice and royalty; but Maurice prudently de;clined the expense and delay of his useless visit to Constantinople. In the nameof his generous benefactor, a rich diadem was presented to the fugitive princewith an inestimable gift of jewels and gold; a powerful army was assembled on thefrontiers of Syria and Armenia under the command of the valiant and faithfulNarses,{3) and this general, of his own nation, and his own choice, was directedto pass the Tigris, and never to sheathe his sword till he had restored Chos­roes to the throne of his ancestors. The enterprise, however splendid, wasless arduous than it might appear. Persia had already repented of her fatal rash­ness, which betrayed the heir of the house of Sassantothe ambition of a rebellioussubject; and the bold refusal of the Magi to consecrate his usurpation, compelledBahram to assume the sceptre, regardless of the laws and prejudices of the nation.The palace was soon distracted with conspiracy, the city with tumult, the pro­vinces with insurrection; and the cruel execution of the guilty and the suspected,served to irritate rather than subdue the public discontent. No sooner did thegrandson of Nushirvan display his own and the Roman banners beyond the Ti*gris, than he was joined, each day, by the increasing multitudes of the nobilityand people; and as he advanced, he received, from every side, the grateful offer-


(1) Theophylact (lib. iv. c. 7.) imputes the death of Horraonr. to his son, hy whose command he was beatento death with clubs. I hare followed the milder account of Khondemii' and Eutychius, and shall always becontent with the slightest evidence to extenuate the crime of parricide.
(2) After the battle of Pharsalia, the Pompey of Luean (lib. Tiii. 256—455) holds a similar debate. He washimself desirous of seeking the Farthians; but his companions abhorred the unnatural alliance; and the ad­verse prejudices miii;ht operate as forcibly on Chosroes and bis companions, who could describe, with thesame vehemence, the contrast of laws, religion, and manners, between the east and west.
(3) In this age there were three warriors of the name of Narses, who had been often confounded. (Pagi,Critica, torn. 11. p. 640.)—I. A Persarmenian, the brother of Isaac and Armatius. who, after a successful ac­tion against Belisarius. deserted from his Persian sovereign, and afterward served in the Italian war. 2. Theeunuch who conquered Italy. 3. The restorer of Chosroes, who is celebrated in the poem of Corippus (lib.iii. 220—227.) as excelsus super omnia vertice agmina .... habitu modestus morum probitatc piace'ni, virtuieverendus; fulminetis, cautui, vigilans, &c.
Vol. III. 23







OCR Output








i48 THE DECLINE AND FALL


frugal maxims of a republican government. The heroic courage of Ali,(f)tnt?consummate prudence of Moawiyah,(2) excited the emulation of their subjects;and the talents which had been exercised in the school of civil discord, were moreusefully applied to propagate the faith and dominion of the prophet. In thesloth and vanity of the palace of Damascus, the succeeding princes of the houseof Ommiyah were alike destitute of the qualifications of statesmen and of saints. (3)Yet the spoils of unknown nations were continually laid at the foot of their throne,and the uniform ascent of the Arabian greatness must be ascribed to the spirit ofthe nation rather than the abilities of their chiefs. A large deduction must be al­lowed for the weakness of their enemies. The birth of Mahomet was fortunatelyplaced in the most degenerate and disorderly period of the Persians, the Romans,and the barbarians of Europe: the empires of Trajan, or even of Constantine orCharlemagne, would have repelled the assault of the naked Saracens, and thetorrent of fanaticism might have been obscurely lost in the sands of Arabia.
In the victorious days of the Roman republic, it had been the aim of the senateto confine their consuls and legions to a single war, and completely to suppress afirst enemy before they provoked the hostilities of a second. These timid max­ims of policy were disdained by the magnanimity or enthusiasm of the Arabiancaliphs. With the same vigour and success they invaded the successors of Au­gustus, and those of Artaxerxes; and the rival monarchies at the same instant be­came the prey of an enemy whom they had been so long accustomed to despise.In the ten years of the administration of Omar, the Saracens reduced to his obe­dience thirty-six thousand cities or castles, destroyed four thousand churches ortemples of the unbelievers, and edified fourteen hundred moschs for the exerciseof the religion of Mahomet. One hundred years after his flight from Mecca, thearms and the reign of his successors extended from India to the Atlantic ocean, overthe various and distant provinces which may be comprised under the names of, I.Persia;II. Syria; III. Egypt; IV. Africa; andV. Spain. Underthis general division,I shall proceed to unfold these memorable transactions; despatching with brevitythe remote and less interesting conquests of the east, and reserving a fuller narra­tive for those domestic countries, which' had been included within the pale of theRoman empire. Yet I must excuse my own defects by a just complaint of theblindness and insufficiency of my guides. The Greeks, so loquacious in contro­versy, have not been anxious to celebrate the triumphs of their enemies. (4) Af­ter a century of ignorance, the first annals of the Mussulmans were collected in agreat measure from the voice of tradition. (5) Among the numerous productionsof Arabic and Persian literature,(6) our interpreters have selected the imperfectsketches of a more recent age. (7) The art and genius of history have ever been


(l) Hi»reign in Eutychius, p.343. Elmacin, p. 5!. Abulpharagius, p. 417. Abulfeda,p. 83. D'Herbelotr
P (2) His reign in Eutychius, p. 344. Klniacin, p. 54. Abulpharagius, p. 123. Abulfeda, p. 101. D'Herbelot,P.J86.
(3) Tbeir reigns in Eutychius.torn. ii. p. 360—395. Elmacin. p. 59—108. Abulpharagius, ciyuan. 9. p. 124—139. Abulfeda, p. Ill—141. D'Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientate, p. 691. and the particular articles of theOmmiades.
(4) For the seventh and eighth centuries, we have scarcely any original evidence of the Byzantine historians,except the chronicles of Thtophanes (Th'ophanis Confcstoris Chronographia, Gr. et Lat. cum notis JacobiGoar. Paris, 1655, in folio;) and the abridgment of Nicephnrus (Nicephori Patriarchal C. P. Breviarum H»to-ricum, Gr. et Lat. Pans, 1648, in folio.) who both lived in the beginning of the ninth century (see Hanckius deScriptor. Byzant. _y. 200—246.) Their coteniporary Photius does not seem to be mere opulent. After prats*
ing the style of Nicephorus, he adds, K»i o>.w,- ireAAov.; tri rrpti aisrou eMrexpuaro.Mlvos T*fit tus i-"Toptst;,Ti a-uvvp*$i«,
and only complains of his extreme brevity (Phot. Bibliot. cod. 66. p. 100.) Some additions may be gleaned fromthe more recent histories of Cedrenus and Zonaras of the twelfth century.
(5) Tabari,or Al Tabari, a native of Tahorestan, a famous imam of Bagdad, and the Livy of the Arabians,finished his general history in the year of the Hegira, 302 (A. D. 014.) At the request^ of his friends, he reduceda work of thirty thousand sheets to a more reasonable size. But his Arabic Original is known only by the Per­sian and Turkish versions. The Saracenic history of Ebn Amid, or Elmacin, is -aid to be an abridgment ofthe great Tabtui (Ockley's Hist, of the Saracens, vol. 2. preface, p. 39. and, list of authors, d'Herbelot, p. 866-.ST0.1014.)
(6) Besides the list of authors framed by Prideaus (Life of Mahomet, p. 179—189.,) Ockley (at the end of hissecond volume,) and the Petit de la Croix (Hist, de Gengiscan, p. 525—550.,) we And in the Bibliotheque Ori­entate Tarik/i, a catalogue of two or three hundred histories or chronicles of the east, of which not more thanthree or four are older than Tabari. A lively sketch of oriental literature is given by Reiske (in his Prorlidag-mats ad Hagji Chalifre librum memorialem ad ealcem Abulfeda9 Tabulee, Svrise, Lipsite, 1766.0 but his projectand the French version of Petit de la Croix (Hist, de Timur Bee, torn, ii preface, p. 45.) have fallen to theground.
(7) The particular historians and geographers will be occasionally introduced. The four following title- re­present the annals, which hav guided me in this general narrative.—1. Annates Eutychiij Patriarchal Ah.van.dnn'i, ab Edtvardo Pocock'io. Oxon. 1656, two voU. in quarto; a pompous edition of an indifferent author, trans­lated by Pocock, to gratify the presbyterian prejudice of his friend Selden. 2. fliitoria Sararenica Gevrgii Ehmnciul, opera et ttudio Thomm Erpenii, in quarto Lugd. Batavorum, 1625. He is said to have hastily translateda corrupt MS. and his version is aften deficient in style and sense. 3. Historia ctmfxndiola DynaJtiarttm a







OCR Output








30 THE DECLINE AND FALL


afforded a retreat to the cattle of the besieged. The inner wall was a monumentof strength and beauty: it measured sixty feet from the ground, and the heightof the towers was one hundred feet; the loop-holes from whence an enemy mightbe annoyed with missile weapons, were small but numerous: the soldiers wereplanted along the rampart, under the shelter of double galleries, and a third plat­form, spacious and secure, was raised on the summit of the towers. The exteri­or wall appears to have been less lofty, but more solid; and each tower was pro­tected by a quadrangular bulwark. A hard rocky soil resisted the tools of the mi­ners, and on the south-east, where the ground was more tractable, their approachwas retarded by a new work, which advanced in the shape of a half-moon.. Thedouble and treble ditches were filled with a stream of water; and in the manage­ment of the river, the most skilful labour was employed to supply the inhabitants,to distress the besiegers, and to prevent the mischiefs of a natural or artificialinundation. Dara continued more than sixty years to fulfil the wishes of its foun­ders and to provoke the jealousy of the Persians, who incessantly complained, thatthis impregnable fortress had been constructed in manifest violation of the treatyof peace between the two empires.
Between the Euxine and the Caspian, the countries of Cholchos, Iberia, andAlbania, are intersected in every direction by the branches of mount Caucasus;and the two principal gates, or passes, from north to south, have been frequentlyconfounded in the geography both of the ancients and moderns. The name ofCaspian or Albanian gates, is properly applied to Derbend.(l) which occupies ashort declivity between the mountains and the sea; the city, if we give credit tolocal tradition, had been founded by the Greeks; and this dangerous entrance wasfortified by the kings of Persia with a mole, double walls, and doors of iron. TheIberian gates(2) are formed by a narrow passage of six miles in mount Caucasus,which opens from the northern side of Iberia or Georgia, into the plain thatreaches to the Tanais and the Volga. A fortress, designed by Alexander, per­haps, or one of his successors, to command that important pass, had descended byright of conquest or inheritance to a prince of the Huns, who offered it for a mo­derate price to the emperor; but while Anastasius paused, while he timorouslycomputed the cost and the distance, a more vigilant rival interposed, and Cabadesforcibly occupied the straits of Caucasus. The Albanian and Iberian gates ex­cluded the horsemen of Scythia from the shortest and most practicable roads, andthe whole front of the mountain was covered by the rampart of Gog and Magog,the long wall which has excited the curiosity of an Arabian caliph(3) and a Rus­sian conqueror. (4) Accordingto a recent description, hugestone, seven feet thick,twenty-one feet in length, or height, are artificially joined without iron or cement,to compose a wall which runs above three hundred miles from the shores of Der­bend, over the hills and through the valleys of Daghestan and Georgia. With­out a vision, such a work might be undertaken by the policy of Cabades; withouta miracle, it might be accomplished by his son, so formidable to the Romansunder the name of Chosroes; so dear to the orientals, under the appellation ofNushirwan. The Persian monarch held in his hand the keys both of peace andwar; but he stipulated in every treaty, that Justinian should contribute to the ex­pense of a common barrier, which equally protected the two empires from the in­roads of the Scythians. (5)
VII. Justinian suppressed the schools of Athens and the consulship of Rome,which had given so many sages and heroes to mankind. Both these institutionsTiad long since degenerated from their primitive glory; yet some reproach may bejustly inflicted on the avarice and jealousy of a prince, by whose hands such vene­rable ruins were destroyed.
Athens, after her Persian triumphs, adopted the philosophy of Ionia and therhetoric of Sicily; and these studies became the patrimony of a city whose inha-
(1) For *he city and pais of Derbend, see d'Herbelot (Bibliot. Orient, p. 157. 291. 807.0 Petite de la Croix(Hist, de Gengiscan. lib. iv. c. 9.0 Histoire Genealogique de Tatars (torn, i. p. 122.,) Olenitis (Voyage cn Perse,p. 1039—1041.0 and Corneille le Brune (Voyages, torn. i. p. 146. 147.0 bis view may be compared with the planof Olearius, who judges the wall to be of shells and gravel hardened by time.
(2) Procopiiis, though with some confusion, always denominates them Caspian (Persic, lib. i. c. 10.) The passis now styled Tatartopa, the Tartar gates (d'Anville, Geographie Ancienne, torn. ii. p. 119,120.)
(3) The imaginary rampart of Gog and Mngog, which was seriously explored and believed by a caliph of theninth century, appears to he derived from the gates of mount Caucasus, and a vague report of the wall ofChina. (Geograph. Nubiensis, p. 267—270. Memoires de F Academic, torn. xxxi. p. 210—219.)
(4) See a learned dissertation of Baler, de mura Caucaseo, in Comment. Aead. Petropol. ann. 1726. torn. i. p.425—463. but it is destitute of a map or plan. When the Czar Peter I. became master of Derbend in the year1722, the measure of the wall was found to be three thousand two hundred and eighty-five Russian orgygie, orfathoms, each of seven feet English; in the whole somewhat more than four miles in length.
(5) See the fortifications and treaties of Chosroes or Nushirwan, in Procopius (Persic lib. i. c. 16. 22. lib. U0and d'Herbelot (p. 6320







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


scourged by the hand, or the command of Musa. Yet so strict was the discipline*so pure the zeal, or so tame the spirit, of the primitive Moslems, that after thispublic indignity, Tarik could serve and be trusted in the reduction of the Tarra-gonese province. A mosch was erected at Saragossa, by the liberality of the Ko-reish; the port of Barcelona was opened to the vessels of Syria; and the Goths werepursued beyond the Pyrenean mountains into their Gallic province of Septimaniaor Languedoc.(l) In the church of St. Mary at Carcassone, Musa found, but it isimprobable that he left seven equestrian statues of massy silver; and from his termor column at Narbonne, he returned on his footsteps to the Gallician and Lusitanianshores of the ocean. During the absence of the father, his son Abdelaziz chas­tised the insurgents of Seville, and reduced, from Malaga to Valentia, the sea-coastof the Mediterranean: his original treaty with the discreet and valiant Theode­mir,^) will represent the manners and policy of the times. " The conditions ofpeace agreed and sworn between Abdelaziz, the son of Musa, the son of Nassir,and Theodemir, prince of the Goths. In the name of the most merciful God, Ab­delaziz makes peace on these conditions: that Theodemir shall not be disturbed inhis principality; nor any injury be offered to the life or property, the wives andchildren, the religion and temples, of the Christians; that Theodemir shall freelydeliver his seven cities, Orihuela, Valentola, Alicant, Mola, Vacasora, Bigerra(now Bejars,) Ora (or Opta,) and Lorca; that he shall not assist or entertain theenemies of the caliph, but shall faithfully communicate his knowledge of theirhostile designs: that himself, and each of the Gothic nobles, shall annually payone piece of gold, four measures of wheat, as many of barley, with a certain pro­portion of honey, oil, and vinegar; and that each of their vassals shall be taxedat one moiety of the said imposition. Given the fourth of Regeb, in the year ofthe Hegira ninety-four, and subscribed with the names of four Mussulman wit­nesses. "(3) Theodemir and his subjects were treated with uncommon lenity; butthe rate of tribute appears to have fluctuated from a tenth to a fifth, according tothe submission or obstinacy of the Christians. (4) In this revolution, many partialcalamities were inflicted by the carnal or religious passions of the enthusiasts.Some churches were profaned by the new worship; some relics or images wereconfounded with idols; the rebels were put to the sword; and one town (an obscureplace between Cordova and Seville) was rased to its foundations. Yet if we com­pare the invasion of Spain by the Goths, or its recovery by the kings of Castilleand Arragon, we must applaud the moderation and discipline of the Arabian con­querors.
The exploits of Musa were performed in the evening of life, though he affectedto disguise his age by colouring with a red powder the whiteness of his beard.But in the love of action and glory, his breast was still fired with the ardour ofyouth; and the possession of Spain was considered only as the first step to the mo­narchy of Europe. With a powerful armament by sea and land, he was preparingto repass the Pyrenees, to extinguish in Gaul and Italy the declining kingdoms ofthe Franks and Lombards, and to preach the unity of God on the altar of the Va­tican. From thence subduing the barbarians of Germany, he proposed to followthe course of the Danube from its source to the Euxine sea, to overthrow theGreek or Roman empire of Constantinople, and returning from Europe to Asia,to unite his new acquisitions with Antioch and the provinces of Syria. (5) But his
(1) Boih the interpreter! of Novairi, de Goignes (Hist, dej Huns, torn. i. p. 349.) and Cardonne, (Hilt, deI'Afrique et de 1'Espagne, torn i. p. 93,94. 104,105.) lead Mnsa into the Narbonnese Gaul. But I find no men­tion of ihis enterprise either in Rodeiic of Toledo, or the MSS. of the Escurial, and the invasion of the Sara­cens » posrpom d.by a French chronicle till the ninth year after the conquest of Spain, A. D. 721.(Pagi, Critica,torn. iii. p. 177.195. Historians of France, torn, iii.) I much question whether Musa ever crossed the Pyrenees.
(2) Four hundred years after Theodemir, his territories of Murcia and Carthagena retain in the Nubian geo­grapher F.drisi (p. 154.161.) the name of Tadmir. (D'Anville, Etats de l*Europe, p. 156. Pagi, torn. iii. p. 174.)In the present decay of Spanish agriculture, Mr. Swinburne (Travels into Spain, p. 119.) surveyed with plea­sure the delicious valley from Murcia to Orihuela, four leagues and a hall of the finest com, pulse, lucern,oranges, &c.
(3) See the treaty in Arabic and Latin, in the B'.bliotheea Arabico-Hispana, torn. ii. p. 105,100. It is signedthe 4th of the month of Kegel), A. H. 94, the 5th of April, A. D. 713; a date which seems to prolong the resist­ance of Theodemir and the government of Musa.
(4) From the history of Sandoval, p. 87. Fleury (Hist, Eccles. torn. ix. p. 281.) has given the substance ofanother treaty concluded A.M.C 782, A. D. 734, between an Arabian chief, and the Goths and Romans, ofthe territory of Conimbra in Portugal. The tax of the churches is fixed at twenty-five pounds of gold; ofthe monasteries, fifty; of the cathedrals, one. hundred: the Christians are judged by their count, bat in capitalcases hentuit consult the_alcaide. The church-doors must be shut, and they must respect the name of Maho­met. I have not the original before ine; it would confirm or destroy a dark suspicion, that the piece had beenforged tc introduce the immunity of a neighbouring convent.
(5) This design, which is attested by ttverat Arabian historians, (Cardonne, torn. i. p. 95, 96.) may be com­pared with that of Mithridatct, to march from the Crimea to Rome; or with that of Csesar, to conquer the east.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,


'character of a divine ambassador: a German chieftain was transformed into theLord's anointed; and this Jewish rite has been diffused and maintained by the su­perstition and vanity of modern Europe. The Franks were absolved from theirancient oath; but a dire anathema was thundered against them and their posterity,if they should dare to renew the same freedom of choice, or to elect a king, exceptin the holy and meritorious race of the Carlovingian princes. Without apprehend­ing the future danger, these princes gloried in their present security; the secretaryof Charlemagne affirms, that the French sceptre was transferred by the authorityof the popes;(l) and in their boldest enterprises, they insist, with confidence, onthis signal and successful act of temporal jurisdiction.
II. In the change of manners and language, the patricians of Rome(2) were farremoved from the senate of Romulus, or the palace of Constantine, from the freenobles of the republic, or the fictitious parents of the emperor. After the reco­very of Italy and Africa by the arms of Justinian, the importance and danger ofthose remote provinces required the presence of a supreme magistrate; he wasindifferently styled the exarch or the patrician; and these governors of Ravenna,who fill their places in the chronology of princes, extended their jurisdiction overthe Roman city. Since the revolt ot Italy and the loss of the exarchate, the dis­tress of the Romans had exacted some sacrifice of their independence. Yet, evenin this act, they exercised the right of disposing of themselves; and the decreesof the senate and people successively invested Charles Martel and his posteritywith the honours of patrician of Rome. The leaders of a powerful nation wouldhave disdained a servile title and subordinate office; but the reign of the Greekemperors was suspended; and, in the vacancy of the empire, they derived a moreglorious commission from the pope and the republic. The Roman ambassadorspresented these patricians with the keys of the shrine of St. Peter, as a pledgeand symbol of sovereignty; with a holy banner, which it was their right andduty to unfurl in the detence of the church and city. (3) In the time of CharlesMartel and of Pepin, the interposition of the Lombard kingdom covered the free­dom, while it threatened the safety, of Rome; and the patriciate represented onlythe title, the service, the alliance, of these distant protectors. The power andpolicy of Charlemagne annihilated an enemy, and imposed a master. In his firstvisit to the capital, he was received with all the honours which had formerly beenpaid to the exarch, the representative of the emperor: and these honours obtainedsome new decorations from'the joy and gratitude of Pope Hadrian I. (4) No soonerwas he informed of the sudden approach of the monarch, than he despatched themagistrates and nobles of Rome to meet him, with the banner about thirty milesfrom the city. At the distance of one mile, the Flaminian way was lined with theschools, or national communities, of Greeks, Lombards, Saxons, &c.: the Romanyouth were under arms; and the children of a more tender age, with palms andolive branches in their hands, chanted the praises of their great deliverer. At theaspect of the holy crosses, and ensigns of the saints, he dismounted from his horse,led the procession of his nobles to the Vatican, and, as he ascended the stairs, de­voutly kissed each step of the threshold of the apostles. In the portico, Hadrianexpected him at the head of his clergy: they embraced, as friends and equals;but in their march to the altar, the king or patrician assumed the right hand of thepope. Nor was the Frank content with these vain and empty demonstrations ofrespect. In the twenty-six years that elapsed, between the conquest of Lombar-dy and his imperial coronation, Rome, which had been delivered by the sword,
borrowed from the Latins in the last age of the empire. Constantine Manasses mentions that of Charlemagneas a foreign, Jewish, incomprehensible ceremony. See Seidell's Tilles of Honour, in his Works, vol. iii. part i.p. 234—249.
(0 See Eginhard, in Vita Caroli Magni, c. 1. p. S, See. c. 3. p. 24. Cliildeiic was deposed—^ujjk, the Carlo­vingian* were established—avctoritate, Pontifices Komani, Launoy, &c, pretend that these strong words aresusceptible of a very soft interpretation. Be it so; yet £ginhard understood the world, the court, and the La­tin language.
(2) For the title and powers of patrician of Home, see Ducange, (Glo.s. Latin, torn. v. p. 149—151.) Pagi.(Critiea, A. I). 740. no. S—11.) Muratori, (Annali d'ltalia, torn. vi. p. 30H—329.) and St. Marc. (Abrege Chro-nologique d'ltalie, torn. i. p. 379—382.) Of these the Franciscan Pagi is the most disposed to make the patriician a l-eutenant of the church, rather than of the empire.
(3) The papal advocates can soften the symbolic meaning of the banner and the keys; hut the style of adregnwn ditnisimus, or direximus, (Codex Carolin. epist. i. torn. iii. pavsii. p. 76.) seems to allow of no pallia-lion or escape. In the MS. of the Vienna library, they read, instead of regnwn^ rogum, prayer or request; (seeDucange) and the royally of Charles Martel is subverted by this important correction. (Catalini, in his Criti­cal Prefaces Annali d'llalia, torn. xvii. p. 95—99.)
. (4) In the authentic narrative of this reception, the Liher Pontificalis observes—obviam illi ejus sanctiras di-ngens venerabiles crnces, id est stgna; sicut, mos est ad exarchum, ant patiicium suscipiendum, cum cum fn-ighenu honore suscipi ftcit. (font, iii, pais i. p. I8J0







OCR Output








* OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 379


■beauty of the female captives, some of whom were afterwards sold for a thousandpieces of gold. The career, though not the zeal, of Akbah was checked by theprospect of a boundless ocean. He spurred his horse into the waves, and raisinghis eyes to heaven, exclaimed with the tone of a fanatic—"Great God! if mycourse were not stopped by this sea, I would still go on, to the unknown kingdomsof the west, preaching the unity of thy holy name, and putting to the sword therebellious nations who worship any other gods than thee."(l) Vet this Mahome­tan Alexander, who sighed for new worlds, was unable to preserve his recent con­quests. By the universal defection of the Greeks and Africans, he was recalledfrom the shores of the Atlantic, and the surrounding multitudes left him only theresource of an honourable death. The last scene was dignified by an example ofnational virtue. An ambitious chief, who had disputed the command and failedin the attempt, was led about as a prisoner in the camp of the Arabian general.The insurgents had trusted to his discontent and revenge; he disdained their offersand revealed their designs. In the hour of danger, the grateful Akbah unlockedhis fetters, and advised him to retire; he chose to die under the banner of hisrival. Embracing as friends and martyrs, they unsheathed their scimitars, broketheir scabbards, and maintained an obstinate combat till they fell by each other'sside on the last of their slaughtered countrymen. The third general or governorof Africa, Zobeir, avenged and encountered the fate of his predecessor. He van­quished the natives in many battles; he was overthrown by a powerful army, whichConstantinople had sent to the. relief of Carthage.
It had been the frequent practice of the Moorish tribes to join the invaders, toshare the plunder, to profess the faith, and to revolt to their savage state of inde­pendence and idolatry, on the first retreat or misfortune of the Moslems. Theprudence of Akbah had proposed to found an Arabian colony in the heart ofAfrica; a citadel that might curb the levity of the barbarians, a place of refuge tosecure, against the accidents of war, the wealth and the families of the Saracens.With this view, and under the modest title of the station of a caravan, he plantedthis colony in the fiftieth year of the Hegira. In its present decay, Cairoan(2)still holds the second rank in the kingdom of Tunis, from which it is distant aboutfifty miles to the south;(3) its inland situation, twelve miles westward of the sea,has protected the city from the Greek and Sicilian fleets. When the wild beastsand serpents were extirpated, when the forest, or rather wilderness, was cleared,the vestiges of a Roman town were discovered in a sandy plain: the vegetable foodof Cairoan is brought from afar; and the scarcity of springs constrains the inhabi­tants to collect in cisterns and reservoirs a precarious supply of rain-water. Theseobstacles were subdued by the industry of Akbah; lie traced a circumstance ofthree thousand and six hundred paces, which he encompassed with a brick wall;in the space of five years, the governor's palace was surrounded with a sufficientnumber of private habitations; a spacious mosch was supported by five hundredcolumns of granite, porphyry, and Numidian marble; and Cairoan became theseat of learning as well as of empire. But these were the glories of a later age;the new colony was shaken by the successive defeats of Akbah and Zobeir, andthe western expeditions were again interrupted by the civil discord of the Arabianmonarchy. The son of the valiant Zobeir maintained a war of twelve years, asiege of seven months, against the house of Ommiyah. Abdallah was said to unitethe fierceness of the lion with the subtlety of the fox; but if he inherited the cou­rage, he was devoid of the generosity of his father. (4)
The return of domestic peace allowed the caliph Abdalmalek to resume theconquest of Africa; the standard was delivered to Hassan, governor of Egypt, andthe revenue of that kingdom, with an army of forty thousand men, was conse-
(1) Otter (p. 119.) has given the strong tone of fiinaticiim to this exclamation, which Cardonne (p. 37,) hatsoftened to a pious wish of preaching the Koran. Yet they had both the same text of Novairi before their eyes.
(2) The foundation of Cairoan is mentioned by Oekley; (Hist, of the Saracens, vol. ii. p. 129,130.) and the si­tuation, mosch, &c.of the city, are described by Leo Afric«nus.flbl. 75.) Marmot, (torn. ii. p. 532.) and Shaw,(p. 115.)
f3) A portentous, though frequent, mistake has been the confounding, from a slight similitude of name, theCyrene of the Greeks, and the Cairoan of the Arabs, two cities which are separated by an interval of a thousandmiles along the sea-coast. The great Thuonua has not escaped this fault, the less excusable, as it is connectedwith a formal and elaborate description of Africa. (Historiar. lib. vii. e. 2. in torn. ii. p. 240. edit. Buckley.)
(4) Besides the Arabic chronicles of Abolfcda, Elmacin, and Abu!p:taragiils, finder the seventy-third year ofthe Hegira, we may consult d'Hrrbeiot.rBibtiot. Orient, p. 7.) and Oekley. (Hist, of (he Saracens, vol. ii. p, 339—349.) The latter has given the last and pathetic dialogue between Abflaliah und h'.s mother; but he has forgota physical effect of her grief for his death, the retai n, at the age of ninety, aud fatal consequences, of fiermenses.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 27 $


tion of a painter, so profane and odious in the eyes of the primitive Christians.The Olympian Jove, created by the muse of Homer and the chisel of Phidias,might inspire a philosophic mind with momentary devotion; but these catholicimages were faintly and flatly delineated by monkish artists, in the last degeneracyof taste and genius. (1)
The worship of images has stolen into the church by insensible degrees, andeach petty step was pleasing to the superstitious mind, as productive of comfortand innocent of sin. But in the beginning of the eighth century, in the full magni­tude of the abuse, the more timorous Greeks were awakened by an apprehension,that, under the mask of Christianity, they had restored the religion of their fa­thers: they heard, with grief and impatience, the name of idolaters; the incessantcharge of the Jews and Mahometans,(2) who derived from the law and the Koranan immortal hatred to graven images and all the relative worship. The servitudeof the Jews might curb their zeal and depreciate their authority; but the trium­phant Mussulmans, who reigned at Damascus, and threatened Constantinople, castinto the scale of reproach the accumulated weight of truth and victory. The citiesof Syria, Palestine, and Egypt, had been fortified by the images of Christ, hismother, and his saints; and each city presumed on the hope or promise of miracu­lous defence. In a rapid conquest often years, the Arabs subdued those cities andthese images; and, in their opinion, the Lord of Hosts pronounced a decisive judg­ment between the adoration and contempt of these mute and inanimate idols. Forawhile Edessa had braved the Persian assaults: but the chosen city, the spouse ofChrist, was involved in the common ruin; and his divine resemblance became theslave and trophy of the infidels. After a servitude of three hundred years, the pal­ladium was yielded to the devotion of Constantinople, for a ransom of twelve thou­sand pounds of silver, the redemption of two hundred Mussulmans, and a perpetualtruce of the territory of Edessa. (3) In this season of distress and dismay, the elo­quence of the monks was exercised in the defence of images; and they "attemptedto prove, that the sin of schism of the greatest part of the orientals had forfeitedthe favour, and annihilated the virtue, of these precious symbols. But they werenow opposed by the murmurs of many simple or rational Christians, who appealedto the evidence of texts, of facts, and of the primitive times, and secretly desiredthe reformation of the church. As the worship of images had never been establish­ed by any general or positive law, its progress in the eastern empire had been re­tarded, or accelerated, by the differences of men and manners, the local degrees ofrefinement, and the personal characters of the bishops. The splendid devotion wasfondly cherished bv the levity of the capital, and the inventive genius of the By­zantine clergy, while the rude and remote districts of Asia were strangers to thisinnovation of sacred luxury. Many large congregations of Gnostics and Ariansmaintained, after their conversion, the simple worship which had preceded theirseparation; and the Armenians, the most warlike subjects of Rome, were not re­conciled, in the twelfth century, to the sight of images. (4) The various denomina­tions of men afforded a fund of prejudices and aversion, of small account in thevillages of Anatolia or Thrace, but which, in the fortune of a soldier, a prelate, ora eunuch, might be often connected with the powers of the church and state.
Of such adventures, the most fortunate was the emperor Leo 111.(5) who, fromthe mountains of Isauria, ascended the throne of the east. He was ignorant of sa-
(1) w Your scandalous figures stand quite out from the canvas: they are as bad as a croupe of statues." Itwas thus that the ignorance and bigotry of a Greek priest applauded the picture of Titian, which he had or*dered, and refused to accept.
(2) By Cedrenus, Zonaras, Glycas, and Manasses, ttie origin of the Iconoclasts is imputed to the caliph Ye-zid and two Jews, who proniised the empii-e to Leo; and the reproaches of these hostile, sectaries are turnedinto an absurd conspiracy for restoring the purity of the Christian worship. (See Spanheim, Hist. Imag.C.2.)
(3) See Elmacin,(Hist. Saracen, p. 267.) Abulpharagius, (Dynast, p. 201.) and Abulfeda, (Annal. Moslem,p. 29s.) the Criticisms of Pagi, torn. iii. A. D. 944.) The prudent Franciscan refused to determine whetherthe image of Edessa now reposes at Rome or Genoa; but its repose is inglorious, and this ancient object ofworship is no longer famous or fashionable.
(4) Appttuc.; xx* Axawxvat,- n *yi»v tiM**v rrpwxui<i|Ti.- xmiyop'.vTxt. (Xicetas, lib. ii. p. 258.) The Armenianchurches are still content with the cross; (Missions do Levant, torn. tii. p. 148.) but surely the superstitiousGreek is unjust to the superstition of the Germans of the twelfth century.
(5) Our original but not impartial monuments of the Iconoclasts must lie drawn from the Acts of the Coun­cil, (mm. viii. and in.) Col leet. Labhe edit. Venet. and the historical writings of Theophanes, Nicephoms, Ma­nasses, Cedrenus, Zonaras, Sec, Of the modern catholics, Baroniiis, Pagi, Natalis Alexander, (Hist. Eccles.Scenlum 8. and 9.) and Maimbourg,(Hist. des Conoclastes) have treated the subject with learning, passion,and credulity. The protestant labours of Frederic Snanlieim (Historia Imaginarurn Reslituta) and JamesBasnage, (Hist, des Eglises Reformees, torn. ii. lib. xsiii. p. 1339—1385.) are cast into the Iconoclast scale."With this mutual aid, and opposite tendency, it is easy for us to poise the balance with philosophic indif­ference.
Vol. III. S5







OCR Output








74 THE DECLINE AND FALL


the fortifications of the Lower Danube; and laboured to secure the alliance of apeople seated in the direct channel of northern inundation, an interval of two hun­dred miles, between the mountains of Transylvania and the Euxine sea. But theAntes wanted power and inclination to stem the fury of the torrent: and the light-*armed Sclavonians, from a hundred tribes, pursued with almost equal speed thefootsteps of the Bulgarian horBe. The payment of one piece of gold for eachsoldier procured a safe and easy retreat through the country of the Gepidae, whocommanded the passage of the Upper Danube.(l) The hopes or fears of thebarbarians; their intestine union or discord; the accident of a frozen or shallowstream; the prospect of harvest or vintage; the prosperity or distress of the Ro­mans; were the causes which produced the uniform repetition of annual visits,(2)tedious in the narrative, and destructive in the event. The same year, and pos­sibly the same month, in which Ravenna surrendered, was marked by an inva­sion of the Huns or Bulgarians, so dreadful, that it almost effaced the memory oftheir past inroads. They spread from the suburbs of Constantinople to the IonianGulph, destroyed thirty-two cities or castles, erased Potidsea, which Athenshad built and Philip had besieged, and repassed the Danube, dragging at theirhorses' heels one hundred and twenty thousand of the subjects of Justinian. In asubsequent inroad they pierced the wall of the Thracian Chersonesus, extirpatedthe habitations and the inhabitants, boldly traversed the Hellespont, and returnedto their companions, laden with the spoils of Asia. Another party, which seemeda multitude in the eyes of the Romans, penetrated, without opposition, from thestraits of Thermopyls to the isthmus of Corinth; and the last ruin of Greece hasappeared an object too minute for the attention of history. The works whichthe emperor raised for the protection, but at the expense of his subjects, servedonly to disclose the weakness of some neglected part, and the walls, which, by flat­tery had been deemed impregnable, were either deserted by the garrisons, orscaled by the barbarians. Three thousand Sclavonians, who insolently dividedtkemselves into two bands, discovered the weakness and misery of a triumphantreign. They passed the Danube and the Hebrus, vanquished the Roman gene­rals who dared to oppose their progress, and plundered, with impunity, the citiesof Illyricum and Thrace, each of which had arms and numbers to overwhelmtheir contemptible assailants. Whatever praise the boldness of the Sclavonians maydeserve, it is sullied by the wanton and deliberate cruelty which they are accusedof exercising on their prisoners. Without distinction of rank, or age, or sex, thecaptiyte were impaled or flayed alive, or suspended between four posts, and beat­en with clu\>= till they expired, or enclosed in some spacious buildings, and leftto perish in the ft^es wfth the spoil and cattle which might impede the march ofthese savage victors, v?) Perhaps a more impartial narrative would reduce thenumber, and qualify the mature, of these horrid acts; and they might sometimesbe excused by the cruel laws ,f retaliation. In the siege of Topirus, (4) whose ob­stinate defence had enraged the Slavonians, they massacred fifteen thousand males;but they spared the women and chilaien; the most valuable captives were alwaysreserved for labour or ransom; the servitude was not rigorous, and the terms oftheir deliverance were speedy and moderaie. But the subject, or the historian ofJustinian, exhaled his just indignation in the language of complaint and reproach;and Procopius has confidently affirmed, that in a reign of thirty-two years eachannual inroad of the barbarians consumed two hundred thousand of the inhabi­tants of the Roman empire. The entire population of Turkish Europe, whichnearly corresponds with the provinces o5 Justinian, would perhaps be incapableof supplying six millions of persons, the res.u of this incredible estimate. (5)
In the midst of these obscure calamities, Europe felt the shock of a revolution,whieh first revealed to the world the name and >atjon 0f the Turks. Like Romu­lus, the founder of that martial people was suckl^j Dy a she-wolf who afterwardmade him the father of a numerous progeny; and th> representation of that animal
(1) Procopius, Goth. lib. iv. c. 25.
fS) An inroad of the Huns is connected, by Procopius, with a comet: perna- that of Hi i-Persie lib ii r4.) A<rathias, (lib. v. p. 154,155.) borrows from his predecessors some earrvfacls. 531 (Persic, lib. n. e.
(3) The cruelties or tbe Sclavonians are related or magninrd by Procopius (Guh lib iii c 19—38 Fortheir mild and liberal behaviour to their prisoners, we may appeal to the authority, nme, hat more recent, oftBe emperor Maurice (Stratagem, lib. ii. c. 5.) J, »mev.nat more recent, oi
(4) Topirus was situate near Philippi in Thrace, or Macedonia, opposite to the isle of Thnsos twelve davs'journey from Constantinople (Cellarius, torn. i. p. 076—840.) ' *"■»" —f
(s) According to the malevolent testimony of tire Anecdotes, (c. 18.,) these inroads had reduced the nro-vinces, south of the Danube, to the state of a Scythian wilderness. ""««" u«u nuuuu me pro







OCR Output








24f> THE DECLINE AND FALL


and it was decreed in her bloody council that Constantine should be rendered in­capable of the throne: her emissaries assaulted the sleeping prince, and stabbedtheir daggers with such violence and precipitation into his eyes, as if they meantto execute a mortal sentence. An ambiguous passage of Theophanes persuadedthe annalist of the church that death was the immediate consequence of this bar­barous execution. The catholics have been deceived or subdued by the authorityof Baronius; and protestant zeal has re-echoed the words of a cardinal, desirous,as it should seem, to favour the patroness of images. Yet the blind son of Irenesurvived many years, oppressed by the court, and forgotten by the world; theIsaurian dynasty was silently extinguished; and the memory of Constantine wasrecalled only by'the nuptials of his daughter Euphrosyne with the emperor Mi­chael II.
The most bigoted orthodoxy has justly execrated the unnatural mother, who maynot easily be paralleled in the history of crimes. To her bloody deed superstitionhas attributed a subsequent darkness of seventeen days; during which many vesselsin mid-day were driven from their course, as if the sun, a globe of fire so vast andso remote, could sympathise with the atoms of a revolving planet On earth, thecrime of Irene was left five years unpunished; her reign was crowned with exter­nal splendour; and if she could silence the voice of conscience, she neither heardnor regarded the reproaches of mankind. The Roman world bowed to the govern­ment of a female; and as she moved through the streets of Constantinople, thereins of her four milk-white steeds were held by as many patricians, who marchedon foot before the golden chariot of their queen. But these patricians were forthe most part eunuchs; and their black ingratitude justified, on this occasion, thepopular hatred and contempt. Raised, enriched, intrusted with the first dignitiesof the empire, they basely conspired against their benefactress: the great treasu­rer Nicephorus was secretly invested with the purple; her successor was intro­duced into the palace, and crowned at St. Sophia by the venal patriarchs In theirfirst interview, she recapitulated with dignity the revolutions of her life, gently ac­cused the perfidy of Nicephorus, insinuated that he owed his life to her unsuspi­cious clemency, and, for the throne and treasures which she resigned, solicited a de­cent and honourable retreat. His avarice refused this modest compensation; andin her exile to the isle of Lesbos, the empress earned a scanty subsistence by thelabours of her distaff.
Many tyrants have reigned undoubtedly more criminal than Nicephorus, butnone perhaps have more deeply incurred the universal abhorrence of their people.His character was stained with the three odious vices of hypocrisy, ingratitude,and avarice; his want of virtue was not redeemed by any superior talents, nor hiswant of talents, by any pleasing qualifications^ Unskilful and unfortunate in war,Nicephorus was vanquished by the Saracens, and slain by the Bulgarians; andthe advantage of his death overbalanced, in the public opinion, the destruction ofa Roman army. His son and heir Stauracius escaped from the field with a mortalwound: yet six months of an expiring life were sufficient to refute his indecent,though popular declaration, that he would in all things avoid the example of hisfather. On the near prospect of his decease, Michael, the great master of thepalace, and the husband of his sister Procopia, was named by every person of thepalace and city, except by his envious brother. Tenacious of a sceptrer now fall­ing from his hand, he conspired against the life of his successor, and cherished theidea of changing to a democracy the Roman empire. But these rash projects servedonly to inflame the zeal of the people, and to remove the scruples of the candidate:Michael L accepted the purple, and before he sunk into the grave, the son of Ni­cephorus implored the clemency of his new sovereign. Had Michael in an ageof peace ascended an hereditary throne, he might have reigned and died the fatherof his people: but his mild virtues were adapted to the shade of private life, norwas he capable of controlling the ambition of his equals, or of resisting the armsof the victorious Bulgarians. While his want of ability and success exposed himto the contempt of the soldiers, the masculine spirit of his wife Procopia awakenedtheir indignation. Even the Greeks of the ninth century were provoked by theinsolence of a female, who, in the front of the standards, presumed to direct theirdiscipline and animate their valour; and their licentious clamours advised the newSemiramis to reverence the majesty of a Roman camp. After an unsuccessfultaimpaign, the emperor left, in their winter quarters of Thrace, a disaffected armyunder the command of his enemies; and their artful eloquence persuaded the sol-fliers to break the dominion of the eunuchs, to degrade the husband of Procopia,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


The epistle of Belisarius to the emperor announced his victory, his danger, andhis resolution. " According to your commands, we have entered the dominions ofthe Goths, and reduced to your obedience, Sicily, Campania, and the city of Rome:but the loss of these conquests will be more disgraceful than their acquisition wasglorious. Hitherto we have successfully fought against the multitude of the bar­barians, but the multitudes may finally prevail. Victory is the gift of Providence, •but the reputation of kings and generals depends on the success or the failure oftheir designs. Permit me to speak with freedom; if you wish that we should live,send us subsistence; if you desire that we should conquer, send us arms, horses,and men. The Romans have received us as friends and deliverers; but in our pre­sent distress, they will be either betrayed by their confidence, or we shall be op­pressed by their treachery and hatred. For myself, my life is consecrated to yourservice; it is yours to reflect, whether my death in this situation will contribute tothe glory and prosperity of your reign." Perhaps that reign would have beenequally prosperous,- if the peaceful master of the east had abstained from the con­quest of Africa and Italy; but as Justinian was ambitious of fame, he made someefforts, they were feeble and languid, to support and rescue his victorious general.A re-enforcement of sixteen hundred Sclavonians and Huns was led by Martin andValerian; and as they had reposed during the winter season in the harbours ofGreece, the strength of the men and horses was not impaired by the fatigues of asea-voyage; and they distinguished their valour in the first sally against the besie­gers. About the time of the summer solstice, Euthalius landed at Terracina withlarge sums of money for the payment of the troops; he cautiously proceeded alongthe^Appian way, and this convoy entered Rome through the gateCapena,(l) whileBelisarius, on the other side; diverted the attention of the Goths by a vigorous andsuccessful skirmish. These seasonable aids, the use and reputation of which weredexterously managed by the Roman general, revived the courage, or at least thehopes, of the soldiers and people. The historian Procopius was despatched withan important commission to collect the troops and provisions which Campaniacould furnish, or Constantinople had sent; and the secretary of Belisarius was soonfollowed by Antonina herself, (2) who boldly traversed the posts of the enemy, andreturned with the oriental succours to the relief of her husband and the besiegedcity. A fleet of three thousand Isaurians cast anchor in the bay of Naples, andafterward at Ostia. Above two thousand horse, of whom a part were Thracians,landed at Tarentum; and, after the junction of five hundred soldiers of Campania,and a train of wagons laden with wine and flour, they directed their march on theAppian way, from Capua to the neighbourhood of Rome. The forces that ar­rived by land and sea were united at the mouth of the Tiber. Antonina convened acouncil of war: it was resolved to surmount, with sails and oars, the adverse streamof the river: and the Goths were apprehensive of disturbing, by any rash hostili­ties, the negotiation to which Belisarius had craftily listened. They credulouslybelieved, that they saw no more than the vanguard of a fleet and army, which al­ready covered the Ionian sea and the plains of Campania; and the illusion wassupported by the haughty language of the Roman general, when he gave audienceto the ambassadors of Vitiges. After a specious discourse to vindicate the justiceof his cause, they declared that, for the sake of peace, they were disposed to re­nounce the possession of Sicily. " The emperor is not less generous, replied his.lieutenant with a disdainful smile: " in return for a gift which you no longer pos­sess, he presents you with an ancient province of the empire—he resigns to the'Goths the sovereignty of the British island." Belisarius rejected with equal firm­ness and contempt the offer of a tribute; but he allowed the Gothic ambassadors toseek their fate from the mouth of Justinian himself; and consented, with seemingreluctance, to a truce of three months, from the winter solstice to the equinox ofspring. Prudence might not safely trust either the oaths or hostages of the bar­barians, but the conscious superiority of the Roman chief was expressed in thedistribution of his troops. As soon as fear or hunger compelled the Goths to eva­cuate Alba, Porto, and Centumcella:, their place was instantly supplied; the gar-risons*of Narni, Spoleto, and Perusia, were re-enforced, and the seven camps ofthe besiegers were gradually encompassed with the calamities of a siege. The
(1) The old Capena was removed by Aurelian to, or near, the modern gate of St. Sebastian (see Nolli's plan.)That memorable spot hat been consecrated by the Egerian grove, the memory of Numa, triumphal arches, thesepulchres of the Scipios, Metelli, &c.
(S) The expression of Proeopius has an invidious cait—tvxw u tcj ser^ou; rw c$nri trvp£nT:nc.vw tty.ftZmi-j(Goth. lib. U. c, 40 Yet he is speaking of a woraan.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


not insensible, (replied the king of the Vandals) how kind and rational is your ad­vice. But I cannot persuade myself, to become the slave of an unjust enemy, whohas deserved my implacable hatred. Him I had never injured either by word ordeed; yet he has sent against me, I know not from whence, a certain Belisarius,who has cast me headlong from the throne into this abyss of misery. Justinian isa man; he is a prince; does he not dread for himself a similar reverse of fortune?I can write no more; my grief oppresses me. Send me, I beseech you, my dearPharas, send me a lyre, (1) a sponge, and a loaf of bread." From the Vandal mes­senger, Pharas was informed of the motives of this singular request. It was longsince the king of Africa had tasted bread; a defluxion had fallen on his eyes, theeffect of fatigue or incessant weeping; and he wished to solace the melancholyhours, by singing to the lyre the sad story of his own misfortunes. The humanityof Pharas was moved; he sent the three extraordinary gifts; but even his humani­ty prompted him to redouble the vigilance of his guard that he might sooner com­pel his prisoner to embrace a resolution advantageous to the Romans, but salutaryto himself. The obstinacy of Gelimer at length yielded to reason and necessity;the solemn assurances of safety and honourable treatment were ratified in the em­peror's name, by the ambassador of Belisarius; and the king of the Vandals de­scended from the mountain. The first public interview was in one of the suburbsof Carthage, and when the royal captive accosted his conqueror, he burst into a fitof laughter. The crowd might naturally believe, that extreme grief had deprivedGelimer of his senses; but in this mournful state, unseasonable mirth insinuated tomore intelligent observers, that the vain and transitory scenes of human greatnessare unworthy of a serious thought.(2)
Their contempt was soon justified by a new example of a vulgar truth; thatflattery adheres to power, and envy to superior merit. The chiefs of the Romanarmy presumed to think themselves the rivals of a hero. Their private despatchesmaliciously affirmed, that the conqueror of Africa, strong in his-reputation andthe public love, conspired to seat himself on the throne of the Vandals. Justinianlistened with too patient an ear; and his silence was the result of jealousy ratherthan of confidence. An honourable alternative, of remaining in the province orof returning to the capital, was indeed submitted to the discretion of Belisarius; buthe wisely concluded, from intercepted letters, and the knowledge of his sovereign'stemper, that he must either resign his head, erect his standard, or confound hisenemies by his presence and submission. Innocence and courage decided hischoice: his guards, captives, and treasures, were diligently embarked; and soprosperous was the navigation, that his arrival at Constantinople preceded anycertain account of his departure from the port of Carthage. Such unsuspectingloyalty removed the apprehensions of Justinian: envy was silenced and inflamedby the public gratitude; and a third Africanus obtained the honours of a triumph,a ceremony which the city of Constantinople had never seen, and which ancientRome, since the reign of Tiberius, had reserved for the ausfiiciom arms of theCxsars.(3) From the palace of Belisarius, the procession was conducted throughthe principal streets of the hippodrome; and this memorable day seemed toavenge the injuries of Genseric, and to expiate the shame of the Romans. Thewealth of nations was displayed, the trophies of martial or effeminate luxury; richarmour, golden thrones, and the chariots of state which had been used by the Van­dal queen; the massy furniture of the royal banquet, the splendour of preciousstones, the elegant forms of statues and vases, the more substantial treasure ofgold, and the holy vessels of the Jewish temple, which, after their long peregri­nation, were respectfully deposited in the Christian church of Jerusalem. A longtrain of the noblest Vandals reluctantly exposed their lofty stature and manlyCountenance. Gelimer slowly advanced: he was Clad in a purple robe, and stillmaintained the majesty of a king. Not a tear escaped from his eyes, not a sighwas heard; but his pride or piety derived some secret consolation from the words
(1) By Procopins it is styled a lyre; perhaps harp would have been mote national. The instruments of mu­sic are those distinguished by Venantius Fortunatus:—
Romauusque lyra tibi plaudit, Barbarus harpa*
(2) Herodotus elegantly describes the strange effects of grief in another roya! captive, Psammetichui ofEgypt, who wept at the lesser, and was silent at the greatest of his calamities, (lib. iii. c. 14.) In the interview,of Paulus jEmilius and Perses, Belisarius might study his part: but it is probable that he never read either Livyor Plutarch; and it is certain that his generosity did not need a tutor.
(3) After the title of imperatar had lost the old military sense, and the Roman auspices were abolished byChristianity (see La Bleterie, Mem. de 1'Academic, torn, xii, p. 302—332,) a triumph might be given with lessinconsistency to a .private general. m







OCR Output








66 THE DECLINE AND FALL


venna, if Belisarius would disclaim the authority of a master, accept the choreeof the Goths, and assume, as he had deserved, the kingdom of Italy- If the falselustre of a diadem could have tempted the loyalty of a faithful subject, his pru­dence must have foreseen the inconstancy of the barbarians, and his rational am­bition would prefer the safe and honourable station of a Roman general. Eventhe patience and seeming satisfaction with which he entertained a proposal of trea­son, might be susceptible of a malignant interpretation. But the lieutenant ofJustinian was conscious of his own rectitude: he entered into a dark and crookedpath, as it might lead to the voluntary submission of the Goths;, and his dexterouspolicy persuaded them that he was disposed to comply with their wishes, withoutengaging an oath or a promise for the performance of a treaty which he secretlyabhorred. The day of the surrender of Ravenna was stipulated by the Gothicambassadors: a fleet, laden with provisions, sailed as a welcome guest into thedeepest recess of the.harbour: the gates were opened to the fancied king of Italy;and Belisarius, without meeting an enemy, triumphantly marched through thestreets of an impregnable city.(l) The Romans were astonished by their suc­cess; the multitude of tall and robust barbarians were confounded by the image oftheir own patience; and the masculine females, spitting in the faces of their sonsand husbands, most bitterly reproached them for betraying their dominion andfreedom to these pigmies of the south, contemptible in their numbers, diminutivein their stature. Before the Goths could recover from their first surprise, and claimthe accomplishment of their doubtful hopes, the victor established his power inRavenna, beyond the danger of repentance and revolt. Vitiges, who perhaps hadattempted to escape, was honourably guarded in his palace;(2) the flower of theGothic youth was selected for the service of the emperor; the remainder of thepeople was dismissed to their peaceful habitations in the southern provinces; and acolony of Italians was invited to replenish the depopulated city. The submissionof the capital was imitated in the towns and villages of Italy, which had not beensubdued, or even visited, by the Romans; and the independent Goths, who re­mained in arms at Pavia and Verona, were ambitious only to become the subjectsof Belisarius. But his inflexible loyalty rejected, except as the substitute of Jus­tinian, their oaths of allegiance; and he was not offended by the reproach of theirdeputies, that he rather chose to be a slave than a king.
After the second victory of Belisarius, envy again whispered, Justinian listened,and the hero was recalled. *' The remnant of the Gothic war was no longer wor­thy of his presence: agracioussovereign was impatient to reward his services, andto consult his wisdom: and he alone was capable of defending the east against theinnumerable armies of Persia." Belisarius understood the suspicion, accepted theexcuse, embarked at Ravenna his spoils and trophies; and proved, by his readyobedience, that such an abrupt removal from the government of Italy was not lessunjust than it might have been indiscreet. The emperor received, with honoura­ble courtesy, both Vitiges and his more noble consort: and as the king of the Gothsconformed to the Athanasian faith, he obtained, with a rich inheritance of landsin Asia, the rank of senator and patrician. (3) Every spectator admired, withoutperil, the strength and stature of the young barbarians: they adored the strengthand majesty of the throne, and promised to shed their blood in the service of theirbenefactor. Justinian deposited in the Byzantine palace the treasures of the Go­thic monarchy. A flattering senate was sometimes admitted to gaze on the mag­nificent spectacle; but it was enviously secluded from the public view; and theconqueror of Italy renounced, without a murmur, perhaps without a sigh, the well-earned honours of a second triumph. His glory was indeed exalted above all ex­ternal pomp; and the faint and hollow praises of the court were supplied, even ina servile age, by the respect and admiration of his country. Whenever he ap­peared in the streets and public places of Constantinople, Belisarius attracted andsatisfied the eyes of the people. His lofty stature and majestic countenance ful­fil Ravenna was taken, not in the 540, but in Ike latter end of 539; and Pagi (torn. ii. p. 560.) is rectified byMurafon (Annali d'llala, torn. \: p. 62..) who piorei from an original act on papyrus (Antiquit Italia; Medii#>i) torn. n.dissert. 32. p.999-1007. Maffei.lstoria Diplomat, p. 15J—160.,) that before the 3d of January,540, peace and free correspondence were restored between Ravenna and Faenza.
(!) He was seized by John the Sanguinary, but an oath or sacrament was pledged for his safety in the Basi­lica Jnln (Hist. Miscell. lib. xvn.in Muraton, torn. i. p. 107.) Anastasiiis (in Vit. Pont. p. 40.) gives a dark butprobable account. Monlfaucon is quoted by Mascon (Hist, of the Germans, 12. 21.) for a volive shield repre­senting the captivity of Vitiges, and now in the collection of Signer I.andi at Rome.
(3) Vitiges lived two years at Constantinople, and imperatoris in nifectu eonvictiu (or conjunctus) rebus ex-cesut'humanu. His widow, Matliruuenta, the wife and mother of the patricians, the elder and younger Ger-manuj, untied the su-eams of Alucian and Araali blood (Jomandes, c lx, p. 211, in Muratori, torn. i.)







OCR Output








3 2 THE DECLINE AND FALL


bath, by the order, or with the connivance, of the new king, who instructed histurbulent subjects to shed the blood of their sovereigns.
Justinian beheld with joy the dissensions of the Goths; and the mediation ofan ally concealed and promoted the ambitious views of the conqueror. His am­bassadors, in their public audience, demanded the fortress of Lilybaeum, ten bar­barian fugitives, and a just compensation for the pillage of a small town on the Illyri-an borders; but they secretly negotiated with Theodatus, to betray the provinceof Tuscany, and tempted Amalasontha to extricate herself from danger and per­plexity, by a free surrender of the kingdom of Italy. A false and servile epistlewas subscribed by the reluctant hand of the captive queen: but the confession ofthe Roman senators, who were sent to Constantinople, revealed the truth of herdeplorable situation; and Justinian, by the voice of a new ambassador, most power­fully interceded for her life and liberty. Yet the secret instructions of the same-minister were adapted to serve the cruel jealousy of Theodora, who dreaded thepresence and superior charms of a rival: he prompted, with artful and ambiguoushints, the execution of a crime so useful to the Romans;(l) received the intelligenceof her death with grief and indignation, and denounced, in his master's name, im­mortal war against the perfidious assassin. In Italy, as well as in Africa, the guiltof a usurper appeared to justify the arms of Justinian; but the forces which heprepared were insufficient for the subversion of a mighty kingdom, if their feeblenumbers had not been multiplied by the name, the spirit, and the conduct, of ahero. A chosen troop of guards, who served on horseback, and were armed withlances and bucklers, attended the person of Belisarius: his cavalry was composedof two hundred Huns, three hundred Moors, and four thousand confederates; and theinfantry consisted only of three thousand Isaurians. Steering the same course as inhis former expedition, the Roman consul cast anchor before Catana in Sicily, tosurvey the strength of the island, and to decide whether he should attempt theconquest, or peaceably pursue his voyage to the African coast. He found a fruitfulland and a friendly people. Notwithstanding the decay of agriculture, Sicily stillsupplied the granaries of Rome; the farmers were graciously exempted from theoppression of their military quarters; and the Goths, who trusted the defence ofthe island to the inhabitants, had some reason to complain, that their confidencewas ungratefully betrayed: instead of soliciting and expecting aid of the king ofItaly, they yielded to the first summons a cheerful obedience; and this province,the first fruits of the Punic wars, was again, after a long separation, united to the Ro­man empire. (2) The Gothic garrison of Palermo, which alone attempted to re­sist, was reduced, after a short siege, by a singular stratagem. Belisarius intro­duced his ships into the deepest recess of the harbour; their boats were laborious­ly hoisted with ropes and pulleys to the topmast head, and he filled them witharchers, who, from that superior station, commanded the ramparts of the city.After this easy, though successful campaign, the conqueror entered Syracuse intriumph, at the head of his victorious bands, distributing gold medals to the people,on the day which so gloriously terminated the year of the consulship. He passed thewinter season in the palace of the ancient kings, amidst the ruins of a Grecian co­lony, which once extended to a circumference of two-and-twenty miles:(3) but inthe spring, about the festival of Easter, the prosecution of his designs was interrupt­ed by a dangerous revolt of the African forces. Carthage was saved by the pre­sence of Belisarius, who suddenly landed with a thousand guards. Two thousandsoldiers of doubtful faith returned to the standard of their old commanderr and hemarched, without hesitation, above fifty miles to seek an enemy whom he affectedto pity and despise. Eight thousand rebels trembled at his approach; they wererouted at the first onset, by the dexterity of their master: and this ignoble victorywould have restored the peace of Africa, if the conqueror had not been hastily re-
(Epist. ii. 96.) celebrates two woody islands that floated on its waters; iF a fable, how crednlons the ancients I—if a fact, how careless the moderns ! Yet, since Pliny, the island may have been fixed by new and gradualsuccessions.
(1) Yet Procopias discredits his own evidence (Anecdot. c 16.) by confessing, that in his public history hehad not spoken the truth. See the epistles from queen Gundelina to the empress Theodora (Var. 10. 20,21.23. and observes a suspicious word, de ilia persona, &c.) with the elaborate Commentary of Buat (torn. a. P»177—185.)
„(2) For the conquest of Sicily, compare the narrative of Proeopius with the complaints of Totila. (Gothic2jJ. c. f. lib. iii. c. 16.) The Gothic queen had lately relieved that thankless bland (Var. 9,10, !!•)
(j)The ancient magnitude and splendour of the five quarters of Syracuse, are delineated by Cicero fin Ver-ter Actio 2. lib. iv. e. 52,53.,) Strabo (lib. vi. p. 415.,) and d'Orville Sicula (torn. ii. p. 174—202.) The newsonttm tored by Augustus, shrunk towards the iiland.







OCR Output








36 J THE DECLINE AND FALL


luxury. In the days of paganism, both Emesa and Heliopolis were addicted to theworship of Baal, or the sun; but the decline of their superstition and splendourhas been marked by a singular variety of fortune. Not a vestige remains of thetemple of Emesa, which was equalled in poetic style to the summit of mount Li-banus,(l) while the ruins of Baalbec, invisible to the writers of antiquity, excitethe curiosity and wonder of the European traveller. (2) The measure of the,tem-ple is two hundred feet in length, and one hundred in breadth: the front is adornedwith a double portico of eight columns; fourteen may be counted on either side;and each column, forty-five feet in height, is composed of three massy blocks ofstone or marble. The proportions and ornaments of the Corinthian order expressthe architecture of the Greeks; but as Baalbec has never been the seat of a mo­narch, we are at a loss to conceive how the expense of these magnificent structurescould be supplied by private or municipal liberality.(3) From the conquest ofDamascus the Saracens proceeded to Heliopolis and Emesa: but 1 shall declinethe repetition of the sallies and combats which have been already shown on a largescale. In the prosecution of the war, their policy was not less effectual than theirsword. By short and separate truces they dissolved the union of the enemy; ac­customed the Syrians to compart their friendship with their enmity; familiarizedthe idea of their language, religion, and manners; and exhausted, by clandestinepurchase, the magazines and arsenals of the cities which they returned to besiege.They aggravated the ransom of the more wealthy or the more obstinate; and Chal-cis alone was taxed at five thousand ounces of gold, five thousand ounces of silver,two thousand robes of silk, and as many figs and olives as would load five thousandasses. But the terms of truce or capitulation were faithfully observed; and thelieutenant of the caliph, who had promised not to enter the walls of the captiveBaalbec, remained tranquil and immoveable in his tent till the jarring factions so­licited the interposition of a foreign master. The conquest of the plain and val­ley of Syria was achieved in less than two years. Yet the commander of the faith­ful reproved the slowness of their progress, and the Saracens, bewailing their faultwith tears of rage and repentance, called aloud on their chiefs to lead them forthto fight the battles of the Lord. In a recent action, under the walls of Emesa, anArabian youth, the cousin of Caled, was heard aloud to exclaim—" Methinks I seethe black-eyed girls looking upon me; one of whom, should she appear in this world,all mankind would iVe for love of her. And I see in the hand of one of them, ahandkerchief of green silk, and a cap of precious stones, and she beckons me andcalls out, Come hither quickly, for I love thee." With these words charging theChristians, he made havoc wherever he went, till observed at length by the gover­nor of Hems, he was struck through with a javelin.
It was incumbent on the Saracens to exert the full powers of their valour andenthusiasm against the forces of the emperor, who was taught by repeated losses,that the rovers of the desert had undertaken, and would speedily achiete, a regu­lar and permanent conquest. From the provinces of Europe and Asia, fourscorethousand soldiers were transported by sea and land to Antioch and Casarea: thelight troops of the army consisted of sixty thousand Christian Arabs of the tribesof Gassan. Under the banner of Jabalah, the last of their princes, thev marchedin the van; and it was a maxim of the Greeks, that, for the purpose of cuttingdiamond, a diamond was the most effectual. Heraclius withheld his person fromthe dangers of the field; but his presumption, ov perhaps his despondency, suggested


(1) ....: RmMie fastigia celsa rcnident
Nam diffusa solo latus explieat; ac subit auras
Turribus in cwlum mtentibus; incola Claris
Cor studiis aeilit . . . • •
Denique flamtnicoruo devoti pectora loli
Vitam agitant. Libanus frnndosa cacuniina turget
lilt tamer* his certant celsifastigia templi,These verses of the Latin Tersion of Rtifus Avienus are wanting in the Greek original of Dionysiw; and sinetbey are likewise unnoticed by Eustathius, I must, with Fabncius (Ribliot. Latin, torn. iii. p. 153. edit. Er.nesti,) and ae^tnst Salmasius, (ad Vopiscum, p. 366, 367. in Hist. August.) ascribe them to the fancy ratherthan to the MSS.of Avienus.
(2) I aw much better satisfied with MaundreU's slight octavo (Journey, p. 134—139.) than with the pompousfolio of Dr Pocuck; (Description of the East, vol. ii. p. 106—113.) but every preceding account is eclipsed by themagnificent description and drawings of MM. Datvkius and Wood, who have transported into England theruins of Palmyra and Baalbec.
(3) The orientals explain the prodifryby a never-failing expedient. The edifices of Baalbec were constructedby the fairies or the genii. (Hist de Timour Bee. torn. iii. lib. v. c. 23. p. 311,312. Voyage d'Otter. torn. i. p. 83.)with less absurdity, but with equal ignorance, Abulfeda and Ibu Chaukel ascribe them to the Sabaeaos oAaditet. Non sunt id omm Syria sedincia magnificcjitiora his. (Tabula Syrhe, p. 103.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


retaliated and redoubled on the heads of the Persians. (1) The general who hadrestored Chosroes to the throne still commanded in the east: and the name of Nar-«es was the formidable sound with which the Assyrian mothers were accustomedto terrify their infants. It is not improbable, that a native subject of Persia shouldencourage his master and his friend to deliver and possess the provinces of Asia.It is still more probable, that Chosroes should animate his troops by the assurancethat the sword which they dreaded the most would remain in its scabbard, or bedrawn in their favour. The hero could not depend on the faith of a tyrant; andthe tyrant was conscious how little he deserved the obedience of a hero: Narseswas removed from his military command; he reared an independent standard atHierapolis in Syria: he was betrayed by fallacious promises, and burnt alive in themarket-place of Constantinople. Deprived of the only chief whom they couldfear or esteem, the bands which he had led to victory were twice broken by thecavalry, trampled by the elephants, and pierced by the arrows of the barbarians;and a great number of the captives were beheaded on the field of battle by thesentence of the victor, who might justly condemn these seditious mercenaries asthe authors or accomplices of the death of Maurice. Under the reign of Phocas,the fortifications of Merdin, Dara, Amida, and Edessa, were successively be­sieged, reduced and destroyed by the Persian monarch: he passed the Euphrates,occupied the Syrian cities, Hierapolis, Chalcis, and Berrhxa or Aleppo, and soonencompassed the walls of Antiocti with his irresistible arms. The rapid tide ofsuccess discloses the decay of the empire, the incapacity of Phocas, and the dis­affection of his subjects; and Chosroes provided a decent apology for their submis­sion or revolt by an impostor who attended his camp, as the son of Maurice,(2)and the lawful heir of the monarchy.-
The first intelligence from the east which Heraclius received,(3) was that ofthe loss of Antioch; but the aged metropolis, so often overturned by earthquakesand pillaged by the enemy, could supply but a small and languid stream of trea­sure and Mood. The Persians were equally successful and more fortunate in thesack of Cxsarea, the capital of Cappadocia; and as they advanced beyond theramparts of the frontiers, the boundary of ancient war, they found a less obstinateresistance and a more plentiful harvest. The pleasant vale of Damascus has beenadorned in every age with a royal city: her obscure felicity has hitherto escapedthe historian of the Roman empire: but Chosroes reposed his troops in the para­dise of Damascus before he ascended the hills of Libanus, or invaded the citiesof the Phenician-coast. The conquest of Jerusalem, (4) which had been meditatedby Nushirvan, was achieved by the zeal and avarice of his grandson; the ruin ofthe proudest monument of Christianity was vehemently urged by the intolerantspirit of the Magi; and he could enlist, for this holy warfare, an army of six andtwenty thousand Jews, whose furious bigotry might compensate, in some degree,for the want of valour, and discipline. After the reduction of Galilee, and theregion beyond the Jordan, whose resistance appears to have delayed the fate ofthe capital, Jerusalem itself was taken by assault. The sepulchre of Christ, andthe stately churches of Helena and Constantine, were consumed, or at least da­maged, by the flames; the devout offerings of three hundred years were rifled inone sacrilegious day; the patriarch Zachariah, and the true cross, were transport­ed into Persia; and the massacre of ninety thousand Christians is imputed to theJews and Arabs who swelled the disorder of the Persian march. The fugitivesof Palestine were entertained at Alexandria by the charity of John the archbishop,
(1) We mast now, for some apes, take our leave of cotemporary historians, and descend, if it be a descent,from the affectation of rhetoric, to the rude simplicity of chronicles and abridgments. Those of Theophanes(Chronograph, p. 244—279.( and Nicephorus, p. 316, supply a regular, but imperfect series of the Persianwar! and for any additional facts I quote my special authorities. Theophanes.a cotmier who became a monk,was born A. 1). 743; Nicephorus. patriarch of Constantinople, who died A. 1). 829, was somewhat younger:they both sutTered in the cause of images. Hankkis de Scriptorihus Ryzantinis, p. 200—246.
(2) The Persian historians have been themselves deceived: but Theopbanes (p. 244.) accuses Chosroes ofthe fraud and falsehood; and Eutychius believes (Annal. torn. ii. p. 21 J.) thai (he son of Maurice, who wassaved from the assassins, lived and died a monk on mount Sinai.
(3) Eutychius dates all the losses of the empire under the reign of Phocas, an error which saves the ho­nour of Heraclius, whom he brings not from Carthage, but Salonica, with a fleet laden with vegetables for therelief of Constantinople, f Anna?, torn. ii. p. 223, 2240 The other Christians of the east. Barhebraus, (apudAsseman. Bibliothec. Oriental, torn. iii. p. 412,413.) Elmacin, (Hist. Saracen, p. 13—16.) Abulpharagius. (Dy­nast, p. 98,99,) are more sincere and accurate. The years of the Persian war are disposed in the Chrono­logy of Pagi.
(4) On the eonquest of Jerusalem, an event so interesting to the church, see the Annals of Eutychius, torn,ii. p. 212—223.) and the lamentations of the monk Antiochus, apud Baronium, Annal. Eccles. A. D. 614. No16—26.) whose one hundred and twenty-nine homilies are still extant, if what no one reads may be said to beextant







OCR Output








150 THE DECLINE AND FALL


primitive Romans were infected by the example of the Etruscans(l) and Greeks:(2)in the mad abuse of prosperity and power, every pleasure that is innocent wasdeemed insipid; and the Scatinian law,(3) which had been extorted by an act ofviolence, was insensibly abolished by the lapse of time and the multitude of cri­minals. By this law, the rape, perhaps the seduction, of an ingenuous youth, wascompensated, as a personal injury, by the poor damages of ten thousand sesterces,or fourscore pounds; the ravisher might be slain by the resistance or revenge ofchastity; and I wish to believe, that at H»me, as in Athens, the voluntary and ef­feminate deserter of his sex was degraded from the honours and the rights of acitizen. (4) But the practice of vice was not discouraged by the severity of opi­nion: the indelible stain of manhood was confounded with the more venial trans- .gressions of fornication and adultery, nor was the licentious lover exposed to thesame dishonour which he impressed on the male or female partner of his guilt.From Catullus to Juvenal,(5) the poets accuse and celebrate the degeneracy ofthe times, and the reformation of manners was feebly attempted by the reason andauthority of the civilians, till the most virtuous of the Caesars proscribed the sinagainst nature as a crime against society. (6)
A new spirit of legislation, respectable even in its error, arose in the empirewith the religion of Constantine.(7) The laws of Moses were received as thedivine original of justice, and the Christian princes adapted their penal statutes tothe degrees of moral anc) religious turpitude. Adultery was first declared to be acapital offence; the frailty of the sexes was assimilated to poison or assassination,to sorcery, or parricide; the same penalties were inflicted on the passive and ac­tive guilt of paederasty; and all criminals of free or servile condition were eitherdrowned or beheaded, or cast alive into the avenging flames. The adultererswere spared by the common sympathy of mankind; but the lovers of their ownsex were pursued by general and pious indignation; the impure manners of Greecestill prevailed in the cities of Asia, and every vice was fomented by the celibacyof the monks and clergy. Justinian relaxed the punishment at least of female in­fidelity; the guilty spouse was only condemned to solitude and penance, and at theend of two years she might be recalled to the arms of a forgiving husband. Butthe same emperor declared himself the implacable enemy of unmanly lust, andthe cruelty or his persecution can scarcely be excused by the purity of his mo­tives. (8) In defiance of every principle of justice, he stretched to past as wellas future offences the operations of his edicts, with the previous allowance of ashort respite for confession and pardon. A painful death was inflicted by the am­putation of the sinful instrument, or the insertion of sharp reeds into the poresand tubes of most exquisite sensibility; and Justinian defended the propriety of 'the execution, since the criminals would have lost their hands had they been con­victed of sacrilege. In this state of disgrace and agony, two bishops, Isaiah ofRhodes, and Alexander of Diospolis, were dragged through the streets of Con­stantinople, while their brethren were admonished by the voice of a crier, to ob­serve this awful lesson, and not to pollute the sanctity of their character. Per­haps these prelates were innocent. A sentence of death and infamy was often
(1) Timon (lib. i.) and Theopompus (lib. xliii. apud Alheneum, lib. xii. p. 517.) describe the luxury and hutof the Etruscans: sroxu it;v toi yt vxipvrt owomi yratttri xxi to*; jttEipKiuoi,-. About the same period (A. TJ.C. 445..) the Roman youth studied in Ctruria (Lib. ix. 36.)
(2) The Persians had been corrupted in the same school: airEyyuvai'.wtSovrf; nxitrt xxt pprytvTixi (Herodot. lib.i. c. 131.) A curious dissertation might be formed on the introduction of Pederasty after the time of Homerits progress amonp; the Greeks of A sia and Europe, the vehemence of their passions, and the thin device ofvirtue and friendship which amused the philosophers of Athens. But, scelera ostendi oportet dum puniunturabscondi flagitia. '
(3) The name, the date, and the provisions of this law, are equally doubtful (Gravina, Opp. p. 432 433.Heineccius, Hist. Jure. Rom. No. 108. Ernesti, Clav. Ciceron. in Indice Leguin.) But I will observe'thatthe nefanda Venus of the honest German is styled aversa by the more polite Italian.
^(4) See the Oration of Aschines against the catamite Timarchus (in Reitke, Orator. Grsec. torn. ii. p.
(5) A crowd of disgraceful passages will force themselves on the memory of the classic reader: I will onlyremind hin of the cool declaration of Ovid— 7
Odi concubitus qui non utrumque resolvunt.Hoc est quod puerum tangar amore minus.
(6) jElius, Lampridiils, in Vit. Heliogabal, in Hist. August, p. 112., Aurelius Victor, in Philippo, Codex The-odos. lib. ix. tit. 7. leg. vii., and Godefroy's Commentary, torn. iii. p. 63. Theodosius abolished the subteria-neous brothels of Rome,in which the prostitution of both sexes was acted with impunity.
(7) See thelaws of Conitantine and his successor against adultery, sodomy, tic. in the Theodosian (lib. ixtit. 7. leg. tn. lib. xi. tit. 36. leg. i. 4.) and Justinian Codes (lib. ix. tit. 9. leg. 30, 31.) These princes sneak thelanguage of passion as well asof justice, and fraudulently ascribe their own severity to the first Ciesan
(8) Justinian, Novel. 77.134. 141. Procopius. in Anecdot. c. xi. 16. with the Notes of Aleraannus. 'Theo-phanes, p. 151. Cedrenus, p. 388. Zona res, lib. xiv. p. 64.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


the evidence of the Latins; and the lives(l) and epistles of the popes them­selves.
Two original epistles from Gregory II. to the emperor Leo, are still extant;(2)and if they cannot be praised as the most perfect models of eloquence and logic,they exhibit the portrait, or at least the mask, of the founder of the papal mo­narchy. " During ten pure and fortunate years (says Gregory to the emperor,)we have tasted the annual comforts of your royal letters, subscribed in purple ink,with your own hand the sacred pledges of your attachment to the orthodox creed ofour fathers. How deplorable is the change! how tremendous the scandal! Younow accuse the catholics of idolatry: and, by the accusation, you betray your ownimpiety and ignorance. To this ignorance we are compelled to adapt the gross-ness of our style and arguments: the first elements of holy letters are sufficient foryourconfusion; and were you to enter a grammar school, and avow yourself the ene­my of our worship, the simple and pious children would be provoked to cast theirhorn-books at your head. After this decent salutation, the pope attempts theusual distinctions between the idols of antiquity and the Christian images. Theformer were the fanciful representations of phantoms or demons, at a time whenthe true God had not manifested his person in any visible likeness. The latterare the genuine forms of Christ, his mother, and his saints, who had approved, bya crowd of miracles, the innocence and merit of this relative worship. He mustindeed have trusted to the ignorance of Leo, since he could assert the perpetualuse of images, from the apostolic age, and their venerable presence in the six sy­nods of the catholic church. A more specious argument is drawn from the pre­sent possession and recent practice: the harmony of the Christian world supersedesthe demand of a general council; and Gregory frankly confesses, that such assem­blies can only bp useful under the reign of an orthodox prince. To the impudentand inhuman Leo, more guilty than a heretic, he recommends peace, silence, andimplicit obedience to his spiritual guides of Constantinople and Rome. The li­mits of civil and ecclesiastical powers are defined by the pontiff'. To the formerhe appropriates the body; to the latter the soul: the sword of justice is in the handsof the magistrate; the more formidable weapon of excommunication is intrustedto the clergy; and in the exercise of their divine commission, a zealous son willnot spare his offending father: the successor of St. Peter may lawfully chastise thekings of the earth. *' You assault us, O tyrant! with a carnal and military hand:unarmed and naked, we can only implore the Christ, the prince of the heavenlyhost, that he will send unto you a devil, for the destruction of your body and thesalvation of your soul. You declare, with foolish arrogance, I will despatch myorders to Rome; I will break in pieces the image of St. Peter; and Gregory, likehis predecessor Martin, shall be transported in chains and in exile, to the foot of theimperial throne. Would to God, that I might be permitted to tread in the foot­steps of the holy Martin; but may the fate of Constans serve as a warning to thepersecutors of the church. After his just condemnation by the bishops of Sicily,the tyrant was cut off, in the fulness of his sins, by a domestic servant; the saint isstill adored by the nations of Scythia, among whom he ended his banishment andhis life. But it is our duty to live for the edification and support of the faithful peo­ple; nor are we reduced to risk our safety on the event of a combat. Incapable asyou are of defending your Roman subjects, the maritime situation of the city mayperhaps expose it to your depredation; but we can remove to the distance of four-
and-twenty stadia(3) to the first fortress-of the Lombards, and then you may
pursue the winds. Are you ignorant, that the popes are the bond of union; themediators of peace between the east and west ? The eyes of the nations are fixed
f 1) With some minute difference, the molt learned critici, Lucas Holstenius, Sehelestrate, Cinmphini, Bian-cmni, Muratori (Prolegomena ad torn. iii. pars. l.J are agreed that the Liber Pontificalis was composed andcontinoed by the apostolical librarians and notaries of the eighth and ninth centuries; and that the last, andsmallest part is the work of Anastasius, whose name it bears. The style is barbarous, the narrative partial,the details are trifling—yet it must be read as a curious and authentic record of the times. The epistles of thepopes are dispersed in the volumes of Councils.
(2) The two epistles of Gregory II. have been preserved in the Acts of the Nieene Council, (torn. viii. p. 651—674.) They are without a date, which is variously fixed by Baronius in the year 726. by Muratori (Annalid'ltalia, torn. vi.p. 120.) in 729,and by Pagiin730. Such is the force of prejudice, that some papists havepraised the good sense and moderation of these letters.
(3) E'xoa-t-TEO-crsep* rraSi» ujrexwpijtrs* 0 Ap%*ip°.vs Partis n;, rtfv JfOW TM5 KapsmMNf mi v-rxyt 8i»fov tou?avsaov;. (Epist. i. p. 864.) This proximity of the Lombards, is hard of digestion. Camillo Pellegrini (Dis-aert. iv. de Ducatu Beneventi,in the Script. Ital. torn. v. p. 172,173 ) forcibly reckons the twenty-fourth sta­dia, not from Rome, but from the limits of the Roman duchy, to the first fortress, perhaps Sora, of the Lom­bards. I rather believe that Gregory, with the pedantry of the ago, employs tttiditi for miles, without muchinquiry into the genuine measure.







OCR Output








S74 THE DECLINE AND FALL


curious and interesting facts are buried in oblivion; the three great historians ofRome have been transmitted to our hands in a mutilated state, and we are deprivedof many pleasing compositions of the lyric, ia&ibic, and dramatic poetry of theGreeks. Yet we should gratefully remember, that the mischances of time andaccident have spared the classic works to which the suffrage of antiquity(l) hadadjudged the first place of genius and glory; the teachers of ancient knowledge,who are still extant, had perused and compared the writings of their predeces­sors;^) nor can it fairly be presumed that any important truth, any useful disco­very in art or nature, has been snatched away from the curiosity of modern ages.
In the administration of Egypt,(3) Amrou balanced the demands of justice andpolicy: the interest of the people of the law, who were defended by God; and ofthe people of the alliance, who were protected by man. In the recent tumult ofconquest and deliverance, the tongue of the Copts and the sword of the Arabswere most adverse to the tranquillity of the province. To the former, Amrou de­clared, that faction and falsehood would be doubly chastised; by the punishmentof the accusers, whom he should detest as his personal enemies, and by the pro­motion of their innocent brethren, whom their envy had laboured to injure andsupplant. He excited the latter by the motives of religion and honour to sustainthe dignity of their character, to endear themselves by a modest and temperateconduct to God and the caliph, to spare and protect a people who had trusted totheir faith, and to content themselves with the legitimate and splendid rewards oftheir victory. In the management of the revenue he disapproved the simple butoppressive mode of a capitation, and preferred with reason a proportion of taxes,deducted on every branch from the clear profits of agriculture and commerce.A third part of the tribute was appropriated to the annual repairs of the dikes andcanals, so essential to the public welfare. Under his administration the fertilityof Egypt supplied the dearth of Arabia; and a string of camels, laden with cornand provisions, covered almost without an interval the long road "from Memphisto Medina. (4) But the genius of Amrou soon venewed the maritime communica­tion which had been attempted or achieved by the Pharaohs, the Ptolemies, orthe Caesars; and a canal, at least eighty miles in length, was opened from the Nileto the Red Sea. This inland navigation, which would have joined the Mediterra­nean and the Indian ocean, was soon discontinued as useless and dangerous; thethrone was removed from Medina to Damascus; and the Grecian fleets might haveexplored a passage to the holy cities of Arabia. (5)
Of his new conquest the caliph Omar had an imperfect knowledge from thevoice of fame and the legends of the Koran. He requested that his lieutenantwould place before his eyes the realm of Pharaoh and the Amalekites; and theanswer of Amrou exhibits a lively and not unfaithful picture of that singular coun­try.^) "O commander of the faithful, Egypt is a compound of black earth andgreen plants, between a pulverized mountain and a red sand. The distance fromSyene to the sea is a month's journey for a horseman. Along the valley descendsa river, on which the blessings of the Most High reposes both in the evening andmorning, and which rises and falls with the revolutions of the sun and moon. Whenthe annual dispensation of Providence unlocks the springs and fountains that nou­rish the earth, the Nile rolls his swelling and sounding waters through the realmof Egypt: the fields are overspread by the salutary flood; and the villages commu­nicate with each other in their painted barks. The retreat of the inundation de-posites a fertilizing mud for the reception of the various seeds; the crowds of hus­bandmen who blacken the land may be compared to a swarm of industrious ants;and their native indolence^s quickened by the lash of the taskmaster, and the pro-
(1) I have often perused with pleasure a chapter of Quintilian, (Imtitut. Orator. 10. 1.) in which that judi­cious critic enumerates and appreciate! the series of Greek and Latin classics.
(2) Such as Galen, Pliny, Aristotle, &c. On this subject Wotton (Reflections on Ancient and ModernLearning;, p. 85—95.) argues with solid sense against the lively exotic fancies of Sir William Temple. The con­tempt of the Greeks For barbaric science, would scarcely admit the Indian or Kthiopie books into the libraryof Alexandria; nor is it proved that philosophy has sustnine;l any real loss from their exclusion.
(3) This curious and authentic intelligence of Murtadi (p. 284—289.) has not been discovered either by Ock-lcy, or by the self-sufficient compilers of the Modern Universal History.
(4) Eutychius, Annal. torn. ii. p. 320. Elmacin, Hist. Saracen, p. 35.
(5) On these el/trure canals, the reader may try tosalisfy himself from d*Anville(Mem. snr l'Egypte, p. 108—110. 124. 132.,) and a learned thesis maintained and printed at Strashurg in the year 1770 (Jungendorum ma-litim fluviorumque molimina. p. 30— 47. 03—70.) Even the supine Turks have agitated the old project of join­ing the two seas (Memoirei de Baron de Tott, torn, ir.)
(6) A small volume, des Marveilles. ccc. de l'Egypte. composed in the thirteenth century by Mortarls ofCairo, and translated from au Arabic MS. of cardinal Mazann, was published by Pierre Vatier, Paris. 166A-The antiquities of Egypt are wild and legendary: but the writer deserves credit and esteem for his account ofthe conquest and geography of his native country. (See the correspondence of Amrou and Omar. p. 279—280.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,


cence of Justinian was displayed in the superior pomp of his public spectacles, anobject not less sacred and important in the eyes of the multitude, than the creedof Nice or Chalcedon; the expense of his consulship was estimated at two hun­dred and eighty-eight thousand pieces of gold; twenty lions, and thirty leopards,were produced at the same time in the amphitheatre, and a numerous train ofhorses, with their rich trappings, was bestowed as an extraordinary gift on thevictorious charioteers of the circus. While lie indulged the people of Constanti­nople, and received the addresses of foreign kings, the nephew of Justin assidu­ously cultivated the friendship of the senate. That venerable name seemed toqualify its members to declare the sense of the nation, and to regulate the succes­sion of the imperial throne: the feeble Ana tasius had permitted the vigour of go­vernment to degenerate into the form or substance of an aristocracy; and the mi­litary officers who had obtained the senatorial rank, were followed by their do­mestic guards, a band of veterans, whose arms or acclamations might fix in a tu­multuous moment the diadem of the east. The treasures of the state were la­vished to procure the voices of the senators; sRid their unanimous wish that hewould be pleased to adopt Justinian for his colleague, was communicated to theemperor. But this request, which too clearly admonished him of his approachingend, was unwelcome to the jealous temper of an aged monarch, desirous to retainthe power which he was incapable of exercising; and Justin, holding his purplewith both his hands, advised them to prefer, since an election was so profitable,some older candidate. Notwithstanding this reproach, the senate proceeded todecorate Justinian with the royal epithet of nobilissimus; and their decree was ra­tified by the affection or the fears of his uncle. After some time the languor ofmind and body, to which he was reduced by an incurable wound in his thigh, in­dispensably required the aid of a guardian. He summoned the patriarch and se-. nators; and in their presence solemnly placed the diadem on the head of his ne­phew, who was conducted from the palace to the circus, and saluted by the loudand joyful applause of the people. The life of Justin was prolonged about fourmonths, but from the instant of this ceremony, he was considered as dead to theempire, which acknowledged Justinian, in the forty-fifth year of his age, for thelawful sovereign of the east.(l)
From his elevation to his death, Justinian governed the Roman empire thirty-eight years seven months and thirteen days. The events of his reign, which ex­cite our curious attention by their number, variety, and importance, are diligentlyrelated by the secretary of Belisarius, a rhetorician whom eloquence had promo­ted to the rank of senator, and prefect of Constantinople. According to the vi­cissitudes of courage or servitude, of favour or disgrace, Procopius(2) successivelycomposed the history, the panegyric, and the satire, of his own times. The eightbooks of the Persian, Vandalic, and Gothic wars,(3) which are continued in thefive books of Agathias, deserve our esteem as a laborious and successful imitationof the Attic, or at least of the Asiatic writers of ancient Greece. His facts arecollected from the personal experience and free conversation of a soldier, astatesman, and a traveller; his style continually aspires, and often attains, tothe merit of strength and elegance; his reflections, more especially in the speecheswhich he too frequently inserts, contain a rich fund of political knowledge; andthe historian, excited by the generous ambition of pleasing and instructing pos­terity, appears to disdain the prejudices of the people, and the flattery of courts.The writings of Procopius (4) were read and applauded by his cotempora-
(1) The reign of llie elder Justin may be found In the three Chronicles of Marcellinns, Victor and JohnMa-Tala (torn. ii. p. 130—15a.) the last of whom fin spite nf Hody, Prolfgonino. 14. 39. edit. Oxon.) lived soon afterJustinian (Jortin's Remarks, &c. vol. iv. p. 383.) in the F.cclesiaslical History of Evaprrius flili. iv. c. 1—3. 9.,)and the Excerpta of Theodonis (Lector No. 37.) and in Cedrenus (p. 362—366.,) and Zonavas (lib. xiv. p. 58—61.,) who may pass for an original.
(2) See the characters of Procopius and Agatbias in La Mothe le Vayer (torn. viii. p. 144—174.,) Vosius (deHistoricis Grsec.is, lib. ii. c. 22.,) and Fabricius (Bibliot. Grace, lib. v. c. 5. torn. vi. p. 248—278.) Their reli-Rion, an honourable problem, betrays occasional conformity with a secret attachment to paganism and phi­losophy.
(3) In the seven first books, two Persie, two Vandalic, and three Gothic, Procopius has borrowed from Appianthe divisions of provinces and wars: the eighth book, though it bears the name of Gothic, is a miscellaneous andgeneral supplement down to the spring of the year 553, from whence it is continued by Agathias till 559. (Pagi,Critica. A. D. 579. No. 5.)
(4) The literary fate of Procopius has been somewhat unlucky, l. His books de Bello Gothieo, were stolenby Leonard Aretin, and published. (Fnlginii, 1470; Venet. 1471, apud Janson; Matlaire, Anna!. Typograptt.torn. i. edit, posterior, p. 290. 304. 279. 299.) in his own name. (See Vossius de Hist. LaU lib- iii. c. 5, and thefeeble defence of the Venice Giornale de Letterati, torn. xix. p. 207.) 2. His works were mutilated by the firstLatin translators, Christopher Persona, (Giomale, torn. xix. p. 340—348.) and Raphael de Volalena Huet deClaris. Interpretibus, p. 166.) who did not even consnll the MS. of the Vatican library, of which Ihey wereprefects. (Aleman.in Pnefat. Anecdote.) 3. The Greek text was not printed till 1607, by Hoesehelius ofAngibiirgh. (Dictionnaire de Bayle, torn. ii. p. 782.) 4. The Paris edition was imperfectly executed by Claude







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


a Thracian journey of health, or business, or devotion. Justiiiian was afflicted bya pain in his head; and his private entry countenanced the rumour of his death. Be­fore the third hour of the day, the bakers' shops were plundered of their bread,the houses were shut up, and every citizen, with hope or terror, prepared forthe impending tumult. The senators themselves, fearful and suspicious, wereconvened at the ninth hour; and the prefect received their commands to visit everyquarter of the city, and proclaim a general illumination for the recovery of theemperor's health. The ferment subsided; but every accident betrayed the impo­tence of the government and the factious temper of the people; the guards weredisposed to mutiny as often as their quarters were changed or their pay was with­held: the frequent calamities of fires and earthquakes afforded the opportunitiesof disorder; the disputes of the blues and greens, of the orthodox and heretics, de­generated into bloody battles; and in the presence of the Persian ambassador, Jus­tinian blushed for himself and for his subjects. Capricious pardon and arbitrarypunishment imbittered the irksomeness and discontent of a long reign; a conspira­cy was formed in the palace; and, unless we are deceived by the names of Mar-cellus and Sergius, the most virtuous and the most profligate of the courtiers wereassociated in the same designs. They had fixed the time of the execution; theirrank gave them access to the royal banquet; and their black slaves(l) were stationedin the vestibule and porticos, to announce the death of the tyrant, and to excite asedition in the capital. But the indiscretion of an accomplice saved the poor rem­nant of the days of Justinian. The conspirators were detected and seized, withdaggers hidden under their garments: Marcellus died by his own hand, and Ser­gius was dragged from the sanctuary. (2) Pressed by remorse, or tempted by thehopes of safety, he accused two officers of the household of Belisarius; and tor­ture forced them to declare that they had acted according to the secret instruc­tions of their patron. (3) Posterity will not hastily believe that a hero, who, inthe vigour of life, had disdained the fairest offers of ambition and revenge, shouldstoop to the murder of his prince, whom he could not long expect to survive. Hisfollowers were impatient to fly; but flight must have been supported by rebellion,and he had lived enough for nature and for glory. Belisarius appeared before thecouncil with less fear than indignation: after forty years' service, the emperorhad prejudged his guilt: and injustice was sanctified by the presence and authori­ty of the patriarch. The life of Belisarius was graciously spared; but his fortuneswere sequestered, and from December to July he was guarded as a prisoner in hisown palace. At length his innocence was acknowledged; his freedom and ho­nours were restored; and death, which might be hastened by resentment and grief,removed him from the world about eight months after his deliverance. Thename of Belisarius can never die: but instead of the funeral, the monuments, thestatues, so justly due to his memory, I only read, that his treasures, the spoils ofthe Goths and Vandals, were immediately confiscated by the emperor. Some de­cent portion was reserved, however, for the use of his widow; and as Antonina 'had much to repent, she devoted the last remains of her life and fortune to thefoundation of a convent. Such is the simple and genuine narrative of the fall ofBelisarius and the ingratitude of Justinian. (4) That he was deprived of his eyes,and reduced by envy to beg his bread. " Give a penny to Belisarius the general!"is a fiction of later times,(5) which has obtained credit, or rather favour, as astrange example of the vicissitude of fortune. (1)
(1) IvJous. They could scarcely be real Indians; and the Ethiopians, sometimes known by that name,were never used by the ancients as guards or followers: they were the trifling, though costly objects of fe­male and royal luxury (Terent. Eunuch, act 1. scene 2. Sueton. in August, c. until* with a good note of Ca-saubon, in Caligula, c. lvii.)
(S) The Sergius (Vandal, lib. ii. c. 21, 22. Anecdot. c. 5.) and Marcellus (Cloth, lib. iii. c. 32.) are mentionedby Procopias. See Theophanes, p. 197. 201.
(3) Alernannus, (p. 3.) quotes an old Byzantine MS. which has been printed in the Imperiam Orientale ofBandnri.
(4) Of the disgrace and restoration of Belisarius, the genuine original record is preserved in the fragmentof John Malala (torn. ii. p. 234—243.,) and the exact Chronicle of Theophanes (p. 194—204.) Cedrenus (Com-pend. p. 337,388.) and Zonaras (torn. ii. lib. xiv.p. 69.J seem to hesitate between the obsolete truth and thegrowing falsehood.
(a") The source of this idle fable may be derived from a miscellaneous work of the twelfth century, theChiliads of John Tzerzes, a monk (Basil. 1546. ad calcem. Lycophront, Colon. Allobrog. 1614. in Corp. Poet.Grac.) He relates the blindness and beggary of Belisarius in ten vulgar or political verses (Chiliad, iii. No.88.339—348. in Corp. Poet. Grac. torn. ii. p. 311.)
Vm. III. 15







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 205


they started, measured back their steps, and were again involved in the gloom ofimpenetrable orthodoxy. To purge themselves from the guilt or reproach ofdamnable error, they disavowed their consequences, explained their principles,excused their indiscretions, and unanimously pronounced the sounds of concordand faith. Yet a latent and almost invisible spark still lurked among the embersof controversy: by the breath of prejudice and passion it was quickly kindled to amighty flame, and the verbal disputers(l) of the oriental sects have shaken thepillars of the church and state.
The name of Cyril of Alexandria is famous in controversial story, and the ti­tle of saint is a mark that his opinions and his party have finally prevailed. Inthe house of his uncle, the archbishop Theophilus, he imbibed the orthodox les­sons of zcal and dominion, and five years of his youth were profitably spent in theadjacent monasteries of Nitria. Under the tuition of the abbot Serapion, he ap­plied himself to ecclesiastical studies, with such indefatigable ardour, that, in thecourse of one sleepless night, he has perused the four gospels, the catholic epis­tles, and the epistle to the Romans. Origen he detested: but the writings of Cle­mens and Dionysius, of Athanasius and Basil, were continually in his hands: by thetheory and practice of dispute, his faith was confirmed, and his wit was sharpened:he extended round his cell the cobwebs of scholastic theology, and meditated theworks of allegory and metaphysics, whose remains, in seven verbose folios, nowpeaceably slumber by the side of their rivals.(2) Cyril prayed and fasted in thedesert, but his thoughts (it is the reproach of a friend)(3) were still fixed on theworld; and the call of Theophilus, who summoned him to the tumult of cities andsynods, was too readily obeyed by the aspiring hermit. With the approbation ofhis uncle, he assumed the office, and acquired the fame of a,popular preacher.His comely person adorned the pulpit, the harmony of his voice resounded in thecathedral, his friends were stationed to lead or second the applause of the congre­gation, (4) and the hasty notes of the scribes preserved his discourses, which, intheir effect, though not in their composition, might be compared with those of theAthenian orators. The death of Theophilus expanded and realized the hopes ofhis nephew. The clergy of Alexandria were divided; the soldiers, and their ge­neral supported the claims of the archdeacon; but a resistless multitude, withvoices and with hands, asserted the cause of their favourite; and, after a period ofthirty-nine years, Cyril was seated on the throne of Athanasius. (5)
The prize was not unworthy of his ambition. At a distance from the court, andat the head of an immense capital, the patriarch, as he was now styled, of Alex­andria, had gradually usurped the state and authority of a civil magistrate. Thepublic and private charities of the city were managed by his discretion; his voiceinflamed or appeased the passions of the multitude; his commands were blindlyobeyed by his numerous and fanatic fiarabolani,(6) familiarized in their daily of­fice with scenes of death; and the prefects of Egypt were awed or provoked bythe temporal power of these Christian pontiffs. Ardent in the prosecution ofheresy, Cyril auspiciously opened his reign by oppressing the Novatians, the mostinnocent and harmless of the sectaries. The interdiction of their religious wor­ship appeared in his eyes a just and meritorious act; and he confiscated their holyvessels without apprehending the guilt of sacrilege. The toleration and even the


^1) I appeal to the sonfession of two oriental prelates. Gregory Abulpharagius, the Jacobite primate of theeast,and Elias.the Nestorian metropolitan of Damascus (gee Aiseman. Bibliothec. Oriental, torn. ii. p. 291.;torn. iii. p. 514, 8ce.O that the Melchites, Jacobites, Neatorians, &c. agree in the doctrine, and differ only in theexpression. Our most learned and rational divine*—Basnage, Le Clerc, Beauiobre, La Croze, Moshcim,Jablonsks—are inclined to favour this charitable judgment; but the zeal of Petavius is loud and angry, andthe moderation of Dupin is conveyed in a whisper.
(2) La Croze (Hist, da Christiamsme des Indes, torn. i. p. 24.) avows his contempt for the genius and writingsof Cyril. De tous let ouvrages des ancieus, il y en a peu qu'on lise avec moms' (Tutilite: and Dupin (Biblio-tbeque Eccleiiastique, torn. iv. p. 42—52.,) in words of respect, teaches us to despise them.
(3) Of Isidore of Pelusiutn (lib. i. epist. 25. p. 8.) As the letter is not of the most eretlitable sort, Tillemont,less sincere titan the Bollandists, affects a doubt whether this Cyril is the nephew of Theophilus (Mem. Eccles.torn. xiv. p. 268.)
(4) A gtatnmarian is named by Socrates, (lib. vii, 13..) Stamp; J, eo^ix-nt; to-j cmrxoweii Kwp«w.ou xaasarw,-, ***
5TI3* TO KfOroo; ivtxi; SiSxnxKixi; auTOw lyttativ yj crauSaorOTCs.
(5) See the youth and promotion of Cyril, in Socrates (lib. vii. c. 7.) and Bcnaudot (Hist. Patriarch, Al«xan-drin. p. 106—108.) The Abbe Renaudot drew his materials from the Arabic History of Severus, bishop ofllerraonolis Magna, or Ashmunein, in the tenth century, who can never be trusted, unless our assent is extort­ed by the internal evidence of facts.
(6) The parabolani of Alexandria were a charitable corporation, instituted during the plague of Oallientls,Jo visit the sick and to bury the dead. They gradually enlarged, abused, and told the privileges of their order,1 heir outrageous conduct during the reign of Cyril provoked the emperor to deprive the patriarchs of theirnomination, and restrained their number to five or six hundred. But these restraints were transient and ineP-teetual. See the Theodoiian Code, lib. svi. tit, 2. and Tillemont,Mem. Ecclej. torn. xiv. p. 276-276.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 239


 


princes; but to those princes alone our obedience is due; and Constantine, the el­der emperor, is of an age to sustain, in his own hands, the weight of the sceptre.Your sex is excluded by nature from the toils of government. How could youcombat, how could you answer, the barbarians, who, with hostile or friendly in­tentions, may approach the royal city? May heaven avert from the Roman re­public this national disgrace, which would provoke the patience of the slaves ofPersia." Martina descended from the throne with indignation, and sought a re­fuge in the female apartment of the palace. The reign of Constantine ifi. lastedonly one hundred and three days: he expired in the thirtieth year of his age, andalthough his life had been a long malady, a belief was entertained that poison hadbeen the means, and his cruel step-mother the author, of his untimely fate. Mar­tina reaped indeed the harvest of his death, and assumed the government in thename of the surviving emperor; but the incestuous widow of Heraclius was uni­versally abhorred; the jealousy of the people was awakened, and the two orphanswhom Constantine had left, became the objects of the public care. It was in vainthat the son of Martina, who was no more than fifteen years of age, was taught todeclare himself the guardian of his nephews, one of whom he had presented atthe baptismal font: it was in vain that he swore on the wood of the true cross, todefend them against all their enemies. On his death-bed, the late emperor des­patched a trusty servant to arm the troops and provinces of the east in the defenceof his helpless children: the eloquence and liberality of Valentin had been success­ful, and, from his camp of Chalcedon, he boldly demanded the punishment of theassassins, and the restoration of the lawful heir. The license of the soldiers, whodevoured the grapes and drank the wine of their Asiatic vineyards, provoked thecitizens of Constantinople against the domestic authors of their calamities, andthe dome of St. Sophia re-echoed, not with prayers and hymns, but with the cla­mours and imprecations of an enraged multitude. At their imperious command,Heracleonas appeared in the pulpit with the eldest of the royal orphans; Constansalone was saluted as emperor of the Romans, and a crown of gold which had beentaken from the tomb of Heraclius, was placed on his head, with the solemn bene­diction of the patriarch. But in the tumult of joy and indignation, the church waspillaged, the sanctuary was polluted by a promiscuous crowd of Jews and barba­rians; and the Monothelite Pyrrhus, a creature of the empress, after dropping aprotestation on the altar, escaped by a prudent flight from the zeal of the catho­lics. A more serious and bloody task was reserved for the senate, who deriveda temporary strength from the consent of the soldiers and people. The spirit ofRoman freedom revived the ancient and awful examples of the judgment of ty­rants, and the imperial culprits were deposed and condemned as the authors of thedeath of Constantine. But the severity of the conscript fathers was stained by theindiscriminate punishment of the innocent and the gulity: Martina and Heracleo •nas were sentenced to the amputation, the former of her tongue; the latter of hitnose; and after this cruel execution they consumed the remainder of their daysin exile and oblivion. The Greeks who were capable of reflection might find someconsolation for their servitude, by observing the abuse of power when it was lodgedfor a. moment in the hands of an aristocracy.
We shall imagine ourselves transported five hundred years backwards to theage of the Antonines, if we listen to the oration which Constans II. pronounced inthe twelfth year of his age before the Byzantine senate. After returning histhanks for the just punishment of the assassins who had intercepted the fairesthopes of his father's reign,—" By the Divine Providence," said the young empe­ror, " and by your righteous decree, Martina and her incestuous progeny havebeen cast headlong from the throne. Your majesty and wisdom have preventedthe Roman state from degenerating into lawless tyranny. I therefore exhort andbeseech you to stand forth as the counsellors and judges of the common safety."The senators were gratified bv the respectful address and liberal donative of theirsovereign; but these servile Greeks were unworthy and regardless of freedom,and in his mind, the lesson of an hour was quickly erased by the prejudices of theage and the habits of despotism. He retained only a jealous fear lest the senateor people should one day invade the right of primogeniture, and seat his brotherTheodosius on an equal throne. By the imposition of holy orders, the grandsonof Heraclius was disqualified for the purple; but this ceremony, which seemed toprofane the sacraments of the church, was insufficient to appease the suspicionsof the tyrant, and the death of the deacon Theodosius could alone expiate thecrime of his royal birth. His murder was avenged by the imprecations of the


 


 







OCR Output








300 I HE DECLINE AND PALL


Ciesars was overthrown; and the invincible genius of liberty prevailed over thetwo Frederics, the greatest princes of the middle age: the first, superior perhapsin military prowess; the second, who undoubtedly excelled in the softer accom­plishments of peace and learning.
Ambitious of restoring the honours of the purple, Frederic I. invaded the re­publics of Lombardy, with the arts of a statesman, the valour of a soldier, and thecrueltv of a tyrant. The recent discovery of the Pandects had renewed a sciencemost favourable to despotism; and his venal advocates proclaimed the ttmperor theabsolute master of the lives and properties of his subjects. His royal prerogatives,in a less odious sense, were acknowledged in the diet of Roncaglia; and the revenueof ^taly was fixed at thirty thousand pounds of silver,(l) which were multiplied toan indefinite demand, by the rapine of the fiscal officers. The obstinate cities werereduced by the terror or force of his arms; his captives were delivered to the exe­cutioner, or shot from his military engines; and, after the siege and surrender ofMilan, the buildings of that stately capital were rased to the ground; three hundredhostages were sent into Germany, and the inhabitants were dispersed in four vil­lages, under the yoke of the inflexible conqueror. (2) But Milan soon rose fromher ashes; and the league of Lombardy was cemented by distress: their cause wasespoused by Venice, Pope Alexander III., and the Greek emperor: the fabric ofoppression was overturned in a day; and in the treaty of Constance, Frederic sub­scribed, with some reservations, the freedom of four-and-twenty cities. His grand­son contended with their vigour and maturity; but Frederic 11.(3) was endowedwith some personal and peculiar advantages. His birth and education recom­mended him to the Italians; and in the implacable discord of the two factions, theGhibelins were attached to the emperor, while the Guelfs displayed the banner ofliberty and the church. The rourt of Rome had slumbered, when his fatherHenry VI. was permitted to unite with the empire the kingdoms of Naples andSicily; and from these hereditary realms, the son derived an ample and readysupply of troops and treasure. Yet Frederic II. was finally oppressed by the armsof the Lombards and the thunders of the Vatican; his kingdom was given to astranger, and the last of his family was beheaded at Naples on a public scaffold.During sixty years, no emperor appeared in Italy, and the name was rememberedonly by the ignominious sale of the last relics of sovereignty.
The barbarian conquerors of the west were pleased to decorate their chief withthe title of emperor; but it was not their design to invest him with the despotismof Constantine and Justinian. The persons of the Germans were free, their con­quests were their own, and their national character was animated by a spirit whichscorned the servile jurisprudence of the new or the ancient Roman. It would havebeen a vain and dangerous attempt to impose a monarch on the armed freemen,who were impatient of a magistrate; on the bold, who refused to obey; on thepowerful, who aspired to command. The empire of Charlemagne and Otho wasdistributed among the dukes of the nations or provinces, the counts of the smallerdistricts, and the margraves of the marches or frontiers, who all united the civiland military authority as it had been delegated to the lieutenants of the first Caesars.The Roman governors, who, for the most part, were soldiers of fortune, seducedtheir mercenary legions, assumed the imperial purple, and either failed or suc­ceeded in their revolt, without wounding the power and unity of government Ifthe dukes, margraves, and counts, of Germany were less audacious in theirclaims,the consequences of their success were more lasting and pernicious to the state.Instead of ainiing at the supreme rank, they silently laboured to establish and ap­propriate their provincial independence. Their ambition was seconded by theweight of their estate's and vassals, their mutual example and support, the commoninterest of the subordinate nobility, the change of princes and families, the minori­ties of Otho III. and Henry IV., the ambition of the popes, and the vain pursuitsof the fugitive crowns of Italy and Rome. All the attributes of regal and territorialjurisdiction were gradually usurped by the commanders of the provinces; the rightof peace and war, of life and death, of coinage and taxation, of foreign alliance anddomestic economy. Whatever had been seized by violence, was ratified by favour


(1) Gutither Lururinns, lib. viii. 584. et icq. apart. Schmidt, torn. iii. p. 359.
(2) Solus imperator feciemsuam tirmavit utpetntro. (Fucard. de F.xcidio Mediolani, Script. Ital. torn. vi.p. 917.) This volume,of Muratnri contains the originals of the history of Frederic I. which must be comparedwith due regard to the circumstances and prejudices of each German or Lombard writer.
(3) For the history of Frederic II. and the house of Swabia at Naples, see Giannone, Istoria Civile, torn. ii.lib. xiv—ju j.







OCR Output








THE DECLIKE AND BALL


The authority and station of Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Christ, and Maho­met, rise in just gradation above each other; but whosoever hates or rejects anyone of the prophets is numbered with the infidels. The writings of the patri­archs were extant only in the apocryphal copies of the Greeks and Syrians:(l)the conduct of Adam had not entitled him to the gratitude or respect of his chil­dren: the seven precepts of Noah were observed by an inferior and imperfectclass of the proselytes of the synagogue(2) and the memory pf Abraham was ob­scurely revered by the Sabians in his native land of Chaldea: of the myriads ofprophets, Moses and Christ alone lived and reigned; and the remnant of the inspiredwritings was comprised in the books of the Old and the New Testament. Themiraculous story of Moses is consecrated and embellished in the Koran;(3) and thecaptive Jews enjoy the secret revenge of imposing their own belief on the nationswhose recent creeds they deride. For the author of Christianity, the Mahome­tans are taught by the prophet to entertain a high and mysterious reverence. (4)'* Verily, Christ Jesus, the son of Mary, is the apostle of God, and his word,which he conveyed into Mary, and a Spirit proceeding from him: honourable inthis world, and in the world to come; and one of those who approach near to thepresence of God. "(5) The wonders of the genuine and apocryphal gospels(6)are profusely heaped on his head; and the Latin church has not disdained to bor­row from the Koran the immaculate conception(7) of his virgin mother. YetJesus was a mere mortal; and, at the day of judgment, his testimony will serve tocondemn both the Jews, who reject him as a prophet, and the Christians, whoadore him as the Son of God. The malice of his enemies aspersed his reputation,and conspired against his life; but their intention only was guilty, a phantom ora criminal was substituted on the cross, and the innocent saint was translated to theseventh heaven. (8) During six hundred years the gospel was the way of truth andsalvation: but the Christians insensibly forgot both the laws and the example oftheir founder; and Mahomet was instructed by the Gnostics to accuse the church,as well as the synagogue, of corrupting the integrity of the sacred text. (9) The
{liety of Moses and of Christ rejoiced in the assurance of a future prophet, more il-ustrious than themselves: the evangelic promise of the Paraclete, or Holy Ghost,was prefigured in the name, and accomplished in the person, of Mahomet,(10) thegreatest and last of the apostles of God.
The communication of ideas requires a similitude of thought and language;the discourse of a philosopher would vibrate without effect on the ear of a pea­sant; yet how minute is the distance of their understandings, if it be comparedwith the contact of an infinite and a finite mind, with the word of God expressedby the tongue or the pen of a mortal ? The inspiration of the Hebrew prophets,of the apostles and evangelists of Christ, might not be incompatible with the ex­ercise of their reasonand memory; and the diversity of their genius is strongly
(1) For the apocryphal hooks of Adam, tee Fabricius, Codex Pseudepigraphtis V. T. p. 27—29; of Seth, p.154—157; of Enoch, p. 160—219. But the book of Enoch is consecrated, in some measure, by the quotation ofthe apostle St. Jude; and a long legendary fragment is alleged by Syncellus and Scaliger.
(2) The seven precepts of Noah are explained by Marsham, (Canon Chronicus, p. 154—180.) who adopts ontins occasion, the learning and credulity of Selden.
(3) The articles of Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, &c. in the Bibliotheque, of d'Herbelot, are gaily bedeckedwith the fanciful legends of the Mahometans, who have built on the groundwork of Scripture and the Talmud.
(4) Koran, c. 7. p. 128, &c. c. 10. p. 173, &c. D'Herbelot. p. 647, &c.
(5) Koran, c. 3. p. 80. c. 4. p. 60. D'Herbelot, p. 399, &c.
(6) See the gospel of St. Thomas, or of the Infancy, in tbe Codex Apocryphus N. T. of Fabricius. who col­lects the various testimonies concerning it. (p. 128—158.) It was published in Greek by Cotelier, and in Arabicby Sike, who thinks our present copy more recent than Mahomet. Yet hit quotations agree with the originalabout the speech of Christ in his cradle, his living birds of clav, &c. (Sike, c. I. p. 168, 169. c. 36. p. 198,199. c.46. p. 206. Cotelier, c. 2. p. 160,161.)
(7) It is darkly hinted in the Koran, (c. 3. p. 39.) and more clearly explained by the tradiiion of the Somnites.(Sale's Note, and Maracci, torn. ii. p. 112.) In the twelfth century, the immaculate conception was condemnedby St. Bernard as a presumptious novelty, (Fra. Papio, Xstoria del Concilio di Trento, lib. ii.)
(8) See the Koran, c. 3. v. 53. and c. 4. v. 156. of Mnracci's edition. Deus est prffistamissimus dolose agentinm(an odd phrase) .... nee crucifixerunt cum, sed objecta est eis similitudo; an expression that may suit withthe system of the Docetes; but the commentators believe (Maracci, torn. ii. p. 113—115.173. Sale, p. 42. 43. 79.)that another man. a friend or an enemy, was crucified in the likeness of Jesus; a fable which thev had read, inthe gospel of St. Barnabas, and w Inch had been started as early as the time nfiren»us, by some Ebionite here­tics. (Beausobre, Hist, du Manicheisme, torn. ii. p. 25. Mosheim, de Reb. Christ, p. 353.)
(9) This charge is obscurely urged in the Koran: (C. 3. p. 45.) but neither Mahomet, nor his followers, aresufficiently versed in languages and criticism to give any weight or colour to their suspicious. Yet tbe Arians«nd Nestorians could relate some stories, and the illiterate prophet might listen to the bold assertions of theManichaeans. See Beansobre, lom. i. p. 291—305.
(10) Among the prophecies of the Old and New Testament, which are perverted by the fraud or ignorance ofthe Mussulmans, they apply to the prophet the promise of the Paracle)e,or Comforter, which had been alreadyusurped by the Montanists and Mauiehmans; (Beausobre, Hist. Critique du Manicheisme, torn. i. p. 263, &c.)and the easy change of letters, sripixxvrc; for sraaaxMjw,-, affords the ervraologv of the name of Mohammed.{Maracci, torn. i. part i. p. 15—28.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, 259


and gratitude. After their defeat, the fears of the emperor solicited a treaty,which was almost accepted by the moderation of the Comnenian. But the formerwas betrayed by his ambassadors, and the latter was prevented by his friends.The solitary Michael submitted to the voice of the people; the patriarch annulledtheir oath of allegiance; and as he shaved the head of the royal monk, congra­tulated his beneficial exchange of temporal royalty for the kingdom of heaven: anexchange, however, which the priest, on his own account, would probably havedeclined. By the hands of the same patriarch, Isaac Comnenus was solemnlycrowned: the sword which he inscribed on his coins, might be an offensive symbol,it it implied his title by conquest; but this sword would have been drawn againstthe foreign and domestic enemies of the state- The decline of his health and vi­gour suspended the operation of active virtue; and the prospect of approachingdeath determined him to interpose some moments between life and eternity. Butinstead of leaving the empire as the marriage portion of his daughter, his reasonand inclination concurred in the preference of his brother John, a soldier, a pa­triot, and the father of five sons, the future pillars of an hereditary succession.His first nicest reluctance might be the natural dictates of discretion and tender­ness, but his obstinate and successful perseverance, however it may dazzle withthe show of virtue, must be censured as a criminal desertion of his duty, and arare offence against his family and countiy. The purple which he had refusedwas accepted by Constantine Ducas, a friend of the Comnenian house, and whosenoble birth was adorned with the experience and reputation of civil policy. Inthe monastic habit, Isaac recovered.his health, and survived two years his volun­tary abdication. At the command of his abbot, he observed the rule of St. Basil,and executed the most servile offices of the convent; but his latent vanity was gra­tified by the frequent and respectful visits of the reigning monarch, who reveredin his person the character of a benefactor and a saint.
If Constantine XI. were indeed the subject most worthy of empire, we must pitythe debasement of the age and nation in which he was chosen. In the labour ofpuerile declamations he sought, without obtaining, the crown of eloquence, moreprecious, in his opinion, than that of Rome; and, in the subordinate functions of ajudge, he forgot the duties of a sovereign and a warrior. Far from imitating thepatriotic indifference of the authors of his greatness, Ducas was anxious only to se­cure, at the expense of the republic, the power and prosperity of his children.His three sons, Michael VII. Andronicus I. and Constantine XII. were invested,in a tender age, with the equal title of Augustus; and the succession was speedilyopened by their father's death. His widow, Eudocia, was intrusted with .the ad­ministration; but experience had taught the jealousy of the dying monarch to pro­tect his sons from the danger of her second nuptials; and her solemn engagement,attested by the principal senators, was deposited in the hands of the patriarch.Before the end of seven months, the wants of Eudocia, or those of the state, calledaloud for the male virtues of a soldier; and her heart had already chosen Roma-nus Diogenes, whom she raised from the scaffold to the throne. ' The discoveryof a treasonable attempt had exposed hinVto the severity of the laws: his beautyand valour absolved him in the eyes of the empress; and Romanus, from a mildexile, was recalled on the second day to the command of the oriental armies. Herroyal choice was yet unknown to the public, and the promise which would havebetrayed her falsehood and levity, was stolen by a dexterous emissary from theambition of the patriarch. Xiphilin at first alleged the sanctity of oaths and thesacred, nature of a trust; but a whisper that his brother was the future emperor,relaxed his scruples, and forced him to confess that the public safety was the su­preme law. He resigned the important paper; and when his hopes were con­founded by the nomination of Romanus, he could no longer regain his security, re­tract his declarations, nor oppose the second nuptials of the empress. Yet a mur­mur was heard in the palace; and the barbarian guards had raised their battle-axesin the cause of the house of Ducas, till the young princes were soothed by the tearsof their mother, and the solemn assurances of the fidelity of their guardian, whofilled the imperial station with dignity and honour. Hereafter I shall relate hisvaliant but unsuccessful efforts to resist 'the progress of the Turks. His defeatand captivity inflicted a deadly wound on the Byzantine monarchy of the east; andafter he was released from the chains of the sultan, he vainly sought his wife andhis subjects. His wife had been thrust into a monastery, and the subjects of Ro­manus had embraced a rigid maxim of the civil law, that a prisoner in the handsof the enemy is deprived, as by the stroke of death, of all the public and private:







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,


Ills life was prolonged to the age of one hundred and ten years, and he became thefather of six daughters and thirteen sons. His best beloved, Abdullah, was themost beautiful and modest of the Arabian youth; and in the first night, when he con­summated his marriage with Amina, of the noble race of theZahrites, two hundredvirgins are said to have expired of jealousy and despair. Mahomet, or more pro­perly Mahommed, the only son of Abdallah and Amina, was born at Mecca, fouryears after the death of Justinian, and two months after the defeat of the Abys-sinians.(l) whose victory would have introduced into the Caaba the religion of theChristians. In his early infancy, he was deprived of his father, his mother, andhis grandfather; his uncles were strong and numerous; and in the division of theinheritance, the orphan's share was reduced to five camels and an Ethiopian maid­servant. At home and abroad, in peace and war, Abu Taleb, the most respecta­ble of his uncles, was the guide and guardian of his youth; in his twenty-fifth year,he entered into the service of Cadijah, a rich and noble widow of Mecca, who soonrewarded his fidelity with the gift of her hand and fortune. The marriage-con­tract, in the simple style of antiquity, recites the mutual loves of Mahomet andCadijah; describes him'as the most accomplished of the tribe of Koreish; andstipulates a dowry of twelve ounces of gold and twenty camels, which was sup­plied by the liberality of his uncle. (2) By this alliance the son of Abdallah wasrestored to the station of his ancestors; and the judicious matron was content withhis domestic virtues, till, in the fortieth year of his age, (3) he assumed the titleof a prophet, and proclaimed the religion of the Koran.
According to the tradition of his companions, Mahomet(4) was distinguishedby the beauty of his person, an outward gift which is seldom despised, except bythose to whom it has been refused. Before he spoke, the orator engaged on hisside the affections of a public or private audience. They applauded his command­ing presence, his majestic aspect, his piercing eye, his gracious smile, his flowingbeard, his countenance that painted every sensation of the soul, and his gesturesthat enforced each expression of the tongue. In the familiar offices of life hescrupulously adhered to the grave and ceremonious politeness of his country: hisrespectful attention to the rich and powerful was dignified by his condescensionand affability to the poorest citizens of Mecca: the frankness of his manner con­cealed the artifice of his views: and the habits of courtesy were imputed to per­sonal friendship or universal benevolence. His memory was capacious and reten­tive, his wit easy and social, his imagination sublime, his judgment clear, rapid,and decisive. He possessed the courage both of thought and action; and, al­though his designs might gradually expand with his success, the first idea whichhe entertained of his divine mission bears the stamp of an original and superiorgenius. The son of Abdallah was educated in the bosom of the noblest race, inthe use of the purest dialect of Arabia; and the fluency of his speech was cor­rected and enhanced by the practice of discreet and seasonable silence. Withthese powers of eloquence, Mahomet was an illiterate barbarian: his youth hadnever been instructed in the arts of reading and \vriting;(5) the common ignorance
(1) The safest eras of Abulfeda (in Vit. c. i. p. SO of Alexander, or (he Greeks, 882, of Bncht Naser, or Nabo-nasser, 1316, equally lead us to the year 569. The old Arabian calendar is too dark and uncertain to support theBenedictines, (Art. de verifier les Dates, p. 15.) who from the day of the month and week deduce a new modeof calculation, and remove the birth of Mahomet to the year of Christ 570. the tenth of November. Yet this datewould agree with the year 882 of the Greeks, which is assigned by Elmacin (Hist. Saracen, p. 5.) and Abnlpha-ragius (Dynast, p. 101. and Errata Pocock's version.) While we refine our chronology, it is possible that theilliterate prophet was ignorant of his own aire.
(2) I copy the honourable testimony of Abu Taleb to his family and nephew. Laos Dei, qui nosastirpeAbraham*! et semine Ismaelis constitttit et nobis regionem sacram dedit, et nos judiccs horoinihus statuit. PorroMohammed filius Abdollahi neputts met (nepftsmeus) qim cum ex aequo librahitur e Korathidjs quispiam cuinon prieponderaturui est bonitate et excellentia, et in ellectu et gloria et acumiue etsi opum inops foerit (etcerte opes umbra transiens sunt et depositum quod reddi debvt.) desiderio Chariijse filial Clmwailedl tenetur, etiKa vicissim ipsius, qtiiequid aulem dotis vice petieritis, ego in toe suscipiatn (Pucock, Specimen, e septimaparte libri Ebu Hamdum.)
(3) The private life of Mahomet, from his birth to his mission, is preserved by Abtllfeda, (in Vit. c. iii.—vii.)and the Arabian..writers of genuine or apoci yphal note, who are alleged by Hottinger (Hist. Orient, p. 204—211.)Mnracci (torn. i. p. 10—14.) and Gagnier. (Vie de Mahomet, torn. i. p. 97—134.)
(4) Abulfeda, in Vit. c. 65, 66. Gagnier, Vte de M*hom?t, tout. iii. o. 272—239. the best traditions of the per-■on and conversation of the prophet are derived from Ayesha, Ali and Abu Horaira. (Gagnier, torn. ii. p. 267,Ockley's Hist, of the Saracens, vol. ii. p. 149.) surnamed the lather of a cat, who died in the year 59 of theIlegira.
(5) Those who believe that Mahomet could read or write, are incapable of reading what is written, withanother pen, in the Sums, or chapters of the Koran, 7. 29.96. These texts and the tradition of the Sonna,are -admitted without doubt by Abulfeda, (in Vit. r. 7.) Gagnier, (Not. ad Abnlfed. p. 15.) Pocoek, (Specimen, p.151.) Reland, (de Religione Mohammedica, p. 236.) and Sale, (Preliminary Discourse, p. 42.) Mr. White, al­most a!nne,denies tbe ignorance, to accuse the imposture of the prophet. His arguments are far from satisfac­tory. Two short trading journeys to the fairs of Syria, were surely not sufficient to infuse a science so rareittnong the citizens of Mecca: it was not in the cool deliberate act of a treaty that Mahomet would have dropped







OCR Output








28 THE DECLINE AND FALL


that peninsula to Trebizond the eastern curve of the Euxine was secured by forts,by alliance, or by religion: and the possession of the Lazka, the Colchos of an­cient, the Mingrelia of modern, geography, soon became the object of an import­ant war. Trebizond, in after times the seat of a romantic empire, was indebtedto the liberality of Justinian for a church, an aqueduct, and a castle, whose ditchesare hewn in the solid rock. From that maritime city, a frontier line of five hun­dred miles may be drawn to the fortress of Circesium, the last Human station onthe Euphrates.(l) Above Trebizond immediately, and five days'journey to thesouth, the country arises into dark forests and craggy mountains, as savage, thoughnot so lofty, as the Alps and the Pyrenees. In this rigorous climate,(2) where thesnows seldom melt, the fruits are tardy and tasteless; even honey is poisonous; the'most industrious tillage would be confined to some pleasant valleys; and the pastoral' tribes obtained a scanty sustenance from the flesh and milk of their cattle. TheChalybians(3) derived their name and temper from the iron quality of the soil;and, since the days of Cyrus, they might produce, under the various appellations ofChaldeans, and Zanians, an uninten-upted prescription of war and rapine. Underthe reign of Justinian, they acknowledged the God and the emperor of the Romans,and seven fortresses were built in the most accessible passes, to exclude the am­bition of the Persian monarch. (4) The principal source of the Euphrates descendsfrom the Chalybian mountains, and seems to flow towards the west and the Eux­ine; bending to the south-west, the river passes under the walls of Satala and Me-litene (which were restored by Justinian as the bulwarks of the Lesser Armenia,)and gradually approaches the Mediterranean sea; till at length repelled by mountTaurus,(5) the Euphrates inclines his long and flexible course to the south-east andthe gulf of Persia. Among the Roman cities beyond the Euphrates, we distinguishtwo recent foundations, which were named from Theodosius, and the relics of themartyrs, and two capitals, Amida and Edessa, which are celebrated in the histo-rv of every age. Their strength was proportioned, by Justinian, to the danger oftheir situation. A ditch and palisade might be sufficient to resist the artless forceof the cavalry of Scythia; but more elaborate works were required to sustain a re­gular siege against the arms and treasures of the great king. His skilful engineersunderstood the methods of conducting deep mines, and of raising platforms to thelevel of the rampart; he shook the strongest battlements with his military engines,and sometimes advanced to the assault with aline of moveable turrets on the backsof elephants. In the great cities of the east, the disadvantage of space, perhaps ofposition, was compensated by the zeal of the people, who seconded the garrisonin the defence of their country and religion; and the fabulous promise of the son ofGod, that Edessa should never be taken, filled the citizens with violent confidence,and chilled the besiegers with doubt and dismay. (6) The subordinate towns ofArmenia and Mesopotamia were diligently strengthened, and the posts which ap­peared to have any command of ground or water, were occupied by numerousforts, substantially built of stone, or more hastily erected with the obvious materi­als of earth and brick. The eye of Justinian investigated every spot; and his cru­el precautions might attract the war into some lonely vale, whose peaceful natives,connected by trade and marriage, were ignorant of national discord and the quar­rels of princes. Westward of the Euphrates, a sandy desert extends above sixhundred miles to the Red Sea. Nature had interposed a vacant solitude betweenthe ambition of the two rival empires: the Arabians, till Mahomet arose, were for-
(1) For the geography and architecture of this Armenian border, lee the Persian Wan and Edifices (lih. ii.c. 4—7. lib. iii. c.S—7.) of Procopius.
(2) The country is described by Totirnefort (Voyage an Levant, torn. iii. lettre 17,18.) That skilful botanistsoon discovered the plant that infects the honey (Plin. xxi. 44.45.) He observes, that the soldiers of Lnculhrsmight indeed be astonished at the cold, since, even in the plain of Erzerum, snow sometimes falls in June,and the harvest is seldom finished before September. The hills of Armenia are below the fortieth degree oflatitude; but in the mountainous country which I inhabit, it is well known that an ascent of some hours car­ries the traveller from the climate of Langnedoc to that of Norway, and a general theory has been introduced,that under the line, an elevation of two thousand four hundred loitet is equivalent to the cold of the polar cir­cle fRomond, Observations sur les Voyages de Cose dans la Suisse, torn. h. p. 104.)
(3) The identity or proximity of the Chalybians, or Chaldeans, may be investigated in Straho (lib. xii. p.P26.0 Cellarins (Geograph. Antiq. torn. ii. p. 202—204.,) and Freret (Mem. de I'Academie, torn. iv. p. 394.)—Xenophon supposes, in his romance (Cyropjed. lib. iii.,) the same barbarians against whom he had fought inhis retreat (Anabasis, lib. iv.)
(4) Procopius, Persic, lib. i. c. 15. De Edifio. lib. iii. c. 6.
(5) Ni Taurus obstet in nostra maria venturus (Pomponius Mela, iii. 8.) Pliny, a poet as well as a naturalist(v. 20..) personifies the river and mountain, and describes their combat. See the course of the Tigris atid Eu­phrates, in the excellent treatise of d'Anville.
(6) Procopius (Persic, lib. ii. c. 12.) tells the story with the tone half sceptical, half superstitious, of Herodo­tus* The promise was not in the primitive lie of Eusebius, but dates at least from the year 400; and a third lie,the Verornca, was soon raised on the two former (Evagrius, lib. iv. c. 27.) As Edessa hai been taken, Tille-rnont mutt disclaim the promise (Mem. Ecclcs. torn. i. p. 362.383.617.)







OCR Output








J38 THE DECLINE AND FALL • *


with the sister of Moses, the mother of Jesus, and Fatima, the best beloved of htodaughters. "Was she not old?" said Ayesha, with the insolence of a bloomingbeauty, " has not God given you a better in her place?—No, by God," said Ma­homet, with an effusion of honest gratitude, "there never can be a better! she be­lieved in me, when men despised me; she relieved my wants, when I was poor andpersecuted by the world. "(1)
In the largest indulgence of polygamy, the founder of a religion and empiremight aspire to multiply the chances of a numerous posterity and a lineal succes­sion. The hopes of Mahomet were fatally disappointed. The virgin Ayesha, andhis ten widows of mature age and approved fertility, were barren in his potentembraces. The four sons of Cadijah died in their infancy. Mary, his Egyptianconcubine, was endeared to him by the birth of Ibrahim. At the end of fifteenmonths the prophet wept over his grave: but he sustained with firmness the rail­lery of his enemies, and checked the adulation or credulity of the Moslems, bythe assurance that an eclipse of the sun was not occasioned by the death of theinfant. Cadijah had likewise given him four daughters, who were married to themost faithful of his disciples: the three eldest died before their father; but Fatima,who possessed his confidence and love, became the wife of her cousin Ali, and themother of an illustrious progeny. The merit and misfortunes of Ali and his de­scendants will lead me to anticipate, in this place, the series of the Saracen ca­liphs, a title which describes the commanders of the faithful as the vicars and suc­cessors of the apostle of God. (2)
The birth, the alliance, the character, of Ali, which exalted him above the restof his countrymen, might justify his claim to the vacant throne of Arabia. Theson of Abu Taleb was, in his own right, the chief of the family of Hashem, andthe hereditary prince or guardian of the city and temple of Mecca. The light ofprophecy was extinct; but the husband of Fatima might expect the inheritanceand blessing of her father: the Arabs had sometimes been patient of a femalereign; and the two grandsons of the prophet had often been fondled in his lap, andshown in his pulpit, as the hope of his age, and the chief of the youth of para­dise. The first of the true believers might aspire to march before them in thisworld and in the next; and if some were of a graver and more rigid cast, the zealand virtue of Ali were never outstripped by any recent proselyte. He united thequalifications of a poet, a soldier; and a saint: his wisdom still breathes in a collec­tion of moral and religious sayings;(3) and every antagonist, in the combats of thetongue, or of the sword, was subdued by his eloquence and valour. From the firsthour of his mission to the last rites of his funeral, the apostle was never forsakenby a generous friend, whom he delighted to name his brother, his vicegerent, andthe faithful Aaron of a second Moses. The son of Abu Taleb was afterward re­proached for neglecting to secure his interest by a solemn declaration of his right,which would have silenced all competition, and sealed his succession by the de­crees of heaven. But the unsuspecting hero confided in himself, the jealousy ofempire, and perhaps the fear of opposition, might suspend the resolutions of Ma­homet; and the bed of sickness was besieged by the artful Ayesha, the daughterof Abubeker, and the enemy of Ali.
The silence and death of the prophet restored the liberty of the people; and hiscompanions convened an assembly to deliberate on the choice of a successor. Thehereditary claim and lofty spirit of Ali, were offensive to an aristocracy of elders,desirous of bestowing and resuming the sceptre by a free and frequent election.-the Koreish could never be reconciled to the proud pre-eminence of the line ofHashem; the ancient discord of the tribes was rekindled; the fugitives of Meccaand the auxiliaries of Medina asserted their respective merits: and the rash pro­posal of choosing two independent caliphs would have crushed in their infancy the
(1) Abnlfeda in Vit. Moham. p. 12,13.16,17. cum notij Gagnier.
(2) This outline of the Arabian history ij drawn from the Bibliotheque Orientale of d'Herbelot; (under thenames of Aboubecre, Omar, Ottoman, Ali, See.) from the Annals of Abulfeda, Abulpharagius. and Elmacin(under the propei- years of the Hrgira,) and especially from Ockley's History of the Saracens (vol. i. p. 1—1».US—122. 229. 249. 363—372. 378—391. and almost the whole of the second volume.) Yet we should welch withcaution the traditions of the hostile sects; a stream which becomes still more muddy as it flows farther from thesource. Sir John Chardtn has too faithfully copied the fables and errors of the modern Persians. (Voyages,torn. 11. p. 235—250, &c.J '
(3) Ockley (at the end of his second volume) has given an English version of one hundred and sixty-ninesentences, which he ascribes, with some hesitation, to Ali, the son of Abu Taleb. His preface is coloured bythe enthusiasm of a translator; yet these sentences delineate a characteristic, though dark, picture of human







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 83


liing! the favourable moment; the east is left without defence, while the armies ofJustinian and his renowned general are detained in the distant regions of the west.If you hesitate and delay, Belisarius and his victorious troops will soon return fromthe Tiber to the Tigris, and Persia may enjoy the wretched consolation of beingthe last devoured. "(1) By such arguments, Chosroes was easily persuaded to imi­tate the example which he condemned: but the Persian, ambitious of militaryfame, disdained the inactive warfare of a rival, who issued his sanguinary com­mands from the secure station of the Byzantine palace.
Whatever might be the provocation of Chosroes, he abused the confidence oftreaties; and the just reproaches of dissimulation and falsehood could only be con­cealed by the lustre of his victories. (2) The Persian army, which had been as­sembled in the plains of Babylon, prudently declined the strong cities of Mesopo­tamia, and followed the western bank of the Euphrates, till the small though popu­lous town of Dura presumed to arrest the progress of the great king. 1 he gatesof Dura, by treachery and surprise, were burst open; and as soon as Chosroes hadstained his simitar with the blood of the inhabitants, he dismissed the ambassadorof Justinian to inform his master in what place he had left the enemy of the Ro­mans. The conqueror still affected the praise of humanity and justice: p.nd as heheheld a noble matron with her infant rudely dragged along the ground, he sighed,he wept, and implored the divine justice to punish the author of these calamities.Yet the herd of twelve thousand captives was ransomed for two hundred poundsof gold; the neighbouring bishop of Sergiopolis pledged his faith for the payment;and in the subsequent year, the unfeeling avarice of Chosroes exacted the penaltyof an obligation which it was generous to contract, and impossible to discharge.He advanced into the heart of Syria; but a feeble enemy, who vanished at his ap­proach, disappointed him of the honour of victory; and as he could not hope to es­tablish his dominion, the Persian king displayed in this inroad the mean and rapa­cious vices of a robber. Hierapolis, Berrhac or Aleppo, Apamea, and Chalcis,were successively besieged: they redeemed their safety by a ransom of gold or sil­ver, proportioned to their respective strength and opulence; and their new masterenforced, without observing, their terms of capitulation. Educated in the religionof the Magi, he exercised without remorse the lucrative trade of sacrilege; and,after stripping of its gold and gems a piece of the true cross, he generously restoredthe naked relic to the devotion of the Christians of Apamea. No more than four­teen years had elapsed since Antioch was ruined by an earthquake; but the queenof the east, the new Theopolis, had been raised from the ground by the liberalityof Justinian: and the increasing greatness of the buildings and the people alreadyerased the memory of this recent disaster. On one side, the city was defended bythe mountain, on the other by the river Orontes; but the -most accessible part wascommanded by a superior eminences the proper remedies were rejected, from thedespicable fear of discovering its weakness to the enemy; and Germanus, the em­peror's nephew, refused to trust his person and dignity within the walls of a be­sieged city. The people of Antioch had inherited the vain and satirical genius oftheir ancestors; they were elated by a sudden re-enforcement of six thousand sol­diers; they disdained the offers of an easy capitulation; and their intemperate cla­mours insulted from the ramparts the majesty of the great king. Under his eyethe Persian myriads mounted with scaling ladders to the assault; the Roman mer­cenaries fled through the opposite gate of Daphne; and the generous assistance ofthe youth of Antioch served only to aggravate the miseries of their country. AsChosroes, attended by the ambassadors of Justinian, was descending from the moun­tain, he affected, in a plaintive voice, to deplore the obstinacy and ruin of that un­happy people; but the slaughter still raged with unrelenting fury, and the city, atthe command of a barbarian, was delivered to the flames. The cathedral of An­tioch was indeed preserved by the avarice, not the pity, of the conqueror: a morehonourable exemption was granted to the church of St. Julian, and the quarter ofthe town where the ambassadors resided; some distant streets were saved by theshifting of the wind, and the walls still subsisted to protect, and soon to betray,their new inhabitants. Fanaticism had defaced the ornaments of Daphne, but
(1) 1 have blended, in a short speech, the two oraiions of the Arsacides of Armenia and the Gothic ambassa­dors. Procopiiis. in his public history, feels, and makes us feel, that Justinian was the true author of the war(Persic, lib. if. e. 2,3.)
(2) The invasion of Syria, the ruin of Antioch, &c. are related in a full and regular series by Procopiiis(Persic, lib. ii. c. 5—14.) Small collateral aid can be drawn from the orientals: yet not they, but D'Hcrbetothimself (p. 080.,) should blush, when he blames them for makiwr Justinian and Nushirvan cotemporaries. Onthe geography of the seat of war, D'Anrille (1'Eophrate et Ie Tigre) issufficient and satisfactory.







OCR Output








QF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 19


indulgence; and many of his subjects have renounced the possession of those lands,■whose value is insufficient to satisfy the demands of the treasury. To the citieswhich had suffered by hostile inroads, Anastasius promised a general exemptionof seven years; the provinces of Justinian have been ravaged by the Persians andArabs, the Huns and Sclavonians; but his vain and ridiculous dispensation of asingle year has been confined to those places which were actually taken by theenemy." Such is the language of the secret historian, who expressly denies thatany indulgence was granted to Palestine after the revolt of the Samaritans; a falseand odious charge, confuted by the authentic record, which attests a relief ofthirteen centenaries of gold (52,000/.,) obtained for that desolate province by theintercession of St. Sabas.(l) III. Procopius has not condescended to explain thesystem of taxation, which fell like a hail-storm upon the land, like a devouringpestilence on its inhabitants; but we should become the accomplices of his malig­nity, if we imputed to Justinian alone, the ancient though rigorous principle, thata whole district should be condemned to sustain the partial loss of the persons orproperty of individuals. The Anona, or supply of corn for the use of the armyand capital, was a grievous and arbritrary exaction, which exceeded, perhaps ina tenfold proportion, the ability of the farmer; and his distress was aggravated bythe partial injustice of weights and measures, and the expense and labour of dis­tant carriage. In a time of scarcity, an extraordinary requisition was made to theadjacent provinces of Thrace, Bithynia, and Phrygia; but the proprietors, after awearisome journey and a perilous navigation, received so inadequate a compensa­tion, that they would have chosen the alternative of delivering both the corn andprice at the doors of their granaries. These precautions might indicate a tendersolicitude for the welfare of the capital; yet Constantinople did not escape therapacious despotism of Justinian. Till his reign, the straits of the Bosphorus andHellespont were open to the freedom of trade, and nothing was prohibited exceptthe exportation of arms for the service of the barbarians. At each of these gatesof the city, a pretor was stationed, the minister of imperial avarice; heavy customswere imposed on the vessels and their merchandise; the oppression was retaliatedon the helpless consumer; the poor were afflicted by the artificial scarcity, and ex­orbitant price of the market; and a people, accustomed to depend on the liberalityof their prince, might sometimes complain of the deficiency of water and bread. (2jThe aerial tribute, without a name, a law, or a definite object, was an annual giftof 120,000/. which the emperor accepted from his pretorian prefect; and themeans of payment were abandoned to the discretion of that powerful magistrate.IV. Even such a tax was less intolerable than the privilege of monopolies, whichchecked the fair competition of industry, and, for the sake of a small and dishonestgain, imposed an arbitrary burden on the wants and luxury of the subject. " Assoon," (1 transcribe the anecdotes) " as the exclusive sale of silk was usurped bythe imperial treasurer, a whole people, the manufacturers of Tyre and Berytus,was reduced to extreme misery, and either perished with hunger, or fled to thehostile dominions of Persia." A province might suffer by the decay of its manu­factures; but in this example of silk, Procopius has partially overlooked the inesti­mable and lasting benefit which the empire received from the curiosity of Justi­nian. His addition of one-seventh to the ordinary price of copper-money may beinterpreted with the same candour; and the alteration, which might be wise, ap­pears to have been innocent; since he neither alloyed the purity nor enhanced thevalue, of the gold coin, (3) the legal measure of public and private payments. V.The ample jurisdiction, required by the farmers of the revenue to accomplishtheir engagements, might be placed in an odious light, as if they had purchasedfrom the emperor the lives and fortunes of their fellow-citizens. And a more di-
- rect sale of honours and offices was transacted in the palace, with the permission,or at least with the connivance, of Justinian and Theodora. The claims of merit,even those of favour, were disregarded, and it was almost reasonable to expect,
• that the bold adventurer, who had undertaken the trade of a magistrate, shouldfind a rich compensation for infamy, labour, danger, the debts which he had con-
(1) One to Scythopolts, capital of the second Palestine, and twelve for the rest of the province. Airman, (p.-59.) honestly produces this fact from a MS. life of St. Sabas, by his disciple Cyril, in the Vatican library, andsince published by Coteterius.
(2) John Malala (torn, it p. 232.) mentions the want of bread, and Zonaras (lib. xiv. p. fi3.) the leaden pipes,which Justinian, or his servants, stole from the aqueducts.
(3) For an aureus, one-sixth of an ounce of gold, instead of two hundred and ten, he e^ve no more than onehundred and eighty folles, or ounces of copper. A disproportion of the mint, below the market price, musthave soon produced a scarcity of small money. In Eue/laml. twelve pence m copper would sell for no morethan leven pence. (Smith's Inquiry into the Wealth of Nations, vol. i. p. 490 For Justinian's gold coin, seeEyngrius (lib. iv. c. 30.)







OCR Output








128 THE DECLINE AND FALL


lessons of his teachers; the judges were enjoined to obey the comment as well asthe text of the law; and the use of codicils was a memorable innovation, whichAugustus, ratified by the advice of the civilians.(l)
The most absolute mandate could only require that the judges should agree withthe civilians, if the civilians agreed among themselves. But positive institutionsare often the result of custom and prejudice; laws and language are ambiguousand arbitrary; where reason is incapable of pronouncing, the love of argument isinflamed by the envy of rivals, the vanity of masters, the blind attachment oftheir disciples: and the Roman jurisprudence was divided by the once famous sectsof the Proculians and Sabinians.{2) Two sages of the law, Ateius Capito and An-tistius Labeo,(3) adorned the peace of the Augustan age: the former distinguishedby the favour of the sovereign; the latter more illustrious by his contempt of that■ favour, and his stern though harmless opposition to the tyrant of Rome. Theirlegal studies were influenced by the various colours of their temper and princi­ples. Labeo was attached to the form of the old republic; his rival embraced themore profitable substance of the rising monarchy. But the disposition of a cour­tier is tame and submissive; and Capito seldom presumed to deviate from the sen­timents, or at least from the words, of his predecessors: while the bold republicanpursued his independent ideas without fear of paradox or innovations. The free­dom of Labeo was enslaved, however, by the rigour of his own conclusions, andhe decided according to the letter of the law, the same questions which his indul­gent competitor resolved with a latitude of equity more suitable to the commonsense and feelings of mankind. If a fair exchange had been substituted to thepayment of money, Capito still considered the transaction as a legal sale;(4) andhe consulted nature for the age of puberty, without confining his definition to theprecise period of twelve or fourteen years.(5) This opposition of sentiments waspropagated in the writings and lessons of the two founders; the schools of Capitoand Labeo maintained their inveterate conflict from the age of Augustus to thatof Hadrian ;(6) and the two sects derived their appellations from Sabinus and Pro-culus, their most celebrated teachers. The names of Cassians and Pegasianswere likewise applied to the same parties; but, by a strange reverse, the popularcause was in the hands of Pegasus, (7) a timid slave of Domitian, while the fa­vourite of the Cxsars was represented by Cassius,(8) who gloried in his descentfrom the patriot assassin. By the perpetual edict, the controversies of the sectswere in a great measure determined. For that important work, the emperorHadrian preferred the chief of the Sabinians; the friends of monarchy prevailed;but the moderation of Salvius Julian insensibly reconciled the victors and the van­quished. Like the cotemporary philosophers, the lawyers of the age of the An-tonines disclaimed the authority of a master, and adopted from every system themost probable doctrines. (9) But their writings would have been less voluminous,


plexed by the number and weight of discordant testimonies, and every sentencethat his passion or interest might pronounce, was justified by the sanction of some


(1) See Pomponius (de Origine Juris Pandect, lib. i. tit. ii. leg. it. No. 470 Heineccius (ad Institnt. lib. i. tit.ii. No. 8. lib. ii. tit. \xv. in Element, et Antiquitat.,) and Gravina (p. 41—15.) Tet the monopoly of Augustus,a harsh meaiure, would appear with some softening in the cotemporary evidence; and it was probably veiledby a decree of the senate.
(2) I have perused the diatribe of Gotfridas Mascovius, the learned Maseou.de Sectis Jurisconsattorura (Lip-siae, 1728, in 12mo. p. 276..) a learned treatise on a narrow and barren ground.
(3) See the character of Antistius Labeo in Tacitus (Annat. 3. 75. J and in an epistle of Ateius Capiro(Aul.Gelliui, 13.12..) who accuses his rival of libertas nimia et vecors. Yet Horace would not have lashed a virtu­ous and respectable senator; and I must adopt the emendatiun of Bentley, who reads Labieno insanior (Serm.lib. iii. 82.) See Mascou, de Seeds, (o. i. p. 1—24.)
(4) Justinian (Institut. lib. iii. tit. xxiii. and Theophil. Vers. Grsec. p. 677. 680.) has commemorated thisweighty dispute,and the verses of Homer that were alleged on either side as legal authorities. It was decidedby Paul (leg. xxsiii. ad Edict, in Pandect, lib. xviii. tit. i. leg. i.,) since, in a simple exchange, the buyer couldSot be discriminated from the seller.
(5) This controversy was likewise given for the Proculians to supersede the indecency of a search, and tocomply with the aphorism of Hippocrates, who was attached to the septenary number of two weeks of yean,or seven hundred of days (Institut. lib. i. tit. xxii.) Plutarch and the stoies (de Placit. Pbitosoph. lib. v. c. 24.)assign a more natural reason. Fourteen years is the age—jrspi ry o (rffsppaToeo; xpwrxt oppo;. See the vestigia ofthe sects in Mascou* e. ix. p. 145—276.
(6) The series and conclusions of the sects are described by Mascou (e. 2—7. p. 24—120.) and it wonHI be al­most ridiculous to praise his equal justice to these obsolete sects.
(7) At the first summons he flies to the turbot council; vet Juvenal (Sar. iv. 75—81.) styles the prefect or bai-liffof Rome tanetissimus legum interpret. From his science, says the old scholiast, he was called, not a roan,but a book. He derived the singular name of Pegasus from the galley which bis father commanded.
(8) Tacit, Annul. 17.7. Sticton. iu JJerone, e. xxxvii.
(9) Mascou. de Seetis, (c. viii. p. 120—144.) de Heriscundis, a legal terra which was applied to these etfectiolawyers: hcrciscereis synonymous to divider*.


 







OCR Output








Of THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


Wesus, which the Greeks, after the siege of Troy, had performed in four days,(l)the fleet of Belisarius was guided in their course by his master-galley, conspicuousin the day by the redness of the sails, and in the night by the torches blazing fromthe mast-head. It was the duty of the pilots, as they steered between the islands,and turned the capes of Malea and Tasnarium, to preserve the just order and regu­lar intervals of such a multitude of ships; as the wind was fair and moderate, theirlabours were not unsuccessful, and the troops were safely disembarked at Methoneon the Messenian coast, to repose themselves for awhile after the fatigues of thesea. In this place they experienced how avarice, invested with authority, maysport with the lives of thousands which are bravely exposed for the public service.According to military practice, the bread or biscuit of the Romans was twice pre­pared in the oven, and a diminution of one-fourth was cheerfully allowed for theloss of weight. To gain this miserable profit, and to save the expense of wood,the prefect John of Cappadocia had given orders that the flour should be slightlybaked by the same fire which warmed the baths of Constantinople: and when thesacks Were opened, a soft and mouldy paste was distributed to the army. Suchunwholesome food, assisted by the heat of the climate and season, soon producedan epidemical disease, which swept away five hundred soldiers. Their healthwas restored by the diligence of Belisarius, who provided fresh bread at Methone,and boldly expressed his just and humane indignation: the emperor heard his com­plaint; the general was praised; but the minister was not punished. From theport of Methone, the pilots steered along the western coast of Peloponnesus, as faras the isle of Zacynthus or Zant, before they undertook the voyage (in their eyesa most arduous voyage) of one hundred leagues over the Ionian sea. As the fleetwas surprised by a calm, sixteen days were consumed in the slow navigation; andeven the general would have suffered the intolerable hardship of thirst, if the in­genuity of Antonina had not preserved the water in glass bottles, which she burieddeep in the sand in a part of the ship impervious to the rays of the sun. At lengththe harbour of Caucana,(2) on the southern side of Sicily, afforded a secure andhospitable shelter. The Gothic officers, who governed the island in the name ofthe daughter and grandson of Theodoric, obeyed their imprudent orders, to re­ceive the troops of Justinian like friends and allies; provisions were liberally sup­plied, the cavalry was reraounted,(3) and Procopius soon returned from Syracusewith correct information of the state and designs of the Vandals. His intelligencedetermined Belisarius to hasten his operations, and his wise impatience was second­ed by the winds. The fleet lost sight of Sicily, passed before the isle of Malta,discovered the capes of Africa, ran along the coast with a strong gale from thenorth-east, and finally cast anchor off the promontory of Caput Vada, about fivedays' journey to the south of Carthage. (4)
If Gelimer had been informed of the approach of the enemy, he must have de­layed the conquest of Sardinia, for the immediate defence of his person and king­dom.
A detachment of five thousand soldiers, and one hundred and twenty galleys,■would have joined the remaining forces of the Vandals; and the descendant of Gen-seric might have surprised and oppressed a fleet of deep-laden transports, incapa­ble of action, and of light brigantines, that seemed only qualified for flight. Beli­sarius had secretly trembled when he overheard his soldiers, in the passage,emboldening each other to confess their apprehensions: if they were once on shore,they hoped to maintain the honour of their arms; but if they should be attacked atsea, they did not blush to acknowledge, that they wanted courage to contend atthe same time with the winds, the waves, and the barbarians. (5) The knowledgeof their sentiments decided Belisarius to seize the first opportunity of landing themon the coast of Africa, and he prudently rejected, in a council of war, the proposal<of sailing with the fleet and army into the port of Carthage. Three months after
(1) Or even in three'days, siace they anchored the first evening in the neighbouring isle of Tenedos: the se­cond day they sailed to Lesbos, the third to the promontory of Eubraa. and on the fourth they readied Argos.(Homer, Odys. p. 130—183. Wood's Essay on Homer, p. 40.460 A pirate sailed from the Hellespont to theseaport at Sparta in three days. (Xenophon, Hellen. Pih. ii. c. 1.)
(2) Cancan*, near Camarina, is at least fifty miles, (three hundred and fifly or four hundred stadia) fromSyracuse. (CItlver, Siciiia Antiqua, p. 191.)
(3) Procopius, Gothic,Kb.i.c. 3. Tibi tollit hinnitum apta qundrigis equa, in the Sicilian pastures of
Grosphuns. Horat. Carnj. 2.15.) Acragas magnanimum quondam generator cquorum. Virg. iflneid,
3. 704.) Thero's horses, whose victories are immortalized by Pindar, were bred in this country.
(4) The Ciput Vada of Procopius, (where Justinian afterward founded a city—de Edific. lib. vi. c. 6.)'is thepromontory of AmmoD in Strabo, the Rrachodes of Ptolemy, the Capaudia of the moderns, a long narrow slipthat runs into the sea. (Shaw's Travels,p. 111.)
(5) A centuxion of Mark Antony expressed, though in a more manly strain, the same dislike to the sea andto naval combats. (Plutarch in Antonio, p. 1730. Edit. Hen. Steph.)







OCR Output








574 THE DECLINE AN1J FALL


-captives were transplanted from Hyrcania to the isle of Cyprus. On the returnof spring, Justinian descended into the fertile plains of Assyria, the flames of warapproached the residence of Nushirvan, the indignant monarch sunk into the grave,and his last edict restrained his successors from exposing their person in a battleagainst the Romans. Yet the memory of this transient affront was lost in the glo­ries of a long reign; and his formidable enemies, after indulging their dream ofconquest, again solicited a short respite from the calamities of war. (1)
The throne of Chosroes Nushirvan was filled by Hormouz, or Hormisdas, theeldest or the most favoured of his sons. With the kingdoms of Persia and India,he inherited the reputation and example of his father, the service, in every rank,of his wise and valiant officers, and a general system of administration, harmo­nized by time and political wisdom, to promote the happiness of the prince andpeople. But the royal youth enjoyed a still more valuable blessing, the friendshipof a sage who had presided over his education, and who always preferred the ho­nour to the interest of his pupil, his interest to his inclination. In a dispute withthe Greek and Indian philosophers, Buzurg(2) had once maintained, that the mostgrievous misfortune of life is old age without the remembrance of virtue; and ourcandour will presume that the same principle compelled him, during three years,to direct the councils of the Persian empire. His zeal was rewarded by the gra­titude and docility of Hormouz, who acknowledged himself more indebted to hispreceptor than to his parent: but when age and labour had impaired the strengthand perhaps the faculties of this prudent counsellor, he retired from court, andabandoned the youthful monarch to his own passions and those of his favour­ites. By a fatal vicissitude of human affairs, the same scenes were renewed atCtesiphon, which had been exhibited in Rome after the death of Marcus Antoninus.The ministers of flattery and corruption, who had been banished by the father,•were recalled and cherished by the son; the disgrace and exile of the friends ofNushirvan established their tyranny; and virtue was driven by degrees from themind of Hormouz, from his palace, and from the government of the state. Thefaithful agents, the eyes and ears of the king, informed him of the progress of dis­order, that the provincial governors flew to their prey with the fierceness of lionsand eagles, and that their rapine and injustice would teach the most loyal of hissubjects, to abhor the name and authority of their sovereign. The sincerity ofthis advice was punished with death, the murmurs of the cities were despised,their tumults were quelled by military execution; the intermediate powers betweenthe throne and the people were abolished; and the childish vanity of Hormouz,who affected the daily use of the tiara, was fond of declaring, that he alone would bethe judge as well as the master of his kingdom. In every word, and in every ac­tion, the son of Nushirvan degenerated from the virtues of his father. His ava­rice defrauded the troops; his jealous caprice degraded the satraps; the palace,the tribunals, the waters of the Tigris, were stained with the blood of the innocent,and the tyrant exulted in the sufferings and execution of thirteen thousand victims.As the excuse of his cruelty, he sometimes condescended to observe, that thefears of the Persians, would be productive of hatred, and that their hatred mustterminate in rebellion: but he forgot that his own guilt and folly had inspired thesentiments which he deplored, and prepared the event which he so justly appre­hended. Exasperated by long and hopeless oppression, the provinces of Babylon,Susa, and Carmania, erected the standard of revolt; and the princes of Arabia,India, and Scythia, refused the customary tribute to the unworthy successor ofNushirvan. The arms.of the Romans, in slow sieges and frequent inroads, afflict­ed the frontiers of Mesopotamia and Assyria; one of their generals professed him­self the disciple of Scipio, and the soldiers were animated by a miraculous Imageof Christ, whose mild aspect should never have been displayed in the front of bat­tlers) At the same time the eastern provinces of Persia were invaded by the
army from the neighbourhood of Moscow to the coast of Persia (Bell's Travels, vol. ii. p. 325—352.) Me justlyobserves, that such martial pomp had never been displayed on the Volga.
{l) For these Persian wars and treaties, see Menander, in Excerpt. Legat. p. 113—125. Theophanes Byzant.apiid Photium, cod. Ixiv. p. 77. 80,81. Evagrius, lib. v. c. 7—13. Theophylact, lib. iii. c. 9—18. Agathias, lib.iv. p. 140.
(2) Buzurg Mihir may be considered, in his character and station, as the Seneca of the east; but hit virtues,and perhaps his faults, are less known than those of the Roman, who appears to have been much more loqua­cious. The Persian sage was the person who imported from India the game of chess and the fables of Pilpav.Such has been the fame of his wisdom and virtues, that the Christians claim him as a believer in the gospel;And the Mahometans revere Buzurg as a premature Mussulman. D'Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientale, p.318.
(3) Seethe imitation Of Scipio in Theophylact, lib. i. e. 14. the image of Chrisr, !ib. ii. c. 3, Hereafter I ihs'i,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


or intelligence in their celestial hierarchy; and in the Magian system the conflicttot the two principles betrays the imperfection of the conqueror. The Christiansof the seventh century had insensibly relapsed into a semblance of paganism; theirpublic and private vows were addressed to the relics and images that disgracedthe temples of the east: the throne of the Almighty was darkened by a cloud ofmartyrs, and saints, and angels, the objects of popular veneration; and the Col-lyridian heretics who flourished in the fruitful soil of Arabia, invested the VirginMary with the name and honours of a goddess. (1) The mysteries of the Trinityand incarnation afifiear to contradict the principle of the divine unity. In theirobvious sense, they introduce three equal deities, and transform the man Jesus intothe substance of the son of God:(2) an orthodox commentary will satisfy only abelieving mind: intemperate curiosity and zeal had torn the veil of the sanctuary;and each of the oriental sects was eager to confess that all, except themselves,deserved the reproach of idolatry and polytheism. The creed of Mahomet isfree from suspicion or ambiguity; and the Koran is a glorious testimony to theunity of God. The prophet of Mecca rejected the worship of idols and men, ofstars and planets, on the rational principle that whatever rises must set, that what­ever is born must die, that whatever is corruptible must decay and perish. (3) Inthe author of the universe, his rational enthusiasm confessed and adored an infiniteand eternal being, without form or place, without issue or similitude, present toour most secret thoughts, existing by the necessity of its own nature, and derivingfrom himself all moral and intellectual perfection. These sublime truths, thus an­nounced in the language of the prophet,(4) are firmly held by his disciples, anddefined with metaphysical precision by the interpreters of the Koran. A philoso­phic theist might subscribe the popular creed of the Mahometans:(5) a creed toosublime perhaps for our present faculties. What object remains for the fancy, oreven the understanding, when we have abstracted from the unknown substance allideas of time and space, of motion and matter, of sensation and reflection? Thefirst principle of reason and revelation was confirmed by the voice of Mahomet: hisproselytes, from India to Morocco, are distinguished by the name of Unitarians;and the danger of idolatry has been prevented by the interdiction of images. Thedoctrine of eternal decrees and absolute predestination is strictly embraced by theMahometans; and thev struggle with the common difficulties, how to reconcile theprescience of God with the freedom and responsibility of man; how to explain thepermission of evil under the reign of infinite power and infinite goodness.
The God of nature has written his existence on all his works, and his law in theheart of man. To restore the knowledge of the one and the practice of theother, has been the real or pretended aim of the prophets of every age; the libe­rality of Mahomet allowed to his predecessors the same credit which he claimedfor himself; and the chain of inspiration was prolonged from the fall of Adam tothe promulgation of the Koran. (6) During that period, some rays of propheticlight had been imparted to one hundred and twenty-four thousand of the elect,discriminated by their respective measures of virtue and grace; three hundredand thirteen apostles were sent with a special commission to recall their countryfrom idolatry and vice; one hundred and four volumes had been dictated by theholy spirit; and six legislators of transcendent brightness have announced to man­kind the six successive revelations of various rites, but of one immutable religion.
(1) Hottinger, Hist. Orient, p. 225—228. The Collyridian heresy was carried from Thraee to Arabia hy somewomen, and the name was borrowed from the *oK*.vft; or cake, which they offered to the goddess. This ex­ample, that of Beryllus bishop of Bostra, (Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. vi. c. 33.) and several others, may excusethe reproach, Arabia haeresem ferax.
(2) The three gods in the Koran (e. 4. p. 81. c. 5. p. 92.) are obviously directed against our catholic mystery;but the Arabic commentators understand them of the Father, the Son, and the Virgin Mary, an heretical tri­nity, maintained, as it is said, hy some barbarians at the council of Nice. (Eutych. Anna), torn. i. p. 440.) Butthe existence of the MarianifesU denied by the candid Beausobre; (Hist, de Manicheisme, torn. i. p. 532.) andhe derives the mistake from the word Rouah, the Holy Ghost, which in some oriental tongues is of the femininegender, and is figuratively styled the mother of Christ in the Gospel of the Nazarenes.
(3) This train of thought is philosophically exemplified in the character of Abraham, who opposed in Chal-dea the first introduction of idolatry. (Koran, c. 6. p. 106. d'Hei'bclot, Bibli.it. Orient, p. 13.)
(4) See the Koran, particularly the second, (p. 30.) the fifty-seventh, (p. 437.) the fif ty-eighth,(p. 441.) chap­ter, which proclaim the omnipotence of the Creator.
(5) The most orthodox creeds are translated by Pocock. (Specimpn, p. 274. 284—292.) Ockley. (Hist, of theSaracens, vol. ii. p. 82—95.) Heland, (de Religion. Moham. lib. i. p. 7—13.) and Chardin (Voyages en•Perse, torn, i. p. 4—28.) The great truth that God is without similitude, is foolishly criticised by Maracci, (Al­coran, torn. i. part iit. p. 87—94.) because he made man after his own image.
(6) Reland, de Relig. Moham. lib. i. p. 17—47. (Sale's Preliminary Discourse, p. 73—76.) Voyage de Chardin,torn. iv. p. 28-37. and 37—47. for the Persian addition, " Ali is the vicar of God!" Yet the precise number ofprophets is not an article of faith.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. , Syf


composition, should suspect his own ignorance, and that of his Byzantine guides,so prone to the marvellous, so careless, and, in this instance, so jealous of the truth.From their obscure, and perhaps fallacious hints, it should seem that the principalingredient of the Greek fire was the nafitha,{l) or liquid bitumen, a light tena­cious, and inflammable oil,(2) which springs from the earth, and catches fire assoon as it comes in contact with the air. The naptha was mingled, I know not bywhat methods or in what proportions, with sulphur and with the pitch that is ex­tracted from evergreen firs. (3) From this mixture, which produces a thick smokeand a loud explosion, proceeded a fierce and obstinate flame, which not only rosein perpendicular ascent, but likewise burnt with equal vehemence in descent orlateral progress; instead of being extinguished, it was nourished and quickened, bythe element of water; and sand, urine, or vinegar, were the only remedies thatcould damp the fury of this powerful agent, which was justly denominated by theGreeks the liquid or the maritime fire. For the annoyance of the enemy, it wasemployed with equal effect, by sea and land, in battles or in sieges.1 It was eitherpoured from the ramparts in large boilers, or launched in red-hot balls of stoneand iron, or darted in arrows and javelins, twisted round with flax and tow, whichhad deeply imbibed the inflammable oil: sometimes it was deposited in fire-ships,the victims and instruments of a more ample revenge, and was most commonlyblown through long tubes of copper, which were planted on the prow of a galleyand fancifully shaped into the mouths of savage monsters, that seemed to vomit astream of liquid and consuming fire. This important art was preserved at Con­stantinople, as the palladium of the state; the galleys and artillery might occa­sionally be lent to the allies of Rome; but the composition of the Greek fire wasconcealed with the most jealous scruple, and the terror of the enemies was in­creased and prolonged by their ignorance and surprise. In the treatise of the ad­ministration of the empire, the royal author(4) suggests the answers and excusesthat might best elude the indiscreet curiosity and importunate demands of the bar­barians. They should be told that the mystery of the Greek fire had been re­vealed by an angel to the first and greatest of the Constantines, with a sacred in-,junction, that this gift of heaven, this peculiar blessing of the Romans, shouldnever be communicated to any foreign nation: that the prince and subject, werealike bound to religious silence, under the temporal and spiritual penalties of trea­son and sacrilege; and that the impious attempt would provoke the sudden and su­pernatural vengeance of the God of the Christians. By these precautions, the se­cret was confined, above four hundred years, to the Romans of the east; and, atthe end of the eleventh century, the Pisans, to whom every art was familiar, suf­fered the effects, without understanding the composition of the Greek fire. It wasat length either discovered or stolen by the Mahometans; and, in the holy wars ofSyria and Egypt, they retorted an invention, contrived against themselves, on theheads of the Christians. A knight, who despised the swords and lances of theSaracens, relates, with heartfelt sincerity, his own fears, -and those of his compa­nions, at the sight and sound of the mischievous engine that discharged a torrentof the Greek fire, the feu Gregeois, as it is styled by the more early of the Frenchwriters. It came flying through the air, says Joinville,(5) like a winged long-tailed dragon, about the thickness of a hogshead, with the report of thunder, andthe velocity of lightning; and the darkness of the night was dispelled by this dead-
(1) The naptha. the oleum incendiarum of the history of Jerusalem,-Gest. Del per Francos, p. 1167.) the ori--enud fountain of James de Vitry, lib. iii. c. 84.) is introduced on slight evidence and strong probability. Cin-namus (lib. vi. p. 163.) calls the Greek fire *rop MnJxov ; and the naptha is known to abound between the Tigrisand the Caspian sea. According to Pliny, (Hist. Natur. 2.109.) it was subservient to the revenge of Medea,and in either etymology the (Xa.ov Mjifasf, or MVi<»s (Procop.de Bell. Gothic, lib. iv. c. 11.) may fairly sig­nify this liquid bitumen.
(2) On the different sorts of oils and bitumen, see Dr. Watson's (the present bishop of LlandafT's) ChemicalEssays; vol. iii. essay 1. a classic book, the best adapted to infuse the taste and knowledge of chemistry. Theless perfect idea of ihe ancients mny be found in Strabo (Geograpli. lib. xvi. p. 1078.) and Pliny (Hist.Natur. 2.108,109.) Huic (Naplbcz) magna cognatio est igniuro, transiliuntque protinus in earn undecunque visam. Ofour travellers I om best pleased with Otter, (torn. 1. p. 153—158.)
(3) Anna Comnena has partly drawn aside the curtain. Am tv; jnvx»;, xxi u\hcav tiw, tcoutmv Jvdpaw usi5x>.wvtrvfayi-r** SsxftuQv ocxa-jo-rov. Tcuto autw0£<cu rpiBoftiuov if*3xXKtTvt s<; ow\«nwu« x»/.a««v x»( iftQuTxTtci mtftt to-j5t*<o»tos u£f» x»i a-w/jtnxvivuzri. (Aleviad. lib. xiii. p. 383.) Elsewhere (lib. si. p. 336.) she mentions theproperty of burning, x«t* to jrpxvig xx» sp' nc»T«p*. Leo. in the nineteenth chapter of his Tactics (Opera Meursii,torn. vi. p. 834. edit. Lami, Florent. 1743.) speaks of the new invention of srup /*et« i3eonT«; x«» xjctvou. These aregenuine and Imperial testimonies.
(4) Constantin. Porphyrogenit. de Administrat. Imperii, c. xiii. p. 64,65.
(5) Histoiie de St. Louis, p. 32. Paris, 1688. p. 44. Pari,, de I'lmprimerie Royalc, 1761. The former of theseeditions is precious fur the observations of Ducange; the latter for the pure and original text of Joinville. Wemust have recourse to that text fo discover, that the feu Gregeois was shot with a pile or javelin, from an en­gine that acted like a sling:







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 345


the Christian apostles St. Peter or St. Paul, could return to the Vatican, theymight possibly inquire the name of the deity who is worshipped with such myste­rious rites in that magnificent temple: at Oxford or Geneva, they would expe­rience less surprise: but it might still be incumbent on them to peruse the cate­chism of the church, and to study the orthodox commentators on their ownwritings, and the words of their master. But the Turkish dome of St Sophia,with an increase of splendour and size, represents the humble tabernacle erectedat Medina by the hands of Mahomet. The Mahometans have uniformly withstoodthe temptations of reducing the object of their faith and devotion to a level withthe senses and imaginations of man. "I believe in one God, and Mahomet theapostle of God," is the simple and invariable profession of Islam. The intel­lectual image of the Deity has never been degraded by any visible idol; the ho­nours of the prophet have never transgressed the measure of human virtue; andhis living precepts have restrained the gratitude of his disciples within the boundsof reason and religion. The votaries of AH have indeed consecrated the memoryof their hero, his wife, and his children, and some of the Persian doctors pretendthat the divine essence was incarnate in the person of the Imams; but their super­stition is universally condemned by the Sonnites; and their impiety has afforded aseasonable warning against the worship of saints and martyrs. The metaphysicalquestions on the attributes of God, and the liberty of man, have been agitated inthe schools of the Mahometans, as well as in those of the Christians; but among theformer they have never engaged the passions of the people, or disturbed the tran­quillity of the state. The cause of this important difference may be found in theseparation or union of the regal and sacerdotal characters. It was the interest ofthe caliphs, the successors of the prophet and commanders of the faithful to re­press and discourage all religious innovations: the order, the discipline, the tem­poral and spiritual ambition, of the clergy, are unknown to the Moslems: and thesages of the law are the guides of their conscience and the oracles of their faith.From the Atlantic to the Ganges, the Koran is acknowledged as the fundamentalcode, not only of theology, but of civil and criminal jurisprudence: and the lawswhich regulate the actions and the property of mankind, are guarded by the in­fallible and immutable sanction of the will of God. This religious servitude is at­tended with some practical disadvantage; the illiterate legislator had been ofteamisled by his own prejudices and those of his country; and the institutions of theArabian desert may be ill adapted to the wealth and numbers pf Ispahan and Con­stantinople. On these occasions, the cadhi respectfully places on his head the holyvolume, and substitutes a dexterous interpretation more opposite to the principlesof equity, and the manners and policy of the times.
His beneficial or pernicious influence on the public happiness is the last conside­ration in the character of Mahomet. The most bitter or most bigoted of his Chris­tian or Jewish foes, will surely allow that he assumed a false commission to incul­cate a salutary doctrine, less perfect only than their own. He piously supposed,as the basis of his religion, the truth, and sanctity of their prior revelations, thevirtues and miracles of their founders. The idols of Arabia were broken beforethe throne of God; the blood of human victims was expiated by prayer, and fast­ing, and alms, the laudable or innocent arts of devotion; and his rewards and pun­ishments of a future life were painted by the images most congenial to an ignorantor carnal generation. Mahomet was perhaps incapable of dictating a moral andpolitical system for the use of his countrymen: but he breathed among the faithfula spirit of charity and friendship, recommended the practice of the social virtues,and checked, by his laws and precepts, the thirst of revenge and the oppressionof widows and orphans. The hostile tribes were united in faith and obedience,and the valour which had been idly spent in domestic quarrels, was vigorously di­rected against a foreign enemy. Had the impulse been less powerful, Arabia, freeat home, and formidable abroad, might have flourished under a succession of hernative monarchs. Her sovereignty was lost by the extent and rapidity of conquest.The colonies of the nation were scattered over the east and west, and their blood,was mingled with the blood of their converts and captives. After the reign ofthree caliphs, the throne was transported from Medina to the valley of Damascusand the banks of the Tigris; the holy cities were violated by impious war: Arabiawas ruled by the rod of a subject, perhaps of a stranger; and the Bedoweens of thedesert, awakening from their dream of dominion, resumed their old and solitaryindependence. (1)
11) The vriten of the Modem TJnireml Hiitory (vol. t, and 20 have compiled, in eight hundred and fifty
Vol. III. 44







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 367


hours, brought a seasonable supply of arms and provisions to the camp of the Sara­cens. Their labours were terminated by the unexpected surrender of Csesarea:the Roman prince had embarked in the night;(l) and the defenceless citizens soli­cited their pardon with an offering; of two hundred thousand pieces of gold. Theremainder of the province, Ramlah, Ptolemaisor Achre, Sichem orNeapolis, Gaza,Ascalon, Berytus, Sidon, Gabala, Laodicea, Apamea, Hierapolis, no longer pre­sumed to dispute the will of the conqueror: and Syria bowed under the sceptre ofthe caliphs seven hundred years after Pompey had despoiled the last of the Mace­donian kings. (2)
The sieges and battles of six campaigns had consumed many thousands of theMoslems. They died with the reputation and cheerfulness of martyrs; and thesimplicity of their faith may be expressed in the words of an Arabian youth, whenhe embraced, for the last time, his sister and mother. " Is it not" said he, " thedelicacies of Syria, or the fading delights of this world, that has prompted me to de­vote my life in the cause of religion? But I seek the favour of God and his apostle;and I have heard, from one of the companions of the prophet, that the spirits of themartyrs will be lodged in the crops of green birds, who shall taste the fruits, anddrink of the rivers of paradise. Farewell, we shall meet again among the grovesand fountains which God has provided for his elect." The faithful captives mightexercise a passive and more arduous resolution; and a cousin of Mahomet is cele­brated for refusing, after an abstinence of three days, the wine and pork, the onlynourishment that was allowed by the malice of the infidels. The frailty of someweaker brethren exasperated the implacable spirit of fanaticism: and the father ofAmer deplored, in pathetic strains, the apostacy and damnation of a son, who hadrenounced the promises of God, and the intercession of the prophet, to occupy,with the priests and deacons, the lowest mansions of hell. The more fortunateArabs, who survived the war, and persevered in the faith, were restrained by theirabstemious leader from the abuse of prosperity. After a refreshment of threedays, Abu Obeidah withdrew his troops from the pernicious contagion of the luxuryof Antioch, and assured the caliph that their religion and virtue could omy be pre­served by the hard discipline of poverty and labour. But the virtue of Omar, how­ever rigorous to himself, was kind and liberal to his brethren. After a just tributeof praise and thanksgiving, he dropped a tear of compassion; and, sitting down onthe ground, wrote an answer, in which he mildly censured the severity of his lieu­tenant. " God," said the successor of the prophet, "has not forbidden the use ofthe good things of this world to faithful men, and such as have performed goodworks. Therefore you ought to have given them leave to rest themselves, and par-• take freely of those good things which the country affordeth. If any of the Saracenshave no families in Arabia, they may marry in Syria; and whosoever of them wantsany female slaves, he may purchase as many as he hath occasion for." The con­querors prepared to use, or to abuse, this gracious permission: but the year of theirtriumph was marked by a mortality of men and cattle; and twenty-five thousandSaracens were snatched away from the possession of Syria. The death of AbuObeidah might be lamented by the Christians; but his brethren recollected that hewas one of the ten elect, whom the prophet had named as the heirs of paradise. (3)Caled survived his brethren about three years; and the tomb of the sword of God is.shown in the neighbourhood of Emesa. His valour, which founded in Arabia andSyria, the empire of the caliphs, was fortified by the opinion of a special provi­dence; and as long as he wore a cap, which had been blessed by Mahomet, hedeemed himself invulnerable amidst the darts of the infidels.
The place of the first conquerors was supplied by a new generation of theirchildren and countrymen: became the seat and support of the house of Ommiyah;and the revenue, the soldiers, the ships of that powerful kingdom, were conse­crated to enlarge on every side the empire of the caliphs. But the Saracens de-
(1) In the loose and obscure chronology of the times, I am fruited by an authentic record (in the book of Ce-remoniei of Constantine Porphyrogenitus.) which certifies that June 4, A. D. 638. the emperor crowned hisyounger ion Heraclius in the presence of his eldest. Cbnstantme, and in the palace of Constantinople; that Ja­nuary 1, A. D. 639. the royal procession visited the great church,and on the fourth of the same month thehippodrome.
(2) Siity-five years before Christ, Syria Pontusqne monnmenta sunt Cn. Pompeii virtutis (Veil. Patereul. 2.38,) rather of his fortune and power: he adjudged Syria to be a Roman province, and the last of the Selencideswere incapable of drawing a sword in the defence of their patrimony. (See the uriginal tests collected by Usher.Annal. p. 420.)
(3) Abulfeda, Annal. Moslem, p. 73. Mahomet could artfully vary the praises of his disciples. Of Omar hewas accustomed to say, that if a prophet could arise after himself, it would be Omar: and that in a general ca­lamity, Omar would be accepted by the divine justice (Ockley, vol. i. p. 321,?







OCR Output








804 THE DECLINE AND FALL


From the northern point of Beles,(l) on the Euphrates, a line of fifteen hundredmiles is terminated by the straits of Babelmandel and the land of frankincense,About half this length may be allowed for the middle breadth from east to west,from Bassorato Suez, from the Persian gulf to the Red Sea. (2) The sides ofthe triangle are gradually enlarged, and the southern basin presents a front of athousand miles to the Indian ocean. The entire surface of the peninsula exceedsin a fourfold proportion that of Germany or France; but the far greater part hasbeen justly stigmatized with the epithets of the stony and the sandy. Even thewilds of Tartary are decked by the hand of nature with lofty trees and luxuriantherbage; and the lonesome traveller derives a sort of comfort and society from thepresence of vegetable life. But in the dreary waste of Arabia, a boundless level ofsand is intersected by sharp and naked mountains, and the face of the desert,without shade or shelter, is scorched by the direct and intense rays of a tropicalsun. Instead of refreshing breezes, the winds, particularly from the south-west,diffuse a noxious and even deadly vapour; the hillocks of sand, which they alter­nately raise and scatter, are compared to the billows of the ocean, and whole ca­ravans, whole armies, have been lost and buried in the whirlwind. The commonbenefits of water are an object of desire and contest; and such is the scarcity ofwood, that some art is requisite to preserve and propagate the element of fire.Arabia is destitute of navigable rivers, which fertilize the soil, and convey its pro­duce to the adjacent regions: the torrents that fall from the hills are imbibed bythe thirsty earth: the rare and hardy plants, the tamarind or the acacia, that striketheir roots into the clefts of the rocks, are nourished by the dews of the night; ascanty supply of rain is collected in cisterns and aqueducts; the wells and springsare the secret treasure of the desert; and the pilgrim of Mecca,(3) after manya dry and sultry march, is disgusted by the taste of the waters, which haverolled over a bed of sulphur or salt. Such is the general and genuine pictureof the climate of Arabia. The experience of evil enhances the value of any localor partial enjoyments. A shady grove, a green pasture, a stream of fresh water,are sufficient to attract a colony of sedentary Arabs to the fortunate spots whichcan afford food and refreshment to themselves and their cattle, and which encou­rage their industry in the cultivation of the palm-tree and the vine. The highlands that border on the Indian ocean are distinguished by their superior plenty ofwood and water; the air is more temperate, the fruits are more delicious, the ani­mals and the human race more numerous: the fertility of the soil invites and re­wards the toil of the husbandman; and the peculiar gifts of frankincense,(4) andcoffee have attracted in different ages the merchants of the world. If it be com­pared with the rest of the peninsula, this sequestered region may truly deserve theappellation of the happy: and the splendid colouring of fancy and fiction has beensuggested by contrast and countenanced by distance. It was for this earthly pa­radise that nature had reserved her choicest favours and her most curious work­manship: the incompatible blessings of luxury and innocence were ascribed to thenatives: the soil was impregnated with gold(5) and gems, and both the land andsea were taught to exhale the odours of aromatic sweets. This division of thesandy, the stony, and the happy, so familiar to the Greeks and Latins, is unknownto the Arabians themselves: and it is singular enough, that a country, whose lan­guage and inhabitants have ever been the same, should scarcely retain a vestige ofits ancient geography. The maritime districts of Bahrein and Oman are oppo-
ribus Notus, and Ire Partie de I'Asie) should lie before the reader with his Geographie Aneienne, torn. ii. p.
208—231.
(1) Abulfed. Rescript. Arabia:, p. 1. D'Anville, PEuphrate et le Tigre, p. 19.20. It was in this place, theparadise or garden of a satrap, that Xenophon and the Greeks first passed the Euphrates. (Anabasis, lib. i. c.10. p. 29. edit. Wells.)
(2) Reland has proved, with much superfluous learning. 1. That our Red Sea, (the Arabian gulf) is notmore than a part of the Mare Rubrum,tbe EpwSp« &*\*<rtrti of the ancients, which was extended to the indefinitespace of the Indian ocean. 2. That the synonymous words spuSpoj oetfiioi}/;, alluded to the colour of the blacksor negroes. (Dissert. Miscell. torn. i. p. 891—617.)
(3) In the thirty days or stations, between Cairo and Mecca, there are fifteen destitute of good water. Seethe route of the Hadjees, in Shaw's Travels, p. 477.
(4) The aromatic, especially the thus or frankincense of Arabia, occupy the twelfth book of Pliny. Oargreat poet (Paradise Lost. lib. iv.) introduces, in a simile, the spicy odours that are blown by the north-eastwind from the Sabcean coast:—
Many a league,
Pleas'd with the grateful scent, old Ocean smiles.
(Plin. Hist. Natur. xii.42.)
(5) Agatharcides affirms, that lumps of pure gold were found, from the size of an olive to that of a put;that iron was twice, and silver ten times the value of gold, (de Man Rubra, p. 60.) These real or imaginarytreasures are vanished; and no gold mines arc at present known in Arabia. (Niebuhr, Description, p. 124,)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 51


tance; her extreme lenity never consented to inflict any corporal or pecuniarypenalties on her Roman subjects; and she generously despised the clamours of theGoths, who at the end of forty years, still considered the people of Italy as theirslaves or their enemies. Her salutary measures were directed by the wisdom, andcelebrated by the eloquence of Cassiodorus; she solicited and deserved the friend­ship of the emperor; and the kingdoms of Europe respected, both in peace and■war, the majesty of the Gothic throne. But the future happiness of the queen andof Italy depended on the education of her son, who was destined by his birth,to support the different and almost incompatible characters of the chief of a bar­barian camp, and the first magistrate of a civilized nation. From the age of tenyears,(l) Athalaric was diligently instructed in the arts and sciences, either use­ful or ornamental for a Roman prince; and three venerable Goths were chosento instil the principles of honour and virtue into the mind of their young king. Butthe pupil, who is insensible of the benefits, must abhor the restraints of education;and the solicitude of the queen, which affection rendered anxious and severe, of­fended the untractable nature of her son and his subjects. On a solemn festival,■when the Goths were assembled in the palace of Ravenna, the royal youth es­caped from his mother's apartment, and with tears of pride and anger, complainedof a blow which his stubborn disobedience had provoked her to inflict. The bar­barians resented the indignity which had been offered to their king; accused theregent of conspiring against his life and crown; and imperiously demanded, thatthe grandson of Theodoric should be rescued from the dastardly discipline of wo­men and pedants, and educated, like a valiant Goth, in the society of his equals,and the glorious ignorance of his ancestors. To this rude clamour, importunate­ly urged as the voice of the nation, Amalasontha was compelled to yield her rea­son, and the dearest wishes of her heart. The king of Italy was abandoned towine, to women, and to rustic sports; and the indiscreet contempt of the ungrate­ful youth, betrayed the mischievous designs of his favourites and her enemies. En­compassed with domestic foes, she entered into a secret negotiation with the empe­ror Justinian; obtained the assurance of a friendly reception, and had actually depo­sited at Dyrrachium in Epirus, a treasure of forty thousand pounds of gold. Hap-
Sy would it have been for her fame and safety, if she had calmly retired from bar-arous faction, to the peace and splendour of Constantinople. But the mind ofAmalasontha was inflamed by ambition and revenge; and while her ships lay atanchor in the port, she waited for the success of a crime, which her passions ex­cused or applauded as an act of justice. Three of the most dangerous malecon-tents had been separately removed, under the pretence of trust and command, tothe frontiers of Italy; they were assassinated by her private emissaries; and theblood of those noble Goths rendered the queen-mother absolute in the court ofRavenna, and justly odious to a free people. But if she had lamented the disorderof her son, she soon wept his irreparable loss; and the death of Athalaric, who, atthe age of sixteen, was consumed by premature intemperance, left her destituteof any firm support or legal authority. Instead of submitting to the laws of hercountry, which held as a fundamental maxim, that the succession could neverpass from the lance to the distaff, the daughter of Theodoric conceived the im­practicable design of sharing with one of her cousins, the regal title and of re­serving in her own hands the substance of supreme power. He received the pro­posal with profound respect and affected gratitude; and the eloquent Cassiodorusannounced to the senate and to the emperor, that Amalasontha and Theodatus hadascended the throne of Italy. His birth (for his mother was the sister of Theodoric)might be considered as an imperfect title; and the choice of Amalasontha was morestrongly directed by her contempt of his avarice and pusillanimity, which had de­prived him of the love of the Italians, and the esteem of the barbarians. But The­odatus was exasperated by the contempt which he deserved; her justice had repres­sed and reproached the oppression which he exercised against his Tuscan neigh­bours; and the principal Goths, united by common guilt and resentment, conspiredto instigate his slow and timid disposition. The letters of congratulation werescarcely despatched before the queen of Italy was imprisoned in a small island ofthe lake of Bolsena,(2) where, after a short confinement, she was strangled in the
(1) At the death of Theodoric,his grandson Athalaric is described by Procopius as a hoy about eight yeanold—ox™ yeyovea; mi. Cassiodorus, with authority and reason, adds two years to his age—infamutum a'hucvix decennero.
(2) The lake, from the neighbouring towns of Etruria, was stvled either Vulsiniensis (now of Bolsena) orTarquuviensis. It is surrounded with white rocks, and stored with fish and wild fowl. The youuger riiny


 







OCR Output








114 THE DECLINE AND FALL


If the emperor could rejoice in the death of Belisarius, he enjoyed the base sa­tisfaction only eight months, the last period of a reign of thirty-eight, and a life ofeighty-three years. It would be difficult to trace the character of a prince whois not the most conspicuous object of his own times: but the confessions of an ene­my may be received as the safest evidence of his virtues. The resemblance ofJustinian to the bust of Domitian, is maliciously urged;(2) with the acknowledg­ment, however, of a well proportioned figure, a ruddy complexion, and a pleasingcountenance. The emperor was easy of access, patient of hearing, courteous andaffable in discourse, and a master of the angry passions, which rage with suchdestructive violence in the breast of a despot. Procopius praises his temper toreproach him with calm and deliberate cruelty; but in the conspiracies which at­tacked his authority and person, a more candid judge will approve the justice oradmire the clemency of Justinian. He excelled in the private virtues of chastityand temperance: but the impartial love of beauty would have been less mischie-vious, than his conjugal tenderness for Theodora, and his abstemious diet was re­gulated, not by the prudence of a philosopher, but the superstition of a monk.His repasts were short and frugal: on solemn fasts, he contented himself withwater and vegetables; and such was his strength as well as fervour, that he fre­quently passed two days and as many nights without tasting any food. The mea­sure of his sleep was not less rigorous: after the repose of a single hour, the bodywas awakened by the soul, and, to the astonishment of his chamberlains, Justinianwalked or studied till the morning light. Such restless application prolonged histime for the acquisition of knowledge, (3) and the despatch of business: and hemight seriously deserve the reproach of confounding, by minute and preposterousdiligence, the general order of his administration. The emperor professed him­self a musician and architect, a poet and philosopher, a lawyer and theologian: andif he failed in the enterprise of reconciling the Christian sects, the review of theRoman jurisprudence is a noble monument of his spirit and industry. In the go­vernment of the empire, he was less wise or less successful: the age was unfortu­nate; the people was oppressed and discontented: Theodora abused her power; asuccession of bad ministers disgraced his judgment; and Justinian was neither be­loved in his life, nor regretted at his death. The love of fame was deeply im­planted in his breast, but he condescended to the poor ambition of titles, honours,and cotemporary praise; and while he laboured to fix the admiration, he forfeitedthe esteem and affection of the Romans. The design of the African and Italianwars was boldly conceived and executed: and his penetration discovered the talentsof Belisarius in the camp, of Narses in the palace. But the name of the emperoris eclipsed by the names of his victorious generals; and Belisarius still lives to up­braid the envy and ingratitude of his sovereign. The partial favour of mankindapplauds the genius of a conqueror, who leads and directs his subjects in the exer­cise of arms. The characters of Philip II. and of Justinian are distinguished bythe cold ambition which delights in war, and declines the dangers of the field. Yeta colossal statue of bronze represented the emperor on horseback, preparing tomarch against the Persians in the habit and armour of Achilles. In the great squarebefore the church of St. Sophia, this monument was raised on a brass column anda stone pedestal of seven steps; and the pillar of Theodosius, which weighed se­ven thousand four hundred pounds of silver, was removed from the same place bythe avarice and vanity of Justinian. Future princes were more just or indulgentto Ma memory; the elder Andronicus, in the beginning of the fourteenth century,
Tbii moral or romantic tale was imported into Italy with the language and manuscripts of Greece; re­peated before the end of the fifteenth century by Crinitus. Pontanus, and Volateranus; attacked by Alciat,for the honour of the law; and defended by Baromus (A. D. 491. No. 2. &c.,) for the honour of the church.Yet Tzetzes himself had read in other chronicles, that Belisarius did not lose his sight, and that he recoveredhis fame and fortunes.
(1) The statue in the villa Borgbese at Rome, in a sitting posture, with an open hand; which is vulgarlygiven to Belisarius, may be ascribed with more dignity to Augustus in the act of propitiating Nemesis (win-kleraan, Hist, de l'Art. torn. iii. p. S46.) Ex-nocturno visu etiam stipem, quotannis, die certo, emendicabat apupolo, cavam manum asses porrigentibus prebeus (Sueton. in August, c. 91. with an excellent note ofCatanbon.)
(2) Theruow of Domitian is stigmatized, quaintly enough, by the pen of Tacitus (in Vic. Agricol.
and has been likewise noticed by the younger Pliny (Panegyr. c. 48.,) and Suetonius (in Domitian. c. 18.)and Casaubon ad locum.) Procopius (Anecdot. c. 8.) foolishly believes that only one bust of Domitian hadreached the sixth century.
(3> The studies and science of Justinian are attested by the confession (Anecdot. c. 8.13.) still more than bythe praises (Gothic lib. iii. e. 31. de Ecliric. lib. i. Proem, c. 7.) of Procopius. Consult the copious index otAlemanous, and read the life of Justinian by Ludewig, (p. I3i—142.)







OCR Output








 


!







OCR Output








2Z8 THE DECLINE AND FALL


throne of Constantinople, displayed the trophies of chivalry, and almost realized thewonders of romance. VII. The Latins; the subjects of the pope, the nationsof the west, who enlisted under the banner of the cross for the recovery and reliefof the holy sepulchre. The Greek emperors were terrified and preserved by themyriads of pilgrims who marched to Jerusalem with Godfrey of Bouillon and thepeers of Christendom. 1'he second and third crusades trod on the footsteps ofthe first: Asia and Europe were mingled in a sacred war of two hundred years;and the Christian powers were bravely resisted, and finally expelled, by Saladinand the mamalukes of Egjpt. In these memorable crusades, a fleet and army ofFrench and Venetians were diverted from Syria to the Thracian Bosphorus; theyassaulted the capital, they subverted the Greek monarchy; and a dynasty of La­tin princes was seated near threescore years on the throne of Constantine. VIII.The Greeks themselves, during this period of captivity and exile, must be con­sidered as a foreign nation; the enemies and again the sovereigns, of Constantino­ple. Misfortune had rekindled a spark of national virtue; and the imperial seriesmay be continued with some dignity from their restoration to the Turkish conquest.IX. The Moguls and Tartars. By the arms of Zingis and his descendants,the globe was shaken from China to Poland and Greece; the sultans were over­thrown; the caliphs fell, and the Caesars trembled on their throne. The victoriesof Timour suspended above fifty years the final ruin of the Byzantine empire. X.I have already noticed the first appearance of the Turks, and the names of thefathers, of Seljuk and Othman, discriminate the two successive dynasties of thenations, which emerged in the eleventh century from the Scythian wilderness.The former established a potent and splendid kingdom from the banks of theOxus to Antioch and Nice; and the first crusade was provoked by the violation ofJerusalem and the danger of Constantinople. From an humble origin, the Otto­mans arose, the scourge and terror of Christendom. Constantinople was besiegedand taken by Mahomet II. and his triumph annihilates the remnant, the image,the title of the Roman empire in the east. The schism of the Greeks will be con­nected with their last calamities, and the restoration of learning in the westernworld. I shall return from the captivity of the new, to the ruins of Ancient Rome;and the venerable name, the interesting theme, will shed a ray of glory on theconclusion of my labours.


The emperor Heraclius had punished a tyrant and ascended his throne; and thememory of his reign is perpetuated by the transient conquest, and irreparable loss,of the eastern provinces. After the death of Eudocia, his first wife, he disobeyedthe patriarch, and violated the laws, by his second marriage with his niece Marti­na; and the superstition of the Greeks beheld the judgment of heaven in the dis­eases of the father and the deformity of his offspring. But the opinion of an il­legitimate birth is sufficient to distract the choice, and loosen the obedience, ofthe people: the ambition of Martina was quickened by maternal love, and perhapsby the envy of a step-mother; and the aged husband was too feeble to withstandthe arts of conjugal allurements. Constantine, his eldest son, enjoyed in a matureage the title of Augustus; but the weakness of his constitution required a colleagueand a guardian, and he yielded with secret reluctance to the partition of the em­pire. The senate was summoned to the palace to ratitify or attest the associationof Heracleonas, the son of Martina: the imposition of the diadem was consecratedby the prayer and blessing of the patriarch; the senators and patricians adoredthe majesty of the great emperor and the partners of his reign; and, as soon asthe doors were thrown open, they were hailed by the tumultuary but importantvoice of the soldiers. After an interval of five months, the pompous ceremonies,which formed the essence of the Byzantine state, were celebrated in the cathedraland the hippodrome: the concord of the royal brothers was affectedly displayedby the younger leaning on the arm of the elder; and the name of Martina wasmingled in the reluctant or venal acclamations of the people. Heraclius survivedthis association about two years; his last testimony declared his two sons the equalheirs of the eastern empire, and commanded them to honour his widow Martinaas their mother and their sovereign.
When Martina first appeared'on the throne with the name and attributes ofroyalty, she was checked by a firm, though respectful opposition; and the dyingembers of freedom were kindled by the breath of superstitious prejudice:—" Wereverence (exclaimed the voice of a citizen,) we reverence the mother of our







OCR Output








« 33" OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


adultery was condemned as a capital offence, and fornication in either sex, waspunished with a hundred stripes.(l) Such were the calm and rational preceptsof the legislator; but in his private conduct, Mahomet indulged the appetites of aman, and abused the claims of a prophet. A special revelation dispensed himfrom the laws which he had imposed on his nation; the female sex, without re­serve, was abandoned to his desires; and this singular prerogative excited the:envy, rather than the scandal, the veneration rather than the envy, of the devout'Mussulmans. If we remember the seven hundred wives and three hundred con­cubines of the wise Solomon, we shall applaud the modesty of the Arabian, whoespoused no more than seventeen or fifteen wives; eleven are enumerated, whooccupied at Medina their separate apartments round the house of the apostle, andenjoyed in their turns the favour of his conjugal society. What is singular enough,they were all widows, excepting only Ayesha, the daughter of Abubeker. Shewas doubtless a virgin, since Mahomet consummated his nuptials (such is the pre­mature ripeness of the climate) when she was only nine years of age. The youth,the beauty, the spirit, of Ayesha, gave her a superior ascendant: she was belovedand trusted by the prophet; and, after his death, the daughter of Abubeker waslong revered as the mother of the faithful. Her behaviour had been ambiguousand indiscreet: in a nocturnal march, she was accidentally left behind; and in themorning Ayesha returned to the camp with a man. The temper of Mahomet wasinclined to jealousy; but a divine revelation assured him of her innocence: he chas­tised her accusers, and published a law of domestic peace, that no woman shouldbe condemned unless four male witnesses had seen her in the act of adultery.(2)In his adventures with Zeineb, the wife of Zeid, and with Mary, an Egyptiancaptive, the amorous prophet forgot the interest of his reputation. At the houseof Zeid, his freedman and adopted son, he beheld, in a loose undress, the beauty ofZeineb, and burst forth into an ejaculation of devotion and desire. The servile,or grateful freedman, understood the hint, and yielded without hesitation to thelove of his benefactor. But as the filial relation had excited some doubt and scan­dal, the angel Gabriel descended from heaven to ratify the deed, to annul theadoption, and gently to reprove the apostle for distrusting the indulgence of hisGod. One of his wives, Hafna, the daughter of Omar, surprised him on her ownbed, in the embraces of his Egyptian captive: she promised secrecy and for­giveness: he swore that he would renounce the possession of Mary. Both partiesforgot their engagements, and Gabriel again descended with a chapter of the Ko­ran, to absolve him from his oath, and to exhort him freely to enjoy his captivesand concubines, without listening to the clamours of his wives. In a solitary re­treat of thirty days, he laboured, alone with Mary, to fulfil the commands of theangel. When his love and revenge were satiated, he summoned to his presencehis eleven wives, reproached their disobedience and indiscretion, and threatenedthem with a sentence of divorce, both in this world and the next: a dreadful sen­tence, since those who had ascended the bed of the prophet were for ever excludedfrom the hope of a second marriage. Perhaps the incontinence of Mahomet maybe palliated by the tradition of his natural or preternatural gift;(3) he united themanly virtue of thirty of the children of Adam; and the apostle might rival thethirteenth labour(4) of the Grecian Hercules. (5) A more serious and decent ex­cuse may be drawn from his fidelity to Cadijah. During the twenty-four years oftheir marriage, her youthful husband abstained from the right of polygamy, andthe pride or tenderness of the venerable matron was never insulted by the societyof a rival. After her death, he placed her in the rank of the four perfect women,
(1) Sale (Preliminary Discourse, p. 133—737.) h«s recapitulated the laws of marriage, divorce, &c. and thecurions reader of Selden's Uxor Hebraica will recognise many Jewish ordinances.
(3) In the memorable case, die caliph Omar decided that all presumptive evidence wa« orno avail; and thatall the roar witnesses most have actually seen strium in pvxide. (Abulfedas Annates Mosleniici. p. 71. vers.Reiske.)
(3) Sibi robtir ad generatinnem, quantum triginta viri habent, innesse jactaret: ita tit unica hora posset un-deeim fsminis Mtufoeere, nt ex Arabum libris refert Stus PetmsPaschasius, c. 2.(Maracci. Prodromal Alcoran,p. 4. p. 55.) See likewise observations de Belon, lib. iii. c. 10. fol. 179. recto.) Al Jannabi (Gagnier, torn. iii. p.487.) records his own testimony, that he surpassed all men in conjugal vigour; and Ahulteda mentions the ex­clamation of Ali, who washed his body after his death,—"O prophetn, certe penis suus ccelum versus erectuseat." (in Vit. Mohammed, p. 140.)
(4) I borrow the style of a father of the church, ev*5\su*t- 'HpsexXov; tjii«j6iSi»*tov «Sxov. (Greg. Nazianzen,orat. iii. p. 108.)
(5) The common and most glorious legend includes, in a single night, the fifty victories of Hercules over thevirgin daughters of Thestios. (Diodor. Sicul, torn. i. lib. iv. p. 274. P.imanias, lib. ix. p. 763. Statins Sylr. lib.i. eleg. lit. v. 43.) But Athenseus allows seven nights, (Diepnosophist, Kb. xiii. p. 556.) and Apollndorus fifty,for this arduous achievement of rlercules, who was then no more than eighteen years of age. (Bibliot. lib. li.e. 4. p. 111. eum notis Heyne, part i. p. 333.)
Vol. III. 43







OCR Output








OF THE ROWAN EMPIRE. £11


■Who carried burning tapers in their hands, and chanted litanies to the mother ofGod, they proceeded from their monasteries to the palace. The people were edi­fied and inflamed by this extraordinary spectacle, and the trembling monarch list­ened to the prayers and abjurations of the saints, who boldly pronounced, that nonecould hope for salvation, unless they embraced the person and the creed of theorthodox successor of Athanasius. At the same time every avenue of the thronewas assaulted with gold. Under the decent names of eulogies and benedictions,the courtiers of both sexes were bribed according to the measure of their powerand rapaciousness. But their incessant demands despoiled the sanctuaries of Con­stantinople and Alexandria; and the authority of the patriarch was unable to si­lence the just murmur of his clergy, that a debt of 60,000/. had already been con­tracted to support the expense of this scandalous corruption.(l) Pulcheria, whorelieved her brother from the weight of an empire, was the firmest pillar of or­thodoxy: and so intimate was the alliance between the thunders of the synod andthe whispers of the court, that Cyril was assured of success if he could displaceone eunuch, and substitute another in the favour of Theodosius. Yet the Egyptiancould not boast of a glorious or decisive victory. The emperor, with unaccus­tomed firmness, adhered to his promise of protecting the innocence of the orientalbishops; and Cyril softened his anathemas, and confessed, with ambiguity and re­luctance, a twofold nature of Christ, before he was permitted to satiate his revengeagainst the unfortunate Nestorius.(2)
The rash and obstinate Nestorius, before the end of the synod, was oppressedby Cyril, betrayed by the court, and faintly supported by his eastern friends. Asentiment of fear or indignation prompted him, while it was yet time, to affect theglory of a voluntary abdication;(.") his wish, or at least his request, was readilygranted; he was conducted with honour from Ephesus to his old monastery of An-tioch; and after a short pause, his successors, Maximian and Proclus, were ac­knowledged as the lawful bishops of Constantinople. But in the silence of his cell,the degraded patriarch could no longer resume the innocence and security of aprivate monk. The past he regretted, he was discontented with the present, andthe future he had reason to dread: the oriental bishops successively disengagedtheir cause from his unpopular name, and each day decreased the number of schis­matics who revered Nestorius as the confessor of the faith. Afte» a residence atAntioch of four years, the hand of Theodosius subscribed an edict,(4) which rankedhim with Simon the magician, proscribed his opinions and followers, condemnedhis writings to the flames, and banished his person fii'st to Petra in Arabia, and atlength to Oasis, one of the islands of the Lybian desert. (5) Secluded from thechurch and from the world, the exile was still pursued by the rage of bigotry andwar. A wandering tribe of the Blemmyes or Nubians invaded his solitary prison;in their retreat they dismissed a crowd of useless captives; but no sooner had Nes­torius reached the banks of the Nile, than he would gladly have escaped from aRoman and orthodox city to the milder servitude of the savages. His flight waspunished as a new crime: the soul of a patriarch inspired the civil and ecclesiasti­cal powers of Egypt; the magistrates, the soldiers, the monks, devoutly torturedthe enemy of Christ and St. Cyril; and, as far as the confines of Ethiopia, the he­retic was alternately dragged and recalled, till his aged body was broken by the
(1) Clerici qui hie itint contristantnr. quod ecelesia Alexandrine nudaia sit linfuf causa turbelse; et debetptsxter ilia quae hinc transiuissa situ auri libra* mille quinpintas. Et nunc ei tcriptum est ut prsestet; ted detua ecclesia praesta araritis quorum nosti, etc. This curious and original letter, from Cyril's archdeacon tohis creature, the new bishop of Constantinople, has been nnaccountably preserved in an old Latin version,(Synodicon. c ZDS. Concil. torn. iv. p. 465—408.) The mask is almost dropped, and (he saints speak the honestlanguage of interest and confederacy.
(2) The tedious negotiations that succeeded the synod of Ephesus are diffusely relatrd in the original Acts(Concil. torn. iii. p. 1339—1771. ad fin. vol. and the Synodicon, in torn, iv.,) Socrates, (lib. vii. c. 28. 35. 40,41.)Evagrius (lib. i.e. 6. 8. 12.,) Liberatusfc. 7—10.) Tillemont (iMem. Eccles. torn. xiv. p. 487—076.) The mostpatient reader will thank me for compressing so much nonsense and falsehood in a fewlines.
(3) Aurou ti etujfiejfiroc, MSTM TS Hmtov iTrxvatnXtvtTBlt fiOvxiryir.v. Evagrius, lib. i. C. 7. The
original letters in the Synodicon (c. xv. 24—26.) .justify the appearance of a voluntary resignation, which is as-ierted by Ebed-Jesn, a Nestorian writer, anud Asseman. Bibliot. Orientale, torn. iii. p. 299—102.
(4) See the imperial letters in the Acts of the Synod of Ephesus. (Concil. torn. iii. p. 1730—1735.) Theodious name of Simonians, which was affixed to the disciples of this ti pxrwaov; J.Wxmmxj was designed *s «u
ovtiSeiri 9rltdXjp9lt>rK ximtov vrnfuvutv rJSXa»04W, TJtv <xpxpTt]iuxTvi>, K»» h*,ti Tijfcupiscc, f*HTt 6xvovretg ariptx;
ixtoc uTotpx-" tv. Yet these were Christians ! who differed only in names and in shadows.
(5) The metaphor of islands is applied by the grave civilians (Pandect, lib. xlviii. tit. xxii. leg. vii.) to thosehappy spots which are discriminated by water ana verdure from the Lybian sands. Three of these under thecommon name of Oasis, or Alvahat—1. The temple of Jupiter Ammon. 2. The middle Ossis, three days'jour­ney to the west of Lycopolis. 3. The southern, where Nestorius was banished, in the first climate, and onlythree days'journey from the confines of Nubia. See a learned note of Micbaelis (ad Detcript. Egypu AbuT-fetf^ P» 21—340







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMP1RE< 265


the unsuccessful general. Eudocia still attended his motions; at midnight, theirtent was suddenly attacked by her angry brothers, impatient to expiate her infamyin his blood: his daring spirit refused her advice, and the disguise of a female habit;and, boldly starting from his couch, he drew his sword, and cut his way throughthe numerous assassins. It was here that he first betrayed his ingratitude andtreachery: he engaged in a treasonable correspondence with the king of Hungaryand the German emperor; approached the royal tent at a suspicious hour, with adrawn sword: and, under the mask of a Latin soldier, avowed an intention of re­venge against a mortal foe; and imprudently praised the fleetness of his horse asan instrument of flight and safety. The monarch dissembled his suspicions; but,after the close of the campaign, Andronicus was arrested and strictly confined in atower of the palace of Constantinople. '
In this prison he was left above twelve years; a most painful restraint, fromwhich the thirst of action and pleasure perpetually urged him to escape. Ajoneand pensive, he perceived some broken bricks in a corner of his chamber, and liegradually widened the passage, till he had explored a dark and forgotten recess.Into this hole he conveyed himself, and the remains of his provisions, replacingthe bricks in their former positions, and erasing with care the footsteps of his re­treat. At the hour of the customary visit, his guards were amazed with the silenceand solitude of the prison, and reported, with shame and fear, his incomprehensi­ble flight. The gates of the palace and city were instantly shut: the strictest or­ders were despatched into the provinces for the recovery of their fugitive; and hiswife, on the suspicion of a pious act, was basely imprisoned in the same tower.At the dead of night she beheld a spectre: she recognised her husband; theyshared their provisions; and a son was the fruit of these stolen interviews; whichalleviated the tediousness of their confinement. In the custody of a woman, thevigilance of the keepers was insensibly relaxed; and the captive had accomplishedhis real escape, when he was discovered, brought back to Constantinople, andloaded with a double chain. At length he found the moment and the means of hisdeliverance. A boy, his domestic servant, intoxicated the guards, and obtained inwax the impression of the keys. By the diligence of his friends, a similar key,with a bundle of ropes, was introduced >nt0 'he prison, in the bottom of a hogshead.Andronicus employed, with industry and courage, the instrument of his safety, un­locked the doors, descended from the tower, concealed himself all day among thebushes, and scaled in the night the garden-wall of the palace. A boat was sta­tioned for his reception; he visited his own house» embraced his children, castaway his chain, mounted a fleet horse, and directed his rapid course towards thebanks of the Danube. At Anchialus in Thrace, an intrepid friend supplied himwith horses and money: he traversed with speed the desert of Moldavia and theCarpathian hills, and had almost reached the town of Haliez, in the Polish Russia,when he was intercepted by a party of Walachians, who resolved to convey theirimportant captive to Constantinople. His presence of mind again extricated himfrom this danger. Under the pretence of sickness, he dismounted in the night,and was allowed to step aside from the troop: he planted in the ground his longstaff, clothed it with his cap and upper garment; and, stealing into the wood, left aphantom to amuse, for some time, the eyes of the Walachians. From Haliez he washonourably conducted to Kiow, the residence of the great duke: the subtle Greeksoon obtained the esteem and confidence of Ieroslaus; his character could assumethe manners of every, climate; and the barbarians applauded his strength and cou­rage in the chase of the elks and bears of the forest. In this northern region hedeserved the forgiveness of Manuel, who solicited the Russian prince to join hisarms in the invasion of Hungary. The influence of Andronicus achieved this im­portant service: his private treaty was signed with a promise of fidelity on oneside, and of oblivion on the other; and he marched, at the head of the Russiancavalry, from the Borysthenes to the Danube. In his resentment Manuel hadever sympathized with the martial and dissolute character of his cousin; and hisfree pardon was sealed in the assault of Zemlin, in which he was second, and se­cond only, to the valour of the emperor.
Ho sooner was the exile restored to freedom and his country, than his ambitionrevived, at first to his own, and at length to the public misfortune. A daughter ofManuel was a feeble bar to the succession of the more deserving males of the Com-nenian blood: her future marriage with the prince of Hungary was'repugnant tothe hopes or prejudices of the princes and nobles. But when an oath of allegianceVas required to the presumptive heir, Andronicus alone asserted the honour of the
Vol. in. 34







OCR Output








94 THE DECLINE AND FALL


CHAPTER XLIII.


Rebellions of Africa.—Restoration of the Gothic kingdom by Totila.—Loss and recoveryof Some.—Final conquest of Italy by Narses Extinction of the Ostrogoths.—De­feat of the Franks and Alemanni Last victory, disgrace, and death, of Belisarius.—-
Death and character of Justinian.—Comet, earthquakes, and plague.
The review of the nations from the Danube to the Nile, has exposed on everyside the weakness of the Romans; and our wonder is reasonably excited that theyshould presume to enlarge an empire, whose ancient limits they were incapable ofdefending. But the wars, the conquests, and the triumphs of Justinian, are thefeeble and pernicious efforts of old age, which exhaust the remains of strength,and accelerate the decay of the powers of life. He exulted in the glorious act ofrestoring Africa and Italy to the republic; but the calamities which followed thedeparture of Belisarius betrayed the impotence of the conqueror, and accomplishedthe ruin of those unfortunate countries.
From his new acquisitions, Justinian expected that his avarice, as well as pride,should be richly gratified. A rapacious minister of the finances closely pursuedthe footsteps of Belisarius; and as the old registers of tribute had been burnt bythe Vandals, he indulged his fancy in a liberal calculation and arbitrary assess­ment of the wealth of Africa. (1) The increase of taxes, which were drawnaway by a distant sovereign, and a general resumption of the-patrimony or crownlands, soon dispelled the intoxication of the public joy: but the emperor was insen­sible to the modest complaints of the people, till he was awakened and alarmed bythe clamours of military discontent. Many of the Roman soldiers had married the•widows and daughters of the Vandals. As their own, by the double right of con­quest and inheritance, they claimed the estates which Genseric had assigned tohis victorious troops. They heard with disdain the cold and selfish representa­tions of their officers; that the liberality of Justinian had raised them from a sa­vage or servile condition; that they were already enriched by the spoils of Africa,the treasure, the slaves, and the moveables, of the vanquished barbarians; andthat the ancient and lawful patrimony of the emperors would be applied only tothe support of that government on which their own safety and reward must ulti­mately depend. The mutiny was secretly inflamed by a thousand soldiers, forthe most part Heruli, who had imbibed the doctrines, and were instigated by theclergy, of the Arian sect; and the cause of perjury and rebellion was. sanctified bythe dispensing powers of fanaticism. The Arians deplored the ruin of their church,triumphant above a century in Africa; and they were justly provoked by the lawsof the conqueror, which interdicted the baptism of their children, and the exer­cise of all religious worship. Of the Vandals chosen by Belisarius, the far greaterpart, in the honours of the eastern service, forgot their country and religion. Buta generous band of four hundred obliged the mariners, when they were in sight ofthe isle of Lesbos, to alter their course: they touched on Peloponnesus, ran ashoreon a desert coast of Africa, and boldly erected on mount Aurasius, the standard ofindependence and revolt. While the troops of the province disclaimed the com­mand of their superiors, a conspiracy was formed at Carthage against the life ofSolomon, who filled with honour the place of Belisarius; and the Arians had pi­ously resolved to sacrifice the tyrant at the foot of the altar, during the awful mys­teries of the festival of Easter. Fear or remorse restrained the daggers of the as­sassins, but the patience of Solomon emboldened their discontent; and at the endof ten days, a furious sedition was kindled in the circus, which desolated Africaabove ten years. The pillage of the city, and the indiscriminate slaughter of itsinhabitants, were suspended only by darkness, sleep, and intoxication: the go­vernor, with seven companions, among whom was the historian Procopius, escapedto Sicily: two-thirds of the army were involved in the guilt of treason, and eight
(1) For the troubles of Africa, I neither have nor desire another guide than Procopius, whose eye contem­plated the image, and whose ear collected the reports of the memorable events of his own times. In the se­cond book of the Vandalic war he relates the revolt of Stoza (c. 14—24..) the return of Belisarius (c. 15.) thevictory of Germanus (e. 16—18.,) the second administration of Solomon (c. 19—21.,) the government of Sergius(c. 22,23.,) of Areobindus (c. 24.,) the tyranny and death of Gontharis Cc. 2S—St.;) nor can I discern «nv symp­toms of flattery or malevolence in his'various portraits'.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 25


might revere the name of their gracious benefactor. ( 1) Almost every saint in thecalendar acquired the honours of a temple; almost every city of the empire obtain­ed the solid advantages of bridges, hospitals, and aqueducts; but the severe libe­rality of the monarch disdained to indulge his subjects in the popular luxury ofbaths and theatres. While Justinian laboured for the public service, he was notunmindful of his own dignity and ease. The Byzantine palace, which had beendamaged by the conflagration, was restored with new magnificence; and some no­tions may be conceived of the whole edifice, by the vestibule or hall, which, fromthe doors perhaps, or the roof, was surnamed choice, or the brazen. The domeof a spacious quadrangle was supported by massy pillars; the pavement and wallswere incrusted with many coloured marbles—the emerald green of Laconia; thefiery red, and the white Phrygian stone intersected with veins of a sea-green hue:the Mosaic paintings of the dome and sides represented the glories of the Africanand Italian triumphs. On the Asiatic shore of the Propontis, at a small distanceto the east of Chalcedon, the costly palace and gardens of Herxum(2) were pre­pared for the summer residence of Justinian, and more especially Theodora. Thepoets of the age have celebrated the rare alliance of nature and art, the harmonyof the nymphs of the groves, the fountains, and the waves; yet the crowd of at­tendants who followed the court complained of their inconvenient lodgings, (3) andthe nymphs were too often alarmed by the famous Porphyrio, a whale of ten cu­bits in breadth, and thirty in length, who was stranded at the mouth of the riverSangaris, after he had infested more than half a century the seas of Constantino-
The fortifications of Europe and Asia were multiplied by Justinian; but the repe­tition of those timid and fruitless precautions exposes to a philosophic eye the de­bility of the empire. (5) From Belgrade to the Euxine, from the conflux of theSave to the mouth of the Danube, a chain of above fourscore fortified places wasextended along the banks of the great river. Single watch-towers were changedinto spacious citadels; vacant walls, which the engineers contracted or enlargedaccording to the nature of the ground, were filled with colonies or garrisons; astrong fortress defended the ruins of Trajan's bridge,(6) and several military sta­tions affected to spread beyond the Danube the pride of the Roman name. Butthat name was divested of its terrors; the barbarians, in their annual inroads, passed,and contemptuously repassed, before these useless bulwarks; and the inhabitantsof the frontiers, instead of reposing under the shadow of the general defence, werecompelled to guard, with incessant vigilance, their separate habitations. The soli­tude of ancient cities was replenished; the new foundations of Justinian acquired,perhaps too hastily, the epithets of impregnable and populous; and the auspiciousplace of his own nativity attracted the grateful reverence of the vainest of princes.Under the name of Justiniana flrima, the obscure village of Tauresium oecamethe seat of an archbishop and a prefect, whose jurisdiction extended over sevenwarlike provinces of Illyricum,(7) and the corrupt appellation of Giustendil stillindicates, about twenty miles to the south of Sophia, the residence of a Turkishsanjak.(8) For the use of the emperor's countrymen, a cathedral, a palace, and
(l) Justinian once gave forty-five centenaries of gold (180,000?.,) for the repairs of Antioch after the earth­quake (John Malala, torn. ii. p. 146—149.)
(3) For the Herasum, the palace of Theodora, see Gyllius de Bosphoro Thracio (lib. iii. c. 11.,) Aleman.(Not. ad Anecdot. p. BO, 81. who quotes several epigrams of the Aulhology.,) and Ducange (C. P. Chtist. lib.vi. c. 13. p. 175,176.)
(3) Compare, in the Edifices (lib. i. c. 11.,) and in the Anecdotes (c. 8—15.,) the different styles of adulationand malevolence: stripped of the paint, or cleansed from the dirt, the object appears to be the same.
(4) Procopius, lib. viii. 29. most probably a stranger and wanderer, as the Mediterranean does not breedwhales. Balsenz quoque in nostra maria penetrant (Plin. Hist. Natur. ix. 2.) Between the polar circle andthe tropic, the cetaceous animals of the ocvan grow to the length of fifty, eighty, or one hundred feet. (Hist,des Voyages, torn. xv. p. 289. Pennants British Zoology, vol. iii. p. 35.)
(5) Montesquieu observes (torn. iii. p. 503. Considerations sur la Grandeur et la Decadence des Romains, c.20.,) that Justinian's empire was like France in the time of the Norman inroads—never so weak as when eve­ry village was fortified.
(6) Procopius affirms (lib. iv. e. 6.,) that the Danube was stopped by the ruins of the bridge. Had Apollodo-rus, tbe architect, left a description of his own work, the fabulous wonders of Dion Cassius (lib. lxviii. p. 1129.)would have been corrected by the genuine picture. Trajan's bridge consisted of twenty or twenty-two stonepiles with wooden arches; the river is shallow, tbe current erentle, and the whole interval no more than four hun-
• deed and forty-three (Reimar ad Dion, from Marsigli) or five hundred and fifteen toitet (d'Anville GeographieAneienne, torn. i. p. 305.)
(7) Of the two Dacias, MedUerranea and RipetuUt Dardania, Prsevalitana, the second Msesia, and the secondMacedonia. See Justinian (Novell. 11.,) who speaks of his castles beyond the Danube, and of homines semperbellicis stldoribus inhserentes.
(8) See d'Anville (Memoirea de l'Academie, &c. torn. xxxi. p. 289,290.)) Rycaut (Present State of the Turk­ish Empire, p. 97. 316.) Marsigli (Stato Militare del Imperio Ottomane, p. 130.) The sanjak of Giustrndil isone of the twenty under the beglerbeg of Komelia, and his district maintains forty-eight zaims and five hun­dred and eighty-three timarioti.
Vol.. III. 1







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


hird is taken, admonished his mistress to hasten her return. In the presence ofCaled, and of death, the unfortunate Jonas professed his belief in one God, and hisapostle Mahomet; and continued, till the season of his martyrdom, to dischargethe duties of a brave and sincere Mussulman. When the city was taken, he flewto the monastery where Eudocia had taken refuge; but the lover was forgotten;the apostate was scorned; she preferred her religion to her country; and the jus­tice of Caled, though deaf to mercy, refused to detain by force a male or femaleinhabitant of Damascus. Four days was the general confined to the city by theobligation of the treaty, and the urgent cares of his new conquest. His appetitefor blood and rapine would have been extinguished by the hopeless computationof time and distance; but he listened to the importunities of Jonas, who assuredhim that the weary fugitives might yet be overtaken. At the head of four thou­sand horse, in the disguise of Christian Arabs, Caled undertook the pursuit.They halted only for the moments of prayer; and the guide had a perfect know­ledge of the country. For a long way the footsteps of the Damascenes were plainand conspicuous: they vanished on a sudden; but the Saracens were comforted bythe assurance that the caravan had turned aside into the mountains, and mustspeedily fall into their hands. In traversing the ridges of the Libanus, they en­dured intolerable hardships, and the sinking spirits of the veteran fanatics weresupported and cheered by the unconquerable ardour of a lover. From a peasant,of the country, they were informed that the emperor had sent orders to the colonyof exiles, to pursue without delay the road of the sea-coast, and of Constantinople;apprehensive, perhaps, that the soldiers and people of Antioch might be discou­raged by the sight and the story of their sufferings. The Saracens were conductedthrough the territories of Gabala(l) and Laodicea, at a cautious distance from thewalls of the cities; the rain was incessant, the night was dark, a single mountainseparated them from the Roman army; and Caled, ever anxious for the safety ofhis brethren, whispered an ominous dream in the ear of his companion. With thedawn of day, the prospect again cleared, and they saw before them, in a pleasantvalley, the tents of Damascus. After a short interval of repose and prayer, Caleddivided his cavalry into four squadrons, committing the first to his faithful Derar,and reserving the last for himself. They successively rushed on the promiscuousmultitude, insufficiently provided with arms, and already vanquished by sorrowand fatigue. Except a captive who was pardoned and dismissed, the Arabs en­joyed the satisfaction of believing that not a Christian of either sex escaped theedge of their scimitars. The gold and silver of Damascus was scattered fiver thecamp, and a royal wardrobe of three hundred load of silk might clothe an armyof naked barbarians. In the tumult of the battle, Jonas sought and found the objectof his pursuit; but her resentment was inflamed by the last act of his perfidy; andas Eudocia struggled in his hateful embraces, she struck a dagger to her heart. .Another female, the widow of Thomas, and the real or supposed daughter of He-raclius, was spared and released without a ransom; but the generosity of Caledwas the effect of his contempt; and the haughty Saracen insulted, by a message ofdefiance, the throne of the Csesars. Caled had penetrated above a hundred andfifty miles into the heart of the Roman province: he returned to Damascus withthe same secrecy and speed. On the accession of Omar, the sword of God wasremoved from the command; but the caliph, who blamed the rashness) was com­pelled to applaud the vigour and conduct, of the enterprise.
Another expedition of the conquerors of Damascus will equally display theiravidity and their contempt for the riches of the present world. They were inform­ed that the produce and manufactures of the country were annually collected inthe fair of Abyla,(2) about thirty miles from the city; that the cell of a devout her­mit was visited at the same time by a multitude of pilgrims; and that the festival oftrade and superstition would be ennobled by the nuptials of the daughter of the go­vernor of Tripoli. Abdallah, the son of Jaafar, a glorious and holy martyr, un­dertook, with a banner of five hundred horse, the pious and profitable commissionof despoiling the infidels. As he approached the fair of Abyla, he was astonished


(1) The towns of Gabala and Laodicea, which the Arabs passed, still exist in a state of decay. (Maundrell, p.11,12. Pocock, vol. ii. p. 13.) Had not the Christians been overtaken, they must have crossed the Orontes onsome bridge in the sixteen miles between Antioch and the sea, and might have rejoined the high road of Con­stantinople at Alexandria. The itineraries wilt represent the directions and distances, (p. 146.148. 531, 582,edit. Wesselinir.)
(2) Dair Abil Kudos. After retrenching the last word, the epithet, holy, I discovered the Abiln of Lysania*between Damascus and Heliopolis: the name (Abil signifies a vineyard) concurs with the situation to "justifyrny conjecture. (Reland. Paleslin. torn. i. p. 517. torn. ii. p. 525. 527.)







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AM) FALL


racks: the lands, moveables, and cattle, were confiscated; and our modern prece»dents will support the charge, that much wanton or malicious havoc was exer->cised against the relics, and even the books, of the monasteries. With the habitand profession of monks, the public and private worship of images was rigorouslyproscribed; and it should seem, that a solemn abjuration of idolatry was exactedfrom the subjects, or at least from the clergy, of the eastern empire.(l)
The patient east abjured, with reluctance, her sacred images: they were fondlycherished, and vigorously defended, by the independent zeal of the Italians. Inecclesiastical rank and jurisdiction, the patriarch of Constantinople and the popeof Rome were nearly equal. But the Greek prelate was a domestic slave underthe eye of his master, at whose nod he alternately passed from the convent to thethrone, and from the throne to the convent. A distant and dangerous stationamidst the barbarians of the west, excited the spirit and freedom of the Latin bi­shops. Their popular election endeared them to the Romans; the public and pri­vate indigence was relieved by their ample revenue; and the weakness or neglectof the emperors compelled them to consult, both in peace and war, the temporalsafety of the city. In the school of adversity the priest insensibly imbibed thevirtues and the ambition of a prince; the same character was assumed, the samepolicy was adopted, by the Italian, the Greek, or the Syrian, who ascended thechair of St. Peter; and, after the loss of her legions, and provinces, the genius andfortune of the popes again restored the supremacy of Rome. It is agreed, that,in the eighth century, their dominion was founded on rebellion, and that the rebellionwas produced, and justified,.by the heresy of the Iconoclasts; but the conduct of thesecond and third Gregory, in this memorable contest, is variously interpreted bythe wishes of their friends and enemies. The Byzantine writers unanimouslydeclare, that, after a fruitless admonition, they pronounced the separation of theeast and west.and deprived the sacrilegious tyrant of the revenue and sovereigntyof Italy. Their excommunication is still more clearly expressed by the Greeks,who beheld the accomplishment of the papal triumphs; and as they are morestrongly attached to their religion than to their country, they praise, instead ofblaming, the zeal and orthodoxy of these apostolical men. (2) The modern cham­pions of Rome are eager to accept the praise and the precedent: this great andglorious example of the disposition of royal heretics is celebrated by the cardinalsBaronius and Bellarmine;(3) and if they are asked, why the same thunders werenot hurled against the Neros and Julians of antiquity; they reply, that the weak­ness of the primitive church was the sole cause of her patient loyalty. (4) On thisoccasion, the effects of love and hatred are the same, and the zealous protestants,. who seek to kindle the indignation, and to alarm the fears, of princes and magis­trates, expatiate on the insolence and treason of the two Gregories against theirlawful sovereign. (5) They are defended only by the moderate catholics, for themost part, of the Gallican church,(6) who respect the saint without approving thesin. These common advocates of the crown and the mitre circumscribe thetruth of facts by the rule of equity, Scripture, and tradition; and appcal(") to


(1) Efby&fifM y«o t"-ittt;il><. xaerx zrxtrxv ei'sepx'sef T*'.' -J-o r^; y,t ipif «'jt5'j, nwTsts ejri) ex\xi zx' tfMWMi Teu*5iTr;-trxt t*v ir?><rx*>yr<rtvTuv Titrrw n'tcivvv. (Damascen. Oj>. torn. i. p. 625.) Tbil oath and subscription I do Dot re­member to have seen in any modern compilation.
(2) Koei Ttti- Pj»p»* <rw itztk Itxkix rr.i &xirt\nxf xurcv «ff0TT(i5"i, says Theophanes (Chronograph, p. 3-13.) Forthis Gregory is stylM by Cedrenus mvxf xrrerToKixs; (p. 450.) Zonaras specifies the thunder xvxSrpxt* rrvveiStxae(torn. ii. lib. xt. p. 104> 105.) It may be obse rved that the Greeks are apt to confound the times and actionsof two Gregories.
(3) See Baronius, Annal.ijccles. A. D. 730. No. 4, 5. dignum fxemplum ! Bellarmin, de Romano Pontifipe,lib. s'. c. 8, roulctavit enm pane imperii. Sigonius, de Regno Italise. lib. iii. Opera, torn. ii. p. 169. Yet suchis the chartge or Italy, that Sigcnius is corrected by the editor of Milan, Phihppus Argelatus, a Bolognese,And subject of the pope,
(4) Quod si Christian'! olim non (eposucnint Xeronem aut Juliarium, id fuit quia deerant Tires temporalesChristianis (Honest Bellarmine, de Pom. Pont. lib. v. c. 7.) Cardinal Perron adds a distinction more honoura­ble to the first Christians, but not mot* satisfactory to modern princes—the treason of heretics and apostates,who break their oath, belie their coin, ami renounce their allegiance to Christ and his Wear (Perroniana, p. 89.)
(5) Take, as a specimen, the cautious Ibunage (Hist. de. I'Eglise, p. 1350. 1351.,) and the Tenement Span-heim(Hist. Imagimim,) who, with a hundred more, tread in the footsteps of the centuriators of Mai
'■ ' ■■— ' dCT (Hi„ -
! (lstoria
.. r-— —.v.,.™,..... .«.uaiiHaii9viiuuji in me nein oi control™-■ "
party, who stand on^the open middle ground, exposed to the fire of both sides


(6> s# m°y (°P«a, 'Oni.T. pars 2.epist. 7. 7. p. 456-474.) Natalis Alexander (Hist. Not. Test!secuh Tin. dissert. 1. p. P2-S6..)Pagi (Critica, torn. iii. p. 215,216.,) and Giannone (lstoria CiTile di 1torn. i. p. 317—320.,) a disciple of the Gallican school. In the field of controveny I always pity the m(party, who stand on the open middle ground, exposed to the fire of both sides.
(7) They appealed to Paul Warnefrid, or Diaconus (de Gestis Langobard. lib. yi. c. 49. p. 506, 507. inItal. Muratori, torn.,. pars 1. J and the nominal Anastasius (de Vit. Pont, in Muratori, torn. iii. pars. 1.J w.- R~nus IX p. 154. Gregorius III. p. 158. Zacharias, p. Ml. Stephanns III. p. 165. Paulns, p. 172. Stephanui IV. p.174. Hadrianus, p. 179. Leo III. p. 195. Yet I may remark, that the true Anastasius (Hist. Eccles. p. 134. edit.Reg.J and the Histona Mi.ce)la,(l,b. xxi. p. 151. in torn. i. Script. Hal. both of the ninth century; translateand approve the Greek text of Theophanea. "







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 347


scure sentence of his Koran, or book, is yet extant;(l) and, in the pride of his mis­sion, Moseilama condescended to offer a partition of the earth. The proposal wasanswered by Mahomet with contempt: but the rapid progress of the impostorawakened the fears of his successor; forty thousand Moslems were assembled un­der the standard of Caled; and the existence of their faith was resigned to theevent of a decisive battle. In the first action, they were repulsed with the loss oftwelve hundred men; but the skill and perseverance of their general prevailed;their defeat was avenged by the slaughter of ten thousand infidels; and Moseilamahimself was pierced by an Ethiopian slave with the same javelin which had mor­tally wounded the uncle of Mahomet. The various rebels of Arabia, without achief or cause, were speedily suppressed by the power and discipline of the risingmonarchy; and the whole nation again professed, and more steadfastly held, thereligion of the Koran. The ambition of the caliphs provided an immediate exer­cise for the restless spirit of the Saracens; their valour was united in the prosecu­tion of a holy war; and their enthusiasm was equally confirmed by opposition andvictory.
From the rapid conquests of the Saracens a presumption will naturally arise,that the first caliphs commanded in person the armies of the faithful, and soughtthe crown of martyrdom in the foremost ranks of the battle. The courage ofAbubeker,(2) Omar,(3) and Othman,(4) had indeed been tried in the persecutionand wars ot the prophet, and the personal assurance of paradise must have taughtthem to despise the pleasures and dangers of the present world. But they as­cended the throne in a venerable or mature age, and esteemed the domestic caresof religion and justice the most important duties of a sovereign. Except the pre­sence of Omar at the siege of Jerusalem, the longest expeditions were the fre­quent pilgrimage from Medina to Mecca; and they calmly received the tidings ofvictory as they prayed or preached before the sepulchre of the prophet. Theaustere and frugal measure of their lives was the effect of virtue or habit, and thepride of their simplicity insulted the vain magnificence of the kings of the earth.When Abubeker assumed the office of caliph, he enjoined his daughter Ayesha totake a strict account of his private patrimony, that it might be evident whetherhe were enriched or impoverished by the service of the state. He thought him­self entitled to a stipend of three pieces of gold, with the sufficient maintenanceof a single camel and a black slave; but on the Friday of each week, he distri­buted the residue of his own and the public money, first to the most worthy, andthen to the most indigent, of the Moslems. The remains of his wealth, a coarsegarment, and five pieces of gold, were delivered to his successor, who lamentedwith a modest sigh his own inability to equal such an admirable model. Yet theabstinence and humanity of Omar were not inferior to the virtues of Abubeker:his food consisted of barley-bread or dates; his drink was water; he preached in agown that was torn or tattered in twelve places; and a Persian satrap who paidhis homage to the conqueror, found him asleep among the beggars on the steps ofthe mosch of Medina. Economy is the source of liberality, and the increase ofthe revenue enabled Omar to establish a just and perpetual reward for the pastand present services of the faithful. Careless of his own emolument, he assignedto Abbas, the uncle of the prophet, the first and most ample allowance of twenty-five thousand drachms or pieces of silver. Five thousand were allotted to eachof the aged warriors, the relics of the field of Beder, and the last and meanest ofthe companions of Mahomet was distinguished by the annual reVard of threethousand pieces. One thousand was the stipend of the veterans who had foughtin the first battles against the Greeks and Persians, and the decreasing pay, as lowas fifty pieces of silver, was adapted to the respective merit and seniority of thesoldiers of Omar. Under his reign, and that of his predecessor, the conquerorsof the east were the trusty servants of God and the people: the mass of the pub­lic treasure was consecrated to the expenses of peace and war; a prudent mixtureof justice and bounty, maintained the discipline of the Saracens, and they united,by a rare felicity, the despatch and execution of despotism, with the equal and
(1) See this text, which demonstrate! a cod from the work of generation, in Abulpharagius, (Specimen HiscArabum. p. 13. and Dynast, p. 103.; and Abulfeda. Annal. p. 63.)
(2) His reign in Eutyehius, torn. ii. p. 251. Elmacin, p. 18. Abiilphaiagiui, p. 108. Abulffda, p. 60.D'Herbelot, p. 58.
(3) His reign in Eutyehius, p. 264. Elmacin, p. 24. Abulpharagius, p. 110. Abulftda, p. 66. D'Herbelot,p. 686.
(4) His reign in Eutyehius, p. 323. Elciacip.p. 36. Abulpharagius, p. 115. Abulfeda, p. 75. D'Herbelot,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 91


fidelity of Gubazes sustained the most rigorous trials. He patiently endured theHardships of a savage life, and rejected with disdain the specious temptations ofthe Persian court. The king of the Lazi had been educated in the Christian reli­gion; his mother was the daughter of a senator; during his youth he had served tenyears a silentiary of the Byzantine palace,(l) and the arrears of an unpaid salarywere a motive of attachment as well as of complaint. But the long continuanceof his sufferings extorted from him a naked representation of the truth; and truthwas an unpardonable libel on the lieutenants of Justinian, who, amidst the delaysof a ruinous war, had spared his enemies, and trampled on his allies. Their ma­licious information persuaded the emperor, that his faithless vassal already medi­tated a second defection: an order was issued to send him prisoner to Constantino­ple; a treacherous clause was inserted, that he might be lawfully killed in case ofresistance; and Gubazes, without arms, or suspicion of danger, was stabbed in thesecurity of a friendly interview. In the first moments of rage and despair, the Col-chians would have sacrificed their country and religion to the gratification of re­venge. But the authority and eloquence of the wiser few, obtained a salutary pause:the victory of the Phasis restored the terror of the Roman arms, and the emperorwas solicitous to absolve his own name from the imputation of so foul a murder.A judge of senatorial rank was commissioned to inquire into the conduct anddeath of the king of the Lazi. He ascended a stately tribunal, encompassed bythe ministers of justice and punishment: in the presence of both nations, this extra­ordinary cause was pleaded, according to the forms of civil jurisprudence, and somesatisfaction was granted to an injured people, by the sentence and execution of themeaner criminals. (2)
In peace, the king of Persia continually sought the pretences of a rupture; butno sooner had he taken up arms, than he expressed his desire of a sate and ho­nourable treaty. During the fiercest hostilities, the two monarchs entertained adeceitful negotiation; and such was the superiority of Chosroes, that whilst hetreated the Roman ministers with insolence and contempt, he obtained the mostunprecedented honours for his own ambassadors at the imperial court. The suc­cessor of Cyrus assumed the majesty of the eastern sun, and graciously permittedhis younger brother Justinian to reign over the west, with the pale and reflectedsplendour of the moon. This gigantic style was supported by the pomp and elo­quence of Isdigune, One of the royal chamberlains. His wife and daughters, witha train of eunuchs and camels, attended the march of the ambassador; two satrapswith golden diadems were numbered among his followers: he was guarded by fivehundred horse, the most valiant of the Persians; and the Roman governor of Darawisely refused to admit more than twenty of this martial and hostile caravan. WhenIsdigune had saluted the emperor, and delivered his presents, he passed ten monthsat Constantinople without discussing any serious affairs. Instead of being confinedto his palace, and receiving food and water from the hands of his keepers, the Per­sian ambassador, without spies or guards, was allowed to visit the capital; and thefreedom of conversation and trade enjoyed by his domestics offended the preju­dices of an age, which rigorously practised the law of nations, without confidenceor courtesy. (3) By an unexampled indulgence, his interpreter, a servant belowthe notice of a Roman magistrate, was seated, at the table of Justinian, by the sideof his master; and one thousand pounds of gold might be assigned for the ex­pense of his journey and entertainment. Yet the repeated labours of Isdigunecould procure only a partial and imperfect truce, which was always purchased withthe treasures, and renewed at the solicitation, of the Byzantine court Manyyears of fruitless desolation elapsed before Justinian and Chosroes were compelled,by mutual lassitude, to consult the repose of their declining age. At a confe­rence held on the frontier, each party, without expecting to gain credit, displayedthe power, the justice, and the pacific intentions of their respective sovereigns;but necessity and interest dictated the treaty of peace, which vms concluded for aterm of fifty years, diligently composed in the Greek and Persian languages, and
(1) In the palace of Constantinople there were thirty silentiariei, who are styled hastati ante forts cubiculi,t»k rjyw *»-*TT«T»i, an honourable title, which conferred the rank, without imposing; thedutiei of a lenator(Cod. Theodos. lib. vi. tit. 23. Gothufred. Comment, torn. ii. p. 120.) .... ^.
(I) Oo these judicial orations, Asrathias (lib. iii. p. 81—89. lib. iv. p. 108—119.) lavishes eighteen or twentypages of false and florid rhetoric. His ignorance or carelessness overlooks the strongest argument against theking t" "


Lazica—his former revolt. . . -
— nth. lib. i. c 7.:) and foreign ambas-(Busbequius, epist. iii. p. 149. MM -Bell's Travels, vol. ii. p. IWsrflJ.O


f3} Procopius represents the practice of the Gothic court of Havenna (Gothaadors have been treated with the same jealousy and rigour in Turkey (nfcc.,) Russia (Voyage d'Olearias, and China (Narrative of M. de Lange, in 1







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 2.1


Wevy knee was bent, and attempted to sow the seeds of discord between the em­peror and his beloved consort. Even Theodora herself was constrained to dis­semble, to wait a favourable moment, and, by an artful conspiracy, to render Johnof Cappadocia the accomplice of his own destruction. At a time when Belisa-rius, unless he had been a hero, must have shown himself a rebel, his wife Anto-nina, who enjoyed the secret confidence of the empress, communicated his feigneddiscontent to Euphemia, the daughter of the prefect; the credulous virgin im­parted to her father the dangerous project, and John, who might have known thevalue of oaths and promises, was tempted to accept a nocturnal, and almost trea­sonable interview with the wife of Belisarius. An ambuscade of guards and eu­nuchs had been posted by the command of Theodora: they rushed with drawnswords to seize or punish the guilty minister: he was saved by the fidelity of hisattendants; but, instead of appealing to a gracious sovereign, who had privatelywarned him of his danger, he pusillanimously fled to the sanctuary of the church.The favourite of Justinian was sacrificed to conjugal tenderness or domestic tran­quillity; the conversion of a prefect into a priest extinguished his ambitious hopes,but the friendship of the emperor alleviated his disgrace, and he retained, in themild exile of Cyzicus, an ample portion of his riches. Such imperfect revengecould not satisfy the unrelenting hatred of Theodora; the murder of his old ene­my, the bishop of Cyzicus, afforded a decent pretence; and John of Cappadocia,whose actions had deserved a thousand deaths, was at last condemned for a crimeof which he was innocent. A great minister, who had been invested with the ho­nours of consul and patrician, was ignominiously scourged like the vilest of male­factors: a tattered cloak was the sole remnant of his fortunes; he was transportedin a bark to the place of his banishment at Antinopolis in Upper Egypt, and theprefect of the east begged his bread through the cities which had trembled at hisname. During an exile of seven years, his life was protected and threatened bythe ingenious cruelty of Theodora; and when her death permitted the emperor torecall a servant, whom he had abandoned with regret, the ambition of John ofCappadocia was reduced to the humble duties of the sacerdotal profession. Hissuccessors convinced the subjects of Justinian, that the arts of oppression mightstill be improved by experience and industry; the frauds of a Syrian banker wereintroduced into the administration of the finances; and the example of the prefectwas diligently copied by the questor, the public and private treasurer, the go­vernors of provinces, and the principal magistrates of the eastern empire. (1)
V. The edifices of Justinian were cemented with the blood and treasure of hispeople; but those stately structures appeared to announce the prosperity of theempire, and actually displayed the skill of their architects. Both the theoiy andpractice of the arts which depend on mathematical science and mechanical power,were cultivated under the patronage of the emperors; the fame of Archimedes wasrivalled by Proclus and Anthemius; and if their miracles had been related by in­telligent spectators, they might now enlarge the speculations, instead of excitingthe distrust of philosophers. A tradition has prevailed, that the Roman fleet wasreduced to ashes in the port of Syracuse by the burning-glasses of Archimedes;(2)and it is asserted, that a similar expedient was employed by Proclus to destroythe Gothic vessels in the harbour of Constantinople, and to protect his benefactorAnastasius against the bold enterprise of Vitalian.(3) A machine was fixed onthe walls of the city, consisting of a hexagon mirror of polished brass, with manysmaller and moveable polygons to receive and reflect the rays of the meridiansun; and a consuming flame was darted to the distance, perhaps, of two hundredfeet.(4) The truth of these two extraordinary facts is invalidated'by the silenceof the most authentic historians; and the use of burning-glasses was never adopt­ed in the attack or defence of'places.(5) Yet the admirable experiments of a
(1) The chronology of Procopius is loose and obscure; bur. with the aid of Pagi. I can discern that John wasappointed pretorian prefect of the east in the year 530; that he was removed in January 532—restored before'June 533—banished in 541—and recalled between June, 548, and April 1, 549. Ateman. p. 96, 97.) gives thelist of his ten successors—a rapid series in a single r( ign.
(2) This conflagration is hinted by Lucian, (in Hippia, c. 2.) and Galen, (lib. iii. de lemperamentis. torn. i.p. 81. edit. Bazil.) in the second century. A thousand years afterwards, it is positively affirmed by Zonaras,(lib. ix. p. 424.) on the filth of Dion Cassius, by Tzetzess, (Chiliad, ii. 119, fke.) EusUthlut, (ad Iliad. E. p.338.) and the scholiast of Lucian. See Fabricius, (Bibliot. Graec. lib. iii. c. 22. torn. ii. p. 551,552.) to whom Iam more or less indebted for several of these quotations.
(3) Zonaras (lib. xiv. p. 55.) affirms the fact, without quoting any evidence.
(4) Tzetzes describes he artifice of these burning glasses, which he had read, perhaps with no learned eyesin a mathematical treatise of Anthemius. That treatise, mpt s-xpzScPyj^ii^avitfMeTooy, has been lately published,translated, and illustrated, by M. Dupuys, a scholar, and a mathematician. (Memoirs de 1'Acadcime des In­scriptions, ton), sxti. p. 392—451.)
(5) In the siege of Syracuse, by the silence of Polybiui, Plutarch, Livyj in the siege of Constantinople, bythat of Marcellinus, and all the cotemporaries of the sixth century.







OCR Output








16 THE DECLINE AND FALL


eighty, or one hundred days: as soon as they had passed the Jazartes, they enteredthe desert; and the wandering hordes, unless they are restrained by armies andgarrisons, have always considered the citizen and the traveller as the objects of law­ful rapine. To escape the Tartar robbers, and the tyrants of Persia, the silk ca­ravans explored a more southern road; they traversed the mountains of Thibet,descended the streams of the Ganges or the Indus, and patiently expected in theports of Guzerat and Malabar, the annual fleets of the west.(l) But the dangersof the desert were found less intolerable than toil, hunger, and the loss of time;the attempt was seldom renewed, and the only European, who has passed thatunfrequented way, applauds his own diligence, that, in nine months after his de­parture from Pekin, he reached the mouth of the Indus. The ocean, however,was open to the free communication of mankind. From the great river to thetropic of Cancer, the provinces of China were subdued and civilized by the em­perors of the north; they were filled about the time of the Christian era with ci­ties and men, mulberry-trees and their precious inhabitants; and if the Chinese,with the knowledge of the compass, had possessed the genius of the Greeks orPhoenicians, they might have spread their discoveries over the southern hemi­sphere. I am not qualified to examine, and I am not disposed to believe, their dis­tant voyages to the Persian gulf, or the Cape of Good Hope: but their ancestorsmight equal the labours and success of the present race, and the sphere of theirnavigation might extend from the isles of Japan to the straits of Malacca, the pil­lars, if we may apply that name, of an Oriental Hercules. (2) Without losingsight of land, they might sail along the coast to the extreme promontory of Achin,which is annually visited by ten or twelve ships laden with the productions, themanufactures, and even the artificers, of China; the island of Sumatra and the*opposite peninsula, are faintly delineated(S) as the regions of gold and silver; andthe trading cities named in the geography of Ptolemy, may indicate, that thiswealth was not solely derived from the mines. The direct interval between Su­matra and Ceylon is about three hundred leagues; the Chinese and Indian navi­gators were conducted by the flight of birds and periodical winds, and the oceanmight be securely traversed in square-built ships, which, instead of iron, weresewed together with the strong thread of the cocoa-nut. Ceylon, Serendib, orTaprobana, was divided between two hostile princes; one of whom possessed themountains, the elephants, and the luminous carbuncle, and the other enjoyed themore solid riches of domestic industry, foreign trade, and the capacious harbourof Trinquemale, which received and dismissed the fleejs of the east and west.In this hospitable isle, at an equal distance (as it was computed) from their re­spective countries, the silk merchants of China, who had collected in their voy­ages, aloes, cloves, nutmeg, and santal wood, maintained a free and beneficial com­merce with the inhabitants of the Persian gulf. The subjects of the great kingexalted, without a rival, his power and magnificence; and the Roman, whoconfounded their vanity by comparing his paltry coin with a gold medal of theemperor Anastasius, had sailed to Ceylon in an Ethiopian ship as a simple pas­senger.^)
As silk became of indispensable use, the emperor Justinian saw, with concern,that the Persians had occupied by land and sea the monopoly of this importantsupply, and that the wealth of his subjects was continually drained by a nation ofenemies and idolaters. An active government would have restored the trade ofEgypt and the navigation of the Red Sea, which had decayed with the prosperityof the empire; and the Roman vessels might have sailed, for the purchase ofsilk, to the ports of Ceylon, of Malacca, or even of China. Justinian embraced amore humble expedient, and solicited the aid of his Christian allies the Ethi­opians of Abyssinia, who had recently acquired the arts of navigation, the spirit
(1) The roads from China to Persia and Hindostan may be investigated in the relations of Hackluyt andTherenot (the ambassadors of Sharokh, Anthony Jenkinson, the Fere Greuber, &c. See likewise HanwBy'sTravels, vol. i. p. 345—357.) A communication through Thibet has been lately explored by the English so­vereign of Bengal.
(2) For the Chinese navigation to Malacca and Achin. perhaps to Ceylon, see Henaudot (on the two Maho­metan Travellers, p. 8—11.13—17.141— 1J7.,) Dampier (vol. ii. p. 136.,) the Hist. Philosophique des deux In-des, torn. i. p. 98.,) and the Hist. Generates des Voyages (torn. vi. p. 201.)
(3) The knowledge, or rather ignorance, of Strabo, Pliny, Ptolemy, Arrian, Mareian, &e. of the countries'eastward of Cape Comorin,is finely Illustrated by d'Anville (Antiquite Geographique de l'lnde, especially p.161—198.) Our geography of India is improved by commerce and conquest: and has been illnstrated by theexcellent maps and memoirs of Major Rennel. If lie extends the sphere of his inquiries with the same criti­cal knowledge and sagacity, he wifi succeed, and may surpass, the first of modern geographers.
(4) The Taprobane of Pliny (6.24.,) Solinus (c. 53.,) and Salmas. Plinianse Exercitat. (p. 781, 782.,) and mostof the ancients, who often confound the islands of Ceylon and Sumatra, is more clearly described by CosmafSndieopleustes; yet even the Christian topographer has exaggerated its dimensions. His reformation on theIndian and Chinese trade is rare and curious (fib. ii. p. 138. lib. xi. p. 337,333. edit. Montfancon.l







OCR Output








AS THE DECLINE AND FALL


ducts were made impervious, and the mole or sepolchre of Hadrian(l) was ton*verted, for the first time, to the use of a citadel. That venerable structure, whichcontained the ashes of the Antonines, was a circular turret rising from a quadrangu­lar basis: it was covered with the white marble of Paros, and decorated by the sta­tues of gods and heroes; and the lover of the arts must read with a sigh, that theworks of Praxiteles or Lysippus were torn from their lofty pedestals, and hurledinto the ditch on the heads or the besiegers. (2) To each of his lieutenants, Be-lisarius assigned the defence of a gate, with the wise and peremptory instruction,that whatever might be the alarm, they should steadilyadhere to their respectiveposts, and trust their general for the safety of Rome. The formidable host of theGoths, as insufficient to embrace the ample measure of the city; of the fourteengates, seven only were invested from the Prsenestine to the Flaminian way;and Vitiges divided his troop"? into six camps, each of which was fortified with aditch ana rampart. On the Tuscan side of the river, a seventh encampment wasformed in the field or circus of the Vatican, for the important purpose of command­ing the Milvian bridge and the course of the Tiber; but they approached with de­votion the adjacent church of St. Peter; and the threshold of the holy apostleswas respected during the siege by a Christian enemy. In the ages of victory. asoften as the senate decreed some distant conquest, the consul denounced hostili­ties, by unbarring, in solemn pomp, the gates of the temple of Janus. (3) Do­mestic war now rendered the admonition superfluous, and the ceremony was su­perseded by the establishment of a new religion. But the brazen temple of Janus■was left standing in the forum, of a size sufficient only to contain the statue of thegod, five cubits in height, of a human form, but with two faces, directed to theeast and west. The double gates were likewise of brass; and a fruitless effort to ■turn them on their rusty hinges, revealed the scandalous secret, that some Romans■were still attached to the superstition of their ancestors.
Eighteen days were employed by the besiegers, to provide all the instrumentsof attack which antiquity had invented. Fascines were prepared to fill the ditches,scaling ladders to ascend the walls. The largest trees of the forest supplied thetimbers of four battering rams; their.heads were armed with iron; they weresuspended by ropes, and each of them was worked by the labour of fifty men.The lofty wooden turrets moved on wheels or rollers, and formed a spaciousplatform of the level of the rampart. On the morning of the nineteenth day, ageneral attack was made from the Prsnestine gate to the Vatican: seven Go­thic columns, with their military engines, advanced to the assault; and the Rb-mans who lined the ramparts, listened with doubt and anxiety to the cheerful as­surances of their commander. As soon as the enemy approached the ditch, Beli-sarius himself drew the first arrow; and such was his strength and dexterity, thathe transfixed the foremost of the barbarian leaders. A shout of applause and*victory was re-echoed along the wall. He drew a second arrow, and the stroke wasfollowed with the same success and the same acclamation. The Roman generalthen gave the word, that the archers should aim at the teams of oxen; they wereinstan#y covered with mortal wounds; the towers which they drew, remained use­less and immoveable, and a single moment disconcerted the laborious projects ofthe king of the Goths. After this disappointment, Vitiges still continued, orfeigned to continue, the assault of the Salarian gate, that he might divert the at­tention of his adversary, while his principal forces more strenuously attacked thePrscnestine gate and the sepulchre of Hadrian, at the distance of three miles fromeach other. Near the former, the double walls of the Vivarium (4) were low orbroken; the fortifications of the latter were feebly guarded: the vigour of theGoths was excited by the hope of victory and spoil; and if a single post had givenway, the Romans, and Rome itself, were irrecoverably lost. This perilous day wasthe most glorious in the life of Belisarius. Amidst tumult and dismay, the wholeplan of the attack and defence was distinctly present to his mind; he observed the
fl) The description of ibis mausoleum, or mole, in Procopius, (lib. i. c. 25.) ii the first and best. The heightabove the vails <r%sSev s? xifloo fi»\w. On Nolli's great plan, the sides measure two hundred and sixty Englishfeet.
(2) Praxiteles excelled in Fauns, and that of Athens was his own master-piece. Rome now contains abovethirty of the same character. When the ditch of St. Angelo was cleansed under Urban VIII., the workmenfound the sleeping Faun of the Barberini palace: but a leg,a thigh, and the right arm, had been broken fromthat beautiful statue. (Winckelraan, Hist, de 1'Art, torn. ii. p. 52,53. torn. iii. p. 265.)
(3) Procopius has riven the best description of the temple of Janus, a national deity of Latium. (Heyne,Excurs. 5. ad lib. 7. JEneid.) It was once a gate in the primitive city of Romulus ana Numa. (Naraini, p.13. 256. 329.) Virgil has described the ancient rite, like a poet and an antiquarian.
(4) rhwrium was an angle in the new wall, enclosed for wild beasts. (Procopius, Goth. lib. i. c.S3.) Tire•pot it still TiiibJe in Nardini (lib. iv. c. 2. p. 159,160.,) and Nolli's great plan of Rome.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALI*


six days'journey, in the neighbourhood of Tebeste,(l) he was astonished by thesuperior numbers and fierce aspect of the barbarians. He proposed a treaty; so­licited a reconciliation; and offered to bind himself by the most solemn oaths." By what oaths can he bind himself? (interrupted the indignant Moors.) Willhe swear by the gospels, the divine books of the Christians? It was on thosebooks that the faith of his nephew Sergius was pledged to eighty of our innocentand unfortunate brethren. Before we trust them a second time, let us try theirefficacy in the chastisement of perjury, and the vindication of their own honour."Their honour was vindicated in the field of Tebeste, by the death of Solomon,and the total loss of his army. The arrival of fresh troops and more skilful com­manders, soon checked the insolence of the Moors; seventeen of their princeswere slain in the same battle; and the doubtful and transient submission of theirtribes was celebrated with lavish applause by the people of Constantinople. Suc­cessive inroads had reduced the province of Africa to one-third of the measure ofItaly; yet the Roman emperors continued to reign above a century over Carthage,and the fruitful coast of the Mediterranean. But the victories and the losses ofJustinian were alike pernicious to mankind; and such was the desolation of Africa,that in many parts a stranger might wander whole days without meeting the faceeither of a friend or an enemy. The nation of the Vandals had disappeared; theyonce amounted to a hundred and sixty thousand warriors, without including thechildren, the women, or the slaves. Their numbers were infinitely surpassed bythe number of the Moorish families extirpated in a relentless war; and the samedestruction was retaliated on the Romans and their allies, who perished by the cli­mate, their mutual quarrels, and the rage of the barbarians. When Procopiusfirst landed, he admired the populousness of the cities and country, strenuouslyexercised in the labours of commerce and agriculture. In less than twenty years,that busy scene was converted into a silent solitude; the wealthy citizens escaped toSicily and Constantinople; and the secret historian has confidently affirmed, thatfive millions of Africans were consumed by the wars and government of the em­peror Justinian.(2)
The jealousy of the Byzantine court had not permitted Belisarius to achieve theconquest of Italy; and his abrupt departure revived the courage of the Goths,(3)who respected his genius, his virtue, and even the laudable motive which had ur­ged the servant of Justinian to deceive and reject them. They had lost their king(an inconsiderable loss,) their capital, their treasures, the provinces from Sicilyto the Alps, and the military force of two hundred thousand barbarians, magnifi­cently equipped with horses and arms. Yet all was not lost, as long as Pavia wasdefended by one thousand Goths, inspired by a sense of honour, the love of free­dom, and the memory of their past greatness. The supreme command was una­nimously offered to the brave Uraias; and it was in his eyes alone that the disgraceof his uncle Vitiges could appear as a reason of exclusion. His voice inclined theelection in favour of Hildibald, whose personal merit was recommended by thevain hope that his kinsman Theudes, the Spanish monarch, would support thecommon interest of the Gothic nation. The success of his arms in Liguria andVenetia seemed to justify their choice; but he soon declared to the world, that hewas incapable of forgiving or commanding his benefactor. The consort of Hildi­bald was deeply wounded by the beauty, the riches, and the pride of the wife ofUraias; and the death of that virtuous patriot excited the indignation of a free peo­ple. A bold assassin executed their sentence by striking off the head of Hildi­bald in the midst of a banquet; the Kugians, a foreign tribe, assumed the privilegeof election; and Totila, the nephew of the late king, was tempted, by revenge, todeliver himself and the garrison of Trevigo into the hands of the Romans. Butthe gallant and accomplished youth was easily persuaded to prefer the Gothicthrone before the service of Justinian; and as soon as the palace of Pavia had been


(1) Now Tibesh, in the kingdom of Algiers. It is watered by a river, the Sitierass, which falls into the Me-jeola. t (Bagradas.) Tibesh is stilt remarkable for its walls of large stones (like the Coliseum of Rome,) afountain and a grove of walnut-trees: the country is fruitful, and the neighbouring Bereberes are warlike. Itappears from an inscription, that, under the reign of Adrian, the road from Carthage to Tebeste was con­structed by the third legion. (Marmol. Description de I'Afrique, torn. ii. p. 442, 443. Shaw's Travels, p.64—66.)
(2) Procopius, Anecdot. c. 18. The series of the African history attests this melancholy trulh.
(3) In the second (e. 30.) and third books, (c. J—40.) Procopius continues the history of the Gothic warfrom the fifth to the fifteenth year of Justinian. As the events are less interesting than in the former period,he allots only half the space to double the time. Jornandes and the Chronicle of Marcellinus, afford somecollateral hints. Sigonms, Psgi, Muratori, Matcou, and De Buat, are useful, and have been used.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 11J


repaired and beautified his equestrian statue; since the fall of the empire, it hasbeen melted into cannon by the victorious Turks. (1)
I shall conclude this chapter with the comets, the earthquakes, and the plague,which astonished or afflicted the age of Justinian.
I. In the fifth year of his reign, and in the month of September, a comet(2) wasseen during twenty days in the western quarter of the heavens, and which shot itsrays into the north. Eight years afterwards, while the sun was in Capricorn, ano­ther comet appeared to follow in the Sagittary: the size was gradually increasing;the head was in the east, the tail in the west, and it remained visible about fortydays. The nations, who gazed with astonishment, expected wars and calamitiesfrom their baleful influence; and these expectations were abundantly fulfilled. Theastronomers dissembled their ignorance of the nature of these blazing stars, whichthey affected to represent as the floating meteors of the air; and few among themembraced the simple notion of Seneca and the Chaldeans, that they are only pla­nets of a longer period and more eccentric motion. (3) Time and science havejustified the conjectures and predictions of the Roman sage: the telescope hasopened new worlds to the eyes of astronomers;(4) and, in the narrow space of his­tory and fable, one and the same comet is already found to have revisited the earthin seven equal revolutions of five hundred and seventy-five years. The first,(S)which ascends beyond the Christian era one thousand seven hundred and sixty-se­ven years, is coeval with Ogyges, the father of Grecian antiquity. And this ap­pearance explains the tradition which Varro has preserved, that under his reignthe planet Venus changed her colour, size, figure, and course: a prodigy withoutexample either in past or succeeding ages.(6) The second visit, in the year 1193,is darkly implied in the fable of Electra, the seventh of the Pleiads, who have beenreduced to six since the time of the Trojan war. That nymph, the wife of Dar-danus, was unable to support the ruin of'her country; she abandoned the dancesof her sister orbs, fled from the zodiac to the north pole, and obtained, from herdishevelled locks, the name of the comet. The third period expires in the year 618,a date that exactly agrees with the tremendous comet of the Sibyl, and perhapsof Pliny, which arose in the west, two generations before the reign of Cyrus. Thefourth apparition, forty-four years before the birth of Christ, is of all others the mostsplendid and important. After the death of Caesar, a long-haired star was conspi­cuous to Rome and to the nations, during the games which were exhibited by youngOctavian, in honour of Venus and his uncle. The vulgar opinion, that it conveyedto heaven the divine soul of the dictator, was cherished and consecrated by the pietyof a statesman: while his secret superstition referred the comet to the glory of hisown times. (7) Thefifth visit has already been ascribed to the fifth year of Justinian,which coincides with the five hundred and thirty-first of the Christian era. And itmay deserve notice, that in this, as in the preceding instance, the comet was fol­lowed, though at a longer interval, by a remarkable paleness of the sun. The sixthreturn, in the year 1106, is recorded by the chronicles of Europe and China; andin the first fervour of the Crusades, the Christians and the Mahometans mightsurmise, with equal reason, that it portended the destruction of the infidels. Theseventh phenomena of 1680 was presented to the eyes of an enlightened age. (8)


(1) Seein the C.P. Christiana of Ducange,(lib.i. c. 24.No. l.)a chain of original testimonies, from Proco-pius in the sixth, to Gyllius in the sixteenth century.
(2) The first comet is mentioned by John Malala, (torn. ii. p. 190,319.) and Theophanes; (p. 154.) the secondby Procopius. (Persic, lib. ii. c. 4.) Yet I strongly suspect their identity. The paleness of the sun (Vandal,lib. ii. c. 14.) is supplied by Theophanes (p. 158.) to a different year.
(3) Seneca's seventh book of Natural Questions displays, in the theory of comets, a philosophic mind.Yetshould we not too candidly confound a vague prediction, a veniet tempus,8cc. with the merit of real dis­coveries.
(4) Astronomers may study Newton and Halley. I draw my humble science from the article Comefe, in theFrench Encyclopedic by M. d'Alembert.
(5) Wbiston, the honest, pious, visionary Whiston, had fancied for the era of Noah's flood (two thousandtwo hundred and forty-two years before Christ,) a prior apparition of the same comet which drowned theearth with its tail.
(6) A dissertation of Freret (Meraoires de 1'Academie des Inscriptions, torn. x. p. 357—377.) affords a happyunion of philosophy and erudition. The phenomenon in the time of Ogyges was preserved by Varro, (apuuAugustin. de Civitate Dei, 21. 8.) who quotes Castor, Dion of Naples, and Adrastns of Cyzicus—nobiles ma­thematics The two subsequent periods are preserved by the Greek mythologists and the spurious books ofSibylline verses.
(7) Pliny (Hist. Nat. ii. 23.) has transcribed the original memorial of Augustus. Mairan, in his most inge­nious letters to the P. Parennin, missionary in China, removes the games and the comet of September, from theyear 44 to the year 43, before the Christian era; but I am not totally subdued by the criticism of the Astrono­mer. (Opusculus, p. 275—351.)
(8) This last comet was visible in the month of December, 1680. Bayle, who began his Pensees sur le Cometeia January, 1681, ((Eurres, torn, iii.) was forced to argue that a supernatural comet would have confirmed the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


first and greatest of the Othos. A portion of Gaul, to the west of the Rhine, alongthe banks of the Meuse and the Moselle, was assigned to the Germans, by whoseblood and language it has been tinged since the time of Csesar and Tacitus. Be­tween the Rhine, the Rhone, and the Alps, the successors of Otho acquired a vainsupremacy over the broken kingdoms of Burgundy and Aries. In the north,Christianity was propagated by the sword of Otho, the conqueror and apostle ofthe Slavic nations of the Elbe and Oder; the marches of Brandenburg and Sleswickwere fortified with German colonies; and the king of Denmark, the dukes of Po­land and Bohemia, confessed themselves his tributary vassals. At the head of a vic­torious army, he passed the Alps, subdued the kingdom of Italy, delivered the pope,and for ever fixed the imperial crown in the name and nation of Germany. Fromthat memorable era, two maxims of public jurisprudence were introduced by forceand ratified by time. I. That the prince who was elected in the German diet, ac­quired from that instant the subject kingdoms of Italy and Rome. II. But thathe might not legally assume the titles of emperor and Augustus, till he had re­ceived the crown from the hands of the Roman pontiff. (1)
The imperial dignity of Charlemagne was announced to the east by the altera­tion of his style; and instead of saluting his fathers, the Greek emperors, he pre­sumed to adopt the more equal and familiar appellation of brother. (2) Perhapsin his connexion with Irene he aspired to the name of husband; his embassy toConstantinople spoke the language of peace and friendship, and might conceal atreaty of marriage with that ambitious princess, who had renounced the most sa­cred duties of a mother. The nature, the duration, the probable consequences,of such a union between two distant and dissonant empires, it is impossible to con­jecture: but the unanimous silence of the Latins may teach us to suspect, that thereport was invented by the enemies of Irene, to chargat her with the guilt of be­traying the church and state to the strangers of the west. (3) The French am­bassadors were the spectators, and had nearly been the victims, of the conspiracyof Nicephorus, and the national hatred. Constantinople was exasperated by thetreason and sacrilege of ancient Rome: a proverb, " That the Franks were goodfriends and bad neighbours," was in every one's mouth; but it was dangerous toprovoke a neighbour who might be tempted to reiterate, in the church of St. So­phia, the ceremony of his imperial coronation. After a tedious journey of circuitand delay, the ambassadors of Nicephorus found him in his camp, on the banks,of the river Sala; and Charlemagne affected to confound their vanity by displaying,in a Franconian village, the pomp, or at least the pride, of the Byzantine palace. (4)The Greeks were successively led through four halls of audience: in the first, theywere ready to fall prostrate before a splendid personage in a chair of state, till heinformed them that he was only a servant, the constable or master of the horse ofthe emperor. The same mistake and the same answer, were repeated in theapartments of the count palatine, the steward and the chamberlain; and their im­patience was gradually heightened, till the doors of the presence-chamber werethrown open, and they beheld the genuine monarch, on his throne, enriched withthe foreign luxury which he despised, and encircled with the love and reverenceof his victorious chiefs. A treaty of alliance was concluded between the two em­pires, and the limits of the east and west were defined by the right of present pos­session. But the Greeks(5) soon forgot this humiliating equality, or rememberedit only to hate the barbarians by whom it was extorted. During the short unionof virtue and power, they respectfully saluted the august Charlemagne with theacclamations of basileus, and emperor of the Romans. As soon, as these qualitieswere separated in the person of his pious son, the Byzantine letters were inscribed,
(0 The power of custom forces roe to number Conrad I. and Henry I.,lhe Fowler, in the list of emperors,a title which was never assumed by those kings of Germany. The Italians, Muratori, for instance, are morescrupulous and correct, and only reckon the princes who have been crowned at Rome.
(9) invidiam tamen suseepti norainis, (C. P.) imperatoribus super hoc indignantibus magna tulit patientia,vicitque eorum contumaciam . . . mittendo ad cos crebas legationes, et in epistolis fratres eos appellando.(Eginhard, c uviii. p. 128.) Perhaps it was on their account that, like Augustus, he affected some reluctanceto receive the empire.
(3) Theophanes speaks nf the coronation and unction of Charles, K«pou>.w;, (Chronograph, p. 39°.) and ofhis treaty of marriage with Irene, (p. 403.) which is unknown to the Latins. Gaillard relates his transactionswith the Greek empire, (torn. ii. p. 446—468.)
(4) Gaillard very properly observes, that this pageant was a farce suitable to children only; but that it wasindeed represented in the presence, and for ihe benefit of children of a larger growth.
(5) Compare, in the original texts collected by Pagi, (torn. iii. A. D. 813. no. 7. A. D. 824. no. 10, Sec,) thecontrast of Charlemagne and hit son: to the former the ambassadors of Michael, (who were indeed disavowed)snore suo, id est lingua Grseca, lautles dixerunt, imperatorem eum et Bv^es appellantes; to the latter, vacateimperatori Franetnm, &e.







OCR Output








192 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Imperial standard. The natural fortifications of Cilicia protected, and even con­cealed, the camp of Heraclius, which was pitched near Issus, on the same groundwhere Alexander had vanquished the host of Darius. The angle which the em­peror occupied, was deeply indented into a vast semicircle of the Asiatic, Arme­nian, and Syrian provinces; and to whatsoever point of the circumference he shoulddirect his attack, it was easy for him to dissemble his own motions, and to preventthose of the enemy. In the camp of Issus, the Roman general reformed the slothand disorder of the veterans, and educated the new recruits in the knowledge andpractice of military virtue. Unfolding the miraculous image of Christ, he urgedthem to revenge the holy altars which had been profaned by the worshippers offire; addressing them by the endearing appellations of sons and brethren, he de­plored the public and private wrongs of the republic. The subjects of a monarchwere persuaded that they fought in the cause of freedom; and a similar enthusiasmwas communicated to the foreign mercenaries, who must have viewed with equalindifference the interest of Rome and of Persia. Heraclius himself, with the skilland patience of a centurion, inculcated the lessons of the school of tactics, and thesoldiers were assiduously trained in the use of their weapons, and the exercisesand evolutions of the field. The cavalry and infantry in light or heavy armourwere divided into two parts; the trumpets were fixed in the centre, and their sig­nals directed their march, the charge, the retreat, or pursuit; the direct or obliqueorder, the deep or extended phalanx; to represent in fictitious combat the opera­tions of genuine war. Whatever hardship the emperor imposed on the troops, heinflicted with equal severity on himself; their labour, their diet, their sleep, weremeasured by the inflexible rules of discipline; and, without despising the enemy,fhey were taught to repose an implicit confidence in their own valour and the wis­dom of their leader. Cilicia was soon encompassed with the Persian arms; buttheir cavalry hesitated to enter the defiles of mount Taurus, till they were circum­vented by the evolutions of Heraclius, who insensibly gained their rear, whilst heappeared to present his front in order of battle. By a false motion which seemedto threaten Armenia, he drew them, against their wishes, to a general action.They were tempted by the artful disorder of his camp; but when they advanced tocombat, the ground, the sun, and the expectations of both armies, were unpropi-tious to the barbarians; the Romans successfully repeated their tactics in a field ofbattle,(l) and the event of the day declared to the world, that the Persians werenot invincible, and that a hero was invested with the purple. Strong in victoryand fame, Heraclius boldly ascended the heights of mount Taurus, directed hismarch through the plains of Cappadocia, and established his troops for the win­ter season in safe and plentiful quarters on the banks of the river Hayls.(2) Hissoul was superior to the vanity of entertaining Constantinople with an imperfecttriumph: but the presence of the emperor was indispensably required to sooth therestless and rapacious spirit of the Avars.
Since the days of Scipio and Hannibal, no bolder enterprise has been attemptedthan that which Heraclius achieved for the deliverance of the empire. (3) Hepermitted the Persians to oppress for a while the provinces, and to insult with im­punity the capital of the east; while the Roman emperor explored his perilous waythrough the Black Sea, (4) and the mountains of Armenia, penetrated into theheart of Persia,(5) and recalled the armies of the great king to the defence oftheir bleeding country. With a select band of five thousand soldiers, Heracliussailed from Constantinople to Trebizond; assembled his forces which had winteredIn the Pontic regions; and from the mouth of the Phasis to the Caspian sea, en-
(1) Foggini (Annotat. p. 31.) suspects that the Persians were deceived by the qx}mi>z rnvKvyfciw of £lian,(Taetic. c. xlviii.) an intricate spiral motion of the army. He observed (p. 28.) that the military descriptionsof George of Pisidia are transcribed into the Taetics of the emperor Leo.
(2) George of Pisidia, an eye-witness (Aeroas. ii. 122, &c.) described in three acroasies or cantos, the firstexpedition of Heraclius. The poem has been lately (1777) published at Rome: but such vague-«nd decla­matory praise is far from corresponding with the sanguine hopes of Pagi, D'Anville, &c.
(3) Theonhanes (p. 256.) carries Heraclius swiftly (**t» t*%»;) into Armenia. Nicephorus' (p. 11.) thoughhe confounds the two expeditions, defines the province of Lazica. EutycbioJ (Annal. torn. ii. p. 231.) hasgiven the five thousand men, with the more probable station of Trebizond.
(4) From Constantinople to Trebizond, with a fair wind, four or five days ; from thence to Erzerom,five-;to Erivan, twelve; to Tauris, ten; in all, thirty-two. Such is the Itinerary of Tavernier (Voyages, torn. i. p.12—56.) who was perfectly conversant with the roads of Asia. Tournefort, who travelled with a pasha, spentten or twelve days between Trebizond and Erzerom (Voyage do Levant, torn. iii. lettre 18.:) and ChardinVuj-ages, torn. i. p. 249—254.) gives the more correct distance of fifty-three parasangs, each of five thousandpaces, (what paces ?) between Erivan and Tanris.
(5) The expedition of Heraclius into Persia is finely illustrated by M. d'Anville (Merooires de l'Acadenriedes Inscriptions, torn, xxviii. p. 559—573.) He discovers the situation of Gandzaca, Theharma, Dastagerd,6cc. with admirable skill and learning: but the o'bscure campaign of 624 he passes over in silence.







OCR Output








OF THE KOMAN EMPIRE. 73


Unction which nature had fixed between the faithful dog and the rapacious wolf,■was applied by an ambassador, who received only verbal instructions from themouth of his illiterate prince.(l) The Bulgarians, of whatsoever species, wereequally attracted by Roman wealth, they assumed a vague dominion over the Scla-vonian name, and their rapid marches could only be stopped by the Baltic sea,or the extreme cold and poverty of the north. But the same race of Sclavoniansappears to have maintained, in every age, the possession of the same countries.Their numerous tribes, however distant or adverse, used one common language;it was harsh and irregular, and were known by the resemblance of their form,which deviated from the swarthy Tartar, and approached, without attaining, thelofty stature and fair complexion of the German. Four thousand six hundredvillages(2) were scattered over the provinces of Russia and Poland, and their hutswere hastily built of rough timber, in a country deficient both in stone and iron.Erected, or rather concealed in the depth of forests, on the banks of rivers, or theedge of morasses, we may not, perhaps, without flattery, compare them to thearchitecture of the beaver; which they resembled in a double issue, to the landand water, for the escape of the savage inhabitants, an animal less cleanly, lessdiligent, and less social, than that marvellous quadruped. The fertility of thesoil, rather than the labour of the natives, supplied the rustic plenty of the Scla­vonians. Their sheep and horned cattle were large and numerous, and the fieldswhich they sowed with millet and panic,(3) afforded, in the place of bread, acoarse and less nutritive food. The incessant rapine of their neighbours compelledthem to bury this treasure in the earth; but on the appearance of a stranger it wasfreely imparted by a people whose unfavourable character is qualified by the epi­thets of chaste, patient, and hospitable. As their supreme god, they adored an in­visible master of the thunder. The rivers and the nymphs obtained their subordi­nate honours, and the popular worship was expressed in vows and sacrifice. TheSclavonians disdained to obey a despot, aprince, or even a magistrate; but their ex­perience was too narrow, their passions too headstrong, to compose a system ofequal law or general defence. Some voluntary respect was yielded to age and valour;but each tribe or village existed as a separate republic, and all must be persuadedwhere none could be compelled. They fought on foot, almost naked, and, exceptan unwieldy shield, without any defensive armouri their weapons of offence werea bow, a quiver, of small poisoned arrows, and a long rope, which they dexterouslythrew from a distance, and entangled their enemy in a running noose. In thefield the Sclavonian infantry was dangerous by their speed, agility, and hardiness:they swam, they dived, they remained under water, drawing their h«»th througha hollow cane; and a river or lake was often the scene of thei' ansusPected am-buscade. But these were the achievements of spies or s*aSB'ers; the militaryart was unknown to the Sclavonians; their name was ob~drc> and "iCir conquests
were inglorious. (4) . _ .
I have marked the faint and general outline the Sclavonians and Bulgarians,without attempting to define their intermeddle boundaries, which were not accu­rately known, or respected by the barianans themselves. Their importancewas measured by their vicinity to the empire; and the level country of Moldaviaand Walachia was occupied by the Antes,(5) a Sclavonian tribe, which swelledthe titles of Justinian with an epithet of conquest. (6) Against the Antes he erected


(1) Procopius (Goth, lib. W. c. 19.) Hi. verbal tnewpf (>* <>«">■ W"""" *"i,liter»e tartarian) i. delivered!u an epistle. The style is savage, figurative, and ortfina'*
^.^•^Sw'tE 5S3f!l3S^«ff «i« h"» »wilderne,? which quires a Saxon andPolish guide.
^™^^&%£X?'*'*"team*ri~« Bomare.nd Miller.
.lUition and manner*, of the Sclav on mm. see the original evidence of the


IS1 Ant.. «m» fhrti.,'vni .... Taysis qui rapidus et voriieosus in Histri flucnta fiirens devnlvilnr (Jor.nande.," v r° 1™ e Monitor. Procoptui, Goth, Iib.iii.e. 14. et de Edific. lib. it c. ■>.) Yet the s»mop"'>copi„, trliioniVae Goths and Hornas neighbours, yi.T.»w.., to the Danube (dc Kdific. I.b.iv.c.l.)
fft) The national title of Antkw,\n 'he laws and inscriptions of Justinian, was adopted by hi« successors,•od is justified1 by the pious Ludewrig (in Vit. Justinian, p. 515.) it bad strangely puzzled the civ.hans ofmiddle age.
Vol. 171. 10







OCR Output








308 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Mahomet erected his holy standard, (1) that kingdom was a province of the Pef»sian empire; yet seven princes of the Homerites still reigned in the mountains;and the vicegerent of Chosroes was tempted to forget his distant country and hisunfortunate master. The historians of the age of Justinian represent the state ofthe independent Arabs, who were divided by interest or affection in the long quar­rel of the east; the tribe of Gassan was allowed to encamp on the Syrian terri­tory; the princes of Hira were permitted to form a city about forty miles to thesouthward of the ruins of Babylon. Their service in the field was speedy andvigorous: but their friendship was venal, their faith inconstant, their enmity ca­pricious: it was an easier task to excite than to disarm these roving barbarians;and in the familiar intercourse of war, they learned to see, and to despise, thesplendid weakness both of Rome and of Persia. From Mecca to the Euphrates,the Arabian tribes(2) were confounded by the Greeks and Latins, under the ge­neral appellation of Saracens,(3) a name which every Christian mouth has beentaught to pronounce with terror and abhorrence.
The slaves of domestic tyranny may vainly exult in their national independence;but the Arab is personally free; and he enjoys, in some degree, the benefits of so­ciety, without forfeiting the prerogatives of nature. In every tribe, superstition,or gratitude, or fortune, has exalted a particular family above the heads of theirequals. The dignities of sheich and emir invariably descend in this chosen race;but the order of succession is loose and precarious; and the most worthy or agedof the noble kinsmen are preferred to the simple, though important, office of com­posing disputes by their advice, and guiding valour by their example. Even a fe­male of sense and spirit has been permitted to command the countrymen of Ze-nobia. (4) The momentary junction of several tribes produces an army; their morelasting union constitutes a nation; and the supreme chief, the emir of emirs, whosebanner is displayed at their head, may deserve, in the eyes of strangers, the honoursof the kingly name. If the Arabian princes abuse their power, they are quicklypunished by the desertion of their subjects, who had been accustomed to a mildand parental jurisdiction. Their spirit is free, their steps are unconfined, the de­sert is open, and the tribes and families are held together by a mutual and volun­tary compact. The softer natives of Yemen supported the pomp and majesty ofa monarch; but if he could not leave his palace without endangering hislife,(5)the active powers of government must have been devolved on his nobles and ma­gistrates. The cities of Mecca and Medina present, in the heart of Asia, the formor rather the substance, of a commonwealth. The grandfather of Mahomet, andhis lineal ancestors, appear in foreign and domestic transactions as the princes oftheir country; but they reigned, like Pericles at Athens, or the Medici at Florence,by the opinion of their wisdom and integrity ; their influence was divided with theirpatrimony; and the sceptre was transferred from the uncles of the prophet to ayounger branch of the tribe of Koreish. On solemn occasions they convened theassembly of the people; and since mankind must be either compelled or persuadedto obey, the use and reputation of oratory among the ancient Arabs is the clearestevidence of public freedom. (6) But their simple freedom was of a very differentCast from the nice and artificial machinery of the Greek and Roman republics, in
(1) See the imperfect history of Yemen in Pocock, Specimen, p. 55—66. of Hira, p. 66—74. of Gassan, p. 75.—78. as far as it could be known or preserved in the time of ignorance.
(2) The ^xpxn.i\vittx $ua.s(, juvpi*^; t*ut« *«i to Trkt tTTtv mjtoiv ipquevo/zei, jt»i aJfiecroToi, are described by Me-uander, £ Excerpt. Legation, p. 149.) Procopius, (de Bell. Persic, lib. i. c. 17.19. lib. ii. c. 10.) and, in themost lively colours, by Aramianus Marcellinus, (lib. xir. c. 4.) who had spoken of them as early as the reign ofMarcus.
(3) The name which,1lsed by Ptolemy and Pliny, in a more confined, by Ammianns and Procopius in alarger sense, has been derived, ridiculously, from Sarah, the wife of Abraham', obscurely from the village of'Saraka, (iustbi N«3«T«ieu;; Stephan de Urbibos) more plausibly from the Arabic words, which signify a thievishcharacter, or oriental situation. (Hottinger, Hist. Oriental, lib. i. c 1. p. 7.8. Pocock, Specimen, p. 33. 35. As*seman. Bibliot.t>rient. torn. iv. p. 567.) Yet the last and most popular of these etymologies, is refuted by Pto­lemy, (Arabia, p. 2. 18. in Hudson, torn, iv.) who expressly remarks the western and southern positions of theSaracens, then an obscnre tribe on the borders of Egypt. The appellation cannot therefore allude to anyfta-iional character; and, since it was imposed by strangers, it must be found, not in the Arabic, but in a foreignlanguage.
(4) Saraceni.... mulieres aiunt in eos regnare. (Expositio totius Mundi, p. 3. in Hudson, torn, iii.) Thereign of Mavia is famous in ecclesiastical story. Pocock, Specimen, p. 69. 83.
(5) -jSs i§,*v«i e* tow sWiXfiwy, is the report of Agatharades, (de Mari Rubro, p. 63,64. in Hudson, torn, i.)Biodorus Stculos, (torn. i. lib. iii. c. 47. p. 215.) and Strabo. (lib. xvi. p. 1124.) But I much suspect that thisis one of the popular tales, or extraordinary accidents, which the credulity of travellers so often transformsinto a fact, a custom, and a law.
(6) Non gloriabantur antiquitus Arabes, nisi gladio, hospite, et ekquentia. (Sephadius, apnd Pocoek, Speci­men, p. lai, 162.) This gift of speech they shared only with the Persians: and the sententious Arabs svoaM■probably have disdained the simple and sublime logic of Demosthenes.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE ANJJ FALL


the invasion of Italy is applied by Procopius to the second year of the Gothicwar.(l)
After Belisarius had left sufficient garrisons in Palermo and Syracuse, he em­barked his troops at Messina, and landed them, without resistance, on the oppo­site shores of Rhegium. A Gothic prince, who had married the daughter ofTheodatus, was stationed with an army to guard the entrance of Italy; but heimitated, without scruple, the example of a sovereign, faithless to his public andprivate duties. The perfidious Ebermor deserted with his followers to the Romancamp, and was dismissed to enjoy the servile honours of the Byzantine court. (2)From Rhegium to Naples, the fleet and army of Belisarius, almost always in viewof each other, advanced near three hundred miles along the sea-coast. The peo­ple of Bruttium, Lucania, and Campania, who abhorred the name and religion ofthe Goths, embraced the specious excuse, that their ruined walls were incapable ofdefence; the soldiers paid a just equivalent for a plentiful market; and curiosityalone interrupted the peaceful occupations of the husbandman or artificer. Na­ples, which has swelled to a great and populous capital, long cherished the lan­guage and manners of a Grecian colony;(3) and the choice of Virgil had ennobledthis elegant retreat, which attracted the lovers of repose and study, from the noise,the smoke, and the laborious opulence of Rome. (4) As soon as the place was in­vested by sea and land, Belisarius gave audience to the deputies of the people, whoexhorted him to disregard a conquest unworthy of his arms, to seek the Gothicking in a field of battle, and, after his victory, to claim, as the sovereign of Rome,the allegiance of the dependent cities.—"When I treat with my enemies," repliedthe Roman chief, with a haughty smile, " I am more accustomed to give than to re-,ceivecounsel: but I hold in one hand inevitable ruin, and in the other peace, andfreedom, such as Sicily now enjoys." The impatience of delay urged him to grantthe most liberal terms; his honour secured their performance; but Naples was di­vided into two factions; and the Greek democracy was inflamed by their orators,who with much spirit and some truth, represented to the multitude, that the Gothswould punish their defection, and that Belisarius himself must esteem their loyal­ty and valour. Their deliberations, however, were not perfectly free: the city was,commanded by eight hundred barbarians, whose wives and children were detainedat Ravenna as the pledges of their fidelity; and even the Jews, who were rich andnumerous, resisted with desperate enthusiasm, the intolerant laws of Justinian.In a much later period, the circumference of Naples(5) measured only two thou­sand three hundred and sixty-three paces :(6) the fortifications were defended byprecipices or the sea: when the aqueducts were intercepted, a supply of watermight be drawn from wells and fountains; and the stock of provisions was sufficientto consume the patience of the besiegers. At the end of twenty days, that of Be­lisarius was almost exhausted, and he had reconciled himself to the disgrace ofabandoning the siege, that he might march, before the winter season, against Romeand the Gothic king. But his anxiety was relieved by the bold curiosity of an Isau-rian, who explored the dry channel of an aqueduct, and secretly reported, that apassage might be perforated to introduce a file of armed soldiers into the heart ofthe city. When the work had been silently executed, the humane general riskedthe discovery of his secret, by a last and fruitless admonition of the impending dan­ger. In the darkness of the night, four hundred Romans entered the aqueduct, raisedthemselves by a rope, which they fastened to an olive tree, into the house or gar-
Justinian and of the Ootliie war; arid his first era coincides with the first of April, 135, and not 536, accord­ing to the Annals of Baronias (Pagi, Crit, torn. ii. p. 555, who is followed by Muratori and the editors of Sigo-nius.) Yet in some passages we are at a loss to reconcile the dates of Procopius with himself, and with theChronicle of Marceliinus.
(1) The series of the first Gothic war is represented by Procopius (lib. i. c 5—39. lib. ii. e, 1—30. lib. iii. e. 1.)till the captivity of Vitiges. With the aid of Sigonius (Opp. torn. i. de Imp. Occident, lib. 17, 18.) and Mu­ratori (Annali d'ltalia, torn, v.) I have gleaned some few additional facts.
(2) Jornandes, de Rebus Geticis, c. lx. p. 702. edit. Grot, and torn. i. p. S21. Muratori, de Success. Regn.p. 241.
(3) Nero (says Tacitus. Annal. 15.35.) Neapolim quasi Gnecam urbem delegit. One hundred and fifty yearsafterward, in the time of Septimius Severus, the Hellenism of the Neapolitans is praised by Philostratus: yevo;E*AtJV!5 **' *TTW»I, oSsv xa( Tass trirOvSxi Ta>v Kvymv Ea.Mv»xoi * »o-t (Icon. lib. i. p. 763. edit. Olear.)
(4) The otium of Naples is praised by the Roman poets, by Virgil, Horace, Silius Italicus, and Statins (Clu-ver. Ital. Ant. lib. iv. p. 1149,1150.) In an elegant epistle (Sylv. lib. iii. v. p. 94—98. edit. Markland,) Statiusundertakes the difficult task of drawing his wife from the pleasures of Rome to that calm retreat.
(5) This measure was taken by Roger I. after the conquest of Naples (A. D. 1139,) which he made the capi­tal of his new kingdom (Giannone, Iitoria Civile, torn. ii. p. 169.) That city, the third in Christian Europe,is now at least twelve miles in circumference (Jul. Csesar. Capaccii Hist. Neopol. lib. i. p. 47.J and contains moreinhabitants (three hundred and fifty thousand) in a given space, than any other spot in the known world.
(6) Not geometrical, but common paces or steps, of twenty.two French inches: d'Anville, Mesures Itinera­ries, p. 7,8.) the two thousand three hundred and siMy-three do not make an English niile.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 401


the times was indulged with a pleasant vision of the soul and body of Charles Mar-tel, burning, to ail eternity, in the abyss of hell.(l)
The loss of an army, or a province, in the western world, was less painful to thecourt of Damascus, than the rise and progress of a domestic competitor. Exceptamong the Syrians, the caliphs of the house of Ommiyah had never been the ob­jects of the public favour. The life of Mahomet recorded their perseverance in ido­latry and rebellion; their conversion had been reluctant, their elevation irregularand factious, and their throne was cemented with the most holy and noble bloodof Arabia. The best of their race, the pious Omar, was dissatisfied with his owntitle: their personal virtues were insufficient to justify a departure from the orderof succession; and the eyes and wishes of the faithful were turned towards the lineof Hashem and the kindred of the apostle of God. Of these the Fatimites wereeither rash or pusillanimous; but the descendants of Abbas cherished, with courageand discretion, the hopes of their rising fortunes. From an obscure residence inSyria, they secretly despatched their agents and missionaries, who preached in theeastern provinces their hereditary indefeasible right; and Mohammed, the son ofAli, the son of Abdallah, the son of Abbas, the uncle of the prophet, gave audienceto the deputies of Chorasan, and accepted their free gift of four hundred thousandpieces of gold. After the death of Mohammed, the oath of allegiance was adminis­tered in the name of his son Ibrahim to a numerous band of votaries, who expectedonly a signal and a leader; and the governor of Chorasan continued to deplore hisfruitless admonitions and the deadly slumber of the caliphs of Damascus, till hehimself, with all his adherents, was driven from the city and palace of Meru, by therebellious arms of Abu Moslem. (2) That maker of kings, the author, as he isnamed, of the call of the Abbasides, was at length rewarded for his presumptionof merit with the usual gratitude of courts. A mean, perhaps a foreign, extractioncould not repress the aspiring energy of Abu Moslem. Jealous of his wives, liberalof his wealth, prodigal of his own blood and of that of others, he could boast withpleasure, and possibly with truth, that he had destroyed six hundred thousand ofhis enemies; and such was the intrepid gravity of his mind and countenance, thathe was never seen to smile except on a day of battle. In the visible separation ofparties the green was consecrated to the Fatimites; the Ommiades were di 'in-
fuished by the white; and the black, as the most adverse, was naturally adoA ?dy the Abbassides. Their turbans and garments were stained with that gloomycolous: two black standards, on pike-staves nine cubits long, were borne aloft inthe van of Abu Moslem; and their allegorical names of the night and the sha­dow, obscurely represented the indissoluble union and perpetual succession of theline of Hashem. From the Indus to the Euphrates, the east was convulsed bythe quarrel of the white and the black factions; the Abbassides were most fre­quently victorious; but their public success was clouded by the personal misfortuneof their chief. The court of Damascus, awakening from a long slumber, resolvedto prevent the pilgrimage of Mecca, which Ibrahim had undertaken with a splen­did retinue, to recommend himself at once to the favour of the prophet and of thepeople. A detachment of cavalry intercepted his march and arrested his person;and the unhappy Ibrahim, snatched away from the promise of untasted royalty,expired in iron fetters in the dungeons of Haran. His two younger brothers,Saffah and Almansor, eluded the search of the tyrant, and lay concealed at Cufa,till the zeal of the people and the approach of his eastern friends allowed them toexpose their persons to the impatient public. On Friday, in the dress of a caliph,in the colours of the sect, Saffah proceeded with religious and military pomp tothe mosch: ascending the pulpit, he prayed and preached as the lawful successorof Mahomet; and, after his departure, his kinsmen bound a willing people by anoath of fidelity. But it was on the banks of the Zab, and not in the mosch of Cufa,that this important controversy was determined. Every advantage appeared tobe on the side of the white faction: the authority of established government; anarmy of a hundred and twenty thousand soldiers against a sixth part of that num­ber; and the presence and merit of the caliph Mervan, the fourteenth and last of
(1) This pastoral letter, addressed to Lewis the Germanic, the grandson of Charlemacne. tad mmt probablycomposed by the pen of the artful Hincmar, is datedjin the year 858, and signed by the bishops of the provincesor Hheinn and Rouen. (Baronim, Anna!. Ee«let. A. D. 741. Fleory, Hilt. Eccles. torn. X. p. 314—US.) Te«Baronius himself, and the French critici, reject with eontempt this episcopal fiction.
(S) The steed and the saddle, which had carried any of his wives, were instantly killed or burned, lest theyshould be afterwards mounted by a mala. Twelve hundred mules or camels were required for his kitchen fui-rriture; and the daily consumption amounted to three thousand cbkfst a hundred sheep, berides oxen, poultry,fct. -iAbnlpharaeim, Hi"' Dyrnw, p< H»,J
' vo».nr. si







OCR Output








186 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Asia, and that the imperial purple should be the reward of diligence and sA faint rumour of their undertaking was conveyed to the ears of Phocas, and thewife and mother of the young Heraclius were secured as hostages of his faith: butthe treacherous art of Crispus extenuated the distant peril, the. means of defencewere neglected or delayed, and the tyrant supinely slept till the African navy castanchor in the Hellespont. Their standard was joined at Abidus by the fugitivesand exiles who thirsted for revenge; the ships of Heraclius, whose lofty mastswere adorned with the holy symbols of religion,(l) steered their triumphant coursethrough the Propontis; and Phocas beheld from the windows of the palace, his ap­proaching and inevitable fate. The green faction was tempted by gifts and pro­mises, to oppose a feeble and fruitless resistance to the landing of the Africans;but the people, and even the guards, were determined by the well-timed defec­tion of Crispus; and the tyrant was seized by a private enemy, who boldly invadedthe solitude of the palace. Stripped of the diadem and purple, clothed in a vilehabit, and loaded with chains, he was transported in a small boat to the imperialgalley of Heraclius, who reproached him with the crimes of his abominable reign-" Wilt thou govern better}" were the last words of the despair of Phocas. Af­ter suffering each variety of insult and torture, his head was severed from hisbody, the mangled trunk was cast into the flames, and the same treatment was in­flicted on the statues of the vain usurper, and the seditious banner of the greenfaction. The voice of the clergy, the senate and the people, invited Heraclius toascend the throne which he had purified from guilt and ignominy, after somegraceful hesitation, he yielded to their entreaties. His coronation was accompa­nied by that of his wife Eudoxia; and their posterity, till the fourth generation,,continued to reign over the empire of the east. The voyage of Heraclius hadbeen easy and prosperous, the tedious march of Nicetas was not accomplished be­fore the decision of the contest: but he submitted without a murmur to the fortuneof his friend, and his laudable intentions were rewarded with an equestrian statue,and a daughter of the emperor. It was more difficult to trust the fidelity of Cris­pus, whose recent services were recompensed by the command of the Cappapo-cian army. His arrogance soon provoked, and seemed to excuse the ingratitudeof his new sovereign. In the presence of the senate, the son-in-law of Phocaswas condemned to embrace the monastic life; and the sentence was justified by theweighty observation of Heraclius, that the man who had betrayed his father, could:never be faithful to his friend. (2)
Even after his death the public was afflicted by the crimes of Phocas, whicharmed with a pious cause the most formidable of her enemies. According to thefriendly and equal forms of the Byzantine and Persian courts, he announced hisexaltation to the throne; and his ambassador Lilius, who had presented him withthe heads of Maurice and his sons, was the best qualified to describe the circum­stances of the tragic scene.(3) However it might be varnished by fiction orsophistry, Chosroes turned with horror from the assassin, imprisoned the pre­tended envoy, disclaimed the usurper, and declared himself the avenger of hisfather and benefactor. The sentiments of grief and resentment which humanitywould feel, and honour would dictate, promoted, on this occasion, the interest ofthe Persian king; and his interest was powerfully magnified by the national andreligious prejudices of the magi and satraps. In a strain of artful adulation, whichassumed the language of freedom, they presumed to censure the excess of hisgratitude and friendship for the Greeks; a nation with whom it was dangerous toconclude either peace or alliance; whose superstition was devoid of truth and jus­tice, and who must be incapable of any virtue, since they could perpetrate themost atrocious of crimes, the impious murder of their sovereign. (4) For thecrime of an ambitious centurion, the nation which he oppressed was chastised withthe calamities of war; and the same calamities, at the end of twenty years, were


(1) According to Theophanes «iS»tw and fi«/nrrip»c. Cedrenut adds an nxsipomiirrar eiismi too xupisa,winch Heraclius bore as a banner in the first Persian expedition. See George Pisid. Acroas 1. 140. The ma­nufacture seems to have flourished ; but Foggini, the Roman editor (p. 26.,) is at a loss to determine whetherthis picture was an original or a copy. r
?LS<^}PVJ^py of Ph°ca» and the elevation of Heraclius, in Chron. Paschal, p. 380—38S. Theophanes,P- 2,4.2~?S0- Nicephorus, jp. 3-7. Cedrenus, p. 404-407. Zonaraa, torn. ii. lib. xiv. p. 80-82.


(4) Christians'nec pactum esse, nec fidemnec ftedns"" " 7quod7fufi™iMs^^^ nonoccidissent. Eutych. Annalii, torn. ii. p. 211. yen. Fococl.







OCR Output








CONTENTS.


and Wars with tho Romans—The Colchlan or LazlcWar—The Ethiopians.
A. D. PAGE
527—565 Weakness of tho empire of Justinian 71
State of the Barbarians . . 72
The Qepidm . . . .73
The Lombards ... lb.
The Sclavonians . . .74
Their inroads ... 75
545 Origin and monarchy of the Turks in Asia 76
The Avars jtybef art Vie Turks, and approach
the empire . . 77
558 Their embassy to Constantinople . 78
562—582 Embassies of the Turks and Romans lb.
500—530 State of Persia . . 79
531—570 Reign of Nusjtvman or Cliosrocs . 80
His love of learning . , ib.
533—539 Peace and war with the Romans . 81
540 He invades Syria . . 82And ruins Antioch . . ib.
541 Defence of the east by Belisarius . 63
Description of Colchos, Dazica, or Mingre-
lia . . . 84
Manners of Vie natives . , 85
Revolutions of Colchos . . 86
Under the Persians., before Christ, 500 . ' ib.Under the Romans, before Cfirist, 60 ib.
130 Visit of Arian . . .88
522 Conversion of the Lazi . . lb.
542—549 Revolt and repentance of the Colchians ib.
549—551 Siege of Petra . . 89
549—556 The Colchian or Lazic war . 90
540—561 Negotiations and treaties between Jus­
tinian and Chosroes . . 91
522 Conquests of the Abyssinians . 92
533 Tlieir alliance with Justinian . . 93
CHAPTER XLIH.
Rebellions of Africa—Restoration of tho Gothic king­
dom by Totila—Loss and Recovery of Rome—Pinal
Conquest of Italy by N arses—Extinction of the Os­
trogoths—Defeat of the Franks and Alcmanni—
Last Victory, Disgrace, ami Death of Dclisarius—
Death and Character of Justinian—Comets, Earth­
quakes, and Plague.


535—545 The troubles of Africa
543- ^558 Rebellion of tho Moors
540 Revolt of the Goths .
541—544 Victories of Totila, king of Italy
Contrast of Greek vice and Gothic virtue
544— 548 Second command of Belisarius in Italy
546 Rome besieged by the Gotlts
Attempt of Belisarius *
Rome taken by the Goths
547 Recovered by Belisarius
548 Final recall of Belisarius
549 Rome again taken by the Goths
519—551 Preparations of Justinian for the Gothic
war ....
552 Character and expedition of tJte Eunuch Wor­
ses .
Defeat and death of Totila
Conquest of Rome by Narscs
553 Defeat and death of Tcias, the last king of
the Goths
Invasion of Italy by Vie Franks and Ale-


PAGE
04


554 Defeat of the Franks and Alcmanni by Nur­
ses ...554—568 Settlement of Italy559 Invasion of the Bulgarians
Last victory of Belisarius501 His disgrace and death505 Death and character of Justinian531—539 Comets
Earthquakes542 Plague—its origin and nature542—594 Extent and duration .
CHAPTER XL1V.


Idea of the Roman Jurisprudence—The. Laws oi the
Kings—The Twelve Tables of the Decemvirs—The
Laws of the People—The Decrees of tho Senate—
The Edicts of the Magistrates and Emperoia—Au­


thority of the Civilians—Codes, Pandecte, Novelsand Institutes, of Justinian: I. Rights of Persons.
II. Rights of Things. III. Private Injuries and Ac­
tions; IV. Crimes and Punishments.
. D. PAGE
The civil or Roman law . 119
Daws of Hie kings of Rome . it>-
The twelve tables of the Decemvirs ■ 120
Their character aiid influence • B>«
Daws of the people . . 121
Decrees of the senate . . ib.
Edicts of the Praters . - 123
The perpetual edict . . ib.
Constitutions of tlie emperors . . ib.
The legislative power . . . 123
Their rescripts . . - 124
Forms of Vie Roman law . . ib.
Succession of the civil lawyers ■ 125
A. V. C. PAGE
303—048 The first period . > 196
048—988 Second period . . ib.
988—1230 Third period . ■ 127
Their philosophy . ■ lb-
A. U. C. TAGK
Authority . . • 128
Seots .... ib.
A. D. PAGE
527 Reformation of the Roman law by Justinian 129
527—540 Tribonian . . . 130
528,529 The code of Justinian . . ib.
530—533 Thepandects or digest . 131
Praise and censure of the code andpandects ib.
Doss of the ancient Jurisprudence . ib.
Legal inconstancy of Justinian . 132
534 Second edition of the code . . ib.
534—565 The novels . . . ib.
533 The institutes . . . ib.
I. Of Persons. Freemen and slaves . 133
Fathers and children . •. . ib.
Limitations of the paternal authority 134
Husbands and wives . . 13$
The religious rites of Marriage _. lb.
Freedom of the matrimonial contract ' lb.
Liberty and abuse of divorce . 136
Limitations of the liberty of divorce .: 137
Incest, concubines, and bastards . 138
Guardians and wards . , lb.
[I. Of Things. Bight of property . ib.
Of inheritance and succession ■ . 139
Civil degrees of kindred . . ib.
Introduction and liberty of Testaments . ' 140
Legacies , . . 141 ■
Codicils and trusts . ib.
. III. Of Actions ... 142
Promises , . . ib.
Benefits ib.
Interest of money ... . 143
Injuries ... lb.
IV. Of Crimes and Punishments . 144
Severity of the twelve tables . ib.
Abolition or oblivion of penal laws . 145
Revival of capital punishments . 146
Measure of Guilt . . 147
Unnatural vice . ib.
Rigour of the Christian emperors . 148
Judgments of the people . . 149
Select judges . . . 150
Assessors . . . 151
Voluntary exile and death . . 152
Abuses of civil jurisprudence - 153
CHAPTER XLV.
Reign of the Younger Justin—Embassy of the Avars—Their Settlement on the Danube—Conquest ofItaly by the Lombards—Adoption and Reign of Ti­berius—Of Maurice—State of Italy under the Lom­bards and the Exarchs—Of Ravedna—Distress ofRome—Character and PonUlicate of Gregory theFirst.
A. O. PAGB
505 Death of Justinian • . 153
565—574 Reign of Justin the II. or tltc younger 154
500 His consulship . . . ih.
Embassy of the Avars .' ib.
Ilboin, king of the Lombards—his vaiour,
low, and revenge . 155


■







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


Obeidah. At the hour of midnight, one hundred chosen deputies of the clergyand people were introduced to the tent of that venerable commander. He re­ceived and dismissed them with courtesy. They returned with a written agreement,on the faith of a companion of Mahomet, that all hostilities should cease; that thevoluntary emigrants might depart in safety, with as much as they could carryaway of their effects; and that the tributary subjects of the caliph should en­joy their lands and houses, with the use and possession of seven churches. Onthese terms, the most respectable hostages, and the gate nearest to his camp,were delivered into his hands: his soldiers imitated the moderation of their chief;and he enjoyed the submissive gratitude of a people whom he had rescuedfrom destruction. But the success of the treaty had relaxed their vigilance, andin the same moment the opposite quarter of the city was betrayed and taken byassault. A party of a hundred Arabs had opened the eastern gate to a more in­exorable foe. "No quarter," cried the rapacious and sanguinary Caled, "noquarter to the enemies of the Lord." His trumpets sounded, and a torrent ofChristian blood was poured down the streets of Damascus. When he reached thechurch of St. Mary, he was astonished and provoked by the peaceful aspect of hiscompanions; their swords were in the scabbard, and they were surrounded by amultitude of priests and monks.—Abu Obeidah saluted the general; " God," saidhe, " has delivered the city into my hands by way of surrender, and lias saved thebelievers the trouble of fighting."—"And am I not," replied the indignant Caled," am I not the lieutenant of the commander of the faithful? Have I not taken thecity by storm? The unbelievers shall perish by the sword. Fall on." The hungryand cruel Arabs would have obeyed the welcome command; and Damascus waslost, if the benevolence of Abu Obeidah had not been supported by a decent anddignified firmness. Throwing himself between the trembling citizens and the mosteager of the barbarians, he abjured them by the holy name of God, to respect hispromise, to suspend their fury, and to wait the determination of their chiefs. Thechiefs retired into the church of St. Mary; and after a vehement debate, Caledsubmitted in some measure to the reason and authority of his colleague, who urgedthe sanctity of a covenant, the advantage as well as the honour which the Moslemswould derive from the punctual performance of their word, and the obstinate re­sistance which thev must encounter from the distrust and despair of the rest ofthe Syrian cities. It was agreed that the sword should be sheathed; that the partof Damascus which had surrendered to Abu Obeidah, should be immediately en­titled to the benefit of his capitulation; and that the final decision should be referredto the justice and wisdom of the caliph. (1) A large majority of the people acceptedthe terms of toleration and tribute; and Damascus is still peopled by twenty thou­sand Christians. But the valiant Thomas, and the free-born patriots who hadfought under his banner, embraced the alternative of poverty and exile. In theadjacent meadow, a numerous encampment was formed of priests and laymen, ofsoldiers and citizens, of women and children: they collected, with haste and terror,their most precious moveables; and abandoned with loud lamentations or silentanguish, their native homes, and the pleasant banks of the Pharphar. The in­flexible soul of Caled was not touched by the spectacle of their distress; he dis­puted with the Damascenes the property of a magazine of corn; endeavoured toexclude the garrison from the benefit of the treaty; consented, with reluctance,that each of the fugitives should arm himself with a sword, or a lance, or a bow;and sternly declared, that, after a respite of three days, they might be pursuedand treated as the enemies of the Moslems.
The passion of a Syrian youth completed the ruin of the exiles of Damascus.A nobleman of the city, of the name of Jonas,(2) was betrothed to a wealthy maiden;but her parents delayed the consummation of his nuptials, and their daughter waspersuaded to escape with the man whom she had chosen. They corrupted thenightly watchmen of the gate Keisan: the lover, who led the way, was encom­passed by a squadron of Arabs; but his exclamation in the Greek tongue,— The
(1) It appears from Abulft-da (p. 125.) and Elmacin,(p. 32.J that this diitinction of the two parts of Damascuswas long remembered, though not always respected, by the Mahometan sovereigns. See likewise Eutychitis.(Annal. torn. ii. p. 379,380.383.)
(2) On the fate of these lovers, whom he names Phocyas and Eudocia, Mr. Hughes lias built the siege of Da­mascus, one of our most popular tragedies, and which possesses the rare merit of blending nature and history.t,e manners of the times and the feelings of the heart. The foolish delicacy of the players compelled bim tosoften the guilt of the hero and the despair of the heroine. Instead of a base renegado, Phocyas serves theArabs as an honourable ally; instead of prompting their pursuit, he flies to the succour of his countrymen, and,after killing Calad and Derav, is himself mortally wounded, and expires in the presence of Eudocia, who pro­fesses her resolution to take the veil at Constantinople. A frigid catmtrophe.'







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 195


his throne, while the Persian envoys, in silk robes, were seated by his side.—" You■see," said the haughty barbarian, " the proofs of my perfect union with the greatking: and his lieutentant is ready to send into my camp a select band of three thou­sand warriors. Presume no longer to tempt your master with a partial and inade­quate ransom: your wealth and your city are the only presents worthy of my accept­ance. For yourselves, I shall permit you to depart, each with an under-garmentand a shirt; and, at my entreaty, my friend Sarbar will not refuse a passage throughhis lines. Your absent prince, even now a captive or a fugitive, has left Constan­tinople to its fate; nor can you escape the arms of the Avars and Persians, unlessyou could soar into the air like birds, unless like fishes, you could dive into thewaves. "(1) During ten successive days the capital was assaulted by the Avars,who had made some progress in the science of attack; they advanced to sap or bat­ter the wall, under the cover of the impenetrable tortoise; their engines deschargeda perpetual volley of stones and darts; and twelve lofty towers of wood exalted thecombatants to the height of the neighbouring ramparts. But the senate and peo-
Ele were animated by the spirit of Heraclius, who had detached to their relief aody of twelve thousand cuirassiers; the powers of fire and mechanics were usedwith superior art and success in the defence of Constantinople; and the galleys,with two and three ranks of oars, commanded the Bosphorus, and rendered thePersians the idle, spectators of the defeat of their allies. The Avars were re­pulsed; a fleet of Sclavonian canoes were destroyed in the harbour; the vassels ofthe chagan threatened to desert, his provisions were exhausted, and after burninghis engines, he gave the signal of a slow and formidable retreat. The devotion ofthe Romans ascribed this signal deliverance to the Virgin Mary; but the motherof Christ would surely have condemned their inhuman murder of the Persian en­voys, who were entitled to the rights of humanity, if they were not protected bythe laws of nations. (2)
After the division of his army, Heraclius prudently retired to the banks of thePhasis, from whence he maintained a defensive war against the fifty thousand goldspears of Persia. His anxiety was relieved by the deliverance of Constantinople;his hopes were confirmed by a victory of his brother Theodoras; and to the hostileleague of Chosroes with the Avars, the Roman emperor opposed the useful andhonourable alliance of the Turks. At his liberal invitation, the horde of Cho-zars,(3) transported their tents from the plains of the Volga to the mountains ofGeorgia; Heraclius received them in the neighbourhood of Teflis, and the khanwith his nobles dismounted from their horses, if we may credit the Greeks, andfell prostrate on the ground, to adore_ the purple of the Caesar. Such voluntaryhomage and important aid were entitled to the warmest acknowledgments; andthe emperor, taking off his own diadem, placed it on the head of the Turkishprince, whom he saluted with a tender embrace and the appellation of son. After asumptuous banquet he presented Ztebel with the plate and ornaments, the gold,the gems, and the silk, which had been used at the imperial table, and, with hisown hand, distributed rich jewels and ear-rings to his new allies. In a secret in­terview, he produced the portrait of his daughter Eudocia, (4) condescended toflatter the barbarian with the promise of a fair and august bride, obtained ah im­mediate succour of forty thousand horse, and negotiated a strong diversion of theTurkish arms on the side of the Oxus.(5) The Persians in their turn, retreated"with precipitation, in the camp of Edessa. Heraclius reviewed an army of seven-


(1) A bird, a frog, a mouse, and five arrows, had been the present of the Scythian king to Darius. (Hero-dot. lib. iv. c. 131,132.) Suhstitnez one lettre a ces signes (says Rousseau, with much (rood taste) plus ellaaera menecaute moins elle effrayera: ce ne fera queune faufarronade, dont Darirjs n'eut fait querire, (Eroile,torn. iii. p.*146.) Tet I much question whether the senate and people of Constantinople laughed at this mes­sage of the chagan.
(2) The Paschal Chronicle (p. 392—397.) gives a minute and authentic narrative of the siege and deliveranceof Constantinople. Theophanes (p. 264.) adds some circumstances; and a faint light may be obtained fromthe smoke of George of Fisidia, who has composed a poem (de Belto Abarico, p. 45—54.) to commemoratethis auspicious event.
(3) The power of the Chozars prevailed in the seventh, eighth, and ninth centuries. They were known tothe Greeks, the Arabs, and, under the name of Kosa, to the Chinese themselves. Oe Guignes, Hist, des Hons,tom.ii. part 2. p. 507—509.
. (4) Bpiphania, or Eudocia, the only daughter of Heraelins and his first wife Eudocia, was bom at Constan­tinople on the 7th of July, A. D. 611. Baptized the 15th of August,and crowned (in the oratory of St. Ste­phen in the palace) the 4th of October of the same year. At this time she was about fifteen. Eudocia wasafterwards sent to her Turkish husband, but the news of his death stopped her journey, and prevented theconsnm.natitin. (Ducange, Familia*. Byzantin. p. 118.)
. (5) Eimacin (Hist. Saracen, p. 13—16.) gives some curious and probable facts: but his numbers are rather toohigh—three hundred thousand Romans assembled at Edessa—-five hundred thousand Persians killed at Nine-Ten. The abatement of a cipher is scarcely enough to restore his sanity.







OCR Output








56 THE DECLINE AND FALL


tenant of Justinian to accept their voluntary allegiance, and. to enter the city, whosegates would be thrown open for his reception. As soon as Belisarius had fortifiedhis n«w conquests, Naples and Cumse, he advanced about twenty miles to thebanks of the Vulturnus, contemplated the decayed grandeur of Capua, and haltedat the separation of the Latin and Appian ways. The work of the censor, afterthe incessant use of nine centuries, still preserved its primeval beauty, and not aflaw could be discovered in the large polished stones, of which that solid, thoughnarrow road, was so firmly compacted. (1) Belisarius, however, preferred theLatin way, which at a distance from the sea and marshes, skirted in the space ofone hundred and twenty miles along the foot of the mountains. His enemies haddisappeared: when he made his entrance through the Asinarian gate, the garri­son departed without molestation along the Flaminian way; and the city, after six­ty years' servitude, was delivered from the yoke of the barbarians. Leuderis alone,from a motive of pride or discontent, refused to accompany the fugitives; and theGothic chief, himself a trophy of the victory, was sent with the keys of Rome tothe throne of the emperor Justinian. (2)
The first days, which coincided with the old Saturnalia, were devoted to mu­tual congratulations and the public joy; and the catholics prepared to celebrate,without a rival, the approaching festival of the nativity of Christ. In the fami­liar conversation of a hero, the Romans acquired some notion of the virtues whichhistory ascribed to their ancestors; they were edified by the apparent respect ofBelisarius for the successor of St. Peter, and his rigid discipline secured, in the midstof war, the blessings of tranquillity and justice. They applauded the rapid successof his arms, which overran the adjacent country, as far as Narni, Perusia, and Spo-leto: but they trembled, the senate, the clergy, and the unwarlike people, as soonas they understood that he had resolved, and would speedily be reduced to sustaina siege against the powers of the Gothic monarchy. The designs of Vitiges wereexecuted during the winter-season, with diligence and effect. From their rustichabitations, from their distant garrisons, the Goths assembled at Ravenna for thedefence of their country; and such were their numbers, that after an army hadbeen detached for the relief of Dalmatia, one hundred and fifty thousand fightingmen marched under the royal standard. According to the degrees of rank or me­rit the Gothic king distributed arms and horses, rich gifts, and liberal promises;he moved along the Flaminian way, declined the useless sieges of Perusia andSpoleto, respected the impregnable rock of Narni, and arrived within two miles•of Rome, at the foot of the Milvian bridge. The narrow passage was fortifiedwith a tower, and Belisarius had computed the value of the twenty davs, whichmust be lost in the construction of another bridge. But the consternation of thesoldiers of the tower, who either fled or deserted, disappointed his hopes, andbetrayed his person into the most imminent danger. At the head of one thousandhorse, the Roman general sallied from the Flaminian gate to mark the ground of anadvantageous position, and to survey the camp of the barbarians; but while he stillbelieved them on the other side of the Tiber, he was suddenly encompassed andassaulted by their innumerable squadrons. The fate of Italy depended on his life; andthe deserters pointed to the conspicuous horse, a bay,(3) with a white face, whichhe rode On that memorable day. " Aim at the bay horse," was the universal cry.Every bow was bent, every javelin was directed, against that fatal object, and thecommand was'repeated and obeyed by thousands who were ignorant of its realmotive. The bolder barbarians_advanced to the more honourable combat of-swords and spears; and the praise of an enemy has graced the fall of Visandus,the standard-bearer, (4) who maintained his foremost station, till he was piercedwith thirteen wounds, perhaps by the hand of Belisarius himself. The Romangeneral was strong, active, and dexterous: on every side he discharged his weighty


(1) Bergier (Hist. Des Grands, Chemins des Romains, torn. i. p. 221—228. 440—444.) examines the structure■and materials, while d'Anville (Analyse d'Ifalie. p. 200—213.) defines the geographical line.
(2) Of the;first recovery of Rome, the year (536) is certain from the series of events, rather than from thecorrupt, or interpolated, text of Procopius: the month (December is ascertained by Evagrius; lib. It. c. 19.) andthe day (the tenth) may be admitted on the slight evidence of Nicephorus Callisthus (lib. xvii. c. 13.) For thisaccurate chronology, we are indebted to the diligence and judgment of Pagi (torn. ii. p. 559,560.)
(3) A horse of a bay or red colour was styled eaXio; by the Greeks, balam by the barbarians, and spadix by .the Romans. Honesti spadices, says Virgil. (Georgic. lib. iii. 72. with the observations of Martin and Heyne'.)SjraS.t or signifies a branch of the palm tree, whose name ?oiv<?, is synonymous to red (Aulus Gellius.ii. 26.)
(4) I interpret 3«»J«>.«p«s, not as a proper name, but an office, standard bearer from bandum (vexillum.) aharbanc word adopted by the Greeks and Romans. (Paul Diacon, lib. i. e. SO. p, 760. Grot Nomina Gothi cs,p. 575. Ducange, Gloss. Latin, Tom. i. p. 539,540.)


l







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 123


crent prerogative of the Roman kings was transferred, in their respective offices,to the consuls and dictators, the censors and pretors; and a similar right was as­sumed by the tribunes of the people, the ediles and proconsuls. At Rome, and inthe provinces, the duties of the subject, and the intentions of the governor, wereproclaimed; and the civil jurisprudence was reformed by the annual edicts of thesupreme judge, the pretor of the city. As soon as he ascended his tribunal, he an­nounced by the voice of the crier, and afterwards inscribed on a white wall, therules which he proposed to follow in the decision of doubtful cases, and the reliefwhich his equity would afford from the precise rigour of ancient statutes. A prin­ciple of discretion more congenial to monarchy was introduced into the republic:the art of respecting the name, and eluding the efficacy, of the laws, was improvedby successive pretors; subtleties and fictions were invented to defeat the plainestmeaning of the decemvirs, and where the end was salutary, the means were fre-frequently absurd. The secret or probable wish of the dead was suffered to pre­vail over the order of succession and the forms of testaments; and the claimant,who was excluded from the character of heir, accepted with equal pleasure froman indulgent pretor, the possession of the goods of his late kinsman and benefactor.In the redress of private wrongs, compensations and fines were substituted to theobsolete rigour of the twelve tables: time and space were annihilated by fancifulsuppositions; and the plea of youth, or fraud, or violence, annulled the obligation,or excused the performance, of an inconvenient contract. A jurisdiction thus vagueand arbitrary was exposed to the most dangerous abuse; the substance, as well asthe form, of justice, were often sacrificed to the prejudices of virtue, the bias oflaudable affection, and the grosser seductions of interest or resentment. But theerrors or vices of each pretor expired with his annual office; such maxims aloneas had been approved by reason and practice were copied by succeeding judges;the rule of proceeding was defined by the solution of new cases; and the temptationsof injustice were removed by the Cornelian law, which compelled the pretor of theyear to adhere to the letter and spirit of his first proclamation. (1) It was re­served for the curiosity and learning of Hadrian, to accomplish the design whichhe had conceived by the genius of Caesar; and the pretorship of Salvius Julian, aneminent lawyer, was immortalized by the composition of the perpetual edict.This well-digested code was ratified by the emperor and the senate; the long di­vorce of law and equity was at length reconciled; and, instead of the twelve ta­bles, the perpetual edict was fixed as the invariable standard of civil jurispru­dence. ( 2)
From Augustus to Trajan, the modern Caisars were content to promulgate theiredicts in the various characters of a Roman magistrate; and, in the decrees of thesenate, the efiistles and orations of the prince were respectfully inserted. Hadri-an(3) appears to have been the first who assumed, without disguise, the plenitudeof legislative power. And this innovation, so agreeable to his active mind, wascountenanced by the patience of the times, and his long absence from the seat ofgovernment. The same policy was embraced by succeeding monarchs, and, ac­cording to the harsh metaphor of Tertullian, " the gloomy and intricate forest ofancient laws was cleared away by the axe of royal mandates and constitutions. "(4)During four centuries, from Hadrian to Justinian, the public and private jurispru­dence-was moulded by the will of the sovereign; and few institutions, either humanor divine, were permitted to stand on their former basis. The origin of imperiallegislation was concealed by the darkness of ages and the terrors of armed des­potism; and a double fiction was propagated by the servilitv, or perhaps the igno­rance, of the civilians who basked in the sunshine of the Roman and Byzantinecourts. 1. To the prayer of the ancient C&sars, the people or the senate had
stitulei flib. i. tit. ii. No. 7.) and more loosely explained in the Greek paraphrase of Theophilos (p. 33—38.edit. Reitz.,) who drops the important word honorarium.
(1) Dion P""'—''"™ ■ Klv »t™ n inn > fi«M n»metiihowever, isvicus Vives.▼ius (ad SuetL—
Cimbricum, detects the forgery (Movie's Works, vol. i. p. 303.)
(2) The history of edicts is compmed.and the text ofthe perpetual edict is restored by the master-band ofHeineccius (Opp. torn. vii. P. 2. p. 1—S84.J in whose researches I might safely acquiesce. In the Academy ofInscriptions, M. Bouchaud has given a series of memoirs to this interfiling; subject of law and literature.
(3) His laws are the first in the Code. See Dodwell (Prselect. Camden, p. 319—340.,) who wanders from thesubjeetin confused reading and feeble paradox.
(4) Totam illam veterem et sqnallentem sylvam leguni novis principalium retcriptnrmn et edictorum stcu-ribus ruscatis et carditis (Apologet. c. W. p. 50. edit. Havercamp.) He proceeds to praise the recent firmnessof Severus. who repealed the useless or pernicious laws, without any regard (o their age or authority.


 







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


people, and the assassin, in the fulness of power, was driven from his capital intovoluntary and perpetual exile. Constans embarked for Greece; and, as if hemeant to retort the abhorrence which he deserved, he is said from the imperialgalley, to have spit against the walls of his native city. After passing the winterat Athens, he sailed to Tarentum in Italy, visited Rome, and concluded a longpilgrimage of disgrace and sacrilegious rapine, by fixing his residence at Syra­cuse. But if Constans would fly from his people, he could not fly from himself.The remorse of his conscience created a phantom who pursued him by land andsea, by day and by night; and the visionary Theodosius, presented to his lips a cupof blood, said, or seemed to say, Drink, brother, drink; a sure emblem of the ag­gravation of his guilt, since he had received from the hands of the deacon the mys­tic cup of the blood of Christ. Odious to himself and to mankind, Constans pe­rished by domestic, perhaps by episcopal treason, in the capital of Sicily. A ser­vant who waited in the bath, after pouring warm water on his head, struck himviolently with the vase. He fell, stunned by the blow, and suffocated by the wa­ter; and his attendants, who wondered at the tedious delay, beheld with indiffer­ence the corpse of their lifeless emperor. The troops of Sicily invested with thepurple an obscure youth, whose inimitable beauty eluded, and it might easily elude,the declining art of the painters and sculptors of the age.
Constans had left in the Byzantine palace three sons, the eldest of whom hadbeen clothed in his infancy with the purple. When the father summoned themto attend his person in Sicily, these precious hostages were detained by the Greeks,and a firm refusal informed him that they were the children of the state. Thenews of his murder was conveyed with almost supernatural speed from Syracuseto Constantinople; and Constantine, the eldest of his sons, inherited his thronewithout being the heir of the public hatred. His subjects contributed, with zealand alacrity, to chastise the guilt and presumption of a province which had usurpedthe rights of the senate and people: the young emperor sailed from the Hellespontwith a powerful fleet; and the legions of Rome and Carthage were assembled un­der his standard in the harbour of Syracuse. The defeat of the Sicilian tyrant waseasy, his punishment just, and his beauteous head was exposed in the hippodrome;but I cannot applaud the clemency of a prince, who, among a crowd of victims,condemned the son of apatrician, for deploring with some bitterness the executionof a virtuous father. The youth was castrated; he survived the operation, andthe memory of this indecent cruelty is preserved by the elevation of Germanusto the rank of a patriarch and saint. After pouring this bloody libation on hisfather's tomb, Constantine returned to his capital, and the growth of his youngbeard during the Sicilian voyage, was announced by the familiar surname of Po-gonatus, to the Grecian world. But his reign, like that of his predecessor, wasstained with fraternal discord. On his two brothers, Heraclius and Tiberius, hehad bestowed the title of Augustus; an empty title, for they continued to languishwithout trust or power in the solitude of the palace. At their secret instigation,the troops of the Anatolian theme or province approached the city on the Asiaticside, demanded for the royal brothers, the partition or exercise of sovereignty,and supported their seditious claim by a theological argument. They were Chris­tians, (they cried,) and orthodox catholics; the sincere votaries of the holy and un­divided Trinity. Since there are three equal persons in heaven, it is reasonablethere should be three equal persons upon earth. The emperor invited these learneddivines to a friendly conference; in which they might propose their arguments to thesenate; they obeyed the summons; but the prospect of their bodies hanging on a gib­bet in the suburb of Galata, reconciled their companions to the unity of the reign ofConstantine. He pardoned his brothers, and their names were still pronouncedin the public acclamations; but on the repetition or suspicion of a similar offence,the obnoxious princes were deprived of their titles and noses, in the presence ofthe catholic bishops who were assembled at Constantinople, in the sixth generalsynod. In the close of his life, Pogonatus was anxious only to establish the rightof primogeniture: the hair of his two sons, Justinian and Heraclius, was offered onthe shrine of St. Peter, as a symbol of their spiritual adoption by the pope; butthe elder was alone exalted to the rank of Augustus and the assurance of the em­pire.
After the decease of his father, the inheritance of the Roman world devolvedto Justinian II. and the name of a triumphant lawgiver was dishonoured by thevices of a'boy, who imitated his namesake onlv in the expensive luxury of build­ing. His passions were strong; his understanding was feeble; and he was intoxi­







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 403


seas and lands from such a formidable adversary. Their mutual designs or decla­rations of offensive war evaporated without effect; but instead of opening a door tothe conquest of Europe, Spain was dissevered from the trunk of the monarchy,engaged in perpetual hostility with the east, and inclined to peace and friendshipwith the Christian sovereigns of Constantinople and France. The example of theOmmiades was imitated by the real or fictitious progeny of Ali, the Edrissites ofMauritania, and the m6re powerful Fatimites of Africa and Egypt. In the tenthcentury, the chair of Mahomet was disputed by three caliphs or commanders ofthe faithful, who reigned at Bagdad, Cairoan, and Cordova, excommunicatedeach other, and agreed only in a principle of discord, that a secretary is moreodious and criminal than an unbeliever. (1)
Mecca was the patrimony of the line of Hashem, yet the Abbassides werenever tempted to reside either in the birth-place or the city of the prophet. Da­mascus was disgraced by the choice, and polluted with the blood, of the Om­miades; and after some hesitation, Almansor, the brother and successor of Saffah,laid the foundations of Bagdad,(2) the imperial seat of his prosperity during areign of five hundred years. (3) The chosen spot is on the eastern bank of theTigris, about fifteen miles above the ruins of Modain: the double wall was of a cir­cular form; and such was the rapid increase of a capital, now dwindled to a pro­vincial town, that the funeral of a popular saint might be attended by eight hun­dred thousand men and sixty thousand women of Bagdad and the adjacent vil­lages. In this city of fieace,(4) amidst the riches of the east, the Abbassides soondisdained the abstinence and frugality of the first caliphs, and aspired to emulatethe magnificence of the Persian kings. After his wars and buildings, Almansorleft behind him in gold and silver about thirty millions sterling;(5) and this trea­sure was exhausted in a few years by the vices or virtues of his children. His sonMahadi, in a single pilgrimage to Mecca, expended six millions of dinars of gold.A pious and charitable motive may sanctify the foundation of cisterns and cara-vanseras, which he distributed along a measured road of seven hundred miles; buthis train of camels, laden with snow, could serve only to astonish the natives ofArabia, and to refresh the fruits and liquors of the royal banquet. (6) The cour­tiers would surely praise the liberality of his grandson Almamon, who gave awayfour-fifths of the income of a province, a sum of two millions four hundred thou­sand gold dinars, before he drew his foot from the stirrup. At the nuptials of thesame prince, a thousand pearls of the largest size were showered on the head ofthe bnde,(7) and a lottery of lands and houses displayed the'eapricious bounty offortune. The glories of the court were brightened rather than impaired in thedecline of the empire; and a Greek ambassador might admire or pity the magni­ficence of the feeble Moctader. " The caliph's whole army," says the historianAbulfeda, " both horse and foot, was under arms, which together made a body ofone hundred and sixty thousand men. His state-officers, the favourite slaves, stoodnear him in splendid apparel, their belts glittering with gold and gems. Near
(1) I shall not stop to refute the strange errors and fancies of Sir William Temple, (his works, vol. iii. p. 371—374, (octavo edition) and Voltaire (Histoire Generale,c. 28. torn. ii. p. 134,125. edition de Lausanne,) concerningthe division of the Saracen empire. The mistakes of Voltaire proceeded from the want of knowledge or re­flection: but Sir William was deceived by a Spanish impostor, who has framed an apocryphal history ofthe con­quest of Spain by the Arabs.
(2) The geographer d'Anville, (I'Euphrate et leTigre, p. 121—123.) and the orientalist UUerbelot, (Dibiio-Tlieque, p. 107, 108) may suffice for the knowledge or Bagdad. Our travellers, Pietro della Valle, torn. i. p.688—098.) Tavernier, (torn. i. p. 230—238.) Thevenot, (part ii. p. 209—212.) Otter, (torn. i. p. 162— ins.) andNiebuhr, (Voyage en Arabie, torn. ii. p. 239—271.) have seen only its deeay: and the Nubian (geographer, (p.£04.) and the travelling Jew, Benjamin of Tudela, (ttinerarium,p. 112—123.) a Const. l'Empereur, apud Elze­vir. Ifi33) are the only writers of my acquaintance who have known Bagdad under the reign ofthe Abbassides.
(3) The foundations of Bagdad were laid A. H. 14*. A. D. 762. Mostatern, the last of the Abbassides, wastaken and put to death by the Tartars, A. H. 656, A. D. 12.38, the 20th of February.
(4) Medinatal Salem, Dar al Salem. Urbs pacis, or, as is more neatly compounded by the Byzantine writers,K.puwiroXis (Irenopolis.) There is some dispute concerning the etymology of Bagdad, but the first syllable isallowed to signify a garden in the Persian tongue; the garden of Dad, a Christian hermit, whose cell had beenthe only habitation on the spot.
(5) Reliquit in acrario sexcenties millies mille stateres, et quater et vicies millies mille aureos aureos. Elma-cin, Hist. Saracen, p. 126. I have reckoned the gold pieces at <-ighl shillings, and Ihe proportion to the silver astwelve to one. But I will never answer for the numbers of Erpenius; and the Latins are scarcely above theaavages in the language of arithmetic.
(6) D'Herbelot, p. 530. Abulfeba, p. 154. Nivem Meceam apportavit, rem ibi aut nunquam aut rarissime
T'(7) Abulfeda, p. 184.189. desciibea the splendour and liberality of Almamon. Milton has alluded to this ori­ental custom:
—Or where the gorgeous east. v. ith richest hand,Showers on her kings barbaric pearls and gold,1 have used the modern word lottery, to express the miisilia of the Roman CDiperars, wluah entitfe to someprize the aersoD who caught them, as they were thrown among the ctowd.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


with the chief of the enemy, he proposed the option of three honourable condi­tions: that he should be allowed to return to Medina, or be stationed in a frontiergarrison against the Turks, or safely conducted to the presence of Yezid. Butthe commands of the caliph, or his lieutenant, were stern and absolute; and Ho-sein was informed that he must either submit as a captive and a criminal to thecommander of the faithful, or expect the consequences of his rebellion. " Doyou think," replied he, " to terrify me with death?" And, during the short re-■spite of a night, he prepared with cairn and solemn resignation to encounter hisfate. He checked the lamentations of his sister Fatima, who deplored the im­pending ruin of his house. "Our trust," said Hosein, "is in God alone. Allthings both in heaven and earth, must perish and return to their Creator. Mybrother, my father, my mother, were better than me; and every Mussulman hasan example in the prophet." He pressed his friends to consult their safety by atimely flight; they unanimously refused to desert or survive their beloved master;and their courage was fortified by a fervent prayer and the assurance of paradise.On the morning of the fatal day, he mounted on horseback, with his sword in onehand, and the Koran in the other; his generous band of martyrs consisted only ofthirty-two horse and forty foot; but their flanks and rear were secured by thetent-ropes, and by a deep trench which they had filled with lighted fagots, ac­cording to the practice of the Arabs. The enemy advanced with reluctance; andone of their chiefs deserted, with thirty followers, to claim the partnership of in­evitable death. In every close onset, or single combat, the despair of the Fati-mites was invincible; but the surrounding multitude galled them from a distancewith a cloud of arrows, and the horses and men were successively slain: a trucewas allowed on both sides for the hour of prayer; and the battle at length expiredby the death of the last of the companions of Hosein. Alone, weary, and wound­ed, he seated himself at the door of his tent. As he tasted a drop of water, hewas pierced in the mouth with a dart; and his son and nephew, two beautifulyouths, were killed in his arms. He lifted his hands to heaven; they were fullof blood, and he uttered a funeral prayer for the living and the dead. In a trans­port of despair, his sister issued from the tent, and adjured the general of the Cu-fians, that he would not suffer Hosein to be murdered before his eyes; a teartrickled down his venerable beard; and the boldest of his soldiers fell back onevery side as the dying hero threw himself among them. The remorseless Sha-mer, a name detested by the faithful, reproached their cowardice; and the grand­son of Mahomet was slain with three-and-thirty strokes of lances and swords.After they had trampled on his body, they carried his head to the castle of Cufa,and the inhuman Obeidollah struck him on the mouth with a cane. " Alas," ex­claimed an aged Mussulman, '* on these lips have I seen the lips of the apostle ofGod!" In a distant age and climate, the tragic scene of the death of Hosein willawaken the sympathy of the coldest reader. (1) On the annual festival of hismartyrdom, in the devout pilgrimage to his sepulchre, his Persian votaries aban­don their souls to the religious frenzy of sorrow and indignation. (2)
When the sisters and children of Ali were brought in chains to the throne ofDamascus, the caliph was advised to extirpate the enmity of a popular and hos­tile race, whom he had injured beyond the hope of reconciliation. But Yezidpreferred the counsels of mercy; and the mourning family was honourably dis­missed to mingle their tears with their kindred at Medina. The glory of mar­tyrdom superseded the right of primogeniture; and the twelve imams,(3) or pon­tiffs of the Persian creed, are Ali, Hassen, Hosein, and the lineal descendants ofHosein to the ninth generation. Without arms, or treasures, or subjects, theysuccessively enjoyed the veneration of the people, and provoked the jealousy ofthe reigning caliphs; their tombs at Mecca or Medina, on the banks of the Eu­phrates, or in the province of Chorasan, are still visited by the devotion of theirsect. Their names were often the pretence of sedition and civil war; but theseroyal saints despised the pomp of the world, submitted to the will of God andthe injustice of man, and devoted their innocent lives to the study and practice of
(t) I baTe abridged the interesting narrative of Ockley (torn. ii. p. 170—231.) It is long and minute: but thepathetic, almost always, consists in the detail of little circumstances.
(2) Niebuhr the Dane (Voyages en Arable, &c. torn. ii. p, 208, &e.) is perhaps the only European travellerwho has dared to visit Meshed Ali and Meshed Hosein. The two sepulchres are in the hands of tbe Turks,who tolerate and tax the devotion af the Persian heretics. The festival of the death of Hosein is amply describedby Sir John Chardin, a traveller whom I have often praised.
(3) The general article of /mam, hi d'Herbelot's Bib]iotheque,will indicate the succession; and the lives of thetwlvc are given under their respective names.







OCR Output








®F THE ROMAN EMPIRE. is?


church: but they hesitate whether that worship be relative or direct; whether thegodhead, and the figure of Christ, be entitled to the same mode of adoration. Ofthis second Nicene council, the acts are still extant; a curious monument of super­stition and ignorance, of falsehood and folly. I shall only notice the judgment of thebishops, on the comparative merit of image-worship and morality. A monk hadconcluded a truce with the demon of fornication, on condition of interrupting hisdaily prayes to a picture that hung in his cell. His scruples prompted him to con­sult the abbot: " Rather than abstain from adoring Christ and his mother in theirholy images, it would be better," replied the casuist, "to enter every brothel, andvisit every prostitute, in the city."(l)
For the honour of orthodoxy, at least the orthodoxy of the Roman church, it issomewhat unfortunate, that the two princes who convened the two councils ofNice, are both stained with the blood of their sons. The second of these assemblieswas approved and rigorously executed by the despotism of Irene; and she refusedher adversaries the toleration which at first she had granted to her friends. Duringthe five succeeding reigns, a period of thirty-eight years, the contest was main­tained, with unabated rage and various success, between the worshippers and thebreakers of the images; but I am not inclined to pursue with minute diligence therepetition of the same events. Nicephorus allowed a general liberty of speech andpractice; and the only virtue of his reign is accused by the monks as the cause ofhis temporal and eternal perdition. Superstition and weakness formed the cha­racter of Michael I. but the saints and images were incapable of supporting their-votary on the throne. In the purple, Leo V. asserted the name and religion of anArmenian; and the idols, with their seditious adherents, were condemned to a se­cond exile. Their applause would have sanctified the murder of aii impious tyrant;but his assassin and successor, the second Michael, was tainted from his birth withthe Phrygian heresies: he attempted to mediate between the contending parties;and the intractable spirit of the catholics insensibly cast him into the oppositescale. His moderation was guarded by timidity; but his son Theophilus, alikeignorant of fear and pity, was the last and most cruel of the Iconoclasts. The en-thusiam of the times ran strongly against them; and the emperors who stemmedthe torrent, were exasperated and punished by the public hatred. After the deathof Theophilus, the final victory of the images was achieved by a second female,his widow Theodora, whom he left the guardian of the empire. Her measureswere bold and decisive. The fiction of a tardy repentance absolved the fame andthe soul of her deceased husband: the sentence of the Iconoclast patriarch wascommuted from the loss of his eyes to a whipping of two hundred lashes: the bi­shops trembled, the monks shouted, and the festival of orthodoxy preserves theannual memory of the triumph of the images. A single question yet remained,whether they are endowed with any proper and inherent sanctity; it was agitatedby the Greeks of the eleventh century ;(2) and as this opinion has the strongest re­commendation of absurdity, I am surprised that it was not more explicitly decidedin the affirmative. In the west, pope Hadrian I. accepted and announced the de­crees of the Nicene assembly, which is now revered by the catholics as the se­venth in rank of the general councils. Rome and Italy were docile to the voice efitheir father; but the greatest part of the Latin Christians were far behind in the raceof superstition. The churches of France, Germany, England, and Spain, steereda middle course between the adoration and the destruction of images, which theyadmitted into their temples, not as objects of worship, but as lively and useful me­morials of faith and history. An angry book of controversy was composed andpublished under the name of Charlemagne;(3) under his authority a synod of threehundred bishops was assembled at Frankfort;(4) they blamed the fury of the Ico-
(1) Eu/ts)! BSJ Si o-ot /oj jum\*7TS tv ei» -nj ^3?j( txut>j rro^iif tsv Etc 0 fai BinKSf,^ u wx cepvtjTi) to rraatrxvvetv rov x-jpfov mumx*- 3fiow InToutf Xpimav /htxtk ceurou ^tp-ao; sv ii*oi/<, Theae visits could not be innocent, since the AxiftwosrBpv.tje? (the demon of fornication) arnhiftit <J. wjtov ... iv ftix aw mc fzre-u'TO etumn o-^oSpx, &c. Actio iv. p. D01.Actio v. p. 1031.
(2) See an account of this controversy in the Alexius of Anna Comnena (lib. v. p. 129.) and Moshcim. In-stitut. (Hist. Eccles. p. 3f1,372.)
(3) TheLibri Carolini, (Spanheim, p. 443—529.) composed in the palace or winter quarters of Charlemagne,at "Worms, A. D. 790, and sent by Engebert to pope Hadrian I., who answered them nya grandis et verbosaepistola. (Concil.tom. viii.p. 1553.) The Carolines propose one hundred and twenty objections against theNicene synod, and such words as these are the flowers oftheir rhetoric—dementiam priscae Gentilitatis obsole-tum errorem argumenta insauissima et absurdissirna .... derisione dignas nssnias, &c &c
(4) The assemblies of Charlemagne were political as well as ecclesiastical; and the three hundred members(Nat. Alexander, sec. viii. p. 53.) who sat ana voted at Frankfort, mast include net only the bWrops, but th">abbots*, ami even the principal laymen-.







OCR Output








iU THE DECLINE AND FALL


short epistle to his legitimate or testamentary heir; who fulfilled with honour, or ne­glected with impunity, this last request, which the judges before the age of Augus­tus were not authorized to enforce. A codicil might be expressed in any mode,or in any language; but the subscription of five witnesses must declare that it wasthe genuine composition of the author. His intention, however laudable, was some­times illegal; and the invention of fidei-commUsa, or trusts, arose from the strugglebetween natural justice and positive jurisprudence. A stranger of Greece or Africamight be the friend or benefactor of a childless Roman, but none, except afellow-citi-zen, could act as his heir. The Voconian law, which abolished female succession, re­strained the legacy or inheritance of a woman to the sum of one hundred thousandsesterces;(l) and an only daughter was condemned almost as an alien in her fa­ther's house. The zeal of friendship, and parental affection, suggested a liberalartifice: a qualified citizen was named in the testament, with a prayer or injunctionthat he would restore the inheritance to the person for whom it was truly intend­ed. Various was the conduct of the trustees in this painful situation: they hadsworn to observe the laws of their country, but honour prompted them to violatetheir oath; and if they preferred their interest under the mask of patriotism, theyforfeited the esteem of every virtuous mind. The declaration of Augustus relievedtheir doubts, gave a legal sanction to confidential testaments and codicils, and gen­tly unravelled the forms and restraints of the republican jurisprudence. (2) But asthe newpractice of trusts degenerated into some abuse, the trustee was enabled,by the Trebellian and Pegasian decrees, to reserve one-fourth of the estate, or totransfer on the head of the real heir all the debts and actions of the succession.The interpretation of testaments was strict and literal; but the language of trustsand codicils was delivered from the minute and technical accuracy of the civi­lians. (3)
III. The general duties of mankind are imposed by their public and private re­lations: but their specific obligations to each other can only be the effect of, 1. apromise, 2. a benefit, or, 3. an injury: and when these obligations are ratified bylaw, the interested party may compel the performance by a judicial action. Onthis principle the civilians of every country have erected a similar jurisprudence,the fair conclusion of universal reason and justice. (4)
1. The goddess of faith (of human and social faith) was worshipped, not only inher temples, but in the lives of the Romans; and if that nation was deficient in themore amiable qualities of benevolence and generosity, they astonished the Greeksby their sincere and simple performance of the most burdensome engagements. (5)Yet among the same people, according to the rigicl maxims of the patricians anddecemvirs, a naked fiact, a promise, or even an oath, did not create any civil obli­gation, unless it was confirmed by the legal form of a stimulation. Whatever mightbe the etymology of the Latin word, it conveyed the idea of a firm and irrevocablecontract, which was always expressed in the mode of a question and answer. Doyou promise to pay me one hundred pieces of gold?—was the solemn interrogationof Seius. I do promise—was the reply of Sempronius. The friends of Semproni-us, who answered for his ability and inclination, might be separately sued at theoption of Seius: and the benefit of partition, or order of reciprocal actions, insensi­bly deviated from the strict theory of stipulation. The most cautious and delibe­rate consent was justly required to sustain the validity of a gratuitous promise; andthe citizen who might have obtained a legal security, incurred the suspicion offraud, and paid the forfeit of his neglect. But the ingenuity of the civilians suc­cessfully laboured to convert simple engagements into the form of solemn stipula­tions. The pretors, as the guardians of social faith, admitted every rational evi­dence of a voluntary and deliberate act, which in their tribunal produced an equi­table obligation, and for which they gave an action and a remedy. (6)
(1) Dion Castiut (torn. ii. Ivi. p. su. with Reiraar's Notes) specifies in Greek money the sum of twenty-firethousand drachms.
(2) The revolutions of the Roman laws of inheritance are finely though sometimes fancifully, deduced byMontesquieu. (Esprit des Loix, lib. 270
(3) Of the civil jurisprudence of successions, testaments, codicils, legacies, and trusts, the principles are as­certained in the Institutes of Caius, (lib. ii. tit. 2—9. p. 91—144.) Justinian,(lib. ii. tit. 10—25,)and Tbeophilus,(p. 328—514,) and the immense detail occupies twelve books (28—39.) of the Pandects.
(4) The Institutes of Caiui.lib. ii. tit. 9,10. p. 144—214.) of Justinian, (lib. iii. tit. 14—30. lib. iv. tit. 1—6.) andof Theophilus, (p. 016—837.) distinguish four sorts of obligations—aut re, aut verbis, aut literis, aut consensu!but I confess myself partial to my own division,
(5) How much is the cool, rational evidence of Polybius (lib. vi. p. 693, lib. ini. p. 14S9, 1460.) superior tovafue,indiscriminate applause—omnium max'uaeet praecipue fldem coluil. (A. Gellius,20,1.)
(•) The Jus Praitorium de Pactis et Transacttonihus is a separate and satisfactory treatise of Gerard Noodt.(Opp. torn. i. p. «3—564.0 And I will here observe that the universities of Holland and Brandenburgli, in the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 67


filled their expectations of a hero; the meanest of his fellow-citizens were embold­ened by his gentle and gracious demeanour; and the martial train, which attendedhis footsteps, left his person more accessible than in a day of battle. Seven thou­sand horsemen, matchless for beauty and valour, were maintained in the service,■and at the private expense, of the general.(l) Their prowess was always con­spicuous in single combats, or in the foremost ranks; and both parties confessed,that in the siege of Rome, the guards of Belisarius had alone vanquished the bar­barian host. Their numbers were continually augmented by the bravest and mostfaithful of the enemy; and his fortunate captives, the Vandals, the Moors, and theGoths, emulated the attachment of his domestic followers. By the union of libe­rality and justice, he acquired the love of the soldiers, without alienating the af­fections of the people. The sick and wounded were relieved with medicines andmoney; and, still more efficaciously, by the healing visits and smiles of their com­mander. The loss of a weapon or a horse was instantly repaired, and each deedof valour was rewarded by the rich and honourable gifts of a bracelet or a collar,which were rendered more precious by the judgment of Belisarius. He was en­deared to the husbandmen, by the peace and plenty which they enjoyed under theshadow of his standard. Instead of being injured, the country was enriched by theinarch of the Roman armies; and such was the rigid discipline of their camp, thatnot an apple was gathered from the tree, not a path could be traced in the fieldsof corn. Belisarius was chaste and sober. In the license of a military life, nonecould boast that they had seen him intoxicated with wine: the most beautiful cap­tives of Gothic or Vandal race were offered to his embraces; but he turned asidefrom their charms, and the husband of Antonina was never suspected of violatingthe laws of conjugal fidelity. The spectator and historian of his exploits has ob­served, that, amidst the perils of war, he was daring without rashness, prudentwithout fear, slow or rapid according to the exigencies of the moment; that in thedeepest distress he was animated by real or apparent hope, but that he was mo­dest and humble in the most prosperous fortune. By these virtues he equalled orexcelled the ancient masters of the military art. Victory, by sea and land, at­tended his arms. He subdued Africa, Italy, and the adjacent islands, led away cap­tives the successors of Genseric and Theodoric; filled Constantinople with the spoilsof their palaces, and in the space of six years recovered half the provinces of thewestern empire. In his fame and merit, in wealth and power, he remained with­out a rival, the first of the Roman subjects: the voice of envy could only magnifyhis dangerous importance; and the emperor might applaud his own discerning spi­rit which had discovered and raised the genius of Belisarius.
It was the custom of the Roman triumphs, that a slave should be placed behindthe chariot to remind the conqueror of the instability of fortune, and the infirmi­ties of human nature. Procopius, in his Anecdotes, has assumed that servile andungrateful office. The generous reader may cast away the libel, but the evidenceof facts will adhere to his memory; and he will reluctantly confess, that the fame,and even the virtue, of Belisarius, were polluted by the lust and cruelty of his wife;and that the hero deserved an appellation which may not drop from the pen of thedecent historian. The mother of Antonina(2) was a theatrical prostitute, and bothher father and grandfather exercised at Thessalonica and Constantinople the vile,though lucrative, profession of charioteers. In the various situations of their for­tune, she became the companion, the enemy, the sen-ant, and the favourite of theempress Theodora; these loose and ambitious females had been connected by si­milar pleasures; they were separated by the jealousy of vice, and at length re­conciled by the partnership of guilt. Before her marriage with Belisarius, An- •tonina had one husband and many lovers; Phothis, the son of her former nuptials,was of an age to distinguish himself at the siege of Naples; and it was not till theautumn of her age and beauty (3) that she indulged a scandalous attachment to a
(1) Procopim, Golh. lib. iii: c. 1. Aimo'.n. a French monk of the eleventh cemnry. who >la'J obtained, andlias disfigured some authentic information of nelisarios. mentions in his name, twelve thousand patn or slatesmios propriis alimus stipendiis— besides eighteen thousand soldiers (Historians of France, torn. in. De GestisFranc, lib. ii. c. 6. p. 48.)
(1) The diligence of Alemannus could add but little to the four first and most curious chapters of Anec­dotes. Of these strange anecdotes, a part may be true, because probable—and a part true, because improba­ble. Procopius most have known the former, and the latter he cuuM scarcely invent.
(3) Procopius insinuates (Anccdot. c. 4.) that, when Belisarius returmd to Italy, (A. D. 443.) Antonina•was sixty years of age. A forced, hut more polite construction, which refers that date to the moment whenhe was writing, A. U. S'9.) would be compatible w ith the manhood of Phonos, (Gothic, lib. i. c- 10.)ia S3S.







OCR Output








136 THE DECLINE AND FALL


nate a youth, the incestuous lover of his step-mother. (1) A private jurisdiction isrepugnant to the spirit of monarchy; the parent was again reduced from a judgeto an accuser; and the magistrates were enjoined by Severus Alexander to hearhis complaints and execute his sentence. He could no longer take the life of a sonwithout incurring the guilt and punishment of murder; and the pains of parricide,from which he had been exempted by the Pompeian law, were finally inflicted bythe justice of Constantine. (2) The same protection was due to every period of ex­istence: and reason must applaud the humanity of Paulus, for imputing the crimeof murder to the father, who strangles, or starves, or abandons his new-born in­fant; or exposes him in a public place to find the mercy which he himself had de­nied. But the exposition of children was the prevailing and stubborn vice of anti­quity; it was sometimes practised, often permitted, almost always practised withimpunity, by the nations who n#ver entertained the Roman ideas of paternal power;and the dramatic poets, who appeal to the human heart, represent with indiffer­ence a popular custom which was palliated by the motives ot economy and com­passion. (3) If the father could subdue his own feelings, he might escape, thoughnot the censure, at least the chastisement, of the laws: and the Roman empire wasstained with the blood of infants, till such murders were included, by Valentinianand his colleagues, in the letter and spirit of the Cornelian law. 1 he lessons ofjurisprudence(4) and Christianity had been insufficient to eradicate this inhumanpractice, till their gentle influence was fortified by the terrors of capital punish­ment.^)
Experience has proved, that savages are the tyrants of the female sex, and thatthe condition of women is usually softened by the refinements of social life. Inthe hope of a robust progeny, Lycurgus had delayed the season of marriage; it wasfixed by Numa at the tender age of twelve years, that the Roman husband mighteducate to his will a pure and obedient virgin. (6) According to the custom of an­tiquity, he bought his bride of her parents, and she fulfilled the coemption, by pur­chasing with three pieces of copper, a just introduction to his house and householddeities. A sacrifice of fruits was offered by the pontiffs in the presence of ten wit­nesses; the contracting parties were seated on the same sheepskin; they tasted asalt cake offar or rice; and this confareation,{7) which denoted the ancient food ofItaly, served a9 an emblem of their mystic union of mind and body. But this unionon the side of the woman was rigorous and unequal; and she renounced the nameand worship of her father's house, to embrace a new servitude, decorated only bythe title of adoption. A fiction of the law, neither rational nor elegant, bestowedon the mother of a family(8) (her proper appellation) the strange characters ofsister to her own children, and of daughter to her husband or master, who was in­vested with the plenitude of paternal power. By his judgment or caprice, her be­haviour was approved, or censured, or chastised; he exercised the jurisdiction oflife and death; and it was allowed, that in cases of adultery or drunkenness,(9) thesentence might be properly inflicted. She acquired and inherited the sole profit ofher lord; and so clearly was woman defined, not as a fierson, but as a thing, that
(1) Quod latrohis magis quam patris j'ure eum interfecit, nam patria potestas in pletate debet non iu atroci-late consittere (Marcian, Institut. lit), xiv. in Pandect, lib. xlviii. tit. ix. leg. v.)
(Z) The Pompeian and Cornelian laws de ricartil and paracidis, are repeated, or rather abridged, with thelast supplements of Alexander Severus, Constantine, and Valentinian, in the Pandects (lib. xlviii. tit. 8,9.,)and Code (lib. ix. tit. 16,17.) See likewise the Theodosian Code (lib. ix. tit. xi. 15.,) with Goderroy's Commen­tary (torn. iii. p. 84—113.J who pours a flood of ancient and modern teaming over these penal laws.
(3) When the Chremes of Terence reproaches his wife for not obeying his orders and exposing their infant,lie speaks like a father and a master, and silences the scruples of a foolish woman. See Apuleius (Metamorph.Kb. x. p. 337. edit. Delphin.)
(4) The opinion of the lawyers, and the discretion of the magistrates, had introduced in the time of Tacitnssome legal restraints, which might support his contrast of the boni mores of the Germans to the bonse legesalibi—that is to say,at Rome (de Morihus Germanorum, c. xix.) Tcrtullian (ad Nationes, lib. i. c. 15,) refuteshis own charges and those of his brethren, against the heathen jurisprudence.
(5} The wise and humane sentence of the civilian Paul (lib. li. Sentcntiarum in Pandect, lib. xxv. tit. iii.leg. iv.,) is represented as a mere moral precept by Gerard Noodt (Opp. torn. i. in Julius Prmllus, p. 567—508.and Arnica Responsio, p. 591—606.) who maintains the opinion of Justus Lipsius (Opp. torn. ii. p. 409. ad Bel-gas, cent, l.epist. 85.,) and as a positive binding law by Bynkershoek (de Jure Decidendi Liberos, Opp. torn. i.p. 318—340. Curse Secundae, p. 391—427.) In a learned but angry controversy, the two friends deviated intothe opposite extremes.
(6) Dionys. Hal. lib. ii. p. 92,93. Plutarch, in Numa, p. 140,141. To <rw,u* x«t to kSos x»5xcoi' x*< »S«to, nrs
T» yttfiWvr* ytvio-Seci.
(7) Among the winter frumenta, the triticum, or bearded wheat; the siligo, or the unbearded; the far, ado-rea,oryza, whose description perfectly tallies with the rice of Spain and Italy. I adopt this identity on thecredit of M. Pauetonin his useful and laborious Metrologie (p. 517—529.)
(8) Aulus Gellius (Noctes Atticce, xviii. 6.) gives a ridiculous definition of £lius Melissus; Matron*, quse se-roel, matertamilias quae sxpius peperit, as pordetra and scropha in the sow kind. He then adds the genuinemeaning, quse in matrimonium vel in manum convenerat.
(9) It was enough to have tasted wine, or to have stolen the key of the cellar (Pan. Hist. Nat. sir. 14 J







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMfilRE. X 37


rcrs, from Maurice to Alexius, Basil the Macedonian has alone been the theme ofa separate work; and the absence, or loss, or imperfection, of cotemporary evi­dence, must be poorly supplied by the doubtful authority of more recent compilers.The four last centuries are exempt from the reproach of penury: and with thethe Comnenian family, the historic muse of Constantinople again revives, buther apparel is gaudy; her motions are without elegance or grace. A'succession ofpriests, or courtiers, treads in each other's footsteps in the same path of servitudeand superstition; their views are narrow, their judgment is feeble, or corrupt: andwe close the volume of copious barrenness, still ignomnt of the causes of events,the characters of the actors, and the manners of the times, which they celebrateor deplore. The observation which has been applied to a man, may be extendedto a whole people, that the energy of the sword is communicated to the pen: andit will be found by experience that the tone of history will rise or fall with thespirit of the age.
From these considerations, I should have abandoned without regret the Greekslaves and their servile historians, had I not reflected that the fate of the Byzan­tine monarchy is passively -connected with the most splendid and important revo­lutions which have changed the state of the world. The space of the lost pro­vinces was immediately replenished with new colonies and rising kingdoms: theactive virtues of peace and war deserted from the vanquished to the victoriousnations; and it is in their origin and conquests, in their religion and government,that we must explore the causes and effects of the decline and fall of the easternempire. Nor will this scope of narrative, the riches and variety of these mate­rials, be incompatible with the unity of design and composition. As, in his dailyprayers, the Mussulman of Fez or Delhi still turns his face towards the temple ofMecca, the historian's eye shall be always fixed on the city of Constantinople.The excursive line may embrace the wilds of Arabia and Tartary, but the circlewill be ultimately reduced to the decreasing limit of the Roman monarchy.
On this principle I shall establish the plan of the two last volumes of the pre­sent work. The first chapter will contain, in a regular series, the emperors whoreigned at Constantinople during a period of six hundred years, from the daysof Heraclius to the Latin conquest: a rapid abstract, which may be supported bya general appeal to the order and text of the original historians. In this introduc­tion L shall confine myself to the revolutions of the throne, the succession of fami­lies, the personal characters of the Greek princes, the mode of their life anddeath, the maxims and influence of their domestic governments, and the tendencyof their reign to accelerate or suspend the downfal of the eastern empire. Sucha chronological review will serve to illustrate the various arguments of the subse­quent chapters; and each circumstance of the eventful story of the barbarians willadapt itself in a proper place to the Byzantine annals. The internal state of theempire, and the dangerous heresy of the Paulicians, which shook the east and en­lightened the west, will be the subject of two separate chapters; but these inqui­ries must be postponed till our farther progress shall have opened the view Of theworld in the ninth and tenth centuries of the Christian era. After this foundationof Byzantine history, the following nations will pass before our eyes, and each willoccupy the space to which it may be entitled by greatness or merit, or the degreeof connexion with the Roman world and the present age. I. The Franks; a ge­neral appellation which includes all the barbarians of France, Italy, and Ger­many, who were united by the sword and sceptre of Charlemagne. The perse­cution of images and their votaries, separated Rome and Italy from the Byzantinethrone, and prepared the restoration of the Roman empire in the west. II. TheArabs or Saracens. Three ample chapters will be devoted to this curious andinteresting object. In the first, after a picture of the country and its inhabitants,I shall investigate the character of Mahomet; the character, religion, and success,of the prophet. In the second, I shall lead the Arabs to the conquest of Syria,Egypt, and Africa, the provinces of the Roman empire; nor can I check theirvictorious career till they have overthrown the monarchies of Persia and Spain.In the third, I shall inquire how Constantinople and Europe were saved by theluxury and arts, the division and decay, of the empire of the caliphs. A singlechapter will include, III. The Bulgarians, IV. Hungarians, and V. Rus­sians, who assaulted bv sea or by land the provinces and the capital: but the last ofthese, so important in their present greatness, will excite some curiosity in theirorigin and infancy. VI. The Normans: or rather the private adventures of thatwarlike people, who founded a powerful kingdom in Apulia and Sicily, shook the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


den of a solitary matron, sounded their trumpets, surprised the sentinels, and gaveadmittance to their companions, who, on all sides, scaled the walls, and burst openthe gates of the city. Every crime which is punished by social justice, was prac­tised as the rights of war; the Huns were distinguished by cruelty and sacrilege,and Belisarius alone appeared in the streets and churches of Naples, to moderatethe calamities which he predicted. " The gold and silver," he repeatedly ex­claimed, "are the just rewards of your valour. But spare the inhabitants, theyare Christians, they are suppliants, they are now your fellow-subjects. Restorethe children to their parents, the wives to their husbands; and show them, by yourgenerosity, of what friends they have obstinately deprived themselves." Thecity was saved by the virtue and authority of its conqueror,(l) and when the Nea­politans returned to their houses, they found some consolation in the secret enjoy­ment of their hidden treasures. The barbarian garrison enlisted in the serviceof the emperor; Apulia and Calabria, delivered from the odious presence of theGoths, acknowledged his dominion; and the tusks of the Calydoman boar, which■were still shown at Beneventum, are curiously described by the historian of Beli­sarius. (2)
The faithful soldiers and citizens of Naples had expected their deliverance froma prince, who remained the inactive and almost indifferent spectator of their ruin.Theodatus secured his person within the walls of Rome, while his cavalry ad­vanced forty miles on the Appian way, and encamped in the Pomptine marshes;which, by a canal of nineteen miles in length, had been recently drained and con­verted into excellent pastures. (3) But the principal forces of the Goths were dis­persed in Dalmatia, Venetia, and Gaul; and the feeble mind of their king was con­founded by the unsuccessful event of a divination, which seemed to presage thedownfal of his empire. (4) The most abject slaves have arraigned the guilt, orweakness of an unfortunate master. The character of Theodatus was rigorouslyscrutinized by a free and idle camp of barbarians, conscious of their privilege andpower: he was declared unworthy of his race, his nation, and his throne; and theirgeneral Vitiges, whose valour had been signalized in the Illyrian war, was raised,with unanimous applause, on the bucklers of his companions. On the first rumour,the abdicated monarch fled from the justice of his country; but he was pursued byprivate revenge. A Goth, whom he had injured in his love, overtookTheodatuson the Flaminian way; and, regardless of his unmanly cries, slaughtered him, ashe lay prostrate on the ground, like a victim (says the historian) at the foot of thealtar. _ The choice of the people is the best and purest title to reign over them: yetsuch is the prejudice of every age, that Vitiges impatiently wished to return toRavenna, where he might seize, with the reluctant hand of the daughter of Ama-lasontha, some faint shadow of hereditary right. A national council was immedi­ately held, and the new monarch reconciled the impatient spirit of the barbarians,a measure of disgrace, which the misconduct of his predecessor rendered wiseand indispensable. The Goths, consented to retreat in the presence of a vic­torious enemy; to delay till the next spring the operations of offensive war; tosummon their scattered forces; to relinquish their distant possessions, and totrust even Rome itself to the faith of its inhabitants. Leuderis, an aged warrior,was left in the capital with four thousand soldiers; a feeble garrison, which mighthave seconded the zeal, though it was incapable of opposing the wishes of the Ro­mans. But a momentary enthusiasm of religion and patriotism was kindled intheir minds. They furiously exclaimed, that the apostolic throne should no longerbe profaned by the triumph or toleration of Arianism; that the tombs of the Cae­sars should no longer be trampled by the savages of the north; and, without re­flecting that Italy must sink into a province of Constantinople, they fondly hailedthe restoration of a Roman emperor as a new era of freedom and prosperity.The deputies Of the pope and clergy, of the senate and people, invited the Iieu-
(1) Belisarius was repro ved by Pope Sylverius for the massacre. He repenpled Naples, and imported coloniesof African captives into Sicily, Calabria, and Apulia (Hist. Miscell. lib. xvi. in Muratori. torn. i. p. 196,107.)
(2) Beneventum was built by Diomede,the nephew of Melager. (Clover, torn. ii. p. 1195,11960 TheCaly-donian hunt is a picture of savage life. (Ovid. Metamorph. lib. viii.) Thirty or forty heroes were leaguedagainst a bog: the brutes (not the hog) quarrelled with a lady for the head.
(3) The Decennovium is strangely confounded by Cluverius (torn. ii. p. 1007.) with the river Ufens. It wanin truth a canal of nineteen miles, from Forum Appii to Terracina, on which Horace embarked in the night.The Decennovium, which is mentioned by Lucan, Dion Cassius. and Cassiodorus, has been sufficiently ruined,restored, and obliterated. (D'Anville, Analyse de Italic, p. 185, 8tc.)
(4; A jew gratified his contempt and hatred for all the Christians, by enclosing three bands, each or ten hogs,and discriminated by the names of Goths, Greeks, and Romans. Of the first, almost all were found dead—al­most all the second were alive—of .the third, half dead, and the rest lost their bristles. No unsuitable emblem'Of the .event.







OCR Output








26. THE DECLINE AND FALL


an aqueduct, were speedily constructed; the public and private edifices were adapt­ed to the greatness of a royal city; and the strength of the walls resisted, duringthe lifetime of Justinian, the unskilful assaults of the Huns and Sclavonians. Theirprogress was sometimes retarded, and their hopes of rapine were disappointed, bythe innumerable castles, which, in the provinces of Dacia, Epirus, Thessaly, Ma­cedonia, and Thrace, Appeared to cover the whole face of the country. Six hun­dred of these forts were built or repaired by the emperor: but it seems reasonableto believe,, that the far greater part consisted only of a stone or brick tower, in themidst of a square or circular area, which was surrounded by a wall and ditch, andafforded in a moment of danger some protection <o the peasants and cattle of theneighbouring villages.(l) Yet these military works, which exhausted the publictreasure, could not remove the just apprehensions of Justinian and his Europeansubjects. The warm baths of Anchialus in Thrace were rendered as safe as theywere salutary; but the rich pastures of Thessalonica were foraged by the Scythiancavalry; the delicious vale of Tempe, three hundred miles from the Danube, wascontinually alarmed by the sound of war;(2) and no unfortified spot, however dis­tant or solitary, could securely enjoy the blessings of peace. The straits of Ther­mopylae, which seemed to protect, but which had so often betrayed, the safety ofGreece, were diligently strengthened by the labours of Justinian. From the edgeof the sea-shore, through theforest and valleys, and as far as the summit of theThessalian mountains, a strong wall was continued, which occupied every practi­cable entrance. Instead of a hasty crowd of peasants, a garrison of two thousandsoldiers was stationed along the rampart; granaries of corn, and reservoirs of wa­ter, were provided for their use; and by a precaution that inspired the cowardicewhich it foresaw, convenient fortresses were erected for their retreat. The wallsof Corinth, overthrown by an earthquake, and the mouldering bulwarks of Athensand Platxa, were carefully restored; the barbarians were discouraged by the pros­pect of successive and painful sieges; and the naked cities of Peloponnesus werecovered by the fortifications of the isthmus of Corinth. At the extremity of Eu­rope, another peninsula, the Thracian Chersonesus, runs three days' journey intothe sea, to form, with the adjacent shores of Asia, the straits of the Hellespont.The intervals between eleven populous towns were filled by lofty woods, fair pas­tures, and arable lands: and the isthmus, or thirty-seven stadia or furlongs, hadbeen fortified by a Spartan general nine hundred years before the reign of Justi­nian. (3) In an age of freedom and valour, the slightest rampart may prevent asurprise; and Procopius appears insensible of the superiority of ancient times, whilehe praises the solid construction and double parapet of a wall, whose long armsstretched on either side into the sea: but whose strength was deemed insufficientto guard the Chersonesus, if each city, and particularly Gallipoli and Sestus, hadnot been secured by their peculiar fortifications. The long wall, as it was em­phatically styled, was a work as disgraceful in the object, as it was respectable^ inthe execution. The riches of a capital diffuse themselves over the neighbouringcountry, and the territory of Constantinople, a paradise of nature, was adorned■with the luxurious gardens and villas of the senators and opulent citizens. Buttheir wealth served only to attract the bold and rapacious barbarians; the noblestof the Romans, in the bosom of peaceful indolence, were led away into Scythiancaptivity, and their sovereign might view, from his palace, the hostile flames whichwere insolently spread to the gates of the imperial city. At the distance only offorty miles, Anastasius was constrained to establish a last frontier; his long wall,of sixty miles from the Propontis to the Euxine, proclaimed the impotence of hisarms; and as the danger became more imminent, new fortifications were added bythe indefatigable prudence of Justinian .(4)
Asia Minor, after the submission of the Isaurians,(5) remained without enemiesand without fortifications. Those bold savages, who had disdained to be the sub­jects of Galenius, persisted two hundred and thirty years in a life of independence
•
(1) These fortifications may be compared to the castles in Mingrelin (Chardin, Voyages en Perse, torn. i. p. 60.131.)—a natural picture.
(3) The Talley of Tempe is situate along the river Peneus, between the hills of Oisa and Olympus: it is onlyfive miles long, and in some places no more than one hundred and twenty feet in breadth. Its verdant beau­ties are elegantly described by Pliny. (Hist. Natur. Iib.iv. 15.) and more diffusely by /Elian (Hist. Yar. lib. iii.c. 1.)
(3) Xenophon Hellenic, lib. iii. c. 2. Aftera long and tedious conversation with the Byzantine declaimers,how refreshing is the truth, the simplicity, the elegance of an Attic writer 1
(4) See the long wall in Evagrius (lib. iv. c. 38.) This whole article is drawn from the fourth book of theSdr&oes, except Anchialus (lib. iii. c. 7.)
(5) In the course of this history, I have sometimes mentioned, and much oftener alighted, the hasty inroadsof the Iiauriaus, which were not attended with any consequences.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


the form of a province. The family of a Greek rhetorician was permitted toreign in Colchos and the adjacent kingdoms, from the time of Mark Antony to thatof Nero; and after the race of Polemo(l) was extinct, the eastern Pontus, whichpreserved his name, extended no farther than the neighbourhood of Trebizond.Beyond these limits the fortifications of Hyssus, of Apsarus, of the Phasis, of Di-oscurias or Sebastopolis, and of Pityus, were guarded by sufficient detachments ofhorse and foot; and six princes of Colchos received their diadems from the lieu­tenants of Cicsar. One of these lieutenants, the eloquent and philosophic Arrian,surveyed, and has described, the Euxine coast, under the reign of Hadrian. Thegarrison which he reviewed at the mouth of the Phasis, consisted of four hundredchosen legionaries; the brick walls and towers, the double ditch, and the militaryengines on the rampart, rendered this place inaccessible to the barbarians; but thenew suburbs, which had been built by the merchants and veterans, required, inthe opinion of Arrian, some external defence. (2) As the strength of the empirewas gradually impaired, the Romans stationed on the Phasis were either with­drawn or expelled; and the tribe of the Lazi,(3) whose posterity speak a foreign,dialect, and inhabit the sea-coast of Trebizond, imposed their name and dominionon the ancient kingdom of Colchos. Their independence was soon invaded by aformidable neighbour, who had acquired by arms and treaties, the sovereignty ofIberia. The dependant king of Lazica received his sceptre at the hands of thePersian monarch, and the successors of Constantine acquiesced in this injuriousclaim, which was proudly urged as a right of immemorial prescription. In thebeginning of the sixth century, their influence was restored by the introduction ofChristianity, which the Mingrelians still profess with becoming zeal, without un­derstanding the doctrines, or observing the precepts, of their religion. After thedecease of his father, Zathus was exalted to the regal dignity by the favour of thegreat king; but the pious youth abhorred the ceremonies of the Magi, and sought,in the palace of Constantinople, an orthodox baptism, a noble wife, and the al­liance of the emperor Justinian. (4) The king of Lazica was solemnly investedwith the diadem, and his cloak, and tunic of white silk, with a gold border, dis­played, in rich embroidery, the figure of his new patron; who soothed the jealousyof the Persian com-t, and excused the revolt of Colchos, by the venerable namesof hospitality and religion. The common interest of both empires imposed on theColchians the duty of guarding the passes of Mount Caucasus, where a wall ofsixty miles is now defended by the monthly service of the musketeers of Miir-greha.
But this honourable connexion was soon corrupted by the avarice and ambitionof the Romans. Degraded from the rank of allies, the Lazi were incessantly re­minded, by words and actions, of their dependant state. At the distance of aday's journey beyond the Apsarus, they beheld the rising fortress of Petra,(5)which commanded the maritime country to the south, of the Phasis. Instead ofbeing protected by the valour, Colchos was insulted by the licentiousness, of fo­reign mercenaries; the benefits of commerce were converted into base and vexatiousmonopoly; and Gubazes, their native prince, was reduced to a pageant of royalty,by the superior influence of the officers of Justinian. Disappointed in their ex­pectations of Christian virtue, the indignant Lazi reposed some confidence in thejustice of an unbeliever. After a private assurance that their ambassador shouldnot be delivered to the Romans, they publicly solicited the friendship and aid ofChosroes. The sagacious monarch instantly discerned the use and importance ofColchos; and meditated a plan of conquest, which was renewed at the end of a
0) We may trace th« rise and fall of the family of Polemo. in Strabo (lib. xi. p. 755. lib. xii. p. S67.) DionCassius or Xiphilin (p. 588. 593. 601. 719. 754. 915. 946. edit. Reimar.;) Suetoniui (in Neron. c. xviii. in Ves­pasian, c. viii.O Eutropius (7.14.:) Josephus, (Antiq. Jadiac. lib. XX. e. 7. p. 970. edit. Havercamp,) and Kuie-bins. (ChroD. with Scaliger, Animadvers. p. 196.)
(2) In the time of Procopius, there were no Roman forts on the Phasis. Pityus and Sebastopolis were eva­cuated on the rumour of the Persians (Goth. lib. iv. c. 4.:) but the lstterfwas afterwards restored by Justinian(de Edif. lib. iv. c. 7.)
(3) In the time of Pliny. Arian, and Ptolemy, the Lazi were a particular tribe on the northern skirts of Col­chos (Cellanus. Geograph. Antiq. torn. li. p. 222.) In the age of Justinian they spread, or at least reigned,over the whole country. At present they have migrated along the coast towards Trebizond, and composesrude sea-laring people, with a peculiar language (Chardin, p. 149. Pevssonnel, p. 64.)
(4) John Malata, Citron, torn. ii. p. 134—137. Theopbanes, p. 144. Hist. Miscell. lib. xv. p. 103. The fact isauthentic, but the dates seem too recent. In speaking of their Persian alliance, the Lazi cotemporaries of Jus­tinian employ the most obsolete words—£ v y^y.x<rt /<v>j,«s*xs jrpsyovot, occ. Could they belong to a connexionwhich had not been dissolved above twenty years?
(5) The whole vestige of Petra subsists in writings of Procopius and Agathias. Most of the towns andcastles ot Lazica may be found by comparing their names and position with the map of Mingrelia, in.Lamberti.







OCR Output








H2 THE DECLINE AND FALL


character, the manners and religion of the Hindoos, are completely obliterated}.-and the intrinsic merit of the fables of Pilpay is far inferior to the concise eleganceof Phiedrus, and the native graces of La Fontaine. Fifteen moral and politicalsentences are illustrated in a series of apologues: but the composition is intricate,the narrative prolix, and the precept obvious and barren. Yet the Brachman mayassume the merit of inventing a pleasing fiction, which adorns the nakedness oftruth, and alleviates, perhaps, to a royal ear, the harshness of instruction. Witha similar design, to admonish kings that they are strong only in the strength oftheir subjects, the same Indians invented the game of chess, which was likewiseintroduced into Persia under the reign of Nushirvan.fi)
The son of Kobad found his kingdom involved in a war with the successor ofConstantine; and the anxiety of his domestic situation inclined him to grant thesuspension of arms, which Justinian was impatient to purchase. Chosroes saw theRoman ambassadors at his feet. He accepted eleven thousand pounds of gold, asthe price of an endless or indefinite peace;(2) some mutual exchanges were regu­lated; the Persian assumed the guard of the gates of Caucasus, and the demolitionof Dara was suspended, on condition that it should never be made the residence ofthe general of the east. This interval of repose had been solicited, and was dili­gently improved, by the ambition of the emperor: his African conquests were thefirst-fruits of the Persian treaty; and the avarice of Chosroes was soothed by a largeportion of the spoils of Carthage, which his ambassadors required in a tone of plea­santry, and under the colour of friendship. (3). But the trophies of Belisarius dis­turbed the slumbers of the great king; and he heard with astonishment, envy, andfear, that Sicily, Italy and Rome itself, had been reduced, in three rapid campaigns,to the obedience of Justinian. Unpractised in the art of violating treaties, he se­cretly excited his bold and subtle vassal Almondar. That prince of the Saracens,who resided atHira,(4)hadnot been included in the general peace, and still wagedan obscure war against his rival Arethas, the chief of the tribe of Gassan, and con­federate of the empire. The subject of their dispute was an extensive sheep-walkin the desert to the south of Palmyra. An immemorial tribute for the license ofpasture, appeared to attest the rights of Almondar, while the Gassanite appealedto the Latin name of strata, a paved road, as an unquestionable evidence of the so­vereignty and labours of the Romans. (5) The two monarchs supported the causeof their respective vassals; and the Persian Arab, without expecting the event ofa slow and doubtful arbitration, enriched his flying camp with the spoil and cap­tives of Syria. Instead of repelling the arms, Justinian attempted to seduce thefidelity of Almondar, while he called from the extremities of the earth, the nationsof Ethiopia and Scythia to invade the dominions of his rival. But the aid of suchallies was distant and precarious, and the discovery of this hostile correspondencejustified the complaints of the Goths and Armenians, who implored, almost at thesame time, the protection of Chosroes. The descendants of Arsaces, who werestill numerous in Armenia, had been provoked to assert the last relics of nationalfreedom and hereditary rank; and the ambassadors of Vitiges had secretly tra­versed the empire to expose the instant, and almost inevitable, danger of the "king­dom of Italy. Their representations were uniform, weighty, and effectual. " Westand before your throne, the advocates of your interest, as well as of our own.The ambitious and faithless Justinian aspires to be the sole master of the world.Since the endless peace which betrayed the common freedom of mankind, thatprince, your ally in words, your enemy in actions, has alike insulted his friends andfoes, and has filled the earth with blood and confusion. Has he not violated theprivileges of Armenia, the independence of Colchos, and the wild liberty of theTzanian mountains? Has he not usurped, with equal avidity, the city of Bospho-rus on the frozen Maeotis, and the vale of palm-trees, on the shores of the Red sea?The Moors, the Vandals, the Goths, have been successively oppressed, and eachnation has calmly remained the spectator of their neighbour's ruin. Embrace, O
(I) See the Historia Shahiludi of Dr. Hyde (Syntngm. Mssertat. torn. ii. p. 61—69.)
(!) The endless peace(Procopins, Persic, lib. i. c. 21.) wat concluded or ratified in the sixth year, and thirdconsulship of Justinian (A. D. 533, between January 1, and April 1, Pagi, torn. ii. p. 550.) Marcellinus, in hisChronicle, uses the style of the Medes and Persians.
(3) Procopius, Persic, lib. i. c. 26.
(4) Almondar, kins; of Hira, was deposed by Kobad, and restored by Nushirran. His mother, from her beau­ty, was sumamed Celestial Water* an appellation which became hereditary, and was extended for a more noblecause (liberality in famine) to the Arab princes of Syria (Pocock, Specimen Hist. Arab. p. 69,70.)
(J) Procopius, Persic, lib. ii. c. 1. We are ignorant of the origin and object of this ttrata, a pared road-often days' Journey from Auranitis to Babylonia (see a Latin note in Delisle's Map, Imp. Orient.) Wesselingand D'AhvilIe are silent.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


voice the praises of Jupiter and those of Christ. But the evidence of his destruc­tive rage is doubtful and recent; the temple of peace, or the theatre of Marcellus,have been demolished by the slow operation of ages, and a formal proscriptionwould have multiplied the copies of Virgil and Livy in the countries which werenot subject to the ecclesiastical dictator. (1)
Like Thebes, or Babylon, or Carthage, the name of Rome might have beenerased from the earth, if the city had not been animated by a vital principle, whichagain restored her to honour and dominion. A vague tradition was embraced,that two Jewish teachers, a tent-maker and a fisherman, had formerly been exe­cuted In the circus of Nero, and at the end of five hundred years their genuine orfictitious relics were adored as the Palladium of Christian Rome. The pilgrimsof the east and west resorted to the holy threshold; but the shrines of the apostleswere guarded by miracles and invisible terrors; and it was not without fear thatthe pious catholic approached the object of his worship. It was fatal to touch, itwas dangerous to behold, the bodies of the saints; and those who, from the purestmotives, presumed to disturb the repose of the sanctuary, were affrightened byvisions, or punished with sudden death. The unreasonable request of an empresswho wished to deprive the Romans of their sacred treasure, the head of St4 Paul,was rejected with the deepest abhorrence; and the pope asserted, most probablywith truth, that a linen which had been sanctified in the neighbourhood of his body,or the filings of his chain, which it was sometimes easy and sometimes impossibleto obtain, possessed an equal degree of miraculous virtue. (2) But the power aswell as virtue of the apostles resided with living energy in the breasts of their suc­cessors; and the chair of St. Peter was filled under the reign of Maurice by thefirst and greatest of the name of Gregory.(5) His grandfather Felix had himselfbeen pope, and as the bishops were already bound by the law of celibacy, his con­secration must have been preceded by the death of his wife. The parents of Gre­gory, Sylvia and Gordian, were the noblest of the senate, and the most pious ofthe church of Rome: his female relations were numbered among the saints andvirgins; and his own figure with those of his father and mother were representednear three hundred years in a family portrait, (4) which he offered to the monas­tery of St. Andrew. The design and colouring of this picture afford an honoura­ble testimony, that the art of painting was cultivated bv the Italians of the sixthcentury; but the most abject ideas must be entertained of their taste and learning,since the epistles of Gregory, his sermons, and his dialogues, are the work of a manwho was second in erudition to none of his cotemporariesi(5) his birth and abilitieshad raised him to the office of prefect of the city, and he enjoyed the merit of re­nouncing the pomp and vanities of this world. His ample patrimony was dedi­cated to the foundation of seven monasteries, (6) one in Rome, (7) and six in Sicily:
(1) Bayle (Dictiniuire Critiaut, torn. ii. p. J98,599.,) in n very- good article of Gregoire I. has quoted forthe buildings and statues, Platina in Gregorio I. for the Palatine library, John of Salisbury (de NutriaCurialium, lib. ii. c. 30.,) and for Livy, Antoninus of Florence; the oldest of the three lived in the twelfthcentury.
(2) Gregor, lib. iii. epist, 84. edict. 12, Sec. From the epistles of Gregory, and his eighth volume of the An-rials of Baronitis, the pious reader may collect the particles of holy iron which were inserted in keys or crossesof gold, and distributed in Britain, Gaul, Spain, Africa, Constantinople, and Egypt. The pontifical smithwho handled the file must have understood the miracles which it was in his own power to operate or withhold;a circumstance which ahalfs the superstition of Gregory at the expense of his veracity.
(3) Besides the epistles of Gregory himself, which are methodized byDupin (Bihliotheqne Eccles. torn. v.p. 103—125.,) we have three lives of the pone; the two first written in the eighth and ninth centuries (de Tri-"plici Vita St. Greg. Preface to the fourth volume of the Benedictine edition,) by the deacons Paul (p. 1—180and John (p. 19—188.) and containing much original, though doubtful evidence; the third, a long and labouredcompilation by the Benedictine editors (p. 199—305.) The annals of Baronius are a copious but partial histo­ry. His papal prejudices are tempered by the good sense of Fleury, (Hist. Eccles. torn, viii,) and his chronolo­gy had been rectified by the criticism of Pagi and Muratori.
(4) John the deacon has described them like an eye-witness (lib. ir. c. 83. 84.) and his description is illus­trated by Angelo Kocca, a Roman antiquary (St. Greg. Opera, torn. iv. p. 312—326.) who observes, that tomeMosaics of the popes of the seventh century are still preserved in the old churches of Rome, (p. 321—323.)The same walls which represented Gregory's family,are now decorated with the martyrdom of St. Andrew,the noble contest of Dominichino and Guido.
(5) Disciplinis vera liberalibus, hoc est grammatiea, rhetorica, dialectioa, ita a pucro est institutus, ut quam*vis eo tempore florerent adhuc Romas studia literarum, tamen nulli in urbe ipsa sectmdus putavettir. (Paul,Diacon. in Vit. S. Gregor. c. ii.
(0) The Benedictines (Vit. Greg. lib. i. p. 205—208.) labour to reduce the monasteries of Gregory withinthe rule of their own order; but as the question is confessed to be doubtful, it is clear that these powerfulmonks are in the wrong. Sec Butler's Lives of the Saints, vol. iii. p. 145. a work of merit; the sense and learn­ing belong to the author—his prejudices are those of his profession.
(7) MonasteriumGregorianiiminejiisdem Beati Gregorii aedibus ad c'ivum Scauri prone ccclcsiam S. S,Johannis et Paul in honorem St. Andrew (John in Vit. Greg. lib. i. c, 0. Greg. lib. vii. epist. 13.) This houseand monastery were situate on the side of the Celian hill which fronts the Palatine; they are now occupied bvthe Camoldoli; San Gregorio triumphs, and St. Andrew has retired to a small chapel. Kardini, Roma Arni­ca, lib. iii. e. 4. p. 100. Descrizzione di Roma, torn. i. p. 442—446.
Vol-. III. 23



