


OCR Output








302 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


without loss of time to the recovery of Pylus. The rest ofthe Lacedaemonians were longer in their approach, as but justreturned from another expedition. Yet a summons had beensent all round Peloponnesus, to inarch directly for Pylus.Their fleet of sixty sail was also remanded from Corcyra,which, being transported by land over the isthmus of Leucas,arrive before Pylus, undescried by the Athenians who layat Zacynthus. And by this time the land army had also ap­proached.
Demosthenes, before the coming up of the Peloponne-sian fleet, had timely dispatched two vessels to Eurymedonand the Athenians on board that fleet now lying at Zacyn--thus, pressing them to return, as the place was in danger ofbeing lost; which vessels made the best of their way, inpursuance of the earnest commands of Demosthenes. Butthe Lacedaemonians were now preparing to attack the for­tress both by land and sea, presuming it would easily bedestroyed, as the work had been raised with so much preci­pitation and was defended by so small a number of hands.But, as they also expected the return of the Athenian shipsfrom Zacynthus, they designed, in case they took not theplace before, to bar up the mouths of the harbour, so as torender the entrance impracticable to the Athenians. Foran isle, which is called Sphacteria, lying before and at asmall distance, locks it up and rendereth the mouths of theharbour narrow ; that near the fortress of the Athenians andPylus a passage for two ships only a-breast, and that be­tween the other points of land for eight or nine. The wholeof it, as desart, was overgrown with wood and quite untrod,and the compass of it at most is about fifteen stadia*. Theywere therefore intent on shutting up these entrances withships moored close together, and their heads towards thesea. And to prevent the molestation apprehended, shouldthe enemy take possession of this island, they threw into ita body of their heavy-armed, and posted another body on< • One mile and a half.







OCR Output








B. I. INTRODUCTION. SI


" Let us nemember, that if any one single state amongst" us had a contest with its foes about a frontier, there would" be need of perseverance. But now, the Athenians are a" match for us all united, and quite too strong for any of us" separately to resist: So that unless we support one another" with our collective forces, unless every nation and every" state unanimously combine to give a check to their ambi-" tion, they will oppress us, apart and disunited, without a" a struggle. Such a triumph, how grating soever the bare" mention of it may be to any of your ears, yet be it known," can end in nothing else but plain and open slavery. To" hint in mere words so base a doubt, that so many stateu" may be enslaved by one, is disgrace to Peloponnesus. In" such a plunge, we should either be thought justly to have" deserved it, or through cowardice to suffer it, the degenerate" offspring of those ancestors who were the deliverers of" Greece. And yet we have not spirit enough remaining to" defend our own liberty. We suffer one single state to" erect itself into a tyrant, whilst we claim the glory of" pulling down monarchs in particular societies. We know" not by what methods to extricate ourselves from these" three, the greatest of calamities, from folly, or cowardice," or sloth. For exempt from these in fact you are not, by" taking up the plea of contempt of your enemies, for which"such numbers have suffered. The many misfortune*" arising from this have changed the sense of the word, and" caused it to stand for arrant folly.
" But on the past what necessity is there to enlarge ? or to" blame any farther than may be necessary for the present ?*4 To prevent worse events for the future, we ought by im-•4 mediate efforts, with toil and perseverance, to seek for re-" dress. Through toil to acquire virtues, is hereditary to Pe-" loponnesians. This custom is not to be dropped though" now in wealth and power you have made some petty ad-" vancements : For it never can become you to let go in af-" fluence what was gained in want. It becomes you rather44 upon many accounts, with manly confidence to declare


 







OCR Output








DISCOURSE III. IXXXJ


fact wert butchers. It was a case of great commiseration,and the speaker lays it open with all that natural eloquencewhich flows from an inward and keen sensibility. If menwere not deaf to persuasion, it must have persuaded. Thecause was most alarming, and a more pathetic plea hath neverbeen exhibited.
" They insist that on a fair and explicit condition they" had surrendered to the Lacedaemonians, whereas now they" were prejudged and precondemned to gratify their unre-" lenting foes the Thebans. The insidious question left them" no plea at all. They could not answer it, and must not" be silent. Since life is at stake, something must be said," even by men who despair of persuading. Their quarrel" with the Thebans had been just and honourable; quarrel" with the Lacedaemonians they never had any. Nay," merely at the desire of the latter had they cultivated" Athenian friendship, that unpardonable crime, for which" they were now doomed to destruction. They expatiate" with truth and energy on the great services they had done" to the liberty of Greece. All Greece was bound in ho-*4 nour, in gratitude, in deference to positive and solemn" oaths, to preserve the Plataeans. Ought every tie to be" rent asunder, generosity to be quite expunged, and all be-" nevolence thrown aside, to serve a private turn ? Ought" Plataeans to be thus basely reduced, as they really had" been, either to be starved or to be butchered ? The Lace-" cUemonians should intreat the Thebans for them, should" beg them to save the lives of friends and benefactors ; at" least should replace them within their walls, and leave" them to the fate of war. They apply to their generosity," to their humanity ; they strive to give them some emotions" of pity; they represent the liableness of mankind to cala-" mity; how brutal it is to be deliberately hard-hearted;" how sinful it is to be resolutely ungrateful! They call upon" heaven and earth to interpose in their behalf; they run" over every pathetic and persuasive topic ; until they can
Voi. I. L







OCR Output













OCR Output








B. III. YEAR VI. BEFORE CHRIST 426. 289


the sea side. This place had been formerly fortified by theAcarnanians, who used it for the public tribunal of justice.It is distant from the city of Argos, which is also a maritimetown, about twenty-five stadia*. The Acarnanians werenow in motion, some running to the defence of Argos, othersto encamp at the important post of Crena in Amphilochia,to observe the motions of the Peloponnesians commanded byEurylochus, that they might not perfect their junction withthe Ambraciots, without some molestation on their route.They also send to Demosthenes the Athenian general in theiEtolian expedition, to come and put himself at their head ;and to the Athenian squadron of twenty sail, which was thenupon the coast of Peloponnesus, under the command of Aris­totle son of Timocrates, and Hierophon son of Antimnestus.
The Ambraciots at Olpae sent also a messenger to theirown city, ordering them, to a man, to come out into thefield. They were afraid lest Eurylochus might not be ableto pass the Acarnanians, and so they should be compelledeither to fight alone ; or, should they attempt a retreat, tofind it full of danger.
But the Peloponnesians commanded by Eurylochus hadno sooner heard that the Ambraciots were at Olpae, thandislodging from Proschium they marched with all expedi­tion to their support. After passing the Achelous, they tookthe route of Acarnania, desolate at present, as the inhabi­tants were fled to the defence of Argos, having on their rightthe city and garrison of the Stratians, and the rest of Acar­nania on their left. When they had passed through the ter­ritory of the Stratians, they crossed Phytia, and again throughthe extremity of Medeon, and then marched across Lim-naea. They now entered the kingdom of the Agraans,which had deserted the Acarnanian to favour the Pelopon-nesian interest. Securing then the mountain Thyamus, awild uncultivated spot, they crossed it, and descended thence


About two miles and a. half.







OCR Output








270 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


to themselves, opportunities were easily found by such aswere fond of innovations to introduce the side they favoured.The consequence of this was sedition in cities, with all itsnumerous and tragical incidents. Such were now, and suchthings ever will be, so long as human nature continues thesame ; but under greater or less aggravations, and diversifiedin circumstances, according to the several vicissitudes of con­junctures, which shall happen to occur. In the seasons ofpeace and affluence, communities as well as individuals havetheir tempers under better regulation, because not liable tothat violence which flows from necessity. But war, whichsnatcheth from them their daily subsistence, is the teacher ofviolence, and assimilates the passions of men to their presentcondition.
By these means were cities harassed with seditions. Andthose to whose fate the later commotions fell, through en­quiry what had happened in such instances before, grewenormously ambitious to suppress the machinations of others,both in policy of attempts and extravagance of revenge.Even words lost now their former significance, since to pal­liate actions they were quite distorted. For truly, what be­fore was a brutal courage, began to be esteemed that forti­tude which becomes a human and sociable creature; pru­dent consideration to be specious cowardice; modesty, thedisguise of effeminacy ; and being wise in every thing, tobe good for nothing: The hot fiery temper was adjudgedthe exertion of true manlv valour: cautious and calm deli-beration, to be a plausible pretext for intended knavery.He who boiled with indignation was undoubtedly trusty;who presumed to contradict, was ever suspected. He whosucceeded in a roguish scheme was wise; and he who sus­pected such practices in others, was still a more able genius.But, was he provident enough, so as never to be in needof such base expedients, he was one that would not standto his engagements and most shamefully awed by his foes,fn short, he who could prewnt another in executing vil-







OCR Output








«0 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


eth Megabazus, the son of Zopyrus, a Persian noble, againstthem with a numerous army, who, marching by land, foughtwith and defeated the Egyptians and their allies ; then drovethe Grecians out of Memphis ; and at last shut them up inthe isle of Prosopis. Here he kept them blocked up for aa year and six months ; till, having drained the channel, byturning the water into a different course, he stranded all theirships, and rendered the island almost continent. He thenmarched his troops across, and took the place by a land-assault.And thus a war, which had employed the Grecians for sixcontinued years, ended in their destruction. Few only of thenumbers sent thither, by taking the route of Libya, got safeaway to Cyrene ; the far greater part were entirely cut off.Egypt was now again reduced to the obedience of the king:Amyrteus alone held out, who reigned in the fenny parts.The large extent of the fens prevented his reduction; andbesides the Egyptians of the fens are the most remarkable ofall for military valour. Inarus, king of the Libyans, the au­thor of all these commotions in Egypt, was betrayed bytreachery, and fastened to a cross. Beside this, fifty triremesfrom Athens and the rest of the alliance, arriving upon thecoast of Egypt to relieve the former, were come up to Me-dasium, a mouth of the Nile, quite ignorant of their fate.These, some forces assaulted from the land, whilst a squadronof Phoenicians attacked them by sea. Many of the vesselswere by this means destroyed, hut some few had the good for­tune to get away. And thus the great expedition of the Athe­nians and allies into Egypt was brought to a conclusion.
But farther, Orestes, son of Echecratidas, king of theThessalians, being driven from Thessaly, persuaded theAthenians to undertake his restoration. The Athenians, inconjunction with the Boeotians and Phocians, now their allies,marched up to Pharsalus of Thessaly. They became mas­ters of the adjacent country, so far as they could be whilst-keeping in a body; for the Thessalian cavalry prevented anydetachments. They took not that city, neither carried any







OCR Output








66 THE PEIOPONHESIAN WAR.


every city in Greece unwalled like Sparta ; but more to gra­tify their confederates, inviting them to such a step from ajealousy of the naval power of the Athenians, now greaterthan at any time before, and of the courage they had sobravely exerted in the war against the Medes. They requir­ed them to desist from building their walls, and rather tojoin with them in levelling every fortification whatever with­out Peloponnesus. Their true meaning and their inwardjealousy they endeavoured to conceal from the Athenians bythe pretence, that " then the Barbarian, should he againinvade them, would find no strong-hold from whence to as­sault them, as in the last instance he had done from Thebes;"alleging farther, that " Peloponnesus was a place of secureretreat and certain resource for all." To these representa­tions of the Lacedaemonians the Athenians by the advice ofThemistocles made this reply, that " they would send am­bassadors to them to debate this afTair;" and so without far­ther explanation dismissed them. Themistocles next advis- /ed, that " he himself might be dispatched forthwith to La-ceda?mon, and by no means hastily to send away the otherswho were to be joined in the commission with him, but todetain them till the walls were carried up to a height neces­sary at least for a defence; that the work should be expeditedby the joint-labour of all the inhabitants without exceptionof themselves, their wives and their children, sparing neitherpublic nor private edifice from whence any proper materialscould be had, but demolishing all." Having thus advisedthem, and suggested farther what conduct he himself design­ed to observe, he sets out for Lacedaemon. Upon his arrivalthere, he demanded no public audience, he protracted mat­ters, and studied evasions. Whenever any person in thepublic administration demanded the reason why he asked notan audience, his answer was, that " he waited for the arrivalof his colleagues, who were detained by urgent business, heexpected they would speedily be with him, and was surpriz­ed they are not yet come." As they had a good opinion of







OCR Output








DISCOURSE III. lxXXV


will distinctly view these strange occurrences; they arepainted strong; the groupes are not mere heaps of confu­sion, and the principal figures are eminently distinguished.The body of Spartans intercepted in the isle of Sphacteria,who must either starve, or, what to Lacedaemonians is fullas bad, must surrender their persons and their arms, is apoint that exceedingly alarms that martial community.Things had long since gone against them ; but now, then-hereditary honour and military glory, on which and whichalone they piqued themselves, are in danger of being misera­bly tarnished. Their proud spirits condescend to heg a truce,that they may send an embassy to Athens to solicit an nocommodatlon.
It must have afforded a high degree of spiteful joy atAthens, to find the Lacedaemonians lengthening their mo­nosyllables and petitioning for peace. It is curious to heafin what manner they solicit, when admitted to audience.They declare themselves sent, " in behalf of their country-" men, to propose an expedient very much for the honour44 of Athens, and which would extricate themselves from" difficulties that now bore hard upon them. Athens never" had so fine an opportunity of raising her credit, securing" her acquisitions, and carrying her glory to the highest" pitch. They should not be puffed up, but reflect on the" strange vicissitude of human affairs. Who could expect," the Lacedaemonians should ever be sunk so low, as to sue44 for peace ? Yet what was the lot of Sparta might possibly" become, some time or other, the lot of Athens. The lat-44 ter should be moderate now, should accept of offered" friendship, should chearfully receive a submission, made" only to prevent desperation in great and gallant souls, and" open a field for mutual benevolence. The rival States" may now be reconciled; and only now, before things are-4 brought to extremities, and disgrace hath rendered one" party desperate. At this crisis, the Athenians may con-44 fer on Greece the bksaiag of a firm and lasting peace.







OCR Output








B. IV. 403 YEAR IX. BEFORE CHRIST 423.


practising with the Athenians. This demolition had everbeen intended, but its execution was now become moreeasy, as the flower of their youth had perished in the latebattle fought against the Athenians.
This summer also, the temple of Juno at Argos was de-stoyed by fire. Chrysis the priestess had placed a burningtorch too near the garlands, and unawares fell fast asleep.The flames broke out and were raging all around before theywere perceived. Chrysis indeed instantly, for fear of theArgives, flies away by night to Phlius. They, according tothe law enacted for that purpose, appointed another priestessin her room, whose name was Phacinis. Eight years ofthis war were elapsed, and it was the middle of the ninthwhen Chrysis fled.
The circumvallation of Scione also was compleated aboutthe close of this summer ; and the Athenians, leaving behinda sufficient body to guard it, drew off the rest of their army.
In the ensuing winter, things were quiet between theAthenians and Lacedaemonians, because of the suspensionof arms. But the Mantin&ans, and Tegeatae, and the con­federates on both sides, engaged at Laodicea of Orestis: Butthe victory was doubtful. Each party routed a wing of theiropponents, and both sides erected trophies, and sent thespoils to Delphi. Many however were slain on both sides.and the battle was drawn, the night putting an end to th:contest. The Tegeatae indeed passed the night upon tiefield, and immediately erected a trophy. But the Mantiie-ans withdrew to Bucolion, and afterwards erected their ro-phy in opposition.
In the close of this winter, and when the spring al­ready approaching, Brasidas farther made an attempt uponPotidaea. For having approached it in the night, and ap­plied his ladders, so far he proceeded without causing analarm. For the bell being passed by, during that interval,before he that carried it forwards could return, the moment







OCR Output








B. IV. 377 YEAR VIII. BEFORE CHRIST 424.


was taken. And not long after, a herald dispatched by theAthenians came again, but quite ignorant of this event, to suefor the dead, which were now delivered by the Boeotians, whono longer laid any stress upon their former reply.
In the battle, there perished of the Boeotians very littleunder five hundred ; of the Athenians, few less than a thou­sand, and Hippocrates the general; but of light-armed andbaggage-men a considerable number indeed*.
Somewhat later in time than this battle, Demosthenes,who, on his appearance before Sipha, had been disappointedin his hope of having it betrayed to him, having the land-force still on board his fleet, consisting of four hundredheavy-armed Acarnanians and Agraeans and Athenians, madea descent on Sicyonia. But before all his vessels could landtheir men, the Sicyonians had marched down to make headagainst them. They defeated those that were landed, andchased them again on board. Some they killed, and somethey took alive ; and after erecting their trophy, they de­livered up the dead by truce.
• The Athenians received in truth a terrible blow on this occasion. TheBoeotians, a people heavy and stupid to a proverb, continued ever after theterror of the Athenians, the politest and most enlightened people uponearth. Nay, thut gross and stupid people had, this day, well nigh com-pleated the destruction of all that was pre-eminently wise and good at thistime upon earth ; and done an irreparable mischief to sound reason andgood sense for ever after. When the two troops of horse, after fetching acompass round the hill, had compleated the rout of the Athenians, whowere now flying away with the utmost speed, the divine Socrates was leftalmost alone, facing the enemy, and fighting and retreating like a lion over­powered. Alcibiades,. who served in the cavalry, was making off on horse­back ; but, seeing Socrates in such imminent danger, he rode up to hini,covered his retreat, and brought him off safe. He thus repaid him thegreat obligation he had formerly received frnm him at Potidaa. Straborelates further (Gcog. I. 9.) that Xenopiion also the same day owed hislife to Socrates. Having fallen from his horse, and being trampled amongthe crowd, Socrates took him upon his shoulders, and carried him to aplace of safety. Upon the whole, brutal strength and mere bodily meritwere never so near getting a total conquest over all the light and under­standing which human nature hath to boast of, that did not come directlydown from heaven.







OCR Output








278 THE PEL0PONNESIAK WAR.


and Procles the son of Theodoras, appeared upon the coastof Peloponnesus ; whilst a larger armament of sixty, andtwo thousand heavy-armed, was employed against Melos,under the command of Nicias son of Niceratus. Melos isan island; and as the inhabitants of it were averse to theAthenian subjection, and had refused to accede to their al­liance, they were now bent on its reduction. Having laidthe island waste, and the Melians still refusing to submit,the Athenians put again to sea, and crossed over to Oropuson the opposite shore ; where arriving at night, the heavy-armed were detached to march with all expedition by landtowards Tanagra of Boeotia. Notice being given of theirarrival there, they were instantly joined by the whole forceof Athens, which had marched out of the city under theorders of Hipponicus the son of Callias and Eurymedon theson of Thucles. A camp they formed ; and having for thespace of a day laid the territory waste, they reposed them­selves there the succeeding night. But the next morninghaving gained a victory over the Tanagreans, who aided bya party of Thebans sallied out upon them, they only staidto gather up the arms and erect a trophy, and then marchedaway—these back again to the city; and those to the fleet.Nicias upon this, putting out again with his sixty sail, plun­dered all the sea-coast of Locris, and then returned into theharbour of Athens.
It was about this time that the Lacedaemonians foundedthe colony of Heraclea in Trachinia. Their view in doing
it was this: Those, who in general are stiled Melien-
sians, are divided into three bodies ; Paralians, Hierensians,and Trachinians. The last of these, the Trachinians, whohad been terribly distressed by a war made upon them bythe bordering Oeteeans, had first of all intended to throw
carried off all the glory of eloquence : But the Dcmotthenca, who is thesubject of this note, was an able general, Tory enterprizing, and verybrave; always vigilant in the service of bis country, though more as a sol­dier than a statesman ; and, provided hi* country was served, not too anx­ious about who carried off the honour. In short, he was an open-hearted,disinterested, worthy Athenian.







OCR Output








'234 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" have revolted from you, I readily absolve. But for a" people who inhabit an island, a fortified island ; who had" no reason to dread the violence of our enemies, except by" sea; who even at sea, by the strength of their own ship-" ping were able to guard themselves against all attacks," who enjoyed their own model of government, and were" ever treated by us with the highest honour and regard—" for such a people to revolt in this manner is never to be" forgiven. Is not their whole procedure one series of"treachery? Have they not rather made war upon than" revolted against us ? for revolt can only be ascribed to" those who have suffered violence and outrage. Have they" not further sought out our implacable foes, and begged to" participate with them in our destruction ? This certainly" is a much greater aggravation of guilt, than if merely on" their own domestic strength they had rebelled against us." They would not be deterred by the calamities of their" neighbours, who have frequently before this revolted, and" been punished for it by a total reduction ; nor would they" so far acquiesce in present felicity, as not to hazard the" dangerous reverse of misery. Audacious in regard to the" future, presumptuous above their strength, but below their" intention, they made war their choice, and in preferring" violence to the just observance of duty have placed their" glory. For, though uninjured and unprovoked, the first" moment they saw a probability of prevailing, they seized" it and rebelled.
" It is the usual effect of prosperity, especially when felt" on a sudden, and beyond their hope, to puff up a people" into insolence of manners. The successes of mankind,"when attained by the rational course, are generally of" much longer continuance than when they anticipate pur-" suit. And in a word, men are much more expert at re-" pelling adversity than preserving prosperity. By this" ought we long ago to have adjusted our conduct towards" the Mityleneans, never distinguishing them above others







OCR Output








DISCOURSE III. xcix


mere accident accomplishes what his eloquence could not.The command of Alcibiades came here to an end. One ofthe State-vessels arrives, and summons him to Athens totake his trial for the late frolics and irregularities committedthere. That city, ever since the departure of the fleet, hadbeen filled with confusion and horror. A plot there was,or rather a plot it was determined there must be, to set up atyrant, that most odious sound to Attic ears. Recollectionof the dismal things they had heard about the tyranny ofthe Pisistratidae increased their fears, and drove them intofurious and desperate proceedings. Thucydides here digres-seth to settle some facts relating to that set of tyrants, andtheir demolition; particularly the affair of Harmodius andAristogiton, one of the most famous incidents in the annalsof Athens. He differs indeed from most other writers, andthe moderns have not thought proper to rest the point uponhis authority, great as it is ; or though no man ever tracedout facts, or made his enquiries with more sedateness andimpartiality.
But to return to Alcibiades : He was obliged to quit thecommand, and he seemed quietly to submit to the orders ofthe State. But, determined not to face his countrymen intheir present mood, nor to hazard a trial, he gave them whowere sent for him the slip, and sheltered himself in Pelopon­nesus. He became instantly a most violent and dangerousenemy to his country. He is gone to pave the way for theruin of Athens ; of Athens, which he loved better than anything, except the parade of his own personal importance, andthe gratification of his private caprice.
Nicias and Lamachus, who now remained in the com­mand of the fleet, by help of a stratagem, land at Syracusewithout opposition, and seize a strong post for their encamp­ment. The Syracusans determine on a battle to dislodgethem. Both sides form in order. Nicias encourages hismen by a short, but spirited and forcible, harangue. Thu­cydides paints the battle with the exactness, perspicuity,







OCR Output








ft. III. TEAR V. BEFORE CHRIST 427. 259


" and not as foes, they intended to prevent the corrupted" part of your body from growing worse, and protect the" worthy and good according to their merit. They calmly" studied the welfare of your minds and your bodies,' not" suffering your city to become an alien, but recovering it" again to its duty and relations, exempting it from being" the foe of any honest Grecian, and re-uniting it in the" bonds of amity with them all.—There are proofs besides," that we did not intermeddle in a hostile manner. We did" no manner of violence to any one; we proclaimed aloud," that " whoever was desirous to conform to the primitive" institutions of all Boeotians, should come and join us."—•" You heard our voice with pleasure ; you came in and en-" tered into articles with us ; you remained for a time with-" out disturbance; but at length, having discovered the" smallness of our number, and then perhaps we were judged" to have proceeded inhumanly in presuming to enter with-" out the consent of your populace, you then returned us" not such treatment as you had received from us, you made" no remonstrances against innovations, nor persuaded us" to depart, but in open breach of articles you rushed upon" us. We lament not here so much the death of those whom" you slew in this base attack upon us ; some colour of law" might be alleged for their destruction: but when, con-" trary to every law, in cold blood you murdered men, who" had spread their arms for mercy, and had surrendered" themselves prisoners on promise of their lives,—was not" that a monstrous act ? In one short interval of time you" were guilty of three outrageous enormities, an infraction" of articles, the succeeding butchery of our people, and a" breach of the solemn promise made to us, that you would" not kill them, provided we refrained from plundering your" lands. Yet still you cry aloud, that ive are the breakers of" law ; you still remonstrate, that you arc not debtors to jus-" tice. It is false. The point, we presume, will soon be dc­







OCR Output








DISCOURSE II. li


" armies of both parties on the beach, whilst a naval en-" gagement is yet under decision on the water, sympathising" in all the contest, adjusting themselves to all the various" turns of battle, by new attitudes, quick contorsions of the" body;—All these things are set before the readers in ac-" tual representation, in all the disposition, all the expres-" sion and perspicuity of picture." Through the wholecourse of the history, a battle either at land or sea is an ob­ject clear and distinct. The writer is never confounded him­self, nor throws confusion on his reader. That reader seesthe whole, from the paean of attack to the erecting of thetrophy; he discerns the whole train of fight, and beholdsexactly the loss or gain of the victory. He further assistsat the assemblies of the people and all important consulta­tions. He learns the state of affairs from the managersthemselves; he hears the debates, is let into the tempers ofthe assembly, pries into all the politics, and preconceivesthe resolution. Where the politics are bad, he will own noother could be expected from those who recommend them.Where they are sound and good, nor wilfully severed fromduty to their country, and in moral consistence with thewelfare of their fellow-creatures, the reader will applaud,and think he hath been himself discovering the fine maximswhich the author hath been teaching, who never appearsin person, never puffs his own integrity and discernment,and without digressing into comments or setting up for apolitician, is found upon reflexion the best of the kind thatever wrote.
To quote passages for the proof of his sublime thoughtor his pathetic address, would be to transcribe the greaterpart of the following history. They will be observed in theorations of these two different casts, and the incidents ofthe work. His figures are thick set; the figures, that regardboth the sentiment and the diction. His metaphors arestrong and uncommon; his hyperboles far but not over­stretched, the tone is still preserved, they flow out from a







OCR Output








B. III. 253 fYEAR V. BEFORE CHRIST 427.


" who have ever wished you well, and bore arms against you" in mere self-defence. Your decisions can in no wise be" righteous, unless you exempt us from the dread of death." Retollect in time, that you received us by free surrender," that to you we held forth our hands ; the law forbids Gre-" cians to put such to death ; and that we have been from" time immemorial benefactors to you. For cast your eyes" there upon the sepulchres of your fathers, who fell by the" swords of the Medes and were interred in this our earth:" These we have annually honoured with vestments, and all" solemn decorations at our public expence. Whatever hath" been the produce of our soil, to them we have ever offered" the first-fruits of the whole ; as friends, out of earth that" was dear to them; as companions, to those who once" fought together in the same field; and, lest all this, by a" wrong determination, you instantly disannul, maturely re-" fleet. For Pausanias interred them here, judging he had" laid them in a friendly soil, and in the care of men with" friendly dispositions. If therefore you put us to death," and turn this Plataan into Theban soil, what is this but to" leave your fathers and relations in a hostile land and in the" power of those who murdered them, never again to receive" the sepulchral honours ? Will you further inslave the spot" on which the Grecians earned their liberty ? Will you lay" desolate the temples of those Gods, to whom they address-" ed their vows before that battle against the Medes, and" so were victorious ? And will you abolish the solemn" sacrifices, which those gallant patriots have founded and" appointed ?
" It cannot, O Lacedaemonians, be consistent with your" glory, to violate the solemn institutions of Greece, the" memory of your own forefathers, and your duty to us your" benefactors, thus, merely to gratify the malice of a hos-" tile party, to put men to death who have never wronged" you. No ; but—to spare, to relent, to feel the just emo-" tions of compassion, to recal the idea not only what mise-
Vol. I. 2 Z







OCR Output








B. I. 101 INTRODUCTION.


verge yet breathing a little ; and, being thus brought out, heimmediately died. They next intended to cast his body intothe Caeada, where they are used to throw their malefactors ; butafterwards changed their minds, and put him into the groundsomewhere thereabouts. But the God at Delphi warned theLacedaemonians afterwards by an oracle " to remove his body" to the place where he died:"—And now it lies in the areabefore the temple, as the inscription on the pillars sheweth—" and, as in what they had done they had violated the laws of" sanctuary, to restore two bodies to the Chalcicecan for thatM one." To this they so far conformed, as to dedicate theretwo statues of brass, as atonements for Pausanias.
(The Athenians, upon the principle that the God himselfhad judged this a pollution, required of the Lacedaemonians,by way of retaliation, to clear themselves of it.)
The Lacedaemonians at that time sent ambassadors toAthens, to accuse Themistocles also of carrying on the sametreasonable correspondence with the Mede as Pausanias, whichthey had discovered from the papers which had been evidenceagainst Pausanias, and demanded that " he should be equallypunished for it." The Athenians complied with this demand.But as he then happened to be under the ostracism*, and re-
• The Ostracism was a compliment of an extraordinary kind paid by thepeople of Athens to superior merit. When a person had done them greatservices, and they grew apprehensive they might possibly shew him toomuch gratitude, to the prejudice of their own liberties, they banished himfor ten years. On some particular day each citizen gave in the name of aperson, wrote upon an ostracum (a shell or piece of tile), whom he desiredshould be sent into retirement. Six thousand of these votes carried the point;and he, who had thus a legal number of votes, was obliged to quit Athenawithin ten days. The most disinterested patriot, and most successfulcommander received, for the most part, this public acknowledgment oftheir services. At length, a scoundrel fellow, one Hyperbolus, was thushonourably distinguished by the public voice. The Athenians thoughtafterwards they had profaned the ostracism by treating him like a Themis­tocles, an Aristides, or a Cimon, and therefore abolished this strange inju­rious privilege, by which wanton libertv was enabled to triumph over itsbest friend, public spirit. Other republics in Greece had something of thesame nature amongst them. Authors vary much about the circumstances
Vol. I. 2D







OCR Output








222 THE PELOPONNESIAK WAR.


the night, and violent the storm. At this crisis the Plataeans,who were left behind in the city, sallied forth and assaultedthe work of the Peloponnesians, in the part opposite to thatwhere their friends were attempting to pass, from them todivert as much as possible the attention of the enemy. Greatwas the confusion of the enemy yet abiding in their posts,for not one durst leave his station to run to the place ofalarm, but all were greatly perplexed to guess at its meaning.At last the body of three hundred, appointed for a reserve ofsuccour upon any emergency, marched without the work tothe place of alarm. Now the lighted torches, denoting ene­mies, were held up towards Thebes. On the other side,the Plataeans in the city held up at the same time from thewall many of these torches already prepared for this verypurpose, that the signals given of the approach of foes mightbe mistaken by their enemies the Thebans, who judging theaffair to be quite otherwise than it really was, might refrainfrom sending any succour, till their friends who had salliedmight have effectuated their escape, and gained a place ofsecurity.
In the mean time those of the Plataeans, who havingmounted first, and by killing the guards had got possessionof the turrets on either hand, posted themselves there to se­cure the passage, and to prevent any manner of obstructionfrom thence. Applying further their ladder to these turretsfrom the top of the wall, and causing many of their num­ber to mount, those now upon the turrets kept off the ene­mies, running to obstruct them both above and below, bydischarging their darts ; whilst the majority, rearing manyladders at the same time, and throwing down the battle­ments, got clean over at the intermediate space between theturrets. Every one, in the order he got over to the outwardside, drew up upon the inner brink of the ditch, and fromthence, with their darts and javelins, kept off those whowere flocking towards the work to hinder their passage.When all the rest were landed upon the outside of the work,







OCR Output








268 THE PELOPO1TNESIAN WAR.


take up the persons in the island, or by some other methodattempt to distress them. For this reason, they removed theprisoners again from the island into the temple of Juno, andapplied themselves to guard the city. But the enemy,though victorious at sea, durst not think of proceeding toattack the city; but satisfied with taking thirteen ships be­longing to the Corcyreans, they returned to the main, fromwhence they had sallied to the engagement. The next dayalso, they refrained from making any attempt upon the city,where the disorder and consternation were as great as ever.Brasidas is reported urgently to have pressed it upon Alci-das, but in the council of war was quite over-ruled. Theylanded, however, at cape Leucymne, and plundered thecountry.
The Corcyrean people, whose fears were still suggestingthat they should be attacked by the enemy's fleet, had con­ferred with the suppliants and others about the only meansto preserve the city. And some of them they persuaded tojoin in navigating their ships ; for by some means or otherthey had again manned thirty, expecting every moment theenemy's approach. But the Peloponncsians continued theravage of their fields only till noon, and then repassed totheir former stations. Yet before the dawn of the succeed­ing day, they saw sixty lights held up, to denote an equalnumber of Athenian ships advancing from Leucas. TheAthenians, advertised of the sedition and the course of thefleet under Alcydas against Corcyra, had sent away this re­inforcement under the command of Eurymedon the son ofThucles. Upon this, the Peloponncsians, whilst yet it wasnight, crept homewards along the shore, and carrying theirvessels over the isthmus of Leucas, lest they should be dis­covered in going round it, are safely retreated within theirown confines.
When the Corcyreans had discovered the approach ofthe Athenian reinforcement, and the departure of the enemy,they received the Messenians within their walls who till now







OCR Output








50 THE PELOPOKKESIAN WAR.


" against their invasions ; and, to expose yourselves more to" the hazards of war against a grown augmented power." And all this while you know, that the Barbarian was guilty" of many errors in his conduct: And the very Athenians" frequently, in their contests with us, have been defeated" more through their own blunders than the vigour of your" resistance: For their confidence in you hath caused the" destruction of some, who upon that very confidence were" taken unprepared.
" Let no one in this assembly imagine, that we speak" more from malice than just grounds of complaint. Com-" plaint is just towards friends who have failed in their duty ;" accusation is against enemies guilty of injustice. And" surely, if ever any people had, we have good reason to" think we have ample cause to throw blame upon our" neighbours; especially, when such great embroilments* have arose, of which you seem to have no manner of feel-" ing, nor ever once to have reflected, in regard to the" Athenians, with what sort of people, how far, and how in" every point unlike yourselves, you must soon contend." They are a people fond of innovations, quick not only toM contrive, but to put their schemes in effectual execution:" Tour method is, to preserve what you already have, to" know nothing further, and, when in action, to leave some-" thing needful ever unfinished. They again are daring be-" yond their strength, adventurous beyond the bounds of"judgment, and in extremities full of hope: Tour method" is, in action to drop below your power, never resolutely to" follow the dictates of your judgment, and in the pressure" of a calamity to despair of a deliverance. Ever active as" they are, they stand against you who are habitually indo-" lent: ever roaming abroad, against you who think it misery" to lose sight of your homes. Their view in shifting place" is to enlarge their possessions: Ton imagine, that in foreign" attempts you may lose your present domestic enjoyments." They, whtn once they have gained superiority over ene­







OCR Output








48 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


were dropped, they retired again within the walls, and theMacedonians marched away to the Athenians: so that thecavalry of neither side had any share in the action. Afterthe battle the Athenians erected a trophy, and granted a sus­pension of arms to the Potida?ans for fetching off their dead.There were killed of the Potidaeans and allies very near threehundred, and of the Athenians one hundred and fifty, withCallias their general.
The Athenians, without loss of time, throwing up a workagainst the wall which faceth the isthmus, blockaded theplace on that side, but the wall towards the Pallene they leftas they found it. For they thought their number was byno means sufficient to keep the guard within the isthmus,and to pass over to the Pallene side, and block it up alsothere. They were apprehensive, that thus divided the Poti-daeans and their allies might fall upon them. And the Athe­nians at home, hearing there was no work on the Palleneside, send thither a thousand and six hundred heavy-armedof their own people, under the Command of Phormio the sonof Asopius, who arriving upon the Pallene, and havinglanded his men at Aphytls, marched forwards to Potidaea,advancing slowly and laying waste the country as he movedalong. And, as nobody ventured out to give him opposi­tion, he also threw up a work against that side of the wallwhich faceth the Pallene. By these methods was Potidaeaclosely blocked up on either side, and also by the shipswhich lay before it at sea.
The blockade being thus perfected, Aristeus, destitute ofany means of saving the place, unless some relief should ar­rive from Peloponnesus, or some miracle should happen, pro­posed it as his advice that " all excepting five hundred menshould lay hold of the first favourable wind to quit the place,that the provisions might for a longer time support the rest;"declaring " his own readiness to be one of those who stayedbehind." Though he could not prevail with them, yetwilling in this plunge to do what could be done, and to man­age affairs abroad in the best manner he was able, he made







OCR Output








B. I. 89


" of the maritime situations, the danger will soon advance" quite up to them, and they of course no less than we are" concerned in the issue of our present determinations. For" this reason they ought, without the least hesitation, to make
" the timely exchange of peace for war.
" It is indeed the duty of the prudent, so long as they" are not injured, to be fond of peace. But it is the duty of the" brave, when injured, to throw up peace, and to have recourse" to arms; and when in these successful, to lay them down" again in peaceful composition ; thus, never to be elevated" above measure by military success, nor delighted with the" sweets of peace to suffer insults. For he who, apprehensive" of losing this delight, sits indolently at ease, will soon be de-44 prived of the enjoyment of that delight which interesteth" his fears; and he whose passions are inflamed by military" success, elevated too high by a treacherous confidence,"hears no longer the dictates of his judgment. Many are" the schemes which, though unadvisedly planned, through" the more unreasonable conduct of an enemy turn out success-" ful: But yet more numerous are those, which, though seem-" ingly founded on mature counsel, draw after them a dis-" graceful and opposite event. This proceeds from that great" inequality of spirit, with which an exploit is projected, and" with which it is put into actual execution. For in council" we resolve, surrounded with security : in execution we faint," through the prevalence of fear.
" We now, having been grossly injured, and in abundant" instances aggrieved, are taking up arms; and, when we have" avenged ourselves on the Athenians, shall at a proper time lay" them down again. Success, upon many considerations, we" may promise ourselves: In the first place, as we are superior" in numbers and military skill: In ihe next, as we all advance" with uniformity to accomplish our designs. A naval force," equal to that in which their strength consists, we shall be en-" ablcd to equip, from competent stores we separately possess," and the funds laid up at Delphi and Olympia*. If we take
• In the temple of Apollo at Delphi, and that of Jupiter at Olympia.


 







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAR VIII. BEFORE CHRIST 424. 349


tune, that they imagined nothing could disconcert theirschemes ; that enterprizes of the greatest as well as of smallimportance, no matter whether adequately or insufficientlysupported, must be ended to their wish. This was owingto the unexpected good luck with which most of their pro­jects had of late succeeded, and now invigorated all theirexpectations.
The same summer, the Megareans of the city of Me-gara, pressed hard by the Athenians, who constantly twicea year made an inroad into their territory with their wholeunited force; harassed at the same time by their own out­laws, who having been ejected by the popular party in thetrain of a sedition had settled at Pegae, and from thencewere continually plundering them, began to have some con­ference about the expediency of recalling their outlaws, thatthe city might not doubly be exposed to ruin. The friendsof these exiles, perceiving such a design to be in agitation,insisted more openly than ever that the affair should be re­gularly considered. The leaders of the people being con­vinced that their own and the strength of the people unitedin their present low condition could not possibly over-ruleit, were so far influenced by their fears as to make a secretoffer to the Athenian generals, Hippocrates the son ofAriphron, and Demosthenes the son of Alcisthenes, " to put" the city into their hands;" concluding, they should beless endangered by such a step than by the restoration ofthe exiles whom they themselves had ejected. It was agreed,that in the first place the Athenians should take possessionof the long-walls (these were eight stadia* in length, reach­ing down from the city to Nisaea their port) to prevent anysuccour which might be sent from Nisaea by the Peloponne-sians, since there alone they kept their garrison for the se­curity of Megara. After this, they promised their endea­vours to put them in possession of the upper city. And thisthey would be able to effect more easily, when the formerpoint was once secured.
•About three quarters of a mileVol. I. 3 M







OCR Output








B. IV. 305 YEAR VII. BEFORE CHRIST 425.


" service, when they must act from their vessels and on the" water, where many lucky contingencies are requisite." And thus am I satisfied, that with these disadvantages they" are but merely a balance for our smallness of number.
" As for you, O Athenians, who are now present, and who,*4 by the long experience of frequent descents, are perfectly" convinced that men, who stand firm and scorn to give way" before the dash of the surge or the menacing approach of a" vessel, can never be beat off—from you I insist, that firmly" embodied together and charging the enemy on the very" margin of the water, you preserve all us who are here, and" preserve this fortress."
In this manner Demosthenes having encouraged his men,the Athenians became more animated than ever ; and, march­ing forwards to the very margin of the sea, posted themselvesthere in order of battle. The Lacedaemonians were also inmotion ; their land force was marching to assault the fortress,and their fleet was approaching the shore. It consisted offorty-three vessels, and a Spartan, Thrasymelidas the son ofCratesicles, was on board as admiral. He steered directly forthe spot on which Demosthenes expected his coming. Inthis manner were the Athenians assaulted on both sides, byland and sea.
The ships of the enemy came on in small divisions, be­cause there was not room for larger. They slackened by in­tervals, and endeavoured by turns to force their landing.They were brave to a man, and mutually animated one ano­ther to beat off the Athenians and seize the fortress.
But Brasidas signalized himself above them all. He com­manded a trireme ; and observing that the other comman­ders and pilots, though they knew they could run aground,yet kept aloof because the shore was craggy, and shunnedevery hazard of staving their vessels, he shouted aloud," that it was shameful for the saving of timber to suffer ene-" mies to raise fortifications within their territory." He en­







OCR Output








166 THK PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" power, and of this let him be assured, who refines
" through fear, and hopes to earn indemnity by exerting it" no longer. In your hands it hath run out into a kind of" tyranny. To take it up seems indeed unjust, but to lay it41 down is exceeding dangerous. And if such dastardly" souls could persuade others, they would soon bring this" state to utter ruin, or indeed any other, where they were" members and enjoyed the chief administration of affairs." For the undisturbed and quiet life will be of short continu-" ance without the interposition of a vigilant activity. Sla-" very is never to be endured by a state that once hath go-" verned—such a situation can be tolerable only to that which" hath ever been dependent.
" Suffer not yourselves therefore to be seduced by men" of such mean and groveling tempers, nor level your re-" sentments at me—since, though I advised the war, it was" not begun without your approbation—if the enemy hath"invaded in such a manner as you could not but expect" from your own resolutions never to be dependent. What" though beyond our apprehensions we have suffered the
« sad visitation of pestilence! Such misfortunes no hu-
" man foresight will be able to prevent—though I know" that even this hath in some measure served to sharpen" your aversion to me. But if this be just, I claim as my"lawful right the glory of all those happy contingencies," which may ever befal you beyond your expectation. The" evils inflicted by heaven must be borne with patient resig­nation; and the evils by enemies with manly fortitude." Such rational behaviour hath hitherto been habitual in
" Athens; let it not now be reversed by you ; by you,
" who know to what a pitch of excellence this State hath" rose in the esteem of the. world, by not yielding to adver-" sity, but by braving all the horrors of war, and pouring"forth its blood in the glorious cause, hath reached the" highest summit of power, and ever since retained it. The" memory of this, time itself will never be able to efface.







OCR Output








316 THE JELOPONNES1AN WAR.


confederates, with a number of ships little more than thirty,were forced to engage in the evening of the day, the disputebeginning about a vessel that was passing through. Theystood away to oppose sixteen sail of Athenians and eight ofRhegians. They were worsted by the Athenians ; but eachside separated in hurry and confusion, just as they could, totheir several stations at Messene and Rhegium. They lostone ship in this action, which was stopped by the sudden ap­proach of night.
But after this, the Locrians evacuated the territory ofRhegium, and the whole collected fleet of the Syracusansand confederates took a new station at Peloris of Messene,and their whole land-force attended. The Athenians andRhegians sailing up to their station, and finding none atpresent on board the ships, rushed in amongst them. Yetthey lost one of their own vessels by the force of a grapplingiron fastened upon it, the crew of which was saved byswimming. Immediately after this the Syracusans got onboard, and being towed along the shore towards Messene,the Athenians came up again to attack them ; but, the enemy-running oft' into the deep and giving the first charge, theylose another of their ships. Though continuing to be towedalong the shore, and to charge in this manner, yet the Syra­cusans, without suffering any loss, got safe into the harbourof Messene. And now the Athenians, having received intel­ligence that Camarina was betrayed to the Syracusans by Ar-chias and his accomplices, stood away for that place.
In the mean while the Messenians, with their whole forceby land, and accompanied by their ships, marched awayagainst Chalcidic Naxus, which /bordered upon their ownterritory. The first day they force the Naxians to shelterthemselves behind their walls, and then they plundered thecountry. The day following, sailing up the river Acesine,they plundered along the shore, and with their land-forcemade an assault upon the city. The Siculi, who live uponthe mountains, were now pouring down in numbers to repel







OCR Output








8. II. 151 YEAR I. BEFORE CHRIST 431.


" flows not from the absence of those good things we have" never yet experienced, but from the loss of those to which" we have been accustomed. They who are not yet by age" exempted from issue, should be comforted in the hope of" having more. The children yet to be born will be a private" benefit to some, in causing them to forget such as no" longer are, and will be a double benefit to their country," in prerenting its desolation, and providing for its security." For those persons cannot in common justice be regarded" as members of equal value to the public, who have no
" childnn to expose to danger for its safety. But you,
" whose age is already far advanced, compute the greater" share »f happiness your longer time hath afforded for so" much jain, persuaded in yourselves, the remainder will be" but short, and enlighten that space by the glory gained by" these. It is greatness of soul alone that never grows old;" nor is t wealth that delights in the latter stage of life, as" some give out, so much as honour.
" To jou, the sons and brothers of the deceased, whatev-" er number of you are here, a field of hardy contention" is opened. For him, who no longer is, every one is ready" to commend, so that to whatever height you push your de-" serts, jou will scarce ever be thought to equal, but to be" somewhat inferior to these. Envy will exert itself against" a competitor, whilst life remains; but when death stops the" competition, affection will applaud without restraint.
" If af:er this it be expected from me to say any thing to" you, wto are now reduced to a state of widowhood, about"female virtue, I shall express it all in one short admonition;" It is your greatest glory not to be deficient in the" virtue peculiar to your sex, and to give the men as little"handle aapossible to talk of your behaviour, whether well" or ill.
" I have now discharged the province allotted me by the"laws, and said what I thought most pertinent to this as-" sembly. Our departed friends have by facts been already







OCR Output








B. IV. 361 YEAR VIII. BEFORE CHRIST 424.


" many of them, as could claim the merit of having done" signal service to the Lacedaemonians in the present war," should enter their claims, and be rewarded with freedom."The view in this was to sound them, imagining that such,who had the greatness of spirit to claim their freedom in re­quital of their merit, must be also the ripest for rebellion.About two thousand claimants were adjudged worthy, andaccordingly were led about in solemn procession to thetemples, crowned with garlands, as men honoured with theirfreedom. But, in no long time after, they made away withthem all, nor hath the world been able to discover, in whatmanner they were thus to a man destroyed.
Now also, with alacrity they sent away seven hundred oftheir heavy-armed under the orders of Brasidas. The restof his body were mercenaries, whom he had hired in Pelo­ponnesus. And it was in compliance with his own particu­lar desire, that Brasidas was employed in this service by theLacedaemonians.
The Chalcidfeans, however, were highly satisfied with aperson, who had ever passed in Sparta for one of the mostactive and accomplished citizens ; and who, in his foreignemployments, had performed very signal services for hiscountry. From his first appearance amongst them, his jus­tice and moderation so instantly recommended them to theadjacent cities, that some voluntarily submitted, and otherswere by intrigue put into his possession. By him the Lace­daemonians were actually impowered, if the accommodationthey wished for took place, which it afterwards did, to makeexchange and restitution of towns, and so relieve Pelopon­nesus from the hardships of the war.
Nay more, even in succeeding time, upon the breakingout of the Sicilian war, the virtue and prudence of Brasi­das exerted at this juncture, which some attested by their ownexperience, others upon sound and unsuspected report, im­printed a zeal on the confederates of Athens to go over tothe Lacedaemonians. Fpr, having been the first sent out to







OCR Output








196 THE FELOPONNESIAN WAR.


near the place from whence they had pursued this victory.They took up their dead, and the shattered pieces of theirships, whatever they found on their own coasts, and by a trucegave permission to the Peloponnesians to fetch off theirs.
The Peloponnesians also erected a trophy, in token of avictory gained by forcing ashore and damaging some of theenemy's ships. The ship they took they consecrated on theRhium of Achaia, near their trophy. Yet, after this, beingin some dread of the reinforcement expected from Athens,all of them, except the Leucadians, sailed away by favourof the night into the gulf of Crissa and Corinth. The Athe­nians, in the twenty ships from Crete, that ought to havebeen up with Phormio before the engagement, not long afterthe above retreat of the other ships, arrived at Naupactus.And here this summer ended.
Before the separation of the fleet that withdrew intoCorinth and the gulf of Crissa, Cnemus, Brasidas, and theother commanders of the Peloponnesians, by the advice ofthe Megareans, formed a design, in the beginning of thiswinter, to make an attempt on the Piraeus, the haven of theAthenians. It was not guarded or secured in the usualmanner; nor was this judged requisite, as the naval powerof Athens was become so extensive. Their project was, thatevery mariner carrying with him an oar, a cushion, and aleathern thong, should march over-land from Corinth, tothe sea on which Athens is situated, and that making thebest of their way to Megara, and drawing out the forty shipsthat lay there in the Nisaean dock, they should immediatelystand into the Piraeus. For there was not so much as oneship appointed to its guard ; nor was there the least suspicionat Athens that the enemy would attempt in this manner tosurprise them : For, openly, and in a regular train, theydurst not attempt it; nor could a project which requireddeliberate procedure have escaped discovery. But no soonerbad they resolved upon, than they set out to execute thepresent scheme. Arriving in the night, they drew the ships







OCR Output








B. I. INTRODUCTION. 81


one point intended by the expedition, but were obliged towithdraw, and carry Orestes back again with them, totallyunsuccessful.
Not long after this, a thousand Athenians going on boardtheir ships which lay at Pegae, for Pegae was now in theirpossession, steered away against Sicyon, under the commandof Pericles* the son of Xantippus. They made a descent,and in a battle defeated those of the Sicyonians, who endea­voured to make head against them. From thence theystrengthened themselves by taking in some Achaeans; andstretching across the gulph, landed in a district of Acarnania,and laid siege to Oenias ; yet unable to carry it, they soonquitted, and withdrew to their own homes.
Three years after this a peace to continue for five yearswas clapped up between the Peloponnesians and Athenians.Upon this, the Athenians, now at leisure from any war inGreece, engaged in an expedition against Cyprus, with a fleetof two hundred ships of their own and allies, commanded byCimon. Sixty of these were afterwards detached to Egypt, atthe request of Amyrtaeus king of the fenny part; but the restof them blocked up Citium. Yet, by the death of Cimon, anda violent famine, they were compelled to quit the blockade of
• Here the name of Pericles first occurs, and a hint should be given tothose who are not well acquainted with him to mark a person that was atrue patriot, a consummate statesman, a great general, and a most sublimespeaker. He was born of one of the most illustrious families in Athens.He was educated in the best manner, and learned his philosophy or theknowledge of nature from Anaxagoras, whose doctrines agreed so littlewith the superstitious practices and tempers of the Athenians, that the mas­ter and all his disciples were charged with atheism, for which many ofthem were prosecuted, and the divine Socrates most injuriously put todeath. He angaged early in public affairs, gained the ascendant over aUbis competitors, became at length, and continued to his death, master of theaffections and liberties too of the Athenian people, and though master, yetguardian and increaser of the latter. In short, according to writer* of thebest authority and the gravest historians, he was one of the most able andmost disinterested ministers that Athens ever had, Athens the most demo-cratical state that ever existed, so fertile in every thing great and glorious,and so over-run at the same time with faction, licentiousness, and wild tu­multuary caprice.







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAR VIII. BEFORE CHRIST 424. 357


at sea, by furnishing them with pilots; but farther, werecontinually alarming the Samians at home, and shelteringtheir deserters. From these apprehensions they assembled aforce from among their dependents, sailed thither, and hav­ing defeated in battle those who came out of Antandrus tooppose them, gain once more possession of that town. Andno long time after, Lamachus, who had been detached toPontus, having anchored in the river Calex in the districtof Heraclea, lost all his ships. A heavy rain had fallen inthe upper country, and the land-flood rushing suddenlydown, bore them all away before it. He himself and themen under his command were forced to march over landthrough Bithynia (possessed by those Thracians who acreseated on the other side of the strait in Asia) to Chalcedon,a colony of the Megareans, in the mouth of the Euxinesea.
This summer also Demosthenes, immediately after he hadquitted the Megaris, with the command of forty sail of Athe­nians, arrives at Naupactus. For with him, and with Hip­pocrates, some persons of the Boeotian cities in those partshad been concerting schemes how to change the governmentof those cities, and introduce a democracy on the Athenianmodel. The first author of this scheme was Ptoeodotus anexile from Thebes, and matters were now ready for exe­cution.
Some of them had undertaken to betray Siphae: Siphaeis a maritime town in the district of Thespiae, upon the gulfof Crissa. Others of Orchomenus engaged for Chaeronea,a town tributary to that Orchomenus which was formerlycalled the Minyeian but now the Boeotian. Some Orchome-nian exiles were the chief undertakers of this point, and werehiring soldiers for the purpose from Peloponnesus. Chaero-nea is situated on the edge of Boeotia towards Phanotis ofof Phocis, and is in part inhabited by Phocians. The shareassigned to the Athenians was the surprisal of Delium, atemple of Apollo in Tanagra, looking towards Euboea. These
Vol.. I. 3 N







OCR Output








lxxxii A Survey of the History.


" add no more, and yet dare not end; and' again intreat" the Lacedaemonians to save those worthy patriots, to" whom all Greece is indebted for her liberty and indepen-" dence."
The Thebans, who were afraid the Lacedaemonians had ahigher sense of honour and gratitude than they really had,demand also to be heard.
In the speech they make on this occasion, " they first" accuse the Plataeans of slander and invective. They en-" deavour to palliate the reproach on themselves, for desert-" ing the cause of liberty and joining the arms of Persia." The Plataeans had been active ever since to betray it to" the Athenians ; that wicked scheme, which with all their" power the Thebans had ever opposed. By such iniqui-" tous conduct the Plataeans had extinguished their former" glory, had effaced all their former merits. Nobody was" bound to redress or pity them, but their friends the Athe-" nians. Their temper had been always bad; always bent"on violence and mischief; always addicted to set up ty-" ranny in Greece, provided Athenians were the tyrants." They then endeavour to throw an anti-pathetic into their" own representations. They paint the death of their coun-" trymen slain at the surprise of Plataea in a mournful light," as put to death contrary to every law, and murdered in" the very act of stretching out their hands and pleading" a promise of life. The lives therefore of such butchers" are forfeited to justice; and they insist the forfeit shall" be taken: The Lacedaemonians are bound in honour to" take it. They beg them therefore to be deaf to vain com-" plaints and intreaties, to revenge the injured, and to punish" the guilty; to regard what bad men have done, and not" what they have said; to defy eloquence, and heed only" simple unsophisticated truth; by which alone men, who" preside in judgment, can satisfy their conscience and their" duty."
An alliance with Thebes is necessan in this war to the







OCR Output








120 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


event, they cast their attention towards the Plataeans, whowere still without: For the people of Plataea were scatteredabout the adjacent country with their implements of hus­bandry, because annoyance in time of peace was quite un«expected. They were desirous to catch some of these as ex­change for their own people within the city, if any were yetliving and prisoners there. On this they were fully bent;but in the midst of their project the Plataeans, who suspectedthe probability of some such design, and were anxious fortheir people yet without, dispatched a herald to the The-bans, representing to them—" the injustice of the attemptalready made ; since treaties subsisting, they had endea­voured to surprize the city;" and then warned them " todesist from any violence to those without. If not, they po­sitively declared they would put all the prisoners yet aliveto the sword; whereas, in case they retired peaceably outof their territory, they would deliver them up unhurt." Thisaccount the Thebans give, and say farther it was swornto. The Plataeans disown the promise of an immediate dis­charge of the prisoners, which was reserved for terms to beagreed on in a subsequent treaty, and flatly deny that theyswore. The Thebans however retired out of their territory,without committing any violence. But the Plataeans, whenthey had with expedition fetched into the city all their effectsof value that were out in the fields, immediately put all theirprisoners to the sword. The number of those that were takenwas one hundred and eighty. Eurymachus was amongstthem, with whom the traitors had concerted the surprize.And this done, they dispatched a messenger to Athens ; andrestored to the Thebans their dead under truce. And thenthey regulated the affairs of the city in the manner most suit­able to their present situation.
The news of the surprised of Plataea had soon reachedthe Athenians, who immediately apprehended all the Boeo­tians then in Attica, and dispatched a herald to Plateea withorders—" to proceed no farther against the Theban pri­







OCR Output








364 THE FELOP0NNESIAN WAR/


" you. For we Lacedaemonians, imagining we were going" to confederates, whose wishes were fastened upon us be-" fore their eyes could behold us, and from whom we might" depend upon the most cordial reception ; we, I say, have" pierced forwards through a series of dangers, marching" many days together through hostile territories, and sur-" mounting every obstacle by a zeal for your service. If" therefore your affections are alienated from us, or if you" act in opposition to your own, and to the liberty of the rest" of Greece, your conduct must terribly distress us. And" that, not only because you yourselves reject us, but may by" such a step deter all others, to whom I shall afterwards ap-" ply, from co-operating with me. Such obstacles you will" raise before me, if you, to whom first I have addressed my-" self, you who are masters of a city of great importance," and are in esteem for your good-sense and discretion," should refuse to receive me. I shall be utterly unable to" put a plausible colour upon such a refusal, and shall be ex-" posed to reproach, as if I meant injustice under the cloak" of liberty, or came hither too weak and impotent to make" head against the Athenian strength, should it be exerted" against me.
" And yet with that force, of which at this very moment" I am honoured with the command, I marched myself to" the succour of Nisaea, and openly defied a superior num-" ber of Athenians who declined the encounter. It is not" therefore probable, that they can send hither a force to"our annoyance equal to that armament they employed" at Nisaea: Nor am I sent hither to execute the schemes of" oppression, but to further the deliverance of Greece. I" have the security of most solemn oaths, sworn by the" magistrates of Lacedaemon, that whatever people I bring" over to their alliance shall remain in free possession of" their own liberties and laws. And farther, we are forbid the" use of violence and fraud as the means of rendering you" dependent on us ; but, on the contrary, are to act in sup­







OCR Output








398 The peloponnesian war.


" than to run to the charge : for otherwise, before this they" had attacked us. And you plainly see, that all the terror" which now runs before them, will vanish at the onset, as" terrible only to sight and hearing. When therefore they" advance to the charge, sustain it and repulse them; and" when opportunity serveth, fall back into your ranks again" with regularity and order. You shall thus the sooner se-" cure your retreat, and be convinced for the time to come," that such rabbles, to men who can stand the first fury of" their onset, have only made, at a distance and by their" pausing, a vain and menacing parade of valour ; but such" as will give ground and fly before them, they pursue" with eagerness ; and are excellently brave, when there is no" resistance.
After this exhortation, Brasidas caused his army to fileleisurely off. The Barbarians perceiving it pressed forwardwith great noise and clamour, supposing that he fled, andthat they might intercept and cut him off. But when theappointed parties sallied out from all quarters to receive them,and Brasidas himself with his picked body sustained theircharge, they repulsed them at their first assault, to the greatsurprize of the enemy. Afterwards, receiving every repeat­ed attack, they beat them off continually ; and then duringthe intervals of pause retreated in good order; till at length,the bulk of the Barbarians discontinued their efforts in theplain against the Greeks under Brasidas, and leaving only apart of their body to follow and annoy them in their retreat,the rest wheeled speedily off to pursue the flying Macedoni­ans, and such as they overtook they slaughtered. To thenarrow pass farther between two hills which was the en­trance into the territories of Arribaeus, they hurried beforein order to secure it, knowing it to be the only rout by whichBrasidas could retreat. He was now drawing near it, and inthe most difficult part of the passage they were spreadingthemselves circularly to encompass him on all sides. ButBrasidas perceiving their design, ordered the three hundred







OCR Output








B. II. YEAR II. BEFORE CHRIST 430. 167


" even though we may suffer it to droop and perish in our" hands—as what is human must decline—Our memory, I say," who, though Grecians ourselves, gave laws to all other Gre-" cians, stood the shock of most formidable wars, resisted" them all when combined against us, conquered them all when" separately engaged, and maintained ourselves in possession" of the most flourishing and most powerful State in the world." These things let the indolent and sluggish soul condemn, but" these let the active and industrious strive to emulate, for" these they who cannot attain will envy.
" To be censured and maligned for a time, hath been the" fate of all those whose merit hath raised them above the" common level;—but wise and judicious is the man who, en-" joying the superiority, despiseth the envy. An aversion so" conceived will never last. His merit soon breaks forth in all" its splendour, and his glory is afterwards handed down to" posterity never to be forgot. You, who have so clear a pros-" pect before you, both of what will be some time glorious, and" of what at present is not disgraceful, recollect your own" worth and secure both. Sink not so low as to petition terms" from the Lacedaemonians; nor let them imagine that you feel" the weight of your present misfortunes.- The man whose re-" solution never sinks before it, but strives by a brave opposi-" tion to repel calamity, such—whether in a public or private" capacity—must be acknowledged to be the worthiest man."
By arguments like these did Pericles endeavour to mollifythe resentments of the Athenians against himself, and to diverttheir minds from their public calamities. In regard to thepublic, they seemed to be satisfied with all that he had urged ;they desisted from soliciting an accommodation with the La­cedaemonians ; and were more hearty than ever for continuingthe war. Yet, in their own private concerns, they were griev­ously dejected under their present misfortunes. The poorcitizens who had but little, could not bear with patience the lossof that little. The rich and the great regretted the loss of theirestates, with their country-seats and splendid furniture;—but







OCR Output








328 THE PELOPOKNESIAN \Ar. •


to that of their countrymen at Thermopylae*. For thosebeing hemmed in by the Persians in a narrow pass, were utter­ly destroyed: These, now inl ike manner beset on both sides,were no longer able to contend. Being but a handful of menopposed to superior numbers, and much weakened in theirbodies for want of food, they quitted their post. And thusthe Athenians became masters of all the approaches.
But Cleon and Demosthenes, assuredly convinced thatshould the foe give way too fast, it would only conduce totheir expeditious slaughter under the fury of the victorioustroops, began to stop their fury and to draw off their men.They were desirous to carry them alive to Athens, in casethey would so far hearken to the voice of a herald as to throwdown their arms, dejected as they must be in spirit and over­powered with the instant danger. It was accordingly pro­claimed, that " such as were willing should deliver up their" arms and their persons to the Athenians, to be disposed of" at discretion."
When this was heard, the greater number threw downtheir bucklers and waved their hands in token of acceptingthe proposal. A suspension of arms immediately tookplace, and a conference was held between Cleon and De­mosthenes on one side, and Styphon, the son of Pharax, onthe othen Of those who had preceded in the command,Epitadas, who was the first had been slain, and Hippagreteswho was his successor, lying as dead among the slain, thoughhe had yet life in him, Styphon was now the third appointedto take the command upon him, according to the provision
• The famous three hundred Spartans with king I.eonidas at their head,who stopped the vast army of Xerxes at the pass of Thermopylx, and atlength perished all to a man. They were all afterwards intombed on thespot where they fell with this short epitaph ;
Tell, traveller, at Sparta what you saw,
That here'trelie obedient to her law.The same spirit and resolution was at this time generally expected fromthe Spartans, now encompassed round about by thrir enemies, in tlir isti-of Sphacteria.







OCR Output








B. IV. TEAR Til.—BEFORE CHRIST 425. 317


the Messenians. This the Naxians perceiving, became morecourageous, and animating one another with the thought thatthe Leontines and their other Greek allies were now march­ing to their relief, they suddenly sally out of the city and fallupon the Messenians, whom they put to flight, and slaughteredmore than a thousand of them; the remainder, with difEculty,escaped to their own homes: for the Barbarians attackedthem upon their road, and made great havoc of them. Theships upon the station of Messene brake up soon after, with­drawing respectively to their own harbours.
Immediately the Leontines and allies, in concert with theAthenians, appeared before Messene, as now reduced to avery low ebb. They assaulted it on all sides ; the Atheniansmaking their attempt from their ships on the side of the har­bour, whilst the land-forces did the same on the body ofthe place. But the Messenians, and a party of Locrianscommanded by Demoteles, who, after their late blow, hadbeen left there for the security of the place, made a suddensally from the city, and falling unexpectedly on the army ofthe Leontines, put the greater part to flight, and did greatexecution upon them. This was no sooner perceived by theAthenians, than they threw themselves ashore to succourtheir confederates, and falling in with the Messenians, whohad lost the order of their battle, drove them again behindtheir walls. This done, having erected a trophy, they putover to Rhegium. And after this, the Grecians of Sicilycontinued a land war against one another, in which the Athe­nians had no participation.
At Pylus, the Athenians still kept the Lacedaemoniansblocked up in the island, and the army of the Peloponne-sians remained in their old posts upon the continent, in astate of inactivity. Their constant guard subjected theAthenians to excessive hardships, since provisions and freshwater were equally scarce. There was but one single foun­tain for their use, which lay within the fortress of Pylus,and yielded but a slender quantity of water. The majority
Vol. I. 3 H







OCR Output








B. II. 191 TEAR III. BEFORE CHRIST 429.


In such terms did their commanders animate the Pelo-ponnesians. But Phormio,—who began to apprehend a de­pression of spirits in his own men, since he plainly saw thatby keeping their ships close together they were afraid ofthe numerous ships of the enemy—had a mind by callingthem together to reinspire them with courage, and give theman exhortation suitable to their present condition. He hadhitherto in all his discourses insisted, and induced them togive him credit, that—" no number of ships could be gottogether large enough to make head against them." Andhis seamen had long since been elated with this presumption,that " as they were Athenians, they ought not to avoid anyfleet of the Peloponnesians, however numerous." But, whenhe saw them intimidated by the formidable object beforetheir eyes, he thought it high time to endeavour to revivetheir sinking courage. The Athenians being gathered round
him, he harangued them thus
" I HAVE observed, my fellow- soldiers, that the num-" ber of your enemies hath struck you with fear.—I have" therefore called you together, as I cannot bear to see you" terrified with what is by no means dreadful. These ene-" mies of yours, whom you have already conquered, who in" no wise think themselves a match for you, have got" together a great number of ships and a superior force. In" the next place they come confidently to attack you with" the vain presumption, that valour is only peculiar to" themselves. Their confidence is occasioned by their skill" in the service of the land. Their frequent successes there" induce them to suppose that they must also for certainty" be victorious at sea. If they have any reason to presume" so far upon their excellence at land, you have more to" form presumptions in your own favour, since in natural" courage they are not in the least superior to us, and" if larger degrees of skill give either side an advantage," we have hence an argument to be more confident of suc-" cess. The Lacedaemonians, now at the head of their







OCR Output








B. r. INTRODUCTION. 25


" IT is quite proper, Athenians, that those who address" themselves to a neighbouring power imploring their suc-" cour, which is now our case, without being able to plead" the merit of prior good-services or an old alliance in their" own behalf, should previously convince them, chiefly, that" a compliance with such requests must turn to their advan-" tage ; at least, that it will cause no manner of inconve-" nience ; and then, that the favour will be returned with" effectual gratitude. If they are unable to give satisfac-" tory conviction in any of these particulars, they can have" no reason to be angry if their suit be rejected. The Cor-" cyreans, confident that they can clear up these points be^" yond the reach of scruple, have sent us hither to request"your alliance.
" The method, indeed, which hitherto we have fondly" observed, hath proved in fact absurd towards you in this our"exigency, and prejudicial to our own affairs in our present" situation. In preceding times, we never chose to grant our" alliance to any, yet now are we come to sue for alliance" from others, being through our own maxims quite destitute" of friends in this our war against the Corinthians : and that" which before appeared the conduct of refined prudence, to" keep clear of danger by shunning the intanglements of a" foreign alliance, we now find by the event to have been" bt'.h impolitic and weak.
" Once already we have engaged the Corinthians at sea," and repulsed them merely by our own strength. But, since" with a greater force collected from Peloponnesus and the" rest jof Greece they are again preparing to attack us ; since" we perceive ourselves unable to resist them merely with" our own domestic strength ; since further with our subjec-" tion the danger will spread abroad; we are necessitated to" apply to you and every where else for succour ; and though" now emboldened to act in opposition to our former inactive" maxims, yet we deserve your pardon, as they were not the" result of bad designs, but of mistaken judgments : and could" we but obtain redress from you, this incidental necessity of







OCR Output








INTRODUCTION*.


his escape by sea undiscovered by the Athenian guard* Con­tinuing now amongst the Chalcideans, he made what militaryefforts he could, and killed many of the inhabitants of Ser-myle by an ambuscade he formed before that city ; and en­deavoured to prevail with the Peloponnesiahs to send up atimely relief. Phormio, also, after compleating the worksround Potidaea, with his sixteen hundred men ravaged Chal-cidica and Bottiaea: And some fortresses he took by storm.
THESE were the reciprocal causes of dissension betweenthe Athenians and Peloponnesians. The Corinthians wereenraged at the blockade of Potidaea, a colony of their own, inwhich were shut up both Corinthians and other Peloponne­sians. The Athenians resented the proceedings qf the Pelo­ponnesians in seducing to a revolt a city in alliance with andtributary to them, and siding openly by a voluntary expeditionwith the warring rebels of Potidaea. Yet a war open andavowed had not yet broke out between them: Hostilitieswere suspended for a time. Hitherto it was merely a privatequarrel of the Corinthians.
But, when once the blockade of Potidaea was formed, theCorinthians could hold no longer. In it their own people wereshut up, and they were at the same time in anxiety about theplace. They summoned their allies to repair immediately toLacedaemon, and thither they went themselves with loud ac­cusations against the Athenians, that " they had violated thetreaty, and injured Peloponnesus." The iEginetae indeed,from a dread of the Athenians, did not openly dispatch theirembassy ; but underhand they had a great share in fomentingthe war, asserting that" they were restrained in the privilegeof governing themselves, which had been allowed them bythe treaty."
The Lacedaemonians, summoning to appear before themnot barely their allies, but whoever had any manner of chargeto prefer against the Athenians, assembled in grand councilas usual, and commanded them to speak: Others who werepresent laid open their respective complaints, but the Mega­


 







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAR VlII. BEFORE CHRIST 424. 387


" force ; the preceding opposition therefore deserved forgive-" ness."
Having spake thus and revived their spirits, when thetruce was expired, he made assaults upon Lecythus. TheAthenians defended themselves from a paltry rampart andthe battlements of the houses. One whole day they effec­tually repulsed them. But on the following, when a machinewas to be planted against them by the enemy, from whencethey intended to throw fire upon their wooden fences, andthe army was now approaching to the spot which seemedconvenient for lodging their machine and whence it mightbe played off with effect; they raised for prevention a woodenturret, the base of which was an edifice that lay ready athand, and carried up many buckets and tubs of water andheavy stones ; and upon it also many defendants were mount­ed. But the edifice, too heavily laden, on a sudden wascrushed by the weight. The crash with which it fell wasgreat; and those of the Athenians, who stood near and sawit, were rather concerned than terrified. But those at a dis­tance, and especially such as were most remote, imaginingthe place was already taken in that quarter, fled amain to thesea and to their vessels.
When Brasidas perceived they were quitting the battle­ments, and had himself beheld the accident, he led his armyto the assault, and immediately carrieth the fortress. Suchas were found within it were instantly destroyed. And theAthenians in boats and ships, after having thus abandoned itto the enemy, crossed over to the Pallene.
But Brasidas (for in Lecythus there is a temple of Miner­va ; and before he proceeded to the assault he had publiclyproclaimed, that a reward of thirty mina* of silver shouldbe given the man who first mounted the rampart,) concludingnow that it was taken less by human than some other means,reposited the thirty mina: in the temple, as an offering to theGoddess. And having demolished Lecythus and cleared all• 9Q. 15s. sterling.







OCR Output








B. IV. 365 YEAR VIII. BEFORE CHRIST 424.


" port of you who are oppressed with Athenian bondage." Upon reasons so valid do I insist upon it, that I am no" longer suspected by you, having given you the strongest" assurances, that I am no impotent avenger, and that you" may boldly abet my cause.
" If there be any person in this assembly, who hesitates" upon the apprehension that I may betray the city into the" hands of a private cabal, let him bid adieu to his fears, and" distinguish himself in open confidence. I came not hither" to be the tool of faction; I am convinced that liberty can" never be re-established by me, if disregarding ancient" constitutions, I enslave the multitude to the few, or the few" to the crowd. Such things would be more grievous than" the yoke of foreign dominion. And should we Lacedaemo-" nians proceed in this manner, our labours could never" merit a return of gratitude, but, instead of honour and glory,-" foul reproach would be our portion. The crimes, on which" we have grounded this war against the Athenians, would" then appear to be our own, and more odious in us for hav-" ing made parade of disinterested virtue, than in a State" which never pretended to it. For it is more base in men" of honour to enlarge their power by specious fraud, than by" open force. The latter, upon the right of that superior" strength with which fortune hath invested it, seizeth at
once upon its prey; the other can only compass it by the" treachery of wicked cunning.
" It is thus that in all concerns of more than ordinaryw importance, we are accustomed to exert the utmost cir-" cumspection. And besides the solemn oaths in your fa-" vour, you can receive no greater security of our honest" intention than the congruity of our actions with our words,
from whence the strongest conviction must result, that" with what I have suggested you are obliged in interest to" comply. But if all my promises are unavailing, and you44 declare such compliance impossible ; if professing your-V selves our sincere well-wishers, you beg that a denial may,
Vol. I. 3 O







OCR Output








DISCOURSE II. lv


" exposes the Sublime to sudden falls. Nor am I ignorant" indeed of another thing, which will no doubt be urged, that" in passing our judgment upon the works of an author, we" always muster his imperfections, so that the remembranceu of his faults sticks indelibly fast in the mind, whereas that" of his excellencies is quickly worn out. For my part, I" have taken notice of no inconsiderable number of faults in" Homer, and some other of the greatest authors, and cannot" by any means be blind or partial to them ; however, I judge" them not to be voluntary faults, so much as accidental slips" incurred through inadvertence ; such as, when the mind is" intent upon things of a higher nature, will creep insensibly" into compositions. And for this reason I give it as my real" opinion, that the great and noble flights, though they cannot" every where boast an equality of perfection, yet ought to" carry off the prize by the sole merit of their own intrinsic" grandeur."







OCR Output








DISCOURSE III. lxxxiii


Lacedaemonians, and they purchase it at a mighty price in­deed. The wretched Plateans, by all mankind abandoned,are butchered one after another, to the number of two hun­dred ; their wives are sold for slaves ; their city is rooted upfrom its foundations.
Thucydides soon after describes the sedition of Corcyra,the horrors of which are scarcely to be paralleled in story.He paints all the dreadful consequences of faction in acommunity. And what pity it is, that a warm, generous,and innate love of liberty, when carried to excess, shouldbe the source of so much misery to reasonable creatures!Our author, contrary to his custom, runs out here into manvgrave and judicious reflexions, in the interest of no party,a champion for no particular form, but as a friend to man,and a friend to virtue. It is the lust of power, that throwsembroilments and confusions into all communities. In go­vernments strictly republican, the ambitious are eager to ob­tain more than an equal share. In an oligarchical form,the few in power want ever to retain and often to enlargetheir share ; and the cry of liberty is shouted loudest bythose who want most to overthrow it. But yet, was- the mat­ter ever mended, or the miseries of mankind prevented bysetting up a single tyrant ? Communities have suffered more,for the caprice, for the support of the nominal glory of sucha head, than they have done by a number of popular seditions.The reader will certainly all along reflect on the fine modelof government established in his own country ; and own, thata community may be governed and yet be happy, that thepower of the one and of the few and of the many may betempered into an apt and lasting consistence; and, as it hathbeen for ages in a train of improvement, keep it but unhurtby intestine faction, may last to the dissolution of this greatglobe itself.
After this tragical business of Corcyra, Thucydides en­ters upon the affairs of Sicily. The seeds of war are sow­ing in that island, which will afterwards grow into a mighty







OCR Output








214 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" felt the miseries designed us:—that person chargeth us" without a reason.. For had our situation been such, that" we could have formed equal schemes to their prejudice and" disconcerted all their projects, what necessity did we lie" under to resign our equality and receive their law ? But," as the power of attempting was ever within their reach, we" ought certainly to lay hold of every proper expedient to" ward off the blow.
" Such are the reasons, ye men of Lacedaemon, and you" their confederates, such the grievances which induced our
" revolt; reasons so clear, that all that hear them must
"justify our conduct—grievances so heavy, that it was time" to be alarmed, and to look for some expedient of safety." We long since shewed our inclination to find this expedient," when, during the peace, we sent you to negotiate a revolt," but, by you rejected, were obstructed in our scheme. And" now, no sooner did the Boeotians invite, than we, without" a pause, obeyed the call. Now we have determined to" make a double revolt;—one from the Grecians, no longer" in concert with the Athenians to force the load of oppres-" sion upon them, but with you to vindicate their freedomu another from the Athenians, that we may not in the
" train of affairs be undone by them, but timely vindicate our" own safety.
" Our revolt, we grant it, hath been too precipitate and" unprepared—But this lays the stronger obligation upon" you to admit us to alliance, with the utmost expedition to" send us succours, that you may shew your readiness te" redress the oppressed, and at the same instant annoy your" foes. Such a juncture for this was never known before." What with the plague and the exorbitant expence of the" war, the Athenians are quite exhausted. Their fleet is" divided, some to cruize upon your coast, others to make" head against us. It is not probable they can have now" the competent reserve of shipping, should you invade" them a second time this summer both by land and sea:







OCR Output








». II. YEAR II. BEEORE CHRIST 430. 155


to an excessive weakness, were carried off. For the maladybeginning in the head, and settling first there, sunk afterwardsgradually down the whole body. And whoever got safethrough all its most dangerous stages, yet the extremities oftheir bodies still retained the marks of its violence. For itshot down into their privy-members, into their fingers andtoes, by losing which they escaped with life. Some therewere who lost their eyes ; and some who being quite recover­ed had at once totally lost all memory, and quite forgot notonly their most intimate friends, but even their own selves.For as this distemper was in general virulent beyond expres­sion, and its every part more grievous than yet had fallen tothe lot of human nature, so, in one particular instance, it ap­peared to be none of the natural infirmities of man, since thebirds and beasts that prey on human flesh either never ap­proached the dead bodies, of which many lay about uninter-red ; or certainly perished if they ever tasted*. One proofof this is the total disappearance then of such birds, for notone was to be seen, either in any other place, or about any one
• This passage is translated close to the letter of the original. It was in­tended by the author to shew the excessive malignancy of the plague, asthe very Beth of the dead bodies was so fatally pestilential to carnivorousanimals ;—'' Either they never tasted ; or, if they tasted, died." One proofof this is presumptive, arising from the disappearance of all birds of prey.The second was certain, and an object of sensible observation. Every bodycould see that dogs, those familiar animals who live with and accompanymen abroad, either never tasted; or, if hunger at any time forced them toit, they certainly lost their lives. Lucretius literally translates the circum­stance itself, but hath enlarged in the proofs, and intimates that the distem­per raged amongst those animals even without eating the flesh of the dead,and was general to every living species.
Multaque hum! cum inhumata jacerent corpora supra
Corporibus, tamen alituum genus atque ferarum.
Autprocul absiliebat, ut acrem exiret odorem ;
Aut, ubi gustarat, languebat morte propinqua.
Nec tamen omnino tcmere illis solibus ulla
Comparebat avis, nec noctibu' ssecla ferarum
Exibant sylvis : languebant pleraque morbo,
Et moriebantur : cum primis fida canum vis '
Strata viis animam ponebat in omnibus aegram :
Extorquebat enim vitam vis morbida membrit.







OCR Output








xxviii On the Life of Thtjtcvdides.


assistance. And the laborious care of a late* author, in ad­justing the chronology and clearing away rubbish, will enableone now to give at least a coherent, though by no means anaccurate, account of him.
Thucydides, an Athenian, by borough an Halymusian,was born in the year before Christ, four hundred seventy-one: twenty-five years after Hellanicus, thirteen after Hero­dotus, according to Aulus Gellius; and about three yearsbefore Socrates, as the birth of the latter is settled by Laer-tius. He was descended of a very splendid and noble family,though perhaps not so honourable as many others, since itwas not purely Attic. Its splendour can no longer be doubt­ed, when it is known to be the family of Miltiades. Miltia-des the elder, born a citizen of Athens, had reigned over th«Dolomci, a people in Thrace ; and left vast possessions inthat country to his descendents : And Miltiades the youngerhad married Hegesipyle the daughter of Olorus a Thraciankingf. Yet foreign blood, though royal, was always thoughtto debase the Athenian. The firm republicans of Athens,had a hereditary aversion to every circumstance of royalty;and the polite inhabitants of it abhorred all connexion withBarbarians-, the scornful title they gave to all the rest of theworld, except their countrymen of Greece. Iphicrates, a fa­mous Athenian in later times, was the son of an Athenianshoemaker and a Thracian princess. Yet, being asked towhich of his parents he thought himself most obliged ? hereplied haughtily—" To my mother. She did all she could" to make me an Athenian; my father would have made me" a Barbarian." The younger Miltiades, whom wars hadobliged to quit his hold in Thrace, commanded the troops ofAthens in the famous field of Marathon. He died after­wards in a jail, unable to pay a large fine set upon him bythe people of Athens. His son Cimon contrived afterwardsto pay it. The family for a time had been in poverty and
• Vitoe Thucydidii Synopsis chronologies, ab Henrico Dodwell.i Herodotus i» Erato.







OCR Output








B. IV. 369 YEAR VIII.—BEFORE CHRIST 424.


" IT ought never, ye men of Boeotia, to have entered in-" to the hearts of any of your rulers, that it is improper for" us to attack the Athenians, because we find them not upon" our own soil. For they, out of a neighbouring country," have rushed into Boeotia, and have fortified a post in it;" from whence they intend to ravage and annoy us. And our" enemies in short they are, in whatever place we find them," from what place soever they march to execute hostilitiesu against us. Now therefore let him, who hath judged this" step we are taking hazardous and insecure, acknowledge" and forego his error. Cautious and dilatory measures are" not to be adhered to by men who are invaded, and whose" all is at stake ; they are expedient only for those whose" properties are secure, and who bent on ' rapine exert their" malice in the invasion of others. But it is eternally the" duty of you Boeotians to combat such foreigners as pre-" sume to invade you, either upon your own or your neigh-" hour's ground, no matter which. And this above all must" he done against Athenians, not only because they are" Athenians, but because they are the nearest borderers upon" us. For it is a maxim allowed, that no State can possibly" preserve itself free, unless it be a match for its neighbour-" ing powers.
44 Let me add farther, that when men are bent on m-" slaving not neighbours only, but even such people as are" more remote, how can it be judged improper to encounter" such, so long as we can find ground whereon to stand ?" Call to mind for your present information the Eubccans" situated in yon island opposite to us ; call to mind the" present disposition of the bulk of Greece in regard to these" Athenians. Why should we forget, that neighbouring" States so often battle one another about settling their" various boundaries ; whereas, should we be vanquished," our whole country will be turned merely into one heap of"limitation, and that never again by us to be disputed?" For when once they have entered upon it, they will remain







OCR Output








286 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


But Demosthenes the Athenian (for he had continuedat Naupactus ever since the vEtolian miscarriage) havingreceived intelligence of this army, and dreading the loss ofthis place, had addressed himself to the Acarnanians, andwith some difficulty, owing to his departure from Leucas,persuades them to send a succour to Naupactus. Accord­ingly, they put a thousand of their heavy-armed under hisorders, whom he threw into the town by sea, which effec­tually preserved it. For the danger before was manifest, asthe wall was very large in compass, and the number of de­fendants inconsiderable.
When Eurylochus and his council had discovered thatsuch a succour had been received into the town, and thatits reduction was now impracticable, they marched awaytheir forces, not towards Peloponnesus, but to that iEtoliawhich is now called Calydon, to Pleuron, to the neighbour­ing towns, and to Proschion of iEtolia. The Ambraciotshad now been with and prevailed upon them, to join insome attempts upon Argos in Amphilochia, upon the restof that province, and Acarnania ; assuring them, that couldthese be reduced, the whole continent there would instantlygo over to the Lacedaemonian league. Eurylochus havingassured them of his concurrence, and given the iEtolianstheir dismission, halted thereabouts with his army, till theAmbraciots had entered upon the expedition against Argos,and it was time for him to join them. And here the sum­mer ended.
The Athenians in Sicily, the beginning of the winter,putting themselves at the head of their Grecian allies, andas many of their Sicilian as unable to support the Syracusanyoke had revolted from Syracuse to join them, began freshoperations of war in concert, and assaulted Nessa a town ofSicily, the citadel of which was in the hands of the Syra-cusans. But the attempt was unsuccessful, and they againdetermined to draw off. During the retreat, the Syracusanssallying forth, fell upon those allies of the Athenians whomarched in the rear, and with such force, that they put







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAR IX. BEFORE CHRIST 423 . 401


and the auxiliaries had chanced to ground their arms in thisquarter within the wall, drew them up in order of battle,and exhorted the Mendeans to sally out. It was replied ina seditious manner by one of the popular faction, that" they would not sally, and would have nothing to do with" the war." At such a refusal Polydamidas having laidhands upon the person, a tumult at once ensued,-in whichthe people ran immediately to arms, and, furious with anger,made towards the Peloponnesians, and all those of the op­posite faction who sided with them. They fell upon androuted them in an instant, terrified as they were at this sud­den assault; and the gates were thrown open at the sametime to the Athenians. They supposed this insurrection hadbeen made against them in consequence of some previouscombination; and as many as escaped out of the scufflewith life, fled away to the citadel, which was before in theirpossession.
But the Athenians (for Nicias was now returned beforethe city) bursting into Mende, for it was not opened bycomposition, with their whole united force, plundered it asthough taken by storm; nay, the generals had some diffi­culty to restrain their soldiers from putting the inhabitantsto the sword. And after this they issued their commandsto the Mendeans to continue their government in the usualform, and to proceed judicially against those of their bodywhom they esteemed the principal authors of the revolt.Those in the citadel they shut up with a wall extending onboth sides to the sea, and posted a guard to secure theblockade.
When in this manner they had possessed themselves ofMende, they marched against Scione. The inhabitants, withthe Peloponnesian aids, coming out to receive them, postedthemselves on a strong eminence before the city ; which, un­less the enemy could take it, would infallibly prevent theirwalling them about. But the Athenians stormed the post,and after an engagement forced them to dislodge, they formed







OCR Output








DISCOURSE III. XCV


" lence and a desire to sow dissentions amongst them. He" exhorts to union, and to the observation of order. Soa Athens rose ; so Athens may yet be much higher exalted." The fire of youth, the temper of the middle-aged, and" the experience of the old should ever duly accord and actM together. Sloth ruins a community; practice enables it44 to go through every conflict, and to triumph over all oppo-" sition."
Such an address could not but affect, such argumentscould not but be persuasive with the people of Athens : Theexpedition must go forwards. But Nicias makes a secondeffort, if possible, to divert them from it.
He begins with " a prayer for its success ; and a desire," that the preparations may be adequate to the ends pro-44 posed. He states the nature, the power, and strength of" the people they are going to invade. He then, in gene-" ral terms, gives in a bulky roll of necessary articles for" those who invade them. He hopes to frighten and deter44 his audience by the vast expence, which he shews must" necessarily be incurred on this occasion. The Athenians44 must provide every thing themselves, and trust for nothing" to the care and fidelity of Sicilian allies. The public wel-44 fare, and the safety of all, who are to be employed in this44 expedition, demand all manner of previous foresight and" care."
This speech had a different effect to what Nicias designed.Instead of discouraging, it animated his countrymen morethan ever for execution. Accordingly, a decree was soonpassed, investing himself and his colleagues, who were Alci-biades and Lamachus, with full power to provide every thingneedful for the service.
All hands now were soon at work. The quotas from thedependents were demanded; the fleet was equipped andmanned ; the levies went on briskly, since all men came intothe service with alacrity ; and every thing was soon ready forthe expedition.







OCR Output








B. iV. YEAR VIII. BEFORE CHRIST 424. 379


except such as were privy to his design. For there residedin the place a body of Argillians, who are an Andrian co­lony, and others who acted in combination with him, someof them at the instigation of Perdiccas, and others at thatof the Chalcideans: But in a more particular manner theArgillians, who had a place of residence very near it, whofarther had ever been suspected by the Athenians, and werereally intent on the ruin of the place when now a fair op­portunity was within their reach, and Brasidas at hand (wholong before had been tampering with these inhabitants offoreign mixture) in order to have the city betrayed to him.The Argyllians at this juncture received him into their owncity, and revolting from the Athenians led his army forwardsthat very night to the bridge laid over the Strymon. Thecity is seated at some distance from this pass; and it wasnot then defended by a fort as it is now, but was only thestation of a small party of guards. Brasidas therefore easilyforced the guard, being favoured in some degree by treachery,not a little also by the season and his own unexpected ap­proach. He then passed the bridge, and was immediatelymaster of all the effects of those Amphipolitans who residein all the tract without the walls. Thjs passage was sosudden, that those within the city had no notice of it; andas to those without, many of them being seized, and othersflying for preservation within the wall, the Amphipolitanswere thrown into vast confusion, increased by their mutualsuspicions of one another. And it is said, that if Brasidas,instead of permitting his troops to disperse for plunder, hadadvanced directly against the city, it must unavoidably havefallen into his hands. But he, on the contrary, having or­dered them to halt, employed himself in the ravage of whatlay without; and, finding nothing effectuated in his favourby accomplices within, he for the present desisted. Butthose his accomplices were overpowered in number by theopposite party, who prevented their opening the gates im­mediately to Brasidas; and, acting in concert with Eucles.







OCR Output








226 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" chains, should make none a slave, should put none t0" death."
These were the terms of the surrender.—But those ofthe Mityleneans who had been most active in all the nego-ciations with the Lacedaemonians, were thrown into the ut­most consternation, and being quite in despair when thearmy took possession of the place, seat themselves down atthe altars for refuge. Paches, having ordered them to arise,with a promise of protecting them from insults, sends themover to Tenedos, till he could know the pleasure of theAthenians. Having further dispatched some triremes toAntissa, he took it in, and made all other dispositions hejudged expedient in regard to his army.
The Peloponnesians on board the squadron of forty ships,who ought to have made the utmost expedition, but insteadof that had loitered upon the coast of Peloponnesus, andmade the rest of the voyage in a leisurely manner, had pro­ceeded so far as Delos, before their motions were known atAthens. Being advanced from Delos to Icarus and Myco-nus, they receive the first intelligence that Mitylene wastaken. But being desirous of certain information, theysailed forwards to Embatus of Erythraea. Mitylene hadbeen taken about seven days before they came up to Em­batus. Here assured of the truth, they consulted what wasnow to be done ; and Teutiaplus, an Elean, gave his opinionthus
" To you, O Alcidas, and as many other Peloponnesians" as are joined with me in the present command, I freely" declare it to be my own opinion, that we should sail to Mi-" tylcne, as we are, before the enemy is apprized of our arri-" val. It is probable, as they are so lately possessed of the" city, we shall find it very remissly and imperfectly guarded:" and towards the sea entirely neglected, as on that side" they cannot in the least expect the approach of an enemy," and our strength in that element is superior. It is proba­







OCR Output








B. IV. TEAR VIII. BEFORE CHRIST 424. 375


" as many other people, who this moment were possessed" of lands from which they had ejected the old proprietors," made a seizure first of those temples which had belonged" to others, and continued in the free possession of them." For their own parts, could they conquer more of their ter-" ritory they should manfully retain it; and as to the spot" they now occupied, their position there was voluntary, and" as it was their own they would not quit it. It was ne-" cessity alone made them use the water, which ought not to" be ascribed to any insolent or profane motive, but to the pre-" ceding invasions their enemies had made, self-preservation" against which laid them under a present necessity of acting" as they did. It might with reason be hoped, that every" proceeding to which war and violence indispensably obliged," would obtain forgiveness from the God : For the altars are" a refuge to involuntary offences, and transgression is im-" puted only to those who are bad without compulsion, and" not to such as urgent necessities may render daring. The*4 guilt of impiety belonged more notoriously to such as in-" sisted on the barter of temple for the bodies of the dead,"than to those who are content to lose their just demands" rather than submit to so base an exchange." They fartherinjoined him in their name to declare, that " they would not" evacuate Boeotia, since the ground which they occupied in" it belonged to no Boeotians, but was now their own property" acquired by dint of arms. All they required was a truce" for fetching off their dead, according to the solemn institu-" tions of their common country."
The Boeotians replied thus—" If they are now in Boeotia," let them quit the ground which belongeth to us, and carry" off what they demand. But, if they are upon ground of" their own, they themselves know best what they have" to do." They judged indeed that Oropia, on which ithappened that the bodies of the dead were lying, as thebattle had been fought upon the lines of partition, belonged







OCR Output








10 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


tions prior to this, and even this, the most celebrated of allthat ever happened, are plainly found to have been less in re­ality than they are in fame or current estimation at presentthrough poetical assistance./ Nor did the prosperous event of the Trojan expedition put/ an end to the unsettled and fluctuating state of Greece, orsecure that tranquillity so necessary to advancement. Thereturn of the Grecians from Ilium, after so long-an absence,gave rise to many innovations. Seditions were excited inalmost every city; and those who were forced to withdraw,built cities for themselves in other places. The present Boeo­tians, for instance, being driven out of Arne by the Thessa-lians, sixty years after the taking of Troy, planted them­selves in the country now called Boeotia, though before thattime Cadmeis: But a body of them had already seated them­selves there, of whom were those who went in the expeditionagainst Troy: And eighty years after it, the Dorians with theHeraclidae took possession of Peloponnesus. It was notwithout much ado and length of time, that Greece quiet andsettled at home had opportunity to send colonies abroad.Then the Athenians planted Ionia and most of the islands;the Peloponnesians the greatest part of Italy and Sicily, andeven some colonies in the different tracts of Greece. But allthese transactions are of a later date than the Trojan war.
But when once the state of Greece was grown more ro­bust, and increase of wealth became their study more thanever before, as the public revenues grew apace, in manyplaces tyrannies started up: For before this kingdoms werehereditary and with limited authority. Now Greece through­out was employed in building navies, and became addictedto naval affairs with unusual application. The Corinthiansare said to have been the first, who by varying the make oftheir ships, brought them to that model which is now in use,and Corinth to be the first place of Greece where triremes*
' The triremes were the ships of war, of the galley kind, and take theirname from the three banks of oars with which they were furnished. They







OCR Output








172 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


standing in great fear of Aristeus, lest upon escape he mightdo them further mischief, since before this he had been theauthor of all the projects to their prejudice both at Potidaeaand in Thrace, put them to death on the very day of theirarrival, unjudged and suing in vain to be heard, and castthem into pits. This cruel usage of them they justified fromthe example of the Lacedaemonians, who had in the samemanner put to death and cast into pits the Athenian mer­chants and those of their allies, whom they had seized inthe trading vessels upon the coasts of Peloponnesus. For,in the beginning of the war, the Lacedaemonians had put todeath as enemies all those whom they could take at sea—not those only who belonged to the States in alliance withthe Athenians, but even such as were of the yet neutral com­munities.
About the same time in the end of summer, the Ambra-ciots in conjunction with many of the Barbarians whomthey had excited to take up arms, invaded Argos of Amphi-lochia, and made excursions over all its dependent territory.Their enmity against the Argives took its original from
hence. This Argos was first built, and this province of
Amphilochia first planted by Amphilochus the son of Am-phiaraus, immediately after the Trojan war, who on his re­turn home, being dissatisfied with the state of affairs in thatether Argos, founded this city in the gulf of Ambracia, andgave it the same name with the place of his nativity. Itsoon became the largest city of Amphilochia, and the inha­bitants were most powerful of any thereabouts. Yet manygenerations after, being sunk by misfortunes, they pre­vailed upon the Ambraciots bordering upon Amphilochiato unite with them. This community of residence broughtthem to their present use of one common language, theGreek: But the rest of the Amphilochians are still Barba­rians. Yet in process of time, the Ambraciots drive theArgives from amongst them, and keep possession of the cityfor themselves. Upon this event the Amphilochians threw







OCR Output








THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" with our superiority in arms and numbers, so that we may" easily march into their territory and lay it waste: Yet," other territories, and of large extent, are subject to their" power, and by sea they will import all necessary supplies." If, further, we tempt their dependents to a revolt, we" shall want a naval strength to support them in it, as the" majority of them are seated upon islands. What therefore" will be the event of this our war ? For, if we are unable" either to overpower them at sea, or divert those revenues" by which their navy is supported, we shall only by acting" prejudice ourselves. And in such a situation to be forced" to give it up will be a blemish on our honour; especially" if we shall be thought to have been the authors of the" breach. For let us not be puffed up with idle hope that" this war must soon be over, if we can lay their territory" waste : I have reason on better grounds to apprehend, that" we shall leave it behind us a legacy to our children. It is" by no means consistent with the spirit of Athenians either" to be slaves to their soil, or, like unpractised soldiers, to" shudder at a war. Nor again, on the other hand, am I so" void of sensibility as to advise you to give up your confe-" derates to their outrage, or wilfully to connive at their en-" croachments ; but only not yet to have recourse to arms," to send ambassadors to prefer our complaints, without be-" traying too great an eagerness for war, or any tokens of" pusillanimity. By pausing thus, we may get our own af-," fairs in readiness, by augmenting our strength through" an accession of allies, either Grecian or Barbarian, where-" soever we can procure supplies of ships or money. And" the least room there cannot be for censure, when a people" in the state we are at present, exposed to all the guiles of the" Athenians, endeavour to save themselves not merely by Gre-" cian but even by Barbarian aid. And at the same time let" us omit no resource within the reach of our own ability.
" If indeed, upon our sending an embassy, they willu hearken to reason, that will be the happiest for us all. If







OCR Output








DISCOURSE I. XXXV


" In Thrace, says he, lay also the possessions of Thucy-" dides and his wealthy mines of gold, as he himself pro-" fesseth in his fourth book. And although those riches" might come to him by a wife (as is also by some affirmed)" which he married in Scapte-Hyle, a city of Thrace; yet" even by that marriage it appeareth, that his affairs had" a relation to that country, and that his nobility was not" there unknown." I cannot believe, that Thucydides evermarried a lady that was not purely Attic. He seems tohave been high-spirited in this respect, and proud of hiscountry. Miltiades indeed had married a Thracian princess;and nothing, but the vast estate brought into the family bythis match, could have made his descendants easy with sucha blemish in their pedigree : For a blemish undoubtedly itmust have been thought at Athens. Let us see how Thucy­dides himself drops his sentiment of such another match.The passage I have in view occurs in the sixth book. Heis speaking of Hippias the son of Pisistratus, tyrant ofAthens. " To iEantidas the son of Hippoclus tyrant of" Lampsacus—to a Lampsacene, though he himself was an" Athenian—he married his daughter Archedice." I can­not think, that he, who let such a sarcasm fall from hisown serious pen, could ever condescend to marry a Barba­rian, let her fortune be never so great. The reader, if itbe worth his while to think at all about it, may determinefor himself.—This digression was caused by the expressmention Thucydides hath made of his mines, the very mo­ment he is going to enter the lists against the most gallantand active commander at this time in the armies of theLacedaemonian league.
It was Brasidas, the Spartan, who was now at the headof the Peloponnesian troops in Thrace. He had made aforced march thither through Thessaly and Macedonia. Byhis fine deportment and his persuasive address, joined touncommon vigilance and activity, he had hitherto carriedall before him. He at length endeavoured to get possession







OCR Output








242 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" are the sources of all our evils; and these invisible princi-" pies within us are too strong for all the terrors that are" seen without. To these add fortune, who contributes her" ample share to divest the mind of its balance. She shews" herself by unexpected starts, and encourageth even the in-" competent to venture dangers, and hath a greater influence" over communities, as the ends proposed by them are of" the greatest concern, such as liberty or dominion, where" every individual, amidst the universal ardour, unaccount-" ably plumes himself up, and acts with a spirit above him-" self. But in truth, it is quite impossible: it is a proof of" egregious folly to imagine, when human nature is impelled" by its own impetuous passions towards such objects, that" the force of laws or any intervening terror is strong enough" to divert them from the mark. Hence therefore ariseth" the strongest dissuasive to us from confiding in the penal-" ty of death as the only pledge of our future safety, which"must betray us into weak prejudicial measures, which" must drive all revolters into utter despair, by shewing" them plainly, that we shall never accept repentance,44 shall not give them one moment's indulgence to palliate" their offences.
" Consider with yourselves, in the merciful light, that a" revolted city, when for certainty assured that it cannot" hold out, may submit upon our own conditions, whilst yet" in a capacity to reimburse our expences, and to advanceM the future tribute. But in the opposite case, can you ima­gine there is any city which will not better prepare itself" for revolt than M itylene hath done ; and hold out a siege" to the last extremity ? Is there no difference between a" quick and a slow submission ? Shall not we be hurt, if" forced through their despair to continue a tedious and ex-" pensive siege ; and, when the place is taken, to be masters" only of one heap of desolation, unable for the future" to squeeze the least pittance of revenue from it ? It is re-" venue alone which renders us a terror to our foes. We


«i







OCR Output








B. II. TEAR I. BEFOR'E CHRIST 431. 143


which stands in the finest suburb of the city ; . for it hathbeen the constant custom here to bury all who fell in war,except those at Marathon, whose extraordinary valour theyjudged proper to honour with a sepulchre on the field ofbattle. As soon as they are interred, some one selected forthe office by the publice voice, and ever a person in greatesteem for his understanding, and of high dignity amongst
them, pronounces over them the decent panegyric and
this done, they depart. Through all the war, as the occasionsrecurred, this method was constantly observed. But overthese, the first victims of it, Pericles son of Xantippus was ap­pointed to speak. So, when the proper time was come, walk­ing from the sepulchre, and mounting a lofty pulpit erectedfor the purpose, from whence he might be heard more dis­tinctly by the company, he thus began
" MANY of those, who have spoken before me on these" occasions, have commended the author of that law which" we are now obeying, for having instituted an oration to the" honour of those who sacrifice their lives in fighting for their" country. For my part, I think it sufficient, for men who" have approved their virtue in action, by action to be ho-" noured for it—by such as you see the public gratitude nowM performing about this funeral; and—that the virtues ofM many ought not to be endangered by the management of" any one person, when their credit must precariously de-" pend on his oration, which may be good and may be bad." Difficult indeed it is, judiciously to handle a subject, where" even probable truth will hardly gain assent. The hearer," enlightened by a long acquaintance, and warm in his af-" fection, may quickly pronounce every thing unfavourably" expressed, in respect to what he wishes and what he knows,"—whilst the stranger pronounceth all exaggerated, through" envy of those deeds which he is conscious are above his" own achievement. For the praises bestowed upon others44 are then only to be endured, when men imagine they can" do those feats they hear to have been done : They envy







OCR Output








B. II. 117 YEAR I. BEFORE CHRIST 431.


with the Athenians. They were induced to this attempt, andhad the gates opened to them by Nauclides, and associates,citizens of Plataea, who had formed a design, for the sake ofaggrandizing themselves, to destroy all their fellow-citizens,averse to their schemes, and to gain the city for the Thebans.But the affair was managed by Eurymachus, the son of Leon-tiadas, a person of the greatest authority among the Thebans.For the Thebans, foreseeing a war unavoidable, had, evennow while peace was actually subsisting and the war not yetdeclared, a strong desire to get possession of Plataea, whichhad been at eternal enmity with them. No regular watch wasas yet kept in it, which was a means of facilitating their en­trance. When they had gained admission, they drew them­selves up in order of battle on the public forum, contrary tothe scheme proposed by the conspirators, of marching imme­diately to the houses of their enemies, and putting them tothe sword. Their own design was, publicly to offer somefair proposals, and gain the city by an amicable composition.With this view, their herald proclaimed aloud, that—" All" who were willing to enter into league, according to the an-" cieivt custom of all Boeotians*, should come and join their" arms with them." By this method they thought the citywould easily be brought to an accommodation.
The Plataeans, when they found that the Thebans werealready got in and had surpriszed the town, being in greatconsternation, and thinking the enemy more numerous thanthey really were, for the night prevented a view of them,came soon to a composition ; and accepting what terms
• Bocotia was one large republic formed by the union of several littlestates. The sovereignty (as Tlmcydides informs us, book the fifth) waslodged in four councils, composed of deputies sent from every city in theunion. These were the states-general, and sat at Thebes, the principal cityof Bocotia. The executive and military powers were lodged in eleven per-sons, chosen annually, and stilcd Rulers of Bocotia, in whose election eachcity had a share. They rolled, and at the battle of Delium, Pagondas wasin the chief command, in right of Thebes. PlaUea had no share in thisunion, but was closely allied with and under the protection of Athens.Vol. I. 2 F







OCR Output








DISCOURSE III. lxv


" their wrongs." He then put the question—Whether thepeace was broke ?—divided the council; told the votes ; anddeclared, in the English style, that the Ayes had it.
The confederates were now called in, and acquaintedwith the resolution. Yet it seems the advice of Archida-mus had carried some weight, and actual war was to be de­ferred, till all the parties in the Lacedaemonian league hadripened their measures, and were ready to act with unanimityand vigor.
Here the author again makes his appearance, and assuresus the true motive of the determination for a war at Sparta,was a JEALOUSY of the Athenian power now very great,and a dread of its more extensive growth ; the latter of whichthey were determined to prevent, and to reduce the formerwithin less distasteful and terrific bounds.
Then follows a most pertinent digression, in which Thu-cydides points out the steps, by which the Athenians had sohighly exalted their State. In a close and succinct mannerhe runs over the history of Athens for fifty years, from theinvasion of Xerxes to the breaking out of the Peloponne-sian war. He arranges all the incidents in due place andtime. Herodotus hath related the splendid passages of theGrecian history during that invasion ; hath exhibited The-mistocles in all the lustre of his command at the battle ofSalamis, where the Athenians, who had abandoned their all,fought, and through the address of Themistocles obliged allparties to fight, for liberty against Xerxes. On this daythey earned a greater title than that of citizens of Athens;they were afterwards acknowledged the sovereigns of thesea. The Lacedaemonians became mortified at it; but theAthenians had gloriously deserved it. Themistocles was thevery life and soul of Greece on this occasion. In the midstof difficulties he formed a most extensive plan for his be-*loved Athens, which he began to execute at once. Thu-cydides describes his address and foresight. He soon setsthe city bevond the reach of envy and jealousy. And
Vol. 1. ' I







OCR Output








B. tV. TEAR VIII. BEFORE CHRIST 424.


" that is Attic, whilst those of Chalcidic, because of that" Ionian affinity, are sure of their protection. The Athenians" invade us not from private enmity, because we are peopled" here from these divided races, but to gratify their lust after" those blessings in which Sicily abounds, and which at pre-" sent we jointly possess. Nay, this they have already" clearly declared, by their ready compliance with the invi-" tation of those of the Chalcidic race. For though they" have never claimed assistance from hence by virtue of" their natural attachments here, yet they have shewn a" greater readiness in support of those than any compact be-" tween them required. Yet though the Athenians be in" this manner rapacious, in this manner politic, by me at" least they ought to be forgiven; since I blame not men" who are greedy of empire, but such as are too eager to" bend their necks to their yoke : Because it is the constant" never-failing turn of the human temper, to control who" will submit, but to make head against more powerful in-" croachments. As for us, who know these things, and yet" will not timely provide against them, though each in this" assembly be separately convinced, that it demands our" greatest attention to unite in dissipating a storm which" threatens us all, we err strangely in our conduct; especially," when its diversion might be so readily effected, would we" only bring our private quarrels to an amicable determina-" tion: For it is not from quarters of their own, that the" Athenians rush thus to annoy us ; but from ground which" belongs to those who invited them. Thus of course, with-" out any intervening trouble, one war will not be terminated"by another, but dissension will at once subside in peace." And these new-comers, who, under specious colours, are" here for our ruin, must return again with a disappointment," which they may as speciously palliate. So desirable a bene-" fit will at once infallibly accrue from proper determinations" in regard to the Athenians.
" That peace is the greatest of human blessings, is a truth







OCR Output








INTRODUCTION. 41


The Corinthians, in their passage homewards, by strata­gem seized Anactorium, which lieth in the mouth of the gulfof Ambracia. It belonged in common to the Corcyreansand themselves. They put it entirely into the hands of theCorinthian inhabitants, and then retired to their own home.Eight hundred of their Corcyrean prisoners, who were slaves,they sold at public sale. Two hundred and fifty they reserv­ed in safe custody, and treated them with extraordinary goodusage, that after their ransom they might serve them in theirdesign of gaining Corcyra: For the majority of them werepersons of the greatest authority in that state. Thus, there­fore, is Corcyra preserved in the war of the Corinthians; andthe ships of the Athenians after such service left them. But 'this was the first ground of war to the Corinthians against jthe Athenians, because they had assisted the Corcyreans in a #naval engagement against themselves, who were in treatywith them.
IMMEDIATELY after this transaction, other misunder­standings also happened between the Athenians and Pelo-ponnesians, tending to a war. For, all the schemes of theCorinthians aiming at revenge, the Athenians jealous oftheir enmity sent an order to the inhabitants of Potidaea si­tuated upon the isthmus of Pallene, (and though a Corin­thian colony, yet allied with and tributary to them) " to de-" molish that part of the wall which faceth the Pallene, to" give them hostages, to send away the epidemiurgi, and" not to receive those magistrates for the future, who were" annually sent them from Corinth." They were apprehen­sive of a revolt at the instigation of Perdiccas and the Co­rinthians, and their seducing into the same defection theother dependents of Athens in Thrace. These steps theAthenians thought proper to take with the people of Poti­daea, immediately after the sea-fight of Corcyra. For theCorinthians were manifestly at variance witli them, and Per­diccas the son of Alexander king of the Macedonians wasnow become their enemy, who before had been their ally







OCR Output








250 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" selves your friends. But at length we became your
" enemies ! For that blame only yourselves : Because
•4 when we stood in great want of support against the vio-" lence and oppression of the Thebans, to you we applied," and by you were rejected. You commanded us then to" address ourselves to Athens. Athens you said was near," but Sparta lay too remote to serve us. Yet, notwithstand-" ing this, in the present war we have committed no one" dishonourable act in regard to you, nor should ever have" committed. You injoined us indeed to revolt from the" Athenians, and we refused to comply ; but in this we have" done no injustice. For they marched chearfully to our44 succour against the Thebans, when you shrunk back ; and44 to betray them afterwards had been base in us; in us," who were highly indebted to them, who at our own re-44 quest were received into their friendship, and honoured44 by them with the freedom of Athens. No, it was rather" our duty boldly to advance wherever they pleased to or-44 der. And whenever either you or the Athenians lead out44 your allies into the field, not such as merely follow you44 are to be censured for any wrong you may respectively" commit, but those who lead them out to its commission.
" Manifold and notorious are the instances in which the44 Thebans have injured us. But outrageous above all is the" last, about which you need no information, since by it we"are plunged into this depth of distress. A right un-" doubtedly we had to turn our avenging arms upon men," who in the midst of peace, and what is more, upon the sa-" cred monthly solemnity, feloniously seized upon our city." We obeyed herein that great universal law, which justi-44 fieth self-defence against a hostile invader ; and there-44 fore cannot, with any appearance of equity, be now doom-44 ed to punishment at their instigation. For, if your own" immediate interest, and their present concurrence with you" in war, is to prescribe and regulate your sentence, you" will shew yourselves by no means fair judges of equity,»4 but partially attached to private interest. What ? though







OCR Output








R. I. 73 INTRODUCTION.


The sums paid on these occasions to the Athenians were em­ployed by them to increase their own naval force; and thetributaries thus drained, whenever they presumed to revolt,had parted with the needful expedients of war, and werewithout resource.
After these things it happened, that the Athenians andtheir confederates fought against the Medes both by landand sea, at the river Eurymedon in Pamphylia. Cimon theson of Miltiades commanded; and the Athenians were victo­rious the very same day in both elements. They took anddestroyed the ships of the Phoenicians, in the whole abouttwo hundred.
Later in time than this happened a revolt of the Thasians,arising from disputes about places of trade on the oppositecoasts of Thrace, and the mines which they possessed there.The Athenians with a sufficient force sailed against Thasus;and, after gaining a victory by sea, landed upon the island.-—About the same time, they had sent a colony, consisting ofabout ten thousand of their own and confederate people,towards the Strymon, who were to settle in a place calledthe Nine-ways, but now Amphipolis. They became mas­ters of the Nine-ways by dispossessing the Edonians. Butadvancing farther into the midland parts of Thrace, theywere all cut off at Drabescus of Edonia by the united forceof the Thracians, who were all enemies to this new set­tlement now forming at the Nine-ways.—But the Tha­sians, defeated in a battle and besieged, implored the suc­cour of the Lacedaemonians, and exhorted them to make adiversion in their favour by breaking into Attica. This theypromised unknown to the Athenians, and were intent onthe performance, but were prevented by the shock of anearthquake. The Helots*, farther, had seized this opportu-
• Helots was the name given in general to the slaves of the I.acedamo-niani. The first of the kind were the inhabitants of Helos in Messenia,who were conquered and enslaved by the Lacedaemonians; and all theirslaves in succeeding times had the same denomination. The tillage of theground, the exercise of trades, all manual labour, and every kind of drudge­ry was thrown upon them. They were always treated by their Spartan







OCR Output








THE HISTORY
OF THE
PELOPONNESIAN WAR,BY THUCYDIDES.


VOL. I.







OCR Output








B. III. 237 YEAR V.—BEFORE CHRIST 427.


" recollecting with yourselves what kind of usage you would" have received from them, had they succeeded in their plots," they! the uninjured, unprovoked aggressors. It is an al-" lowed truth, that men who, without the least provocation," have recourse to acts of malice, will be sated with nothing" less than complete destruction, as they must ever be terri-" fied at the sight of a surviving foe. For he who suffers from" a quarter whence he never deserved it, will not so easily" lay down his resentments, as when mutual enmity hath kin-" died the contention. Be not therefore traitors to your own" selves. Figure to yourselves, as strongly as you can, the" miseries they designed you; remember how you wished" for nothing in this world so much as to have them in your" power, and now retaliate upon them. Relent not at the" scene of horror imagination may present to your fancy, but" fix your remembrance fast on that weight of misery, which" was just now suspended over your own heads. Punish these" wretches according to their deserts ; make them a notable" example to the rest of your dependents, that death must be" the portion of whoever dares revolt. For when once they" are certain of this, your arms will no more be recalled from" your foreign enemies, to be employed in the chastisement of" your own dependents."
In this manner Cleon* supported the decree, and when he
• From the short sketch of Cleon's character given before by Tliucydi-des, and the speech lie hath now made, it is likely he can be no favouritewith the reader. Cicero hath styled him, " a turbulent but eloquent Atlie-man." By means of his eloquence, and an impudence that never could bedashed, he was now a prime favourite with the people, but the scorn andterror of all good men at Athens. He had ever been a snarler at Pericles,but so long as he lived could obtain no share in the public administration.He had now got the ascendant by cajoling the people, and by his loud anddaily invectives against their ministers and commanders. He will make avery splendid and very despicable figure in the sequel. Aristophanes, whohad a particular grudge against him, hath exhibited him in the most dis­tasteful light. His comedy of the Hnrtemen or Knights is entirely employedto shew him off. He calls him throughout the Paphlagotdan, to brand hislow and brutal disposition, who, "quitting his original trade of selling lea-
Vol. I. 2 X







OCR Output








248 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


The Peloponnesians supplied the Plataeans with necessarysustenance for the space of a few days, till the five delegatesarrived from Lacedaemon to preside at their trial. And yet,when these were actually come, no judicial process was form­ed against them. They only called them out, and put thisshort question to them—" Whether they had done any ser-" vice to the Lacedaemonians and their allies in the present" war ?"—Their answer was, that they begged permission tourge their plea at large ; which being granted, they pitchedupon Astymachus the son of Asopalaus and Laco the son ofAeimnestus, who had formerly enjoyed the public hospitalityof the Lacedaemonians, to be their speakers, who stood forth,and pleaded thus
" PLACING in you, O Lacedaemonians, an entire con-" fidence, we have delivered up our city ; but never imagined" we should be forced to such a process as this, when we ex-" pected only to be tried by justice and laws—when we yield-" ed to plead, not before other judges, as is now our fate ;" but only before yourselves. Then indeed we thought, that"justice might be obtained.—But now, we have terrible" grounds for apprehending, that we have at once been doubly" over-reached. Strong motives occur to alarm our suspi-" cions, that the point most in view is to deprive us of our" lives, and that you will not prove impartial judges. We" cannot but be too certain of this, when no manner of crime" is formally objected, against which we might form our de-" fence ; when barely at our own intreaty we are heard, and" your concise demand is such, that if we answer it with" truth we condemn ourselves ; if with falsehood, must be" instantly refuted.
" Thus on all sides beset with perplexities, something of" necessity must be said in our own behalf; nay, where the" danger is so urgent, the only small glimpse of security ap-•4 pears in hazarding a plea. For persons like us distressed,u in silence to abandon their own defence—this may with" sad compunction torture them at last, as if their safety" might have been earned by speaking for themselves—







OCR Output








360 THE PELOPOKTNESIAN WAR.-


proceeded to Phacium, and from thence into Peraebia.Being so far advanced, his Thessalian guides received theirdismission ; and the Peraebians, who are tributaries to theThessalians, escorted him to Dium in the kingdom of Per-diccas : it is a fortress of Macedonia situated under mountOlympus on the Thessalian side. In this manner Brasidas,advancing so expeditiously as to prevent all obstruction,compleatcd his passage through Thessaly, and arrived in thedominion.i of Perdiccas and the region of Chalcis. Forthose in Thrace, who revolted from the Athenians, had joinedwith Perdiccas in procuring this auxiliary force out of Pelo­ponnesus, because the great success of the Athenians hadstruck a terror amongst them. The Chalcideans were per­suaded, that they should be first attacked by the Athenians :and in truth their neighbour-states, who yet persevered intheir obedience, were secretly instigating them to it. Per­diccas, indeed, had not yet declared himself their enemy ;but he dreaded the vengeance of the Athenians for formergrudges ; and now he had a scheme at heart for the subjec­tion of Arribaeus king of the Lyncestians.
Other points concurred to facilitate the procurement ofsuch a succour from Peloponnesus, suph as the misfortunesby which the Lacedaemonians at present were afflicted. For,the Athenians pressing hard on Peloponnesus, and not leastof all on Laconia, they hoped in case they could equallyannoy them in this quarter, by thus marching an armyagainst their dependents, to effect a diversion. And thevwere more encouraged by the offers of maintenance for theirtroops, and solicitations to support revolts. They were atthe same time glad of a pretext to rid themselves of theirHelots, lest, in the present state of affairs, now that Pylus wasin hostile hands, they might be tempted to rebel. This far­ther gave rise to the following event:—Dreading the youthand number of these slaves (for many precautions have everbeen put in practice by the Lacedaemonians to curb andawe their Helots) they made public proclamation, that " so







OCR Output








VI DEDICATION.


The Maritime power of Great Britain is more sub­stantially founded, and hath ever been more steadilysupported dian was that of Athens. The most com­plete and most lasting Form of Government, that mancan invent, happily subsists in this Realm under YourRoyal Grandfather. The British Constitutionhath long been, and may it long continue to be theenvy of other Nations! For the future support of it,the public hopes and expectations are fixed upon YourRoyal Highness. Long may His MAJESTYYour Royal Grandfather live to secure the free­dom and happiness of his People, that Your RoyalHighness may become equal, in every respect, to thesame great and glorious Charge !
I have a heart duly sensible of the great honour con­ferred upon me, by being thus permitted to profess my­self,
Your Royal Highness's
most devoted and
most humble Servant,
WILLIAM SMITH.
London, 1753.







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAR VII. BEFORE CHRIST 42*. 335


mitted sad ravage. Accordingly they assaulted that post,and carried it by storm. The defendants, who had fled awayin a body towards another eminence, were soon forced tocapitulate, " giving up their auxiliaries, and then giving up" their own arms, to be proceeded with afterward at the" pleasure of the people of Athens." The commanders re­moved them all for safe custody into the isle of Ptychia, tillthey could conveniently be conveyed to Athens, with thisproviso, that" if any one person should be caught in an attempt" to get off, the whole number should forfeit the benefit of" the capitulation."
But the leaders of the populace at Corcyra, apprehend­ing that the Athenians, should they be sent to Athens, mightpossibly save their lives, contrive the following machination.—They tamper successfully with some of those who were con­fined in the isle, by the means of some trusty agents whomthey sent privately amongst them, and instructed that " with" great professions of regard for them, they should insinuate" no other resource was left for them but to make their escape" with all possible expedition, and that themselves would un-" dertake to provide them with a bark, for it was the certain" resolution of the Athenian commanders to give them up to" the fury of the Corcyrean populace."—When they hadgiven ear to these suggestions, and were on board the barkthus treacherously provided for them, and so were appre­hended in the very act of departure, the articles of capitula­tion came at once to an end, and they were all given up tothe Corcyreans. Not that the Athenian commanders did nothighly contribute to the success of this treachery ; since, inorder to make it go down more easily, and to lessen the fearsof the agents in the plot, they had publicly declared that" the" conveyance of those persons to Athens by any other hands" would highly chagrin them, because then, whilst they were" attending their duty in Sicily, others would run away with" all the honour." The Corcyreans had them no sooner intheir power, than they shut them up in a spacious edifice.—







OCR Output








130 THE FELOPONNESIAN WAR.


Their private properties he left to them entire, but madethem rest contented with Athens alone for their city;which, when all its subjects were now jointly contributingto its support, was quickly enlarged, and delivered so byTheseus to the succeeding kings. In memory of this, fromthe days of Theseus quite down to the present time, theAthenians have held an anniversary solemnity to the Goddess,which they call Synctcia or Cohabitation. Before this, thatwhich is now the Citadel, and that part which lies onthe south-side of the citadel, was all the city. The templesbuilt either within the citadel or without sufficiently shewit. For in the south-part of the city, particularly, stand thetemples of the Olympian Jove, of the Pythian Apollo, ofTerra, and of Bacchus in Linn*, in honour of whom theold Bacchanalian feasts are celebrated on the twelfth day ofthe month Anthesterion*: which custom is still retainedto this day by the Ionians of Attic descent. All the otherancient temples are seated in the same quarter. Near it
• The English reader may perhaps call this a hard word, but I hopewill not be frightened. The names of other Attic months will occur in thesequel, which I shall leave as I find ihem, because no exact correspondencehath been found out between the Attic months which were lunar and thosenow in use. Monsieur Tourreil, the celebrated French translator of De­mosthenes, hath made it a very serious point. " I have long doubted (says" he) whether in my translation I should give the months their old Greek" names, or such as they have in our language. The reason that made me" balance is the impossibility of computing the months so that they shall
" answer exactly to our French. My first determination was to date in
" our own manner; I chose to be less exact, rather than frighten the•' greatest part of my readers by words to which they are not accustomed." For what French ears would not be appalled at the words, Thergolion," Boedroinion, Etapheholion," &c. ! He then gives reasons for retainingGreek ones, and adds, " I declare then once for all, that I am far from pe-" dantically affecting the terms of an old calendar conceived in a language" barbarous to numbers of people, who, shocked at the sound, would per-" haps impute to me a taste which thank God I have not. I protest that" to my ear, no less than to theirs, the French name of the word would be" more pleasing and would sound better. But neither false delicacy nor" vicious complaisance hath been able to prevail with me to expose myself" to reproaches, for knowingly leading others into mistake, and using" words appropriated to Roman and solar months, which hare no corres"







OCR Output








B. II. 145 YEAR I. BEFORE CHRIST 431.


" in a private capacity, we all enjoy the same general equali-" ty our laws are fitted to preserve; and superior honours" just as we excel. The public administration is not confined" to a particular family, but is attainable only by merit.—" Poverty is not a hindrance, since whoever is able to serve" his country meets with no obstacle to preferment from hisfirst obscurity. The offices of the state we go through with-" out obstructions from one another ; and live together in the" mutual endearments of private life without suspicions ; not" angry with a neighbour for following the bent of his own" humour, nor putting on that countenance of discontent," which pains though it cannot punish—so that in private life" we converse without diffidence or damage, whilst we dare" not on any account offend against the Public, through the" reverence we bear to the magistrates and tlje laws, chiefly" to those enacted for redress of the injured, and to those un-" written, a breach of which is allowed disgrace. Our laws" have further provided for the mind most frequent intermis-" sions of care by the appointment of public recreations and" sacrifices throughout the year*, elegantly performed with a" peculiar pomp, the daily delight of which is a charm that" puts melancholy to flight. The grandeur of this our Athens" causeth the produce of the whole earth to be imported" here, by which we reap a familiar enjoyment, not more of" the delicacies of our own growth, than of those of other na-" tions.
" In the affairs of war we excel those of our enemies," who adhere to methods opposite to our own. For we lay" open Athens to general resort, nor ever drive any stranger" from us whom either improvement or curiosity hath" brought amongst us, lest any enemy should hurt us by
• Beside the vast number of festivals, which were celebrated at Athenswith pompous processions, costly sacrifices and sometimes public games,the presidents in course offered up sacrifices every morning constancy furthe public welfare.







OCR Output








104 THE PELOP0NNESIAN WAR.


Salamjs; and, that out of regard to him, he had preventedthe breaking down of the bridges, which was mere fiction ;)" and now, able to perform great services for you, I am" near at hand, having been persecuted by the Grecians" for my friendship to you. I beg only a year's respite," that I may notify to you in person those points which are" the subject of my journey hither."
The king, it is said, was surprized at the spirit* of theman, and ordered him to act as he desired. The time ofrespite he had thus obtained he spent in making all possibleprogress in the Persian language, and in learning the man­ners of the country. When the year was elapsed, appearingat court, he became a favourite with the iing; a greater thanany Greek had ever been before, as well on account of theformer lustre of his life, as the hope he suggested to him ofenslaving Greece ; but above all, by the specimens he gaveof his fine understanding.—For, in Themistocles the strength
• The boldness and intrepidity of Themistocles hath been the subject ofadmiration, in throwing himself on the protection of the Persian monarch,who had fixed a price on bis head. And yet be was so high in his esteem,that the night after first giving him audience, he cried aloud thrice in hiasleep, "1 have got Themistocles the Athenian." He afterwards acknow­ledged himself 200 talents (near 40,0001. sterling) in his debt; " For somuch I promised the man that brought you to me." Themistocles soongave him a specimen of his fine understanding. He was desired by theking to speak his mind freely in relation to the affairs of Greece : He an­swered by his interpreter, that " discourse, like a Persian carpet, had in ita variety of figures, which never appeared to advantage unless it was quiteunfolded, but were not to be apprehended, when wrapped up in the piece."By this ingenious plea he obtained a year's respite to learn the Persianlanguage, that he might be enabled to deliver explicitly his own sentimentsto the king in his own words and method. He became afterwards so greata favourite, that the most engaging promise in future times, that the Per­sian monarch could make to a Greek whom he had a mind to inveigle intohis service, was " that he should live with him as Themistocles did with" Artaxerxes." And yet no attachment to his royal friend ever made him anenemy to his country; nor did his disinterested patriotism, of which neverman had more, ever render him ungrateful to his benefactor. Through hisbounty, he lived the remainder of his life in pomp and affluence, and wasused to say humorously to his children, " We had been undone, mychildren, if we had not been undone."







OCR Output








B. I. . INTRODUCTION. 77


raise their siege from iEgina. The Athenians however re­called not their army from iEgina, but marched away all theold and young that were left in Athens to the aid of Megara,under the command of Myronides: And having fought adrawn battle against the Corinthians, both sides retired, andboth sides looked upon themselves as not worsted in theaction. The Athenians however, upon the departure of theCorinthians, as being at least so far victorious, erected a tro­phy. The Corinthians at their return heard nothing but re­proaches from the seniors in Corinth: so, after bestowing aninterval of about twelve days to recruit, they came backagain; and, to lay their claim also to the victory, set abouterecting a trophy of opposition. Upon this, the Athenianssallying with a shout out of Megara, put those who were busyin erecting this trophy to the sword, and routed all who endea­voured to oppose them. The vanquished Corinthians wereforced to fly; and no small part of their number, being closelypursued and driven from any certain route, were chased intothe ground of a private person, which happened to be encom­passed with a ditch so deep as to be quite impassable, andthere was no getting out. The Athenians, perceiving this,drew up all their heavy-armed to front them, and then form­ing their light-armed in a circle round them, stoned everyman of them to death. This was a calamitous event to theCorinthians: But the bulk of their force got home safe againfrom this unhappy expedition.
About this time also the Athenians began to build thelong-walls reaching down to the sea, both towards the Pha-lerus and towards the Piraus.
The Phocians were now embroiled with the Dorians,from whom the Lacedaemonians are descended. Havingmade some attempts on Boeon, and Cytinium, and Erineus,and taken one of those places, the Lacedaemonians marchedout to succour the Dorians with fifteen hundred heavy-armedof their natives, and ten thousand of their allies commandedby Nicomedes the son of Cleombrotus in the right of Pleis»
Vol. I. 2 A







OCR Output








232 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" carried into act, and we remain for ever ignorant—that" the community which uniformly abides by a worse set of" laws, hath the advantage over another, which is finely mo-" delled in every respect, except in practice ;—that modest" ignorance is a much surer support than genius which" scorns to be controled ;—and that the duller part of man-" kind in general administer public affairs much better than" your men of vivacity and wit. The last assume a pride in" appearing wiser than the laws ; in every debate about the" public good they aim merely at victory, as if there were" no other points sufficiently important, wherein to display" their superior talents ; and by this their conduct they ge-" nerally subvert the public welfare : The former, who are" diffident of their own abilities, who regard themselves as" less wise than the laws of their country—though unable to" detect the specious orator, yet being better judges of equity" than champions in debate, for the most part enforce the" rational conduct. This beyond denial is our duty at pre-" sent; we should scorn competitions in eloquence and wit," nor wilfully and contrary to our own opinion mislead the"judgment of this full assembly.
" For my part, I persist in my former declarations, and" I am surprized at the men who proposed to have the affair" of Mitylene again debated, who endeavour to protract the" execution of justice, in the interest of the guilty more than" of the injured. For by this means the sufferer proceeds" to take vengeance on the criminal with the edge of his" resentment blunted ; when revenge, the opposite of wrong," the more nearly it treads upon the heels of injury, gene-" rally inflicts the most condign punishment. But I am" more surprized at him, whoever he be, that shall dare to" contradict, and pretend to demonstrate that the injuries" done by the Mytelcneans are really for our service, and" that our calamities are hardships on our dependents. He" certainly must either presume upon his own eloquence, if" he contends to prove that what was plainly decreed was ne­







OCR Output








B. III. YEAR VI. BEFORE CHRIST 426. 291


select party, was posted there over-against the Messeniansand Demosthenes.
No sooner was the battle joined, and the Peloponnesianson that wing were moving forward their superior numbersto surround the right of their adversaries, than the Acarna-nians, starting up from their ambuscade, falling upon themin the rear, assault and put them to flight. They gave waybefore the very first shock, and struck such a consternationinto the bulk of the army, that they also began to run: Forthey no sooner saw the party with Eurylochus, and whichwas the flower of their strength, intirely broke, than they felta panic for themselves. And the Messenians, who foughtat the same post with Demosthenes, behaved so very wellthat they finished the rout. The Ambraciots in the meantime, and those in the right, had got the better of their oppo­nents, and were pursuing them towards Argos ; for, beyonda doubt, they are the most warlike people of any in thoseparts. But when they were returned from the pursuit, theyperceived the bulk of their army was defeated; and the restof the Acarnanians beginning to charge them, with much dif­ficulty they threw themselves into Olpae. The number of theslain was great, as they had made their attacks without anyorder, and with the utmost confusion: We must except theMantineans, who kept most firmly together, and retreated inthe best order of the whole enemy. The battle was endedonly with the night.
The next morning, as Eurylochus was killed and Maca-rius also, the command devolved upon Menedaeus. The de­feat was irrevocably great, and he was highly perplexed—whether he should abide a siege, in which he must not onlybe shut up by land, but by the Athenian ships be blockedup also by sea—or, whether he should ei.deavour to securehis retreat. At length—he treats with Demosthenes andthe Acarnanians for a suspension of arms both for his owndeparture and the fetching off the dtad. The dead theyat once delivered, and set up atrophy themselves, and took







OCR Output








16 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


/


But, from the testimonies alleged in support of what Ihave hitherto advanced, any one may depend on my accountof things, without danger of false opinions. Let him with­hold his credit from the songs of poets, whose profession itis to give all possible enlargements to their subjects : Let himdo so farther, by the writers of prose*, who study more thatartful composition which captivateth the ear than the plainand simple recital of truth, where proper attestations arenever to be found, and many things through length of timehave incredibly sallied out into mere fable: and then he willbe convinced upon the plainest proofs, that the state of an­cient Greece was very nearly the same as I have describedit. And this present war, when considered in all its opera­tions, notwithstanding the propensity of mankind to imaginethat war in which they are personally engaged, to be thegreatest that ever happened, and so soon as it is over to re­place their admiration upon others more ancient, will easilybe owned to have been the most important of all.
As to the speeches of particular persons either at the com­mencement or in the prosecution of the war, whether suchas I heard myself or such as were repeated to me by others,I will not pretend to recite them in all their exactness. Ithath been my method to consider principally what might bepertinently said upon every occasion to the points in debate,and to keep as near as possible to what would pass for genu­ine by universal consent. And as for the actions performedin the course of this war, I have not presumed to describethem from casual narratives or my own conjectures, buteither from certainty, where I myself was a spectator, orfrom the most exact informations I have been able to collectfrom others. This indeed was a work of no little difficulty,because even such as were present at those actions disagreedin their accounts about them, according as affection to eitherside or memory prevailed.
My relation, because quite clear of fable, may prove less
• Thucydides is here supposed to glance at Herodotus ; and again a littleaf;cr he justly thinks, thatyferion and fable ought to have no place in history.







OCR Output








A Survey of the History.


nor address in promoting that cause of liberty, which was thegrand pretext for engaging in this destructive war. Theyseem at last more intent on pocketing the royal subsidies,than doing their duty as leaders and champions of Greece.They have not yet learned to make a figure at sea. The lastview we have of them is at the battle of Cynos-sema, wherethey receive a signal defeat from those very men, whose ruinthey judged was well nigh compleated. When Athens istotally to be vanquished, as her doom is fast approaching, shemust aid her own conquerors and tyrants, in demolishing herown trophies, and trampling under foot her liberties andrights. Her own factions will help to accomplish, what with­out them no foreign enemy could have done. Whateveris human must decay. The best-constituted State in theworld may be undermined by its own members, when theycould not be conquered, and at length be rendered an easyprey to foreign powers. May GREAT-BRITAIN provean exception to this affecting but just observation !







OCR Output








58 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" pressions of the Mede they bore with patience, but our" government they look upon as severe : It may be so: For" to subjects the present is always grievous. If you therefore" by our overthrow should gain the ascendant over them, you" would soon perceive that good disposition towards you," which a dread of us hath occasioned, to be vanishing away;" especially should you exert your superiority according to" the specimens you gave during your short command against" the Mede. For the institutions established here amongst" yourselves have no affinity with those of other places: andft more than this, not one Spartan amongst you, when delega-" ted to a foreign charge, either knoweth how to apply his*4 own, or make use of those of the rest of Greece.
" Form your resolutions therefore with great deliberation," as on points of no small importance. Hearken not so far" to the opinions and calumnies of foreign states as to embroil" your own domestic tranquillity. Reflect in time on the" great uncertainty of war, before you engage in it. Pro-" tracted into long continuance, it is generally used to end in" calamities, from which we are now at an equal distance ;" and to the lot of which of us they will fall, lieth yet to be" determined by the hazardous event. Men who run eager-" ly to arms are first of all intent on doing some exploits," which ought in point of time to be second to something" more important; and, when smarting with distress, they" have recourse to reason. But since we are by no means" guilty of such rashness ourselves, nor as yet perceive it in" you, we exhort you, whilst healing measures are in the elec-" tion of us both, not to break the treaty, not to violate your" oaths, but to submit the points in contest to fair arbitration," according to the articles subsisting between us. If not, we" here invoke the Gods, who take cognizance of oaths, to bearM us witness, that we shall endeavour to revenge ourselves" upon the authors of a war, by whatever methods yourselvesa shall set us an example."
These things were said by the Athenian embassy. And







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAR VII. BEFORE CHRIST 425. 327


guard posted there' drew up in order to defend it in what­ever quarter it might possibly be assaulted. The Athenians,speedily coming up, were hindered by the natural site of theplace from forming a circle and besetting it on all sides.—Advancing therefore directly forwards, they endeavoured tobeat the defendants off. Thus, for a long time, for thegreatest part of the day, both sides persisted in the contest,under the painful pressures of battle and thirst and a burn­ing sun. No efforts were spared by the assailants to drivethem from the eminence ; nor by the defendants to maintaintheir post. But here the Lacedaemonians defended them­selves with more ease than in the preceding engagement,because now they could not be encompassed on theirflanks.
When the dispute could not thus be brought to a decision,the commander of the Messenians, addressing himself toCleon and Demosthenes, assured them, " they took a deal of" pains to no manner of purpose ; but would they be per-" suaded to put under his guidance a party of the archers and" light-armed, to get a round-about way on the enemies rear" by a track which he himself could find, he was confident he" could force an entrance." Having received the party hedemanded, marching off from a spot undescried by the La­cedaemonians in order to conceal the motion, and continuingto mount higher and higher along the ridge of rock that layupon the verge of the island, in the quarter where the Lace­daemonians depending upon its natural strength had placedno guard, with great difficulty and fatigue he got behind themundiscovered. Now shewing himself on a sudden upon thesummit and in their rear, he astonished the enemy with thisunexpected appearance ; and his friends, who now beheldwhat they so earnestly looked for, he very much emboldened.The Lacedaemonians were now exposed to the missiveweapons on both sides ; and (if a point of less consequencemay be compared to one of greater) were in a state parallel







OCR Output








356 THE PEI.OPONNESIAN WAR.


Soon afterwards, the confederates being dismissed totheir respective cities, Brasidas also himself returned to Co­rinth to continue his preparations for that Thracian expedi­tion, in which before this avocation he had been intentlyemployed.
The Athenians also being now marched homewards, theMegar>ans in the city, who had acted most zealously in fa­vour of the Athenians, finding all their practices detected,stole off as fast as possible. The others, after concerting theproper steps with the friends of the exiles, fetch them homefrom Pegae, having first administered to them the mostsolemn oaths " to think no more on former injuries, and to" promote the true welfare of the city to the utmost of their* power."
But these, when re-invested with authority, and taking areview of the troops of the city, having previously disposedsome bands of soldiers in a proper manner, picked out abouta hundred persons of their enemies, and who they thoughthad busied themselves most in favour of the Athenians. Andhaving compelled the people to pass a public vote upon them,they were condemned to die and suffered an instant execu­tion. They farther new-modelled the government of Me-gara into almost an oligarchy. And this change, thoughintroduced by an inconsiderable body of men ; nay, what ismore, in the train of sedition, yet continued for a long spaceof time in full force at Megara.
The same summer, the Mityleneans being intent on exercuting their design of fortifying Antandrus, Demodocus andAristides, who commanded the Athenian squadron for levy­ing contributions, and were now at Hellespont ("for Lama-chus the third in the commission had been detached withten ships towards Pontus), when informed of what was thusin agitation, became apprehensive that Antandrus mightprove of as bad consequence to them as Ana>a in Samos hadalready done; wherein, the Samian exiles having fortifiedthemselves, were not only serviceable to the Peloponnesians







OCR Output








INTRODUCTION. 45


Athenians, in concert with his colleagues, detaches the Ma­cedonian horse, and a few of their allies to Olynthus to pre­vent any sally from thence ; and then, breaking up theircamp, they marched directly for Potidaea. But, when theywere advanced as far as the isthmus, and saw their enemiesdrawn up in order to fight, they also formed; and in a littletime they came to an action. The wing under Aristeus,Corinthians, and the very flower of their strength, who en­gaged with him, soon compelled their enemies to tuna theirbacks, and pursued execution to a great distance: but therest of the army, composed of Potidaeans and Peloponne-sians, were defeated by the Athenians, and chased to thevery walls of Potidaea. Aristeus, returning from his pursuit,perceived the rout of the rest of the army, and knew notwhither with the least hazard to retreat, whether to Olynthusor Potidaea. But at last, he determined to embody toge­ther those he had about him, and, as Potidaea lay at thesmallest distance, to throw himself into it with all possiblespeed. This with difficulty he effected, by plunging into thewater near the abutments of the pier amidst a shower ofmissive weapons, with the loss indeed of some of his men,but the safety of the larger number.
Those who should have come to succour the Potidaeansfrom Olynthus, which is at no greater distance than sixtystadia-*, and situated in view, at the beginning of the battle,when the colours were elevatedf, advanced indeed a littleway as designing to do it, and the Macedonian horse drewup against them as designing to stop them. But, as the vic­tory was quickly gained by the Athenians, and the colours
• About six miles.
t The elevation of the colours or ensigns was the signal of joining battle,and they were kept up during the whole continuance of it: The depressionof them was a signal to desist, or the consequence of a defeat. The depres­sion of the colours in this mstance, was a proof to the Macedonian cavalry,that all was over. The Athenians in their colours bore an owl, as sacredto Minerva the tutelary goddess of Athens. See Puffer's Jrcfuro!»gia Or**\7, \ol. ij. e. 9.
Vol. I. U


 







OCR Output








168 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


worst of all, that instead of peace they had the sad alternativeof war. However, neither poor nor rich abated their displea­sure to Pericles, till they had laid upon him a pecuniary fine*.And yet, no long time after—so unsteady are the humours ofthe people—they elected him general again, and intrusted himwith the administration of affairs. The keen sense they hadat first of their^own private losses soon grew blunt and unaffect-ing, and they could not but allow him the most capable per­son to provide for all the urgent necessities of the public. Forthe supreme authority he enjoyed in times of peace he hadexercised with great moderation ; he was vigilant and activefor the good of the community, which never made so great afigure as under his administration ; and after war broke outit is plain he best knew the reach of its ability to carry it on.He lived two years and six months from its commencement:and after his deathf, his judicious foresight in regard to this
• Plutarch (in the life of Pericles) says, authors are not agreed about thequantity of the fine al this time laid upon Pericles Some lower it to fif­teen talents, others mount it up to fifty. The demagogue, who incited thepeople to fine him, is also said by some to have been Clean, with whose ge­nius and character the reader will soon become acquainted.
t As the historian is here going to take his leave of Pericles, he adjoinsa true representation of his patriot spirit, his great abilities, his judiciousforesight, and successful administration. And here the reader may be in­formed of some points, which Thucydides either thought needless when he
wrote, or foreign to his subject. Pericles had two sons by his former
wife. The eldest of them proved a great vexation to his father, who wasunable to support him in his expensive way of living. Pericles had nolarge estate, and he was not rjcher for fingering the public money. HeUid it all out in adorning his Athens, and was rewarded for it by giving somany magnificent and lasting proofs of his fine taste in painting, sculpture,and building. For the city of Rome received not so much decoration fromher foundation till the time of the Caesars, as Athens did from Periclesalone- Yet economy was his passion at home, as that of his son Xantippuswas luxury. This son however was taken off by the plague, as was after­wards a sister of Pericles, most of his intimates and relations, and his otherson Paralus. This last was the heaviest blow ; he fell it deeply : And allAthens did all that lny in their power to comfort him, since, contrary to aUw of Pericles' own making, the} enrolled his son Pericles, whom he hadby Aspasia, an Athenian of the full blood. At length he was seized him­self by the plague ; and, after languishing a long lime, in a manner differ­







OCR Output








B. IV. 329 YEAR VII. BEFORE CHRIST 425.


made by their law, in case their generals drop. Styphonintimated his desire of leave to send over to the Lacedaemo­nians on the continent for advice. This the Athenians re­fused, but however called over some heralds to him from thecontinent. Messages passed backwards and forwards twiceor thrice; but the last who crossed over to them from theLacedaemonians on the continent brought this determination—" The Lacedaemonians permit you to take care of your ownconcerns, provided you submit to nothing base." In conse­quence of this, after a short consultation with one anotherapart, they delivered up their arms and their persons. Theremainder of the day and the succeeding night the Atheni­ans confined them under a strong guard. But the day follow­ing, having erected a trophy upon the island, they got them­selves in readiness to sail away, and distributed the prisonersto the custody of the captains of the triremes. The Lacedae­monians, having obtained permission by a herald, fetched ofTtheir dead.
The number of those who were slain, and those who weretaken alive, stood thus: They who had thrown themselvesinto the island amounted in the whole to four hundred andtwenty heavy-armed. Of these three hundred wanting eightwere carried off alive, the rest had been destroyed. Amongthe prisoners were about one hundred and twenty Spartans.The number of Athenians slain was inconsiderable : for itwas not a standing fight. The whole space that these menwere besieged in the island, from the engagement at seatill the battle in the island, was seventy-two days. Twentyof these, during the absence of the ambassadors to nego-ciate an accommodation, they were supplied with food: Theremainder of the time, they were fed by such as got overby stealth. Nay, meal and other eatables were found inthe island, even when all was over. Their commander, Epi-tadas, had made a more sparing distribution than his storesrequired.
Now the Athenians and Peloponnesians respectively drewoff their forces from Pylus to return home : And the promise







OCR Output








346 THE tELOPONNESlAN WAR.


Some of the Cythereans had before-hand obtained a confer­ence with Nicias. This rendered the capitulation more easyand expeditious, and not only the present, but all futurepoints were by this means speedily and satisfactorily ad­justed. For the Athenians insisted that they should eva-cuate Cythera, because they were Lacedaemonians, and be-»cause the island lay so conveniently on the Laconic coast.The accommodation being once perfected, the Athenians,having secured Scandea, the fortress situated upon the har­bour, and fixed a garrison in Cythera, stood away for Asineand Helas, and most of the adjacent places on the coast.There they made descents, and reposing themselves in thenights at the most convenient of those places, they spentabout seven days in ravaging the country.
The Lacedaemonians, though they saw the Athenianshad possessed themselves of Cythera, and expected furtherthat they would proceed to make more such descents upontheir territories, yet no where drew together in a body to re­pulse them. They only stationed their parties of guard insuch posts as were of greatest importance. In other re­spects they exerted their utmost vigilance, being under ap­prehensions that the very form of their government was indanger of subversion. Their loss in Sphacteria was unex^pected and great indeed. Pylus was now in the hands ofthe enemy, as was also Cythera. War was bursting in uponthem on all sides with irresistible impetuosity. This com­pelled them, contrary to their usual maxims, to form abody of four hundred horse and archers. If they were everdejected by the prevalence of fear, at this juncture theywere more feelingly so, when they saw the necessity of en­tering the lists contrary to all that practice of war to whichthey had been inured, in a naval contest, and in this againstthe Athenians, whose passion it was to compute as so muchloss whatever they left unattempted. Their general misfor­tune besides, which so suddenly and so fast had poured inupon them, had thrown them into the utmost consternation.







OCR Output








discourse in. lxxxvii


Athenians under Nicias, the consequence of which is thebattle of Solygia. We are then recalled to view the lastacts of the tragical sedition at Corcyra, quite of a piecewith, or rather in cruelty and horror transcending the pre­ceding.
In the eighth year of the war, the Athenians proceedwith success. The conquest of the isle of Cythera byNicias is another sad blow to the Lacedaemonians. Theyare quite dispirited ; and dare no longer face in the fieldthese active and lively, and now more so because successful,enemies.
Our author repasseth to Sicily. The Athenians had beenhovering with a squadron on that coast, on pretence of aid­ing the Egesteans, but in fact to excite a war and embroilthe States of that island. Syracuse, the leading State, per­ceived all their schemes, and endeavoured to prevent them.They first obtain a suspension of arms amongst all the par­ties at war; and prevail on the Sicilians to hold a generalcongress at Gela, for the amicable adjustment of all theirquarrels, and a perfect re-union against foreign enemies.Hermocrates, the plenipotentiary from Syracuse, opens thetrue interest of Sicily on this occasion. The warrior mustnow give place to the politician, who shews himself a masterin the business.
" He is here (he tells them) as representative of the" greatest of the Sicilian States. As such, he cannot speak" from pusillanimity or a sense of fear, though he declares" himself averse to war. It is difficult to enlighten ignor-" ance, and difficult to check ambition. But there is a pru-" dence, which all ought to learn ; a prudence, which points" out the proper season for every pursuit. It was separate" interest, that first kindled the flames of war in Sicily; but" separate interests should always be hushed, when the ge-" neral welfare is at stake. The Athenians have been busy" amongst them, to inflame their mutual resentments, to" note their indiscretions, and turn them to their own ad­







OCR Output








28 THE PEL0PONNESIAN WAR.


" to us, in what manner you may be persuaded is the most" expedient: but the course you ought principally to take" iAA to form with us a defensive alliance, and to act inline-" diately.
" The advantage of such a measure, as we premised at" first, we are clearly proving. But that which carrieth the" greatest weight is this, that our enemies are enemies also" to you (a point too clear to require proof), and enemies" by no means despicable, but able to make revolters feel" their vengeance. The bad consequences of rejecting a" land cannot be equal to those of rejecting a naval alliance," especially to you, who should exert your utmost efforts to" let none be masters of a fleet beside yourselves ; or, if that" be not feasible, to make the most powerful in that respect" your fast allies. And whosoever, allowing the plain ad-" vantage of these our arguments, may yet dread a rupture
" if their influence prevail, let such a one know, that
" the event he feareth, accompanied by strength, will strike" greater dread into all your enemies, but that the zeal of" him who would have us now rejected, since it is founded" on a weak presumption of their strength, must the sooner" encourage those enemies to attack you. The present con-" sultation is not confined to Corcyra, but very nearly con-
" cerneth Athens also: Let him therefore be assured,
" that he doth not provide the best for the welfare of Athens,a when, directly foreseeing a war fast approaching and only" not on foot, he hesitateth the least about gaining a people" provided with all the necessary means of being a most ser-
" viceable friend or a most prejudicial foe ; a people op-
" portunely situated in the course to Italy and Sicily, so ca-" pable to hinder the accession of any naval force from" thence to the Peloponnesians, and to secure a passage from" hence to any of those coasts, not to mention the commodi-" ousness of Tt in many other respects.
" To reduce the whole to one short point, wherein all and" every individual of you is concerned, learn from hence that







OCR Output








B. I. INTRODUCTION. 61


" not; after two or three years delay, then, better provided," we may, if it be thought expedient, take the field against" them. But in good time perhaps, when they see our pre-" parations and the intent of them clearly explained by our" own declarations, they may make each requisite concession," before their territory is destroyed by ravage, and whilst" yet they may save their property from utter devastation." Regard their territory, I beseech you, in no other light than" as a hostage for their good behaviour, and the more firm-" ly such the better may be its culture. Of this we ought to" be sparing as long as possible, that we drive them not into" desperate fury, and render more impracticable their defeat." For if, thus unprovided as we are, and worked up to anger" by the instigations of our confederates, we at once begin" this ravage, reflect whether we shall not taint its reputa-" tion, and the more embroil Peloponnesus: Since accusa-" tions as well of states as private persons it is possible to" clear away: But in a war, begun by general concurrence" for the sake of a single party, which it is impossible to see" how far it will extend, we cannot at pleasure desist, and" preserve our honour.
" Let no one think it a mark of pusillanimity, that many" as we are we do not rush immediately upon one single State." That State has as large a number of dependents who con-" tribute to its support: And a war is not so much of arms" as of money, by which arms are rendered of service ; and"the more so, when a landed power is contending against a" naval. Be it therefore our earliest endeavour to provide• amply for this, nor let us prematurely be too much fer-" mented by the harangues of our allies. Let us, to whose" account the event, whatever it be, will be principally charged
" Let us, with sedate deliberation, endeavour in some
" degree to foresee it; and be not in the least ashamed of" that slow and dilatory temper, for which the Corinthians"so highly reproach you. For through too great precipi-" tancy you will come more slowly to an because you
Vol. I. Y


 







OCR Output








400 THE PKI.OPONNF.SIAN WAR.


Stionc with the armament they had provided, consisting offifty ships, ten of which were Chian, of a thousand heavy-armed of their own citizens, six hundred archers, a thousandmercenary Thracians, and a body of targeteers furnished bytheir adjacent dependents : Nicias the son of Niceratus andNicostratus the son of Diotrephes had the command of thewhole. They weighed from Potidaea, and landing at thetemple of Neptune marched directly for Mende. The Men-dans, with their own force and three hundred Scioneanswho were come to their succour, and the Peloponnesianauxiliaries, in all seven hundred heavy-armed under the com­mand of Polydamidas, were encamped without the city upona strong eminence. Nicias taking with him a hundred andtwenty light-armed Methoneans and sixty picked men of theheavy-armed Athenians, and all the archers, attempted tomount by a path that led up the eminence ; but, being galledby the enemy, was not able to force the ascent. Nicostratus,with all the rest of the force, having fetched a compass about,in order to mourn: in a remote quarter, where the ascent wasimpracticable, was quite thrown into disorder; and thus thewhole Athenian army narrowly escaped a total defeat. Astherefore the Mend^ans and allies maintained their post thewhole clay, the Athenians drew off and encamped. And,when night came on, the Mendeans withdrew into the city.
The next day, the Athenians sailing round to the Scione-side possessed themselves of the suburbs, and spent thewhole day in ravaging the country, as not a soul sallied outto obstruct them: For some bustles now were on foot in thecity inclining to a sedition. The three hundred Scioneansdeparted also in the succeeding night to their own home :And the day following Nicias, advancing with a moiety ofthe force within their frontier, ravaged the district of theScioneans ; whilst Nicostratus, with the remainder, sat downbefore the upper gates of Mende, from whence the roadleadcth to Potidaea. But Polvdamidas. as the MeatU-ans







OCR Output








Si I. INTRODUCTION. 5


in armour, like Barbarians. A proof of this is the continu­ance still in some parts of Greece of those manners, whichwere once with uniformity general to all. The Athenianswere the first who discontinued the custom of wearing theirswords, and who passed from the dissolute life into more po­lite and elegant manners. And it is not a long time sincethose amongst the rich, who were advanced in years andstudied their ease, left off wearing their linen garments andfastening the hair of their head behind with grasshoppers*of gold; though the aged amongst the Ionians have con­stantly persevered in the use of these ornaments as marksof their affinity. That modest uniformity of dress, which isstill in vogue, was first introduced by the Lacedaemonians ;amongst whom in other points also there was the greatestequality of dress and diet observed, both in the highest andthe meanest ranks. They also were the first who performedtheir exercises naked, stripping themselves in public andanointing with oil before they entered the lists ; though, be­fore, the custom had prevailed at the Olympic games for thechampions to wear scarfs about their loins ; and it is only afew years since these were quite disused]. But even yet,amongst some Barbarians, more especially those of Asia,where the matches of boxing and wrestling are in repute,the combatants engage with scarfs round their loins. Manyother arguments might with ease be alleged to prove thatancient Greece had forms and modes of living quite similarto those of the present Barbarian world.
As for cities, so many as are of a later foundation, andbetter placed for The increase of wealth, since the improve­ment of naval skill; all these have been built on the seashore, and walled about, and are situated upon necks of landjutting out into the sea, for the sake of traffic and greater


• To intimate their being the original possessors and pure natives of thesoil, as much as the very grasshoppers, which they supposed to be a naturaland spontaneous production of the earth. They regarded themselves ascoteinporary with the insects.
t See Mr. West's Dissertation on the Olympic Games, p. 50.Vol. I. P







OCR Output








t. III. 293 YEAR VI. BEFORE CHRIST 426.


endeavouring to escape without permission, and therefore setout in the pursuit of the Peloponnesians. Their officers en­deavoured to stop them, crying out, that "leave was given" for their escape."—Upon which a soldier, concluding theirofficers had been guilty of treachery, darted his javelinamongst them. But afterwards they connived at the escapeof the Mantineans and Peloponnesians, but made slaughterof the Ambraciots. Great indeed was the tumult, and theperplexity also to distinguish which was an Ambraciot, andwhich was a Peloponnesian ; and amidst the confusion abouttwo hundred were slain. The rest made their escape intothe bordering kingdom of Agraeis, where Salythius king ofthe Agraeans, who was their friend, took them under his pro­tection.
The Ambraciots of the city were now advanced as far asIdomene. They are two lofty eminences which are calledby this name. The higher of the two, by favour of the dark,the detachment sent before by Demosthenes from the camphad seized without being discovered, and had posted them­selves upon it. The Ambraciots had possessed themselvesalready of the lower, and halted there for the night. De­mosthenes after his evening repast, and the remainder ofthe army about shut of evening, began to march. He him­self took half of them to attack the enemy in front, whilst theother was fetching a compass round the mountains of Am-philochia.
The next morning was no sooner in its dawn, than he comesupon the Ambraciots yet in their beds, still ignorant of all thathad passed, and rather supposing these new-comers to be theirfriends. For Demosthenes had poKtkly placed the Messeni-ans in the van, and ordered them to discourse as they movedalong in the Doric dialect, thus to prevent any alarm from theiradvanced guards, who further so long as the dark continuedcould not possibly distinguish their faces. By this means,he no sooner assaulted the camp than the rout began.Numbers of them were slain upon the spot. The remainder
Vol. I. 3 E







OCR Output








B. II. YEAR III. BEFORE CHRIST 429. 177


" we will restore every thing again. In the mean time, we" will make the best use of every thing intrusted to us, and" pay you an annual equivalent for your subsistence." Uponhearing this, they again returned into the city, and the wholebody of the people assisting at a general consultation, theyreturned for answer—" That they desired only to communi-" cate the proposals to the Athenians, and then with their" approbation would accept them. In the mean time they" begged a suspension of arms, and to have their lands spared" from depredation." He granted them a truce for the timerequisite to receive an answer, and forbore ravaging thecountry'.
The ambassadors of Plntaea, having been at Athens, andconsulted with the Athenians, return again with this answer
to their city. " The Athenians say, that in no preceding
" lime, ever since we entered into confederacy with them," did they ever suffer us in any respect to be injured ; that" neither will they neglect us now, but send us a powerful" aid. And you they solemnly adjure by the oaths which" your fathers have sworn, to admit no change or innovation" in the league subsisting between you and them."—Whenthe ambassadors had thus delivered the answer of the Athe­nians, after some consultation the Plateeans resolved, " never" to desert them, to bear any devastation of their lands, nay" if such must be the case, to behold it with patience, and to" suffer any extremities to which their enemies might reduce" them ; that, further, no person should stir out of the city," but an answer be given from the walls—" That it was im-" possible for them to accept the terms proposed by the Lace-" daemonians."
This was no sooner heard than Archidamus the kingmade this solemn appeal to all their tutelary Heroes andGods.—"Ye Gods and Heroes, said he, who protect this" region of Plataea, bear witness to us, that it was not till" after a violation of oaths already sworn, that we have" marched into this country, where our fathers through the







OCR Output








B. », 3o INTRODUCTION.


the son of Cimon, Diotimus the son of Strombichus, and Pro-teas the son of Epicles. Their orders were " by no means to" engage the Corinthians, unless they stood against and en-" deavoured to make a descent at Corcyra, or any of its de-" pendent places; if they did so, to resist them with all their" efforts." These orders were given with a view of not in­fringing the treaty: And this their aid of shipping arrivethat Corcyra.
The Corinthians, when they had compleated their pre- /parations, set sail for Corcyra with a fleet of one hundredand fifty ships. Of these, ten belonged to the Eleans, twelveto the Megareans, ten to the Leucadians, twenty-seven tothe Ambraciots, one to the Anactorians, and the other ninetywere their own. The quotas from the allied cities had eachof them their respective commanders ; but the Corinthiansquadron was commanded by Xenoclides, the son of Euthy-cles, with four colleagues. So soon as they were all assem­bled at that part of the continent which looks towards Cor­cyra, they set sail from Leucas, and arrive at the Chime-rium in Thesprotis. A harbour openeth itself here, andabove it is the city of Ephyre, at a distance from the sea,in Eleatis, a district of Thesprotis: Near it is the outlet intothe sea of the lake of Acherusia, into which the river Ache­ron, having run through Thesprotis, is at last received; fromwhich it also deriveth its name. The river Thyamis alsorunneth here, dividing Thesprotis from Cestrine, and be­tween these two rivers ariseth the cape of Chimerium. TheCorinthians therefore arrive at this part of the continent,and fix their station there. But the Corcyreans, so soon asever advised of their sailing, having manned a hundred andten^siups under the command of Miciades, iEsimides, andEurybatus, took their station at one of those isles which arecalled the sijbota, accompanied by the ten Athenian ships.Their land force was left at the promontory of Leucimna, withan aid of a thousand heavy-armed Zacynthians. .The Co­rinthians had also ready upon the continent a numerous aid







OCR Output








xc A Survey of the History.


mer had been laughed into a general, and is now grownso conceited that he wants to enter the lists against thattruly heroic Spartan. He accordingly arrives in Thrace, atthe head of a squadron and a fine body of land-forces. Heretakes a town or two: is confident he shall soon recoverthe important city of Amphipolis; and, though contemnedby his own soldiers, he endeavours to brave the enemy.Brasidas, having harangued his men with his usual spirit,throws open the gates, sallies out of Amphipolis, and routshim in an instant. Cleon falls a victim to his own cowar­dice, and Brasidas also drops a victim to his own valour.The latter lives long enough to know his own side had con­quered, and then expires, admired by all that knew him, andmost highly regretted by the allies of his country.
Their riddance from Cleon diminished the loss of Athensin this defeat, and the Lacedaemonians had dearly purchasedthe victory with the loss of their hero. As the principalStates were now pretty nearly balanced, and sadly tired ofthe war, a truce is concluded for a year, and a peace soonafter settled by the management chiefly of Nicias. Thucy-dides hath given us the forms of negotiating and drawing uptreaties. They are curious morsels of antiquity, and thereader will see with admiration, how solemn, how concise,and yet how guarded they are. The peace turns out to bemerely nominal. The Corinthians, who cannot relish it atall, set their invention to work in order to embroil Greeceafresh, and to re-kindle a general war. Several wars breakout, in which the Athenians and Lacedaemonians are con­cerned as auxiliaries. And another State in Greece, whichhitherto had been neutral and saving its strength entire,endeavours now to seize the primacy of Greece for itself.We shall be made privy to all her negotiations for carryingon the plan, and see it all blasted by one battle at Manti-nea. This State was the republic of Argos in Peloponne­sus, which had been in long alliance with but in no depend­ence at all upon Athens, and had been for a long time also







OCR Output








B. I. INTRODUCTION. 51


" mies, push forward as far as they can go ; and if defeated," are dispirited the least of all men. More than this, they" are as lavish of their lives in the public service as if those" lives were not their own, whilst their resolution is ever in" their power, ever ready to be exerted in the cause of their" country. Whenever in their schemes they meet with dis-" appointments, they reckon they have lost a share of their" property : When those schemes are successful, the acqui-" sition secmeth small in comparison with what they have4'' farther in design : If they are baffled in executing a pro-" ject, invigorated by reviving hope, they catch at fresh ex-" pedients to repair the damage. They are the only people," who instantaneously project and hope and acquire: so ex-" peditious are they in executing whatever they determine." Thus, through toils and dangers they labour forwards so*4 long as life continueth, never at leisure to enjoy what they" already have, through a constant eagerness to acquire" more. They have no other notion of a festival than of a" day whereon some needful point should be accomplished ;" and inactive rest is more a torment to them than laborious" employment. In short, if any one abridging their charac-" ters should say, they are formed by nature never to be at" quiet themselves nor to suffer others to be so, he describeth" Mew justly.
" When such a state hath taken the lists of opposition" against you, do ye dally, O Lacedaemonians ? do you ima-" gine that those people will not continue longest in the en-" joyment of peace, who timely prepare to vindicate them-" selves, and manifest a settled resolution to do themselves" right whenever they are wronged ? You indeed are so far" observers of equity as never to molest others, and stand on" your guard merely to repel damage from yourselves;—" points, you would not without difficulty secure, though this" neighbouring state wese governed by the same principles" as you are: But now, as we have already shewn you, your•1 customs compared with them are quite obsolete ; whereas







OCR Output








DISCOURSE II. xllX


tory, which is pithy, nervous, and succinct, yet plain, strik­ing, and manly. He never flourisheth, never plays uponwords, never sinks into puerilities, never swells into bom­bast. It is a relation from the mouth of a very great man,whose chief characteristic is gravity. Others talk more in­genuously ; others utter themselves with a more cheerfulair; yet, every one must attend to Thucydides, must hearkenwith serious and fixed attention, lest they lose a word, aweighty and important word, by which the whole storywould be spoiled. It is in his Orations that he is most re­markably obscure. He might not be so in so high a degreeto the apprehensions of mankind, when his history was first-"made public. The world was then used to hear continualharangues: No business of a public nature could be carriedon without them. In his time, the speakers aimed intirelyat strength and brevity. If they were not exceeding quick,the apprehensions of the Athenians would outstrip, or atleast affect to outstrip, their utterance. They must thinkmuch, and yet leave much of what they had thought to theready conception of the audience. An orator in the follow­ing history* calls them " Spectators of speeches." Theyaffected to discern at the first glance, and without waitingfor formal deduction and solemn inference, to be mastersof the point as it were by intuition. The more copious anddiffusive eloquence was the improvement of the next gene­ration. But the most forcible orator, that even Athens everboasted, improved, if he did not quite learn, his peculiarmanner from Thucydides. It was Demosthenes, who co­pied him in the close energy of his sentences, and the abruptrapidity of his thoughts. Demosthenes is said to have tran­scribed him eight times over with his own hand: so diligentlydid he persevere to form an intimate acquaintance with him,and habituate himself to his quick manner of conception,and to his close and rapid delivery. Cicero says howeverf,that " no rhetorician of Greece ever drew any thing from• Cleon's speech in book the third. t IQ ll|e Orator.
Vol, I, G







OCR Output








». IJ. TEAR L—BEFORE CHRIST 431. 121


soners, till they should send their determination about them ;
for they were not yet informed of their having been
actually put to death. The first messenger had been sentaway immediately upon the irruption of the Thebans—thesecond so soon as they were defeated and made prisoners—as to what happened afterwards, they were utterly in thedark. Thus ignorant of what had since been done, the Athe­nians dispatched away their herald, who upon his arrivalfound them all destroyed. Yet after this, the Atheniansmarching a body of troops to Plataea, carried thither all ne­cessary provisions, left a garrison in the place, and broughtaway all the hands that would be useless in a siege, with thewomen and children.
After this business of Plataea, and so manifest a breachof peace, the Athenians made all necessary preparations forimmediate war. The Lacedaemonians also and their confe­derates took the same measures. Nay, both sides were in­tent on dispatching embassies* to the king\, and to severalother Barbarian powers, wherever they had hope of formingsome effectual interest for themselves, and spared no painsto win those states over to their alliance, which had hithertobeen independent. In the Lacedaemonian league, besidesthe ships already furnished out for them in Italy and Sicily,the confederates there were ordered to prepare a new quota,proportioned to the abilities of the several states, that the
• By this means the intestine quarrels of Greece were going to throw apower into the hands of the Persian monarch which he could not obtain byforce. Each party could cringe to tlie common enemy, in order to obtainsubsidies from him to enable them to distress each other. And thus thebalance of power rested at last in his hands, and he became for a time su­preme arbiter of Greece. Aristophanes, in his comedy of The Acarmam,hath described these embassies and the Persian monarch too with exces­sive buffoonery, but quite too low and ridiculous to quote. He bears hardupon the Athenian ambassadors for lengthening out the time of their em-ploy as much as possible for the lucre of the salary paid them by the state,which is there mentioned at two drachmas a day. Was it either avariceor public rapine—this exorbitant salary of 15Jd. a day to an imibassad-jrfrom the republic of Athens to the great kiog of Persia ?
\ Artaxerxcs of Longin;anits.







OCR Output








ft. IV. 323 YEAR VII. BEFORE CHRIST 425.


tuals sent in by stipulation he was used to compute them.He then judged it highly to concern the Athenians to exerttheir utmost efforts: and, as the island was now becomemore opportune for a descent, he got every thing in readi­ness for its execution, having sent for a supply of men fromthe adjacent confederates, and busied himself about all thedispositions needful for success. He had further receivedan express from Cleon notifying his approach, who now,at the head of the supply he himself had demanded, ar-riveth at Pylus. No sooner were they joined, than theydispatched a herald to the camp on the continent, demand­ing—" Whether they were willing to order their people in" the island to surrrender their arms and persons, without" risking extremities, on condition to be kept under an easy" confinement till the whole dispute could be properly ac­commodated ?"—This being positively refused, they re­mained quiet one day longer; but on the succeeding day,having embarked their whole strength of heavy-armed onboard a few vessels, they put out by night, and a little beforethe ensuing dawn landed on each side of the island, bothfrom the main sea and the harbour, amounting in the wholeto eight hundred men in heavy armour. They advancedwith their utmost speed towards the first guard on the island.This was done in pursuance of a previous disposition: Forthis first guard consisted of about thirty heavy armed: Themain body under Epitadas was posted about the centre,where the ground was most level and watery : And anotherparty guarded the extremity of the island facing Pylus,which towards the sea was a rocky cliff, and by land altoge­ther impregnable. On the top further of this cliff wasseated a fort, built some ages before of stones picked care­fully for the purpose. This they judged might be service­able to them, should they be forced to shelter themselvefrom superior violence. In this manner was the enemyposted.
The Athenians immediately, in their first carrer. put the







OCR Output








». IV. YEAR VIII. BEFORE CHRIST 424. 359


and his army. And as soon as he was met at Melitia ofAchaea by Panaerus, and Dorus, and Hippolochidas, and To­ry laus, and Strophacus, who had been formerly the publichost of the Chalcideans, he continued his march forwards.Others also of the Thessalians assisted in conducting him,and from Larissa Niconidas the friend of Perdiccas. Thepassage through Thessaly without proper guides is alwaysdifficult, and must be more so to an armed body. Besides,to attempt such a thing through a neighbouring dominionwithout permission first obtained, hath ever been regardedby all the Grecians with a jealous eye, and the bulk of theThessalians had been ever well-affected to the Athenians.Nor could Brasidas have possibly effected it, had not theThessalian been rather despotic than free governments. Forupon his route he was stopped at the river Enipeus by someof contrary sentiments to the rest of their countrymen, whoordered him to proceed at his peril, and taxed him with in­justice in having come so far without the general permis­sion. His conductors told them in return, that " without" such permission he should not proceed; but, as he had" come amongst them on a sudden, they thought themselves" obliged in friendship to conduct him." Brasidas also gavethem strong assurances, that " he was come thither for the" service of Thessaly and of them ; that his arms were not" intended against them, but against the common enemy," the Athenians; that he never suspected any enmity be-" tween Thessalians and Lacedaemonians, why they might" not tread upon one another's ground; that even now," should they withhold their consent, he was neither willing" nor indeed able to proceed ; but he conj ured them" however to give him no molestation." Having heardthese declarations, they acquiesced and withdrew. Brasi­das now, by the advice of his conductors, advanced with theutmost speed without ever halting, in order to anticipate freshand more potent obstruction. Nay, the very same day thathe left Melitia, he advanced as far as to Pharsalus, and en­camped upon the banks of the Apidanus. From thence he







OCR Output








1. II. 133 YEAR I.—BEFORE CHRIST 431.


too dilatory in gathering together the confederate-army, andtoo much attached to the Athenians, because he never de­clared warmly for the war. But after the army was drawntogether, his long stay at the Isthmus, and the slow marcheshe had made from thence, exposed him to calumny, whichwas still heightened by the length of the siege of Oenoe :For, in this interval of delay, the Athenians had without mo­lestation withdrawn all their effects from the country, thoughit was the general opinion, that, had the Peloponnesians ad­vanced with expedition, they might undoubtedly have seizedthem, were it not for these dilatory proceedings of Archi-damus. Under such a weight of resentment did Archida-mus still lie with his army before Oenoe. His remissnesswas said to be owing to his presumption, that the Athenians,if their territory was spared, would make some concessions,and that they dreaded nothing more than to see it destroyed.But after their assault on Oenoe, and the successive mis­carriage of all the methods employed to take it, the Athe­nians still resolutely refraining from the least shew of sub­mission, they broke up the siege and marched into Attica,in the height of summer, when the harvest was ripe, abouteighty days after the Thebans had miscarried in the surprizeof Plataea. They were still commanded by Archidamus sonof Zeuxidamus, king of the Lacedaemonians, and havingformed their camp began their devastations. They first ofall ravaged Eleusis and the plain of Thriasia. Near Rheitithey encountered and put to flight a party of Athenian horse.Then they advanced farther into the country through Ce-cropia, leaving mount iEgaleon on their right, till they cameto Acharnae, the greatest of all those which are called TheBoroughs of Athens. They sat down before it, and havingfortified their camp, continued a long time there, laying allthe adjacent country waste.
The design of Archidamus in stopping thus before Achar-nae, keeping there his army ready for battle, and not march­ing down there this first campaign into the plains, is said to
Vol. I. 3 H







OCR Output








INTRODHCTIOJJ. 55


" to any stranger who hath appeared amongst you. We our*" selves shewed further, on this occasion, the most daring cou-" rage; since, though none before marched up to our succour," and every state already enslaved had opened the road against" us, we bravely determined to abandon even Athens, to de-M stroy our own effects, nor, like the generality of those whou were yet undemolished, to desert the common cause, or, dis-" persing ourselves, to become useless to our allies, but—" to embark at once, to face the urgent danger, without the* least resentment against you for your preceding backward-" ness of aid. So that we avfer the service we then did you" to be no less than what we afterwards received. Forto our" aid indeed at last you came, from cities yet inhabited, from" cities you ever designed should still be inhabited, when once" you were alarmed for your own safety much more than for" ours. So long as we were safe, your presence was in vain" expected: But we, launching forth from a city no longer our" own, and hazarding our all for a place we almost despaired" of recovering, effected our own preservation, and with it, in" a great measure, yours. Had we, overcome wUhiear, gone" over early to the Mede, as others did, to save our lands ; had" we afterwards not dared, as men undone beyond recovery," to throw ourselves on board ; you never had been obliged" to fight at sea, as not having sufficient strength to do it; but
" decided. Themistocles, however, waa celebrated and honoured as the" man, who, in prudence, far surpassed all the Grecians then alive. Thus" denied the honour due to him for having undoubtedly excelled them all" in the affair of Salamis, he immediately repaired to Lacedaemon, desirous" to have justice done him there. The Lacedaemonians received him no-" bly, and honoured him abundantly. They gave indeed to Euribiades the" crown of olive as first in valour; but for wisdom and dexterity they be-" stowed a second crown of olive on Themistocles. They presented him" further with the first chariot in Sparta. And after so much applause, he" was conducted, in his return, to the frontier of Tegea, by three hundred" picked Spartans, who composed the royal guard. He was «4>e only per-" son ever known Ui have received such a compliment from the Spartan1!."Herodotus in Urania-


 







OCR Output








THE PELOPONNESIAl* WAR.


tophanes, whose plays were acted during the Peloponnesian war, hath ridi­culed the cotemporary statesmen and commanders with the utmost petu-lancy and virulence. The Athenians afterwards thought proper to restrainthis licentiousness of their comic poets i but it may not be amiss in theeourse of the notet to quote occasionally some passages from him, to shewmy countrymen how much writing libels differs from writing history ; andthat where liberty is abused, no public merit nor private worth can defendits owners from the malice of faction or the petulance of buffoons.
Our historian hath laid open the true and pretended causes of the Pelo­ponnesian war. Let us now see, how affairs were represented on thestage of Athens. His comedy of The Acharnian* was exhibited by Aris­tophanes at Athens in the sixth year of this war, after the death of Peri­cles. The decree against Megara is the ground-work of it: One Dian-polis of the borough of Acharnae is the droll of the play, and amply ridiculesit to a set of his neighbours—
" Do not be angry, says he, if though a beggar I presume to talk to Athe-" mans about affairs of state, and for once play the tragedian. It is the" province of tragedy lo give a just representation of things ; and I am" going to speak in a just manner of very sad things indeed. Cleon will" not be able to catch me this bout, for traducing my countrymen in the" hearing of strangers. We are here by ourselves, and to-day is the fes-" tival of Bacchus. The strangers are not yet come, nor the tributes, nor" the confederates from other states : We are here snug by ourselves, all"ofus true-blooded Athenians. Those odd creatures the sojourners I" look upon as the chaff of Athens. And now to speak sincerely, I hate" the Lacedaemonians from the bottom of my soul; and I heartily wish" that Neptune, the god adored at Taenarus, would give them an earth-" quake, and tumble down all their houses upon their heads. They have«' made sad work with me, all my vineyards are quite destroyed by the" rogues. But, my dear friends and countrymen here present, why do we"blame the Lacedaemonians for this ! And mind, Sirs, I cast no aspersions" on our own state; I aim at nobody employed in the affairs of the adrain-" istration, but at a parcel of sad rascals, scurvy, low, infamous scoundrels," who are eternally bringing informations against a Megarean pair of pa-" niers. If they once set eye but on a cucumber, a leveret, a sucking pig," a sprig of parsley, or a grain of salt, they swear at once they belonged to" Megareans, and were sold that very day. These things, however, though" the general practice, are of small signification. A parcel of jolly fellows,"deep in their cups, had stole away from Megara that jade Simaetha. The" Megareans, exasperated at the loss of their wench, made reprisals by" carrying off a brace of strumpets that belonged to Aspasia. And thus•'this cursed war, which plagues all Greece, took its rise from three"strumpets. Ay, on account of three whores Olympian Pericles began to" storm, he lightened, he thundered, roused all Greece to arms ; he made," new laws as fast as so many ballads, that the poor dogs of Megara must







OCR Output








DISCOURSE Til. Ixxvii


the preceding. The incidents crowd fast upon one another,and politics and oratory are in full employ. The revolt ofLesbos is the first occurrence of importance. The peopleof that isle had been long in the Athenian league : But thenumber of this league were dependents rather than confe­derates. Thucydides always employs the same Greek word(<rvn/uix»i) for the members of either league: The idea itgives is that of companions in war. But there is great dif­ference between such as accompany, because they chuseit; and such as accompany, because they are summonedand cannot help it. The former was in general the case ofthose who sided with Sparta; the latter, of those who sidedwith Athens. The least thought of compulsion is grating toany State, which thinks it ought, and is able, to be quiteindependent. This was the case with the Lesbians, a peopleconsiderable in many respects, but especially for their navalstrength. It was well worth the while of the Lacedaemo-nions to gain such confederates ; it must be a sad blow tothe Athenians to lose such dependents. The fact was; allthe cities of Lesbos, except Methymne, declare a revolt.The Athenians lose no time, but are at once with a powerfulsquadron before Mitylene, and block it up. The Mityle-neans had sent ambassadors to beg immediate aid from theLacedaemonians. They had an audience from them andthe rest of their league at Olympia, so soon as the gameswere ended. The speech they make on this occasion is veryartful, very insinuating, and nicely adapted to carry theirpoint.
" They open the nature of a revolt, and the cases in" which it merits protection and succour from others. They" have been ill used by the Athenians; have been made" their tools in inslaving their compatriots of Greece ; have" been long caressed indeed, but are well assured what their" own fate would soon have been. Every State hath a na-" tural right to take preventive measures against the loss of" their liberty, and to stand on their defence. They had







OCR Output








200 THE PELOPONNEBIAN VAlt.


to all his officers and the noble Odryssians. The customobserved by them and general to all the Thracians, " ofreceiving rather than bestowing," was contrary to that whichprevails in the Persian court, where it was a greater shameto be asked and to deny, than to ask and be denied. Yet,as their power was great, this practice continued long invogue amongst them; for nothing could be obtained byhim who brought no present: And this afforded a large in­crease of power to his kingdom. It had the greatest reve­nue, and was in other respects the most flourishing of allthe kingdoms in Europe between the gulf of Ionia and theEuxine sea. But in military strength and numerous armies,it was the second, though at a great distance from the Scy­thians. For there is no one nation in Europe, nor even inAsia, that in these points can in any degree be a match forthem; or when standing singly, nation against nation, isable to make head against the Scythians, united and in goodharmony with one another. Yet, at the same time, in everypoint of conduct, and management of all the necessary af­fairs of life, they fall vastly short of other people.
Sitalces therefore, who was king of so large a country,got his army together; and, when every thing was ready,marched against Macedonia. He first of all passed throughhis own dominions; then over Cercine a desert mountain,the boundary between the Sintians and Paeonians. He wentover it by a passage he had, by cutting down the wood,made formerly himself, in an expedition against the Paeo-nians. In their march from Odrysae over this mountain,they left the Paeonians on their right, but on their left theSintians, and Mcedians. On their descent from it, they ar­rived at Doberus, a city of Paeonia. He lost none of hisarmy in the march, but by sickness; notwithstanding whichit was very much increased : For many of the free Thra­cians came daily in without invitation, and followed for thesake of plunder ; so that the whole number is said at last tohave amounted to a hundred and fifty thousand. Of these.







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAR VIII. BEFORE CHRIST 424. 373


wing of the Boeotians, even to the centre, was routed by theAthenians, who pressed upon those who composed it, but es­pecially on the Thespiensians. For, the others who weredrawji up with them giving way before the shock, the Thes­piensians were inclosed in a small compass of ground, wheresuch of them as were slaughtered defended themselvesbravely till they were quite hewed down. Some also of theAthenians, disordered in thus encompassing them about,knew not how to distinguish, and slew one another. In thisquarter, therefore, the Boeotians were routed, and fled to­wards those parts where the battle was yet alive. Theirright wing, in which the Thebans were posted, had the betterof the Athenians. They had forced them at first to giveground a little, and pressed upon them to pursue theiradvantage. It happened that Pagondas had detached twotroops of horse (which motion was not perceived) to fetch acompass round the eminence and support the left wing whichwas routed. These suddenly appearing in sight, the victo­rious wing of Athenians, imagining a fresh army was comingup to the charge, was struck into consternation. And nowbeing distressed on both sides by this last turn, and by theThebans who pursued their advantage close and put theminto a total disorder, the whole Athenian army was routedand fled. Some ran towards Delium and the sea, others toOropus, and others towards mount Parnes ; all, to whateverplace they hoped was safe. But the Boeotians, especiallytheir horse, and the Locrians who had come up to the fieldof battle just as the rout began, pursued them with great exe­cution. But the night putting an end to the chace, the bulkof the flying army preserved themselves more easily.
The day following, such of them as had reached Deliumand Oropus, leaving behind a garrison in Delium, which stillremained in their possession, transported themselves by seato Athens. The Boeotians also, having erected a trophy,carried off their own dead, rifled those of the enemy, andhaving posted a guard upon the field of battle, retired to
Vol.. I. 3 P







OCR Output








358 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


things farther were to be atchieved on a day prefixed, thatthe Boeotians might be disabled from rushing to the rescue ofDelium with all their force, by the necessity of staying athome to defend their respective habitations. Should the at­tempt succeed, and Delium once be fortified, they easily pre­sumed that, though the change of the Boeotian governmentmight not suddenly be effected, yet, when those towns werein their hands, when their devastations were extended allover the country, and places of safe retreat lay near at handfor tneir parties, things could not longer remain in their for­mer posture ; but in process of time, when the Athenians ap­peared in support of the revolters, and the Boeotians could notunite in a body to oppose them, the designed revolution mustnecessarily take place. This was the nature of the scheme atpresent in agitation.
Hippocrates, having the whole force of Athens under hiscommand, was ready at the proper time to march into Bceo-tia. But he had dispatched Demosthenes beforehand toNaupactus with forty ships, that after he had collected a suf­ficient force in those parts from the Acarnanians and theirother confederates, he should appear with his fleet beforeSiphae, which was then to be betrayed to him. A day alsowas fixed upon between them, in which both of them were atonce to execute the parts assigned them.
Demosthenes, being arrived at Naupactus, found the Oeni-adae already compelled by the united Acarnanians into an as­sociation with the confederates of Athens. He marched away,therefore, at the head of the whole confederacy in those parts,and invaded first Salynthius and the Agraeans ; and havingcarried some other points, got all in readiness to shew himselfbefore Siphae at the time appointed.
About the same time this summer, Brasidas, at the headof seventeen hundred heavy-armed, began his march to­wards Thrace. When he was come up to Heraclea in Tra-chis, he dispatched a messenger beforehand to his corres­pondents in Pharsalus, to beg a safe conduct for himself







OCR Output








r> SOME ACCOUNT


OF


THE LIFE AND WRITINGS


OF


DR. SMITH,
BY THE REV. THOMAS CRANE, OF CHESTER.
WILLIAM SMITH, son of the Rev. Richard Smith,Rector of the Church of All Saints, and Minister of St. An­drews, in the city of Worcester, was born in the Parish of St.Peter's Church in that city, on the 30th day of May, in theyear 1711. He was educated in grammar-learning at theCollege-School in his native city, where he made great pro­ficiency in his studies. In January 1725-6, it pleased Godto deprive him of his father. On the 27th day of Novem­ber, 1728, he was matriculated at New College in Oxford;where he took the degree of Bachelor of Arts in June, 1732;and that of Master in July, 1737.
Soon after he had taken his Bachelor's degree, his meritcaused him to be recommended to the Right Hon. JamesEarl of Derby, that great Patron of Arts and Sciences: andhe was retained three years in his lordship's house, in theoffice of Reader to his lordship. His connections with myLord of Derby introduced him to the honour of being knownto several other persons of fortune and quality; which wasof singular service to him in his progress through life.
A gentleman by birth, blessed with an excellent capacityand education, and having ready and easy intercourse withthe great and good, it is no wonder that he was adorned withmanners most polite, with literary accomplishments mostsplendid and solid, and with morals becoming a faithful ser­vant of the holy Jesus. Well qualified for the work of the
Vol. I. C







OCR Output








74 THE PELOPONMESIAN WAR.


nity, in concert with the neighbouring Thuriafce and Ethe-ans, to revolt and seize Ithome, Most of the Helots weredescendants of the ancient Messenians then reduced toslavery, and on this account all of them in general werecalled Messenians. This war against the revolters in Ithomegave full employ to the Lacedaemonians. And the Thasians,after holding out three years blockade, were forced to surren­der upon terms to the Athenians :.—They were " to level theirwalls, to give up their shipping, to pay the whole arrear oftheir tribute, to advance it punctually for the future, and toquit all pretensions to the continent and the mines."
The Lacedaemonians, as their war against the rebels inIthome ran out into a length of time, demanded the assist­ance of their allies, and amongst others of the Athenians,No small number of these were sent to their aid, under thecommand of Cimon. The demand of assistance from themwas principally owing to the reputation they then were in fortheir superior skill in the methods of approaching and at­tacking walls. The long continuance of the siege convincedthem of the necessity of such methods, though they wouldfain have taken it by storm. The first open enmity betweenthe Lacedaemonians and Athenians broke out from this expe­dition. For the Lacedaemonians, when the place could notbe carried by storm, growing jealous of the daring and in­novating temper of the Athenians, and regarding them asaliens, lest by a longer stay they might be tampering with
masters with great severity, and often with the utmost barbarity; at theircaprice, or sometimes for reasons of state, they were wantonly put to deathor inhumanly butchered. There is a remarkable instance of the latter inthe fourth book of this history. According to Plutarch it was a commonsaying in Greece, That a freeman at Sparta was the freest, and a slave thegreatest slave in the world.—Tims miserably oppressed, no wonder theyseized an opportunity of revolt. The earthquake here mentioned was soviolent, that (according to Plutarch) it demolished all the houses in Sparta,except five. The Helots rose at once effectually to demolish those Spar­tans too, who were not buried in the ruins. But Archidumus had already,by way of precaution, sounded an alarm, and got them together in a body.The Helots, thus prevented, marched off, and seized Ithome. where theymade a long and obstinate resistance.







OCR Output








394 THE PELOPONNESIAK WAR.


was farther more truth in the date of the revolt than at pre­sent the Athenians could evince : For, in fact, the Scioneansrevolted two clays too late. But at the instigation of Cleonthey immediately passed a decree, that " the Scioneans" should be reduced by force, and then put to the sword."And their attention was recalled from all other points,to expedite the needful preparations for the execution ofthis.
In the mean time, Mende also a city in the Pellene, anda colony of Eretrians, revolted from them. Brasidas re­ceived them into his protection, thinking himself justified,as they had openly come over to him in the time of truce.Besides, he had himself some reasons to recriminate uponthe Athenians, as violaters of the articles. Upon this ac­count the Mendeans were more encouraged to the step, asthey saw Brasidas was determined to support them ; andwere convinced, by the affair of Scione, that he would notabandon them. The design farther had been originally seton foot by the yew ; who, though they delayed it for a time,were resolved to push it into execution : for they appre­hended that a discovery might prove fatal to themselves ;and so forced the bulk of the people to act against their in­clination. But the Athenians, who had a quick intelli­gence of it, were now exasperated much more than be­fore, and redoubled their preparations against both thoseplaces.
Brasidas, who soon expected the arrival of their arma­ment, conveyed away the wives and children of the Scio­neans and Mendeans to Olynthus of Chalcidica, and hadthem escorted thither by five hundred heavy-armed Pelo-ponnesians and three hundred Chalcidic targeteers: thecommander of the whole escort was Polydamidas. Thoseleft behind, expecting soon to be visited by the Athenians,united their endeavours to get things in good order for theirreception.
In the interval, Brasidas and Perdiccas march together







OCR Output








THB
PELOPONNESIAN WAR.
BOOK II.


YEAR I.—BEFORE CHRIST 431.
HENCE instantly commenceth the war between the Pe-loponnesians and Athenians, and the confederates on bothsides—during which they had no kind of intercourse with oneanother without the herald; and now, once engaged, carriedit on without intermission. The particular incidents of it areorderly related by the Summer and the Winter.
The Thirty-years Peace, which was made after the con­quest of Euboea, had now lasted fourteen: But in thefifteenth year, when Chrysis had been forty-eight yearsPriestess at Argos, when iEnesias was Ephorus at Sparta,and Pythodorus ten months Archon at Athens, in the sixthmonth after the battle at Potidaea, and in the very begin­ning of the spring a body of Thebans, somewhat above
three hundred, under the command of Pythangelus the sonof Phylidas, and Diemporus the son of Onetoridas, two ofthe rulers of Breotia, about the first sleep got into Plataea*of Bffiotia with their arms, which place was then in alliance
• Plataea was a city and petty state in Bccotia, on the confines of Attica.The inhabitants of it had ever been so fir mly attached to the liberties ofGreece, that it drew upon them the lasting rancour of the Thebans, who hadjoined the Persians when they invaded Greece, and persuaded them toburn down Plataea. The Plataeans engaged with the Athenians on the sideof Greece, in the famous battle fought within their own territory. TheAthenians, to shew their gratitude, gave them a place in the fine battle-piece painted in the Paecile in honour of the victory, made them all citi­zens of Athens, and ever after concluded their religious solemnities with aprayer for the prosperity of the Plataeans.







OCR Output








162 THE PELOPONNESIAN' WAR.


to expect they would, called a general assembly of the people,which, by still continuing in the command of the-army, hewas authorised to do. He had a mind to encourage them,to soothe the hot resentments fermenting in their breasts, andbring them into a more calm and confident temper. He pre­sented himself before them, and spoke as follows
" I FULLY expected, I freely own it, to become the" object of your resentments. I am not ignorant of the" causes of it; and for this purpose have convened this as-" sembly, to expostulate with, nay even to reprimand you," if without any reason you make me the mark of your dis-" pleasure, or cowardly sink under the weight of your mis-" fortunes: For it is my firm opinion, that by the full health" and vigour of a state the happiness of its constituents is" better secured, than when each separate member is thriv-" ing whilst the public welfare totters. Be the situation of" any private person prosperous and fine as his heart can" wish—if his country be ruined, he himself must neces-" sarily be involved in that ruin. But he that is unfortunate" in a flourishing community, may soon catch hold of expe-a dients of redress. When therefore your country is able" to support the misfortunes of its every member, and yet" each of those members must needs be inveloped in the" ruin of his country, why will you not join and unite" your efforts to prevent that ruin—and not (as you are" now going to do, because confounded with your do-" mestic misfortunes) basely desert the public safety, and" cast the most unjust of censures upon me who advised" this war, upon your own selves also who approved thisH advice? What—I am the man that must singly stand the
" storm of your anger ? 1 am indeed the man who I
" am confident is not inferior to any one amongst you in" knowing what ought to be known, and in speaking what" ought to be spoke, who sincerely loves his country, and ist: superior to all the sordid views of interest. For he wh#







OCR Output








B. I. 4y INTRODUCTION.


" loponnesus with the greatest navy. But to your account" these events are to be charged, who, after the invasion of44 the Medes, first suffered the strength of Athens to be en-" creased, and afterwards their long-rvalln to be erected.44 Ever since, you have connived at liberty overthrown, not
only in whatever communities they have proceeded to en-" slave, but now, where even your own confederates are con-44 cemed. For, not to the men who rivet on the chains of44 slavery, but to such as, though able, yet neglect to prevent" it, ought the sad event with truth to be imputed ; especially," when assuming superior virtue they boast themselves the" deliverers of Greece.
" With much ado we are now met together in council,44 but not even now upon the plain and obvious points. We" ought not to be any longer debating whether we have been" injured, but by what measures we should avenge ourselves." The aggressors, having long since planned out their pro-" ceedings, are not about to make but are actually making" attacks upon those, who are yet come to no resolution." Nor are we unexperienced by what steps, what gradual" advance*, the Athenians break in upon their neighbours." Imagining themselves to be still undiscovered, they shew" themselves the less audacious because you are insensible." But when once they know you alarmed and on your guard," they will press more resolutely forwards. For you, Lace-44 daemonians, are the only people of Greece, who sit iudo-" lently at ease, protecting not with present but with pro-44 mised succour: You alone pull down, not the commencing" but the redoubled strength of your foes. You have indeed44 enjoyed the reputation of being steady, but are indebted" for it more to report than fact. We ourselves know, that44 the Persian had advanced from the ends of the earth quite" into Peloponnesus, before you exerted your dignity in re--" sistance. Now also you take no notice of the Athenians," not remote as he was, but seated near you ; and, instead of" Invading them, criuse rather te lie upon year defener







OCR Output













OCR Output








DISCOURSE III. lxxi


His subject was certainly the greatest that to this day hadoccurred in the world: And, ought Thucydides to be degra­ded, or even lessened at all, because he was not born in thesame age with Livy ? As much amusement at least accom­panies, and as much instruction flows from reading carefullythe history of Athens, as from that of Rome. Wonder maybe more raised by the latter, and the wonder may end indetestation of a people, who became enormously great by themiseries and destruction of their fellow-creatures. The Ro­mans were but brute-like men: They were not tolerably hu­manised, till they had conquered Greece. Greece re-con­quered them, and established a better, more lasting triumphover mind, than the others over body.
Grxcia capta ferum victorem cepit—/for.
Who then best deserve the applause of the heart, the citi­zens of Athens, or the citizens of Rome ? I am not at all indoubt, how men of a calm and considerate spirit will decidethe question. Or, Vet such as judge only by numbers, consi­der a little more sedately, whether Athens at this time wasthat diminutive and petty State, which could be magnifiedand enobled only by artifice. The first army, that invadedher territories in this war, consisted (according to Plutarch)of sixty thousand men. This is an object big enough to fillthe eye. The state of her revenue, when the value of moneyis adjusted, will turn out by no means trifling. They werepossessed, at the breaking out of the war, of three hundredtriremes fit for sea. Two hundred and fifty of them were atone time in commission, in the fourth year of the war: Con­sequently at two hundred men a ship, the number of seamenemployed must have been fifty thousand. If the reader benot yet convinced, that Athens was not a petty State, nothingcan get the better of his prejudice. It would be pity, anyone should sit down to Thucydides with such low pre-posses-sions against his subject.
The confederate army of Peloponnesians is now assem­







OCR Output








B, I. INTRODUCTION. Tl


money which each state was to furnish against the Barbarian.The colour pretended was, " to revenge the calamities theyhad hitherto suffered, by carrying hostilities into the domin­ions of the King.'' This gave its first rise to the Athenianoffice of General Receivers of Greece*, whose business it wasto collect this tribute : For the contribution of this moneywas called by that title. The first tribute levied in conse­quence of this, amounted to foiir hundred and sixty talents.Delos was appointed to be their treasury; and the sittingswere held in the temple there.
Their command was thus at first over free and independ­ent confederates, who sat with them at council, and had a votejn public resolutions. The enlargement of their authoritywas the result of wars and their own political managementduring the interval between the invasion of the Medes andthe present war, when the contests were against the Barbari­an, or their own allies endeavouring at a change, or those ofthe Peloponnesians who interfered on every occasion on pur­pose to molest them. Of these I have subjoined a particulardetail, and have ventured a digression from my subject, be­cause this piece of history hath been omitted by all precedingwriters. They have either confined their accounts to theaffairs of Greece prior in time, or to the invasions of theMedes. Hellanicus is the only one of them, who hath touch­ed it in his Attic history ; though his memorials are short, andnot accurately distinguished by proper dates. But this, atthe same time, will most clearly shew the method in which theAthenian empire was erected.


* This nice and difficult point was adjusted by Aristides, to the generalsatisfaction of all parties concerned. Greece conferred upon him this mostimportant trust, he was called to this delicate commission by the unitedvoice of his country ; " Poor (says Plutarch) when he set about it; butpoorer when he had finished it," The Athenian state was now furnishedwith a large annual fund, by which it was enabled not only to annoy theforeign enemies of Greece, but even those Greeks who should at any timepresume to oppose the measures of Athens. They soon found out thattheir own city was a more convenient place for keeping this treasure than•he isle of Delos, and accordingly took care to remove it thither.







OCR Output








CHARACTER op the WORK.
The public is here presented with a translation of one of the best histo­ries of antiquity ; a history full of important instruction. The perniciousconsequences of faction in states, the tendency that power rigorously orwantoi^y exercised has to make men desperate, and that liberty, whenabused, has to make them insolent; is no where more strongly represented,than in the grave and judicious Thucydioes. In him too we see false pa­triots and venal orators dressed out in genuine colours, and those who em­ploy their eloquence and abilities to promote the public interest, and exertthemselves to the utmost of their power in the support of liberty, drawn atfull length and in just proportions.
With regard to the translation now before us, we shall only say, that itsmerit is superior to any praises we can bestow, and that it will, we arepersuaded, approve itself to the judgment of such (and such only are pro­per judges) as have an Attic taste, and are well acquainted with the turnand manner of the original. That our readers may see, in some measure,how our ingenious translator has succeeded, both in the oratorial and nar­rative part, we shall present them with the celebrated oration of Pericles,made at the public funeral of the Athenians, and the account of the plagueat Athens, both in the second book of the history of Tiicctiudbs.
Vide Monthty Review, vol. 8.—Old Series.







OCR Output








B. III. YEAR V.—'BEFORE CHRIST 427. 263


monians, since they had miscarried at Lesbos, to augmenttheir fleet, and sail immediately for Corcyra now embroiledin sedition, as there were no Athenians in those parts, except­ing only twelve ships which were stationed at Naupactus—and thus their design might be effectuated, before a fleet large
enough to obstruct them could be sent from Athens.
This was their plan, and Brasidas and Alcidas prepared forits execution.
The Corcyreans were now embroiled in a sedition, ex­cited by the return of the prisoners, whom the Corinthianshad taken in the naval engagements of Epidamnus. Theyhad obtained their release, as was publicly given out, forthe sum of eighty talents*, for the payment of which theirformer friends at Corinth had joined in a security ; but infact, for a secret promise they had made the Corinthians, toput Corcyra into their hands. To fulfil their engagementsthey tampered with every single Corcyrcan in order to bringabout a revolt from the Athenians. An Athenian and Co­rinthian ship arrived at the same time with ambassadors onboard. These were admitted together to an audience, atwhich the Corcyreans decreed, " to maintain their alliance" with the Athenians according to treaty,—but to be friends" to the Peloponnesians as in preceding times." Pythias,who at that time was at the head of the people, entertainedand lodged the Athenians without the public warrant. Andtherefore against him the accomplices prefer an accusation,as plotting how to subject Corcyra to Athenian slavery.Pythias being acquitted, in his turn exhibits a chargeagainst five of the most considerable of their number, forhaving cut pales in the sacred grove of Jupiter and Alcinus.The fine for every pale was by law a staterj. Being con­demned to pay the whole, they fled into the temples and satdown as supplicants, in hope to obtain a mitigation of theirline, which was quite exorbitant. Pythias, who was also
• 15,5001. .terlinfc. f H. 0s. 94.







OCR Output








THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


During the former transactions at Delium, Shakes alsoking of the Odiysians was killed in an expedition he had form­ed against the Triballians, who encountered and vanquishedhim. And Seuthes the son of Sparadocus, his nephew by thebrother, succeeded him in the kingdom of the Odrysians andthe rest of Thrace over which he had reigned.
The same winter, Brasidas, in conjunction with the alliesof Thrace, marched against Amphipolis, an Athenian colony,upon the river Strymon.
The spot of ground on which the city now standeth, Aris-tagoras the Milesian formerly, when he fled from king Da­rius had endeavoured to plant, but was beat off by the Edo-nians. Two and thirty years after, the Athenians made thesame attempt, having sent thither a colony consisting of tenthousand of their own people and such others as voluntarilycame in, all of whom were destroyed by the Thracians atDrabescus. But after an interval of twenty-nine years, theAthenians came hither again with a fresh colony led byAgnon the son of Nicias, who having drove away the Edo-nians built this city upon that spot of ground which hadformerly been called the nine-roads. They rushed to theseizure from Eion, a maritime emporium situated at the ri­ver's mouth, and belonging to them. Eion is distant twentystadia* from the spot where the city now standeth, and whichby Agnon was named Amphipolis, because it is almost sur­rounded by the Strymon which floweth along it on bothsides. Running therefore a wall from the river to the river,' 5he planted his colony on a spot conspicuous both to the landand to the sea.
Against this place, Brasidas, decamping from Arne ofChalcidica, advanced with his army. About sun-set he ar­rived at Aulon and Bromiscus, where the lake Bolbe issuethinto the sea. From hence, after taking the evening-repast,he continued his march by night. It was winter, and asnow was falling. This favoured and encouraged his enter-\ prize, as he intended to surprize the people of Amphipolis,• About two English miles.







OCR Output








B. II. YEAR I.—BEFORE CHRIST 431. 129


no less in any one article were the military provisions of theAthenians, when the Peloponnesians had formed the de­sign of invading them, and both sides began the war.—These, and such like arguments, was Pericles continuallyemploying, to convince them that they were well able tocarry on a successful war.
The Athenians heard him with attention, and followedhis advice. They withdrew from the country their chil­dren, their wives, all tlie furniture of their houses there,pulling down with their own hands the timber of which theywere built. Their flocks and their labouring-cattle they sentover into Euboea and the adjacent islands. But this re­moval was a very grievous business to them, since it hadbeen the ancient custom of many of the Athenians to resideat large in the country.
This method of living had been more habitual to theAthenians than to any other Greeks, from their first com­mencement as a people. From the time of Cecrops andtheir first series of kings down to Theseus, Attica had beeninhabited in several distinct towns, each of which had itsown Archons and its own Prytaneum*; and, unless intimes of danger, had seldom recourse to the regal authority,since justice was administered in every separate borough,and each had a council of its own. Sometimes they evenwarred against one another; for instance, the Eleusinians,when they sided with Kumolpus against Erectheus. Butwhen the regal power devolved upon Theseus, a man of anextensive understanding, and who knew how to govern, inseveral respects he improved the whole territory; and be­sides, dissolving all the councils and magistracies of thepetty boroughsf, he removed them to the metropolis, as itis at present, and constituting one grand Senate and Pryta­neum, made it the point of union in which all concentred.


• That is—Magistrates of its own, and a common-hall, in which those,magistrates performed the duties of their office in administering justice,and offering sacrifices, and where they had their diet at the puhlic expence-
t The number of the boroughs in Attica was one hundred seventy-four.







OCR Output








B. I. 53 INTRODUCTION.


resolutions, but to consider matters with sedate deliberation."They were further desirous " to represent before them theextensive power of their own state, to excite in the minds ofthe elder a recollection of those points they already knew, andto give the younger information in those of which they wereignorant;" concluding, that " such a representation mightturn their attention more to pacific measures than militaryoperations." Addressing themselves therefore to the Lace­daemonians, they expressed their desire to speak in the presentassembly, if leave could be obtained. An order of admit­tance being immediately sent them, they approached and de­livered themselves as followeth:
" IT was not the design of this our. embassy to enter into" disputations with your confederates, but to negotiate the" points for which our state hath employed us. Yet, having" been advertised of the great outcry raised against us, hither" we have repaired: not to throw in our plea against the ac-" cusations of the complainant states: for you are not the" judges before whom either we or they are bound to plead ;" but, to prevent your forming rash and prejudicial resolu-" tions, upon concerns of high importance, through the in-" stigation of these your confederates. Our view is, farther," to convince you, notwithstanding the long comprehensivef charge exhibited against us, that we possess with credit" what we have hitherto obtained, and that the state of" Athens is deserving of honour and regard.
" And what need is there here to go back to remote an-" tiquity, where hearsay tradition must establish those facts" to which the eyes of the audience are utter strangers ? This" we shall waive ; and call forth first to your review the Per-" sian invasions and those incidents of which you are con-" scious, without regarding that chagrin which the remem-" brance of them will constantly excite in you. Our achieve-" meats there were attended with the utmost danger: The" consequence was public benefit, of which you received a" substantial share: and though the glory of that acquisi-
Vol. I. ^







OCR Output








B. I. 19 INTRODUCTION.


Corinth, make there a tender of the colony, representingthat " the leader of it had been at Corinth," and communi­cating the oracle ; and farther intreated them " not to lookon with eyes of unconcern till their destruction was com-pleated, but to undertake their redress." The Corinthiansgranted them their protection from a regard to justice, ima­gining themselves to be no less interested in this colony thanthe Corcyreans. But they were also actuated by a hatredof the Corcyreans, from whom, though a colony of theirown, they had received some contemptuous treatment: Forthey neither paid them the usual honour on their public so­lemnities, nor began with a Corinthian in the distribution ofthe sacrifices, which is always done by other colonies. Thistheir contempt was founded as well on the sufficiency oftheir own wealth, in which at that time they equalled therichest of the Greeks, as on the superiority of their militaryforce. Their insolence became greater, in time, with theenlargement of their navy, and they assumed glory to them­selves in a naval character as succeeding the Phaeacians inthe possession of Corcyra. This was their chief incentive tofurnish themselves with a naval strength, and in it they wereby no means inconsiderable : For they were masters of anhundred and twenty triremes, when they began this war.Upon all these reasons the resentments of the Corinthiansrising high against them, they undertook with pleasure therelief of Epidamnus ; encouraging all who were so disposed,to go and settle there, and sending thither a garrison of Am-braciots and Leucanians and their own people. Thesemarched by land to Apollonia, which is a colony of theCorinthians, from a dread of the Corcyreans, lest theyshould have hindered their passage had they attempted itby sea.
As soon as the Corcyreans heard that the new inhabitantsand garrison were got to Epidamnus, and that the colonywas delivered into the hands of the Corinthians, they grewhot with indignation: and putting out immediately with







OCR Output








DISCOURSE I.


distress, but emerged again in Cimon. Cimon the same daygained a victory both by land and sea over the Persians atMycale. By his conduct he very much enlarged the powerof Athens, and put it in a train of much greater advance­ments. In civil affairs he clashed with Pericles, who wasleader of the popular party; Cimon always sided with thenoble or the few ; as were the party-distinctions in vogue atAthens.
The proofs that Thucydides was of this family are strongand convincing. Plutarch directly asserts it in the life ofCimon. His father, in grateful at least if not honourable re­membrance of the Thracian king, whose daughter Miltiadeshad married, bore the name of Olorus. His mother alsowas another Hegesipyle. He inherited rich possessions inThrace; particularly some mines of gold. A monument ofhim was to be seen for many ages after, in the Coele at Athens,amongst the Cimonian, or those belonging to the family ofCimon; and stood next, according to Plutarch, to that of El-pinice, Cimon's own sister. His father's name in the in­scription on this monument, at least some later grammarianshave averred it, was Orolus. Thucydides himself, in thefourth book of his history, calls it Olorus. Can we wantstronger authority ? Whether any stress ought to be laid onthe variation, or whence the mistake, though a very minuteone, might proceed, are points too obscure and trifling totake up any attention.
Such was the family of which Thucydides was descended.His pedigree might be fetched from the Gods ; since thatof Miltiades is traced down from ifiacus. But, like my au­thor, I should choose to keep as clear of the fabulous aspossible, Cicero says of him, "Though he had never" written a history, his name would still have been extant," be was so honourable and noble*." I quote this, merelyas a testimony to the splendor of his birth, since it may bequestioned whether the historian, in the present instance,


• In the Oral op.







OCR Output








SOME ACCOUNT OF DR. SMITH.


From this time the Dean's friends saw, with infinite con­cern, his health gradually declining. In the year 1786, heWas exceedingly indisposed. In November, he was confinedto his room ; in December, to his—bed.
About eight, on Friday morning, the 12th of January, 1787,the Dean meekly resigned his spirit into the hands of a mer­ciful Redeemer. On the Friday following, the funeral pro­cession passed the nearest way to the Cathedral: the Bishopand five Prebendaries were pall-bearers. The body reposethon the south side of the holy table. The Dean's name ap­pears over his grave.
In the broad aisle, at the great pillar on your right hand,as you retire from the choir, an elegant and costly Monument*is erected to his memory by Mrs. Smith, who was a MissHeber of Essex. He only once married.
The Dean never was a stipendiary curate. The moment hewas ordained a Priest, he became a Rector; and enjoyed everafter an income which far exceeded his expenses. An enemyto ostentatious legacies, he bequeathed the chief of his fortune,which was very considerable, to his widow and his nephew,for he had no children. He gave one hundred pounds to theChester Infirmary, and one hundred pounds to the fund forwidows of clergymen in the archdeaconry of Chester: thesehe esteemed useful charities.
The Dean was tall and genteel: his voice was strong, clear,and melodious. He spoke Latin fluently, and was completemaster not only of the Greek, but Hebrew language. Hismind was so replete with knowledge, that he was a living li­brary. His manner of address was graceful, engaging, de­lightful. His sermons were pleasing, informing, convincing.His memory, even in age, was wonderfully retentive: andhis conversation was polite, affable, and in the highest degreeimproving.
• See the next page.







OCR Output








B. I. r - INTRODUCTION.


without exertions of skill, and very much resembling a battleupon land. When they had laid one another close, theywere not easily separated again, because of the number andhurry of the vessels. The greatest hope of victory was placedin the heavy-armed fighting on the decks, who, fixed to theirpost, engaged hand to hand, whilst their ships continuedwithout any motion. They had no opportunity to make theircharges and tacks, but fought it out by dint of strength andcourage without any dexterity. The tumult was great on allsides, and the whole action full of disorder: In which theAthenian ships relieved the Corcyrean wherever they werepressed too hard, and did what they could to intimidate theenemy ; but their commanders refrained from any direct at­tack, remembering with awe the orders of the Athenians.The right wing of the Corinthians suffered the most: Forthe Corcyreans, with twenty ships, having put them to flight,chased them, when dispersed, to the continent j and continu­ing the pursuit to their very camp, land immediately, wherethey set fire to their abandoned tents, and carried off all thebaggage: In this part, therefore, the Corinthians and their al­lies were vanquished, and the Corcyreans plainly superior.But in the left, where the Corinthians personally engaged,they easily prevailed, as twenty ships of the Corcyreans, andthose too from a number at first inferior, were gone off in thepursuit. But the Athenians, seeing the Coreyreans thus dis­tressed, now came up to their support more openly than be­fore, having hitherto refrained from any direct attack. Andwhen the chace was clearly begun, and the Corinthians fol­lowed their suqeess, then every one amongst them appliedhimself to action. There was no longer any time for discre­tion : Corinthians and Athenians were forced by absolutenecessity to engage one another.
The chace being thus begun, the Corinthians towed notafter them the hulks of the vessels they had sunk, but turnedall their attention to the men who were footing about, andcruize at large more to slaughter than take alive. And,
Voi. I. T







OCR Output








B. III. YEAR VI.—BEFORE CHRIST 426. 983


composed of Tolophus the Ophionian, Bofiades the Euryst-hanian and Tisander the Apodotian prevail there in theirsuit for a diversion against Naupactus, because the Athe*nians had invaded their territories. It was about autumnwhen the Lacedaemonians marched away three thousandheavy-armed of their allies; of which number five hundredbelonged to Heraclea, the city so lately founded in Trachi*nia. Eurylochus, a Spartan, was appointed to command inthe expedition, and was accompanied by two other Spartans,Macarius and Menedaeus. The army being drawn intoa body at Delphi, Eurylochus dispatched a herald to the'Ozolian-Locri: His route to Naupactus lay through theirterritory. He was also desirous to detach them from theAthenian alliance. The Amphissensians were the readiestof all the Locri to give their concurrence, as standing inperpetual awe of the hatred bore them by the Phocians.These therefore were the first who sent in hostages, andwho persuaded others to follow their example, from a dreadof this army which was now approaching. Accordingly,the Myonensians, their own borderers, were the first whocomplied ; for their part of Locris is most difficult of access1.These were followed by the Ippensians, and Messapians,and Tritaeensians, and Challaeans, Tolophonians, Hessians,and Oeanthians; and all these gave a personal attendancein the expedition. The Olpeans indeed sent in their hos­tages, but would not attend. The Hyasans refused theirhostages till one of their villages called Polis was seized.
When all things were ready, and the hostages placedsecurely at Cytinium of Doris, Eurylochus with his army,taking the route of Locris, advanced against Naupactus.He seized upon Oeneon and Eupolium as he marched forrefusing to concur. When they had entered the territoryof Naupactus, and were joined by the Etolian aid, theywasted the country to the very suburb, of which also, be­cause unfortified, they took possession. Turning thence toMolycrium, a Corinthian colony, but now subject to theAthenians, they reduce it.
Vol. I. 3D







OCR Output








282 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


as they knew so well their method of battle, and their country.Having reposed his army one night within the verge of thetemple of the Nemean Jove (in which the inhabitants have atradition that Hesiod the poet expired*, in pursuance of anoracle which had fixed Nemea for the place, of his death), hemarched again at break of day and entered iEtolia. On the firstday he taketh Potidania, on the second Crocylium, and on thethird Tichium. There he halted, and sent away the booty toEupolium of Locris. It was now his resolution, after he hadsubdued the rest, to march last of all against the Ophionians,if they did not voluntarily submit beforehand, in his retreatback to Naupactus.
This preparation against them did by no means escapethe iEtolians. The scheme was no sooner formed than theyhad gained intelligence of it; and by that time the army
• The story of Hesiod's death is related by Plutarch in the The banquetof the seven viite nun. Solon interposing here, said, " Such things, Diodes," must be referred immediately to the Gods, they are above human condi-" t ion. But the case of Hesiod is within the lot of humanity, and concerns" us all. But perhaps you know the story." 1 do not, he replied. " It is" then well worth your hearing. A certain Milesian, it seems, in whose" company Hesiod was hospitably lodged and entertained in Locris, had se-" cretly debauched the daughter of their host. When the affair came to" light, it was suspected that Hesiod had all along been privy to the in-" trigue, and concealed such base behaviour; and though he was entirely" innocent, he fell a victim to hasty resentment and foul calumniation. The" brothers of the damsel laid wait for and slew him at the Nemean temple" in Locris, and with him his servant, whose name was Troilus.' Their bo." dies being thrown into the sea, that of Troilus indeed, floating up into" the river Daphnus, was stopped at a rock quite surrounded with water a" small distance from the sea. But the moment Hesiod's body was thrown" into the sea, a shoal of dolphins caught it and carried it to Rhium and" Molycrium. The Locrians that very day were assembled at Khium for'' a solemn festival and sacrifice, which they still continue to celebrate at'4 the same place. The dead body was no sooner beheld in its approach," than, full of wonder, as was likely, they hurried down to the beach, and," knowing it to be the body of Hesiod, and very fresh, they postponed" every other care to the discovery of this murder, from their high regard" for Hesiod. This was soon done : the assassins were found out, whom'' they threw headlong into the sea, and demolished their houses. But" Hesiod was buried by them in the temple of the Nemean Jove."







OCR Output








B. IV. 343 YEAR VIII. BEFORE CHRIST 424.


laboured most of any at a firm re-union, delivered his senti­ments thus:
" I am here the representative, ye men of Sicily, of one" and not the meanest of the Sicilian states, nor yet the most" exhausted by war ; and what I am going to propose is cal-" culated for, and will, I am convinced, most effectually se-" cure the welfare of our common country. And what need." is there now to run over in minute detail the calamities in-" separable from war, in the hearing of men who have expe-" rienced them all ? None ever plunge headlong into these," through an utter ignorance of them ; nor, when the views" are fixed on gratifying ambition, are men used to be deter-" red by fear. The acquisitions proposed, in the latter case," are generally imagined to overbalance dangers: and the•4 former choose rather to submit to hazards, than suffer di-" minution of their present enjoyments. Yet, where the parties," actuated by these different views, embroil themselves at a"juncture when it is impossible to succeed, exhortations to a" mutual agreement are then most highly expedient.
" To be influenced by such exhortations must at present be" highly for the advantage of us all. For it was the strong" desire of fixing our own separate views on a firm establish-" ment, which at first embroiled us in this war, and which at" present raiseth such mutual altercations even during our en-" deavours to effect an accommodation: and in fine, unless" matters can be so equally adjusted as to satisfy all parties," we shall again have recourse to arms. But then, we ought" to recollect, that not merely for securing our separate in-
them all to concorJ and unanimity, and teaching them the method of se­curing the welfare and glory of their common country, upon the noblestplan. This is noted merely to draw upon him the attention of the reader.He will act afterwards in the most illustrious scenes, and shew himselfon all occasions a man of true honour and probity, a firm and disinterestedpatriot, an excellent statesman, and a most able commander. The Athe­nians never had a more determined or a more generous enemy. But thatwill not hinder our historian from representing him in all his merit.







OCR Output








110 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


44 but that others are intent on watching for himself to share" the benefit; and, whilst this error universally prevailed!44 amongst all the several members, the general welfare insen-" sibly drops to ruin. But the greatest obstruction to themil will be a scarcity of money j which as they can but slowly44 raise, their steps must needs be dilatory; and the urgent oc-" casions of war can never tarry.
" As for any forts they can erect within our territory, or" their application to a navy, it is beneath us to form any" apprehensions from thence. To effectuate the former," would be difficult for a people of equal strength, in a sea-" son of tranquillity: Much more so must it be, upon the" lands of an open enemy, and when we are impowered to44 put the same expedients in execution against them. And," if they should fix a garrison in Attica, they might by ex-" cursions or desertions from us annoy some part of our ter-" ritory; but, whatever works they can raise will be insuffi-" cient to block us up, to prevent our descents upon their"coastSj and making reprisals upon them by our fleets," wherein we are superior. For, we are better qualified for44 land-service by the experience we have gained in that of" the sea, than they for service at sea by their experience at44 land. To learn the naval skill they will find to be by no44 means an easy task. For even you, who have been in con-44 stant exercise ever since the Persian invasion, have not yet" attained to a mastery in the science. How then shall men,44 brought up to tillage and strangers to the sea, whose prac-44 tice farther will be ever interrurupted by us, through the" continual annoyance which our larger number of shipping" will give them, effect any point of eclat ? Against small44 squadrons they might indeed be sometimes adventurous, em-44 boldening their want of skill by multiplying their num-" bers : But when awed by superior force, they will of neces-" sity desist; and so, by practice interrupted, the growth of" their skill will be checked, and in consequence of it their44 fears be increased. The naval, like other sciences, is the" effect of art. It cannot be learned by acccident, nor use­







OCR Output








256 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" Athenians. But consider further the respective situations" from which such conduct ensued in both. Our city at that" time was not administered by the few who presided with" an equal and steady rule, nor directed by the general voice" of the people. Its state was such as with laws and sound" policy is quite incompatible ; it bordered close upon a ty-" ranny : the incroaching ambition of a handful of men held" fast possession of it. These with no other view than the" strong establishment of their own private authority in the" success of the Mede, by force overawed the people, and" opened their gates to the invader. This was not the act of" a whole city, of a city master of its own conduct; nor ought" she to be reproached for offences committed in despite of" her laws. But on the other hand, when the Mede was once" repulsed and the city repossessed of her ancient polity, you" ought then to consider—fresh invasions being formed by" the Athenians, projects attempted to bring the rest of Greece" and our dominions also into their subjection, sedition fo-" mented amongst us, by favour of which they seized the" greater part—whether in the field of Coronea we fought" them and prevailed, recovered the liberty of Boeotia, pro-" ceed even now with all alacrity to regain their liberty for" others, supplying them with horse and all other military" provision, far beyond any other confederate. Such is the" apology we make for all the charge against us in having" joined the Mede. But—that you have been the most out-" rageous foes to Greece, and are most deserving of whatever" punishment can be inflicted upon you, we shall next endea-" vour to demonstrate.
" In order to procure some revenge on us, it is your" own plea, " you became confederates and citizens of" Athens."—Be it so. You ought then to have marched in" their company only against us ; you ought not to have" followed them in their expeditions against others. Had" your own wills been averse to attend them on these occa­







OCR Output








402 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


their camp, and having erected a trophy, got every thing inreadiness for the circumvallation. And no long time after,whilst they were busied in this work, the auxiliaries blockedup in the citadel at Mende, having forced the guard postednear the sea, get away by night; and the major part of them,escaping privily through the Athenian camp before Scione,got safe into that town.
When the circumvallation of Scione was in hand, Per-diccas, having dispatched a herald for the purpose to theAthenian generals, strikes up a new treaty with the Athe­nians. He took this step out of pure enmity to Brasidas,arising from the retreat out of Lyncus ; and had begun fromthat time to act in their favour. For it happened, that atthis very juncture of time Ischagoras the Lacedaemonianwas bringing up by land a reinforcement to Brasidas. ButPerdiccas, as well to oblige Nicias, who, as he had renewedhis alliance, commanded him to give some conspicuous,proof of his attachment to the Athenians, as to gratify hisown resentment in refusing the Peloponnesians a passagethrough his dominions, had gained the concurrence of hisThessalian friends, since with the chief persons of thatcountry he had ever been closely united by the hospitableties, and so stopped the reinforcement and their convoy thatthey durst not attempt to pass through Thessaly. Ischagorashowever, and Aminias and Aristeus reached Brasidas in per­son, being commissioned by the Lacedaemonians to inspectthe posture of their affairs, and brought with them someyoung men of Sparta, though contrary to their laws, whowere to take upon them the government of the cities whichwere no longer to be trusted to their former managers. Ineffect, Clearidas the son of Cleonymus they place as gover­nor in Amphipolis, and Epitelidas the son of Hegesander inTorone.
This same summer, the Thebans demolished the walls ofthe Thespiensians, alleging as the reason, that they were







OCR Output








210 THE PELOPONNKSIAN WAR.


some solicitations they had received from the Acarnaniansto send them either a son or some relation of Phormio tocommand' in those parts. These ships sailing along thecoasts of Laconia ravaged all the maritime places. Afterthis Asopius sends back the greatest part of his ships toAthens, but with a reserve of twelve proceeds himself toNaupactus. And raising afterwards the whole force of theAcarnanians, he leads them against the Oeniadae. Withhis ships he sailed up the Achelous, and the army marchingby land laid the country waste. But when this was foundineffectual he dismisseth the land force, and stretching overhimself to Leucas, and having made a descent upon Neri-cum, was intercepted in his retreat—by those of the adja­cent country, who ran together for mutual aid, supportedby a small party that lay there for guards,—with the loss ofhis own life, and a part of his army. After this, the Atheni­ans stayed only to take up their dead by favour of a truce ob­tained from the Leucadians, and then steered homewards.
The ambassadors of Mitylene, who were sent in thefirst ship, having been ordered by the Lacedaemonians torepair to Olympia, that their applications might be addressed,and resolutions formed about them, in the grand resort oftheir whole alliance, arrive at that place. It was that Olym­piad, in which Doricus the Rhodian was a second timevictor*. So, when the solemnity was ended, and an audi­ence was granted them|, they spoke as follows
" YE men of Lacedaemon and you their Confederates,


• Olympiad 88.
f In this manner for private ends, and through party-feuds, was a mostnoble and sacred institution abused. All Grecians in general paid theirattendance at the Olympic Games; and were obliged by all the ties ofhonour and religion to suspend their animosities and quarrels, and meet to­gether as countrymen and brethren with frank and open ingenuity. Andyet, in the present instance, they are going to contrive the means of an­noying one another, so soon as that solemnity is o- er, which was calculatedto teach them union and concord, and a steady attachment to the interestsof Greece their common mother. The policy however of the present pro­ceeding is remarkable. The Athenians who assisted at the games could







OCR Output








B. IV. 321 YEAR VII^—BEFORE CHRIST 425.


" dred archers from other places. With these, he said, add-" ed to the military force already at Pylus, he would either" in the space of twenty days bring off all the Lacedaemonians" alive, or put them all to death upon the spot."
This big way of talking raised a laugh among the people;all men of sense however were not a little delighted. Theyconcluded, they should compass by it one of these two desi­rable ends ; either to rid themselves effectually of Cleon,which they chiefly expected; or, should they be disappointedof this, to get those Lacedaemonians into their power*.
Having thus transacted the requisite points in the publicassembly, where the Athenians had awarded the expeditionto him by a formal decree, and Demosthenes, at Cleon's ownrequest, was joined in the commission of commanders at Py­lus, he hastened to his post with the utmost speed. His rea­son for associating Demosthenes in the command, was owing
• The honour of Athens was very deeply concerned in the point, whichhad been the subject of this day's debate in the assembly of the people, andyet it hath turned out a mere comic scene. The dignity of the republic.had never been well supported on thes« occasions, since the death of Peri­cles. Cleon had introduced all kinds of drollery and scurrility into the de­bates ; and it was now become quite the same thing to the people, whetherthey laughed with or laughed at him. He hath now railed Nicias, thoughnone but a person of so diffident and fearful a temper as Nicias could sohave been railed, out of an honourable command ; and then is laughed him­self into it, and though an arrant poltroon is metamorphosed into a generalof the first class, and soon after swells into a very hero. However, theAthenian good sense, whatever turn Thucydides gives it, can hardly bejustified on this occasion, in thrusting so important a commission upon Cleonpurely for a joke. Plutarch says, they always bore his impertinent andmad way of talking, because it was humorous and diverting. Once, whenthe assembly had been met some time, and the people had sat long expect­ing his coming, at length he made his appearance with a garland on hishead, and begged the favour of them to adjourn till the morrow, " For at" present, said he, 1 am not at leisure, since I have sacrificed to-day, and'• must entertain my friends." A loud laugh ensued at his impudence, andthen they rose and adjourned. This affair of Pylus was, however, far froma jocular point; and the Athenians might have paid very dear for theirmirth, had not Cleon been wise enough to associate Demosthenes withhim in the command.







OCR Output








SACRED TO THE MEMORY OP
WILLIAM SMITH, D.D.
DEAN OF TALS CATHCAALL, ANDRECTOR OF WEST KIRKBY AND HANDLEY IN THIS COVNTY,WHO DIED THE XIIth. OF -ANVARY M,DCC,LXXXVII,IN THE LXXVlth. YEAR OF HIS AGE.
AS A SCHOLAR, HIS REPVTATION IS PERPETVATEDBY HIS VALVA E PV ICATIONS,PARTICVLARLY HIS CORRECT AND ELEGANTTRANSLATIONS OF LONGINVS, THUCYDIDES AND XENOPHON.AS A PREACHER, HE WAS ADMIRED ANDESTEEMED BY HIS RESPECTIVE AVDITORIES.AND AS A MAN, HIS MEMORY REMAINS INSCRIBEDON THE HEARTS OF HIS FRIENDS.
THIS MONVMENT WAS ERECTEDBY HIS AFFECTIONATE WIDOW.







OCR Output








On the Life of Thucydides.


hath not intirely preserved his memory, and been solely in­strumental in ennobling and perpetuating the man.
His education no doubt was such, as might be expectedfrom the splendor of his birth, the opulence of his family,and the good taste then prevailing in Athens, the politestcity that then existed, or ever yet existed in the world. Itis impossible however to give any detail of it. The verylittle to be found about it in writers of any class whatever,seems merely of a presumptive though probable kind. It issaid Anaxagoras was his preceptor in philosophy, becausethe name of Anaxagoras was great at this period of time.Anaxagoras, the preceptor of Euripides, of Pericles, and ofSocrates, is named also by Marcellinus for the preceptor ofThucydides. And he adds, quoting Antyllus for an evi­dence, that " it was whispered about that Thucydides was" atheistical, because he was so fond of the theory of Anax-" agoras, who was generally reputed and stiled an atheist."The solution of an eclipse from natural causes, accountingfor appearances from the laws of motion, and investigatingthe course of nature, were sufficient proofs of atheismamongst a people so superstitious as the Athenians. Thu­cydides, possibly, might be well acquainted with the philo­sophy of Anaxagoras, without having personally attendedhis lectures. However that be, his own history abundantlyshews that he was no atheist; it may be added, and nopolytheist. By his manner of speaking of the oracles andpredictions tossed about in his own time, it is plain helooked upon them as equivocal, or rather insinuates them tobe mere forgeries. " And yet, says Mr. Hobbes*, he con-" firms an assertion of his own, touching the time this war" lasted, by the oracle's prediction." The passage occurs inthe fifth book of this history. But whoever considers it, willfind it only an argumentum ad hominem, to stop the mouthsof such as believed in oracles, from contesting his own com­putation of the. whole time the Peloponnesian war lasted.


Of the Life and History of Thucydides.







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAR VIII. BEFORE CHRIST 424.


the - Athenians, having thus cut off their long walls fromthe city of the Megareans, and possessed themselves ofNisaea, were preparing to accomplish what was yet to bedone.
But Brasidas, son of Tellis, the Lacedaemonian, happenedat this time to be about Sicyon and Corinth, levying forcesto march for Thrace. He was no sooner informed of thesurprisal of the walls than he trembled for the Peloponne-sians in Nisaea, and lest Megara should be taken. He sum­mons the Boeotians to attend him expeditiously with theirforces at Tripodiscus (the place so named is a village of theMegaris under the mountain Geranea) whither he was march­ing himself with two thousand seven hundred heavy-armed.Corinthians, four hundred Phliasians, six hundred Sicyoni-ans, and what levies he had already made upon his own ac­count. He imagined he might come up before Nisaea couldbe taken. But hearing the contrary (for he came up in thenight to Tripodiscus), with a picked body of three hundredmen, before the news of his march could be spread, he ap­proached to the city of Megara, undescried by the Atheni­ans, who were posted near the sea. He intended to declarethat he was ready to attempt, and in fact would have beenglad to have effected, the recovery of Nisaea. But it wasprincipally his view to get admission into Megara, and pro­vide for its security. He demanded admission, assuringthem he had great hope of recovering Nisaea. But the fac­tious in Megara, perplexed at this step of Brasidas—on oneside, lest he meant to reinstate the exiles by ejecting them ;the other, lest the people with such an apprehension might atonce fall upon them, and their city thus plunged into a tu­mult of arms might be lost, if the Athenians, who lay readyin ambush, should seize it; refused him admittance, andboth factions thought proper without any stir to await theevent. For it was severally their full expectation, that abattle must ensue between the Athenians and these new­comers ; and then, without plunging themselves into unne­







OCR Output








B. t. 99 IHTRODUCTION.


For Persia's hosts o'erthrown, and Graecia freed.To Phoebus THIS Pausanias hath decreed,Who led the Grecians to the glorious deed.
These verses indeed the Lacedaemonians immediately de­faced from the tripod, and placed in their stead the names ofthe several states which had joined in the overthrow of theBarbarian, and in making this oblation. This therefore wasnow recollected to the prejudice of Pausanias ; and, in hispresent situation, it was interpreted, from the circumstancesof his late behaviour, as an argument that he had been equallyguilty long before. They had moreover got an informationthat he was tampering with the Helots, which in fact wastrue : For he promised them their liberty and the privilegeof citizens of Sparta, if they would rise at his command, andco-operate with him in the whole of his project. But eventhis would not prevail: They disdained to place so much con­fidence in the informations given by Helots, as to run into ir­regularities to punish him. They adhered to the customever observed amongst them, never to be hasty in forming asentence never to be recalled against a citizen of Sparta,without unquestionable evidence. At length they obtainedthe fullest conviction, as it is said, by means of an Argyllian,an old minion of his, and the person most in his confidence,who was to convey Artabazus the last letters he wrote to theking. This man, alarmed by the recollection that no personsent on these errands before him had ever returned again,having already counterfeited the seal, to the end that if hewas deceived in his suspicions, or Pausanias should demandthem again to make any alteration, he might avoid discovery,breaks open the letters. He found by them, that he was go­ing on the errand his fears foreboded, and that his own mur­der was expressly enjoined. He carried upon this the pac­ket to the Ephori, who were now more than ever convinced,but still were desirous to hear themselves, from the mouth ofPausanias, an acknowledgment of the truth. They thereforecontrived, that this person should go to sanctuary at Tsena­







OCR Output








xxxviii On the Life of Thucydides.


at proper seasons to observe transactions, and pick up intelli­gence. He was now more conversant in person on the Pelo-ponnesian side. Some private correspondences he mightstill carry on with Athenians. And he had money to pur­chase all proper materials, was ready, and knew how to layit out. This was his employment until the very end of thewar; and it is certain he had collected materials for carryingdown his history to that period of time " when (in his own" words*) the Lacedaemonians and their allies put an end to" to the empire of Athens, and became masters of the Long-" walls and the Piraeus." But whoever reads it, will be in­clined to think, that he drew it not up in that accurate andelaborate manner in which it now appears, until the war wasfinished. He might keep every thing by him in the form ofannals ; he might go on altering or correcting, as he saw bet­ter reason or gained more light. His compleat well-connectedhistory, though the first thing in his intention, was the last inexecution.
His exile lasted twenty years. It commenced in the eighthyear of the war, in the year before Christ four hundredtwenty-three. Consequently, he was restored the year be­fore Christ four hundred and three, being at that time sixty-eight years old. In that very year an amnesty was publishedat Athens, in the archonship of Euclides, after the demoli­tion of the thirty tyrants by Thrasybulus.
Thucydides was now at liberty, if he pleased, to returnand pass the remainder of his days at Athens. Whether hedid so or not is left quite in the dark. He lived twelve yearsafter, and died in the year before Christ three hundredninety-one, being then about fourscore years old. He wasconstantly employed in giving coherence and dignity to thisHistory ;—with what accuracy, what severity, what toil, thereader may judge, since he will find that after all he left itimperfect. The first seven books are indeed fully and exactly
• Book the fifth.







OCR Output








DISCOURSE III.


A SURVEYOF THE HISTORY.
IN the preceding discourse we have examined into the ca­pacity and qualifications of our author for writing history, andsettled his character. Let us now take a view of the workitself; first casting our eyes upon and noting the general dis­position of the whole ; and then surveying it more distinctlyin its parts.
The disposition of the whole is most elaborately exact.Order is scrupulously observed ; and every incident so faith­fully arranged in its proper time, that some have doubtedwhether annals were not a more proper title for it thanhistory. If we should call it annals, it must be owned at thesame time that annals were never composed with so muchmajesty and spirit; and never was history more accuratelydistinguished by the punctuality of dates so nicely inter­wove. Thucydides states every occurrence in just placeand time. But he is forced for this purpose to make fre­quent transitions, and to drop a particular narration, perhapsthe very moment a reader's attention may be most fixed up­on and most eager for the event. If they cannot bear adisappointment here, the remedy is ready at hand. Byturning over a few leaves, they will find it regularly resumedin due place and time: and they at once may satisfy theirown curiosity, without disarranging the author's scheme, orperplexing that work which he was determined to keepquite clear and unembarrassed. They will afterwards for.







OCR Output








374 THE PEL0PONNESIAN WAR.


Tanagra, and called a consultation about the method of as­saulting Delium.
A herald, farther, dispatched by the Athenians about theirdead, meets upon his way a herald of the Boeotians, whoturned him back by assuring him that his errand would befruitless till he himself should be again returned. The latter,being come to the Athenians, declared to them in the nameof the Boeotians;
" THAT by their late proceedings they had enormously" violated the laws of the Grecians, amongst whom it was" an established rule, that amidst their mutual invasions re-" ligious places should be ever spared, whereas the Athe-" nians had not only fortified, but had made Delium a place" of habitation, and whatever profanations mankind can be" guilty of had been there by them committed: That the44 water, which it would even be impious for the Boeotians" themselves to touch, unless by way of ablution, before" they sacrificed, had been profanely drawn by them for" common use: That, for these reasons the Boeotians, in" the cause of the God and in their own, invoking the as-" sociated Daemons and Apollo, gave them this early no-" tice to evacuate the sacred place, and clear it of all in-" cumbrances."
This message being thus delivered by the herald, theAthenians returned this answer to the Boeotians by a heraldof their own:
" THAT they were hitherto guilty of nothing illegal in4' regard to the holy place, nor would willingly be so for the" future. They had no such intention when they first en-" tered into it, and their view was merely to give an ejec-" tion from thence to persons who had basely injured them." It was a law among the Grecians for those who were" masters of any district, whether great or small, to be also" proprietors of its temples, which are to be honoured by" them with the usual forms, and with what additional ones" they may be able to appoint. Even the Boeotians, as well







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAR VII. BEFORE CHRIST 425. 3U


" the present strength of your State and its late acquisitions" that fortune may not always declare upon your side. Wise" indeed are they, who in their estimates of success^ make" judicious allowances for chance. Such are best able to bear" the alternatives of calamity with prudence and temper.." Such will form their judgments of war, not as the infallible" means of accomplishing whatever scheme they please to" undertake, but as deriving its effects from the guidance of" fortune. Such are the persons who are most of all exempt-" ed from fatal miscarriages ; because -hey are not puffed up" by presuming too far on present prosperity, and would" gladly acquiesce in the peaceable enjoyment of what they" now possess.
" It concerns your honour, Athenians, to deal in this" manner with us, lest, in case you now reject our propo-" sals, when you yourselves in future times miscarry (many" such events must happen), your present good fortune may" then be perversely ascribed to chance, even though you" are now able to deliver down to posterity the fame of your" power and moderation beyond a possibility of blemish." The Lacedaemonians invite you to agreement, and a con-" elusion of the war. They offer you peace and alliance," nay, friendship in its whole extent, and the exchange of" good offices mutually revived; demanding nothing in re-" turn but their citizens out of the island. To this step they" have condescended rather than be exposed to the dangers" incidental on either side, should they either seize some fa-" vourable opportunity to force their escape by arms, or" holding out to the last against your blockade, be reduced" with all the aggravations of defeat. Great enmities, in" our opinion, may the soonest be brought to a firm deter-" mination—not when either party, having exerted all their" strength, and gained the far greater superiority in war, dis-" dains the fair accommodation, and relieth on that forced" acquiescence which necessitated oaths impose ; but rather," when, though victory be within their reach, they recollect







OCR Output








B. I. INTRODUCTION. 3


somuch that at last, Attica being insufficient to support thenumber, they sent over colonies into Ionia.
There is another, and to me a most convincing proof ofthe weakness of the ancients. Before the affairs of Troy, itdoth not appear that Greece (or Hellas) was ever united inone common undertaking ; nor had the whole country thatone general appellation: nor indeed did the same subsist atall before the time of Hellen, the son of Deucalion ; the se­veral nations taking their distinguishing names from theirown selves, and Pelasgicum being that of the greatest tract.But when Hellen and his sons had acquired power in Pthiotis,and led out their dependants by way of aid to other cities,conversation made the use of this name become much morefrequent among the several people, though it was long be­fore it so prevailed as to become the general appellation ofthem all. For this Homer is my principal authority, who,though born a long time after the Trojan war, hath no wherementioned them all in this general stile, but hath appro­priated it to those who came with Achilles from Pthiotis,and were the first that bore this name of Grecians (or Hel­lenes-). In his poems Danaans, and Argives and Achaeansare their distinguishing titles. Nor hath he farther oncementioned the Barbarians, for this plain reason in my opin­ion, because Grecians were not yet distinguished by thisone comprehensive name in contra-distinction to that other.These Grecians, therefore whatever, whether so apart in theirdifferent cities, or united by mutual converse, or at lengthcomprehended in one general name, for want of strength andcorrespondence, never acted together in joint confederacybefore the war of Troy: nor was it till the use of the seahad opened free communication amongst them that they en­gaged together in that expedition.
For jMinosjis the earliest person whom we know fromtradition to have been master of a navy; and to have beenchiefly lord of the sea which is called the Grecian. To himwere the isles of the Cyclades subject; nay, most of them he







OCR Output








238 THE PEtOPONNESIAN WAR.


had concluded, Diodotus the son of Eucrates, who in the for­mer assembly had most strenuously opposed the bloody sen­tence against the Mityleneans, stood forth, and thus replied.
" I NEITHER blame those who proposed the resumption" of the decree against Mitylene, nor do I praise the men" who inveigh against repeated consultations on points of the" greatest importance. But I lay it down for certain, that" there are no two greater impediments of sound mature coun-" sel than precipitation and anger ; of which, the one is closely" connected with madness, the other with raw inexperience" and short limitary judgment.
" It may indeed be warmly asserted, that words are not the" proper guides to actions. But the author of such an asser-" tion is either wanting in discernment, or confines it only to" his own selfish views. He is wanting in discernment, if he" imagines there is any other possible method of putting light" into things that are future or unseen ; or confines it only to" himself, if willing to recommend a scandalous measure, and" conscious he hath not eloquence enough to support it openly," he launcheth out into plausible calumnies, to intimidate his" opponents as well as his audience.
" But odious beyond all support is their procedure who" prematurely condemn the advice of others as purchased" and corrupt. For would they only acquiesce in the charge" of ignorance, the defeated opponent goes off with the
" ther, vile leather, since people rather swam than walked in the shoes" made of it, was now become the leading politician, the scourge and pest" of the republic." The chorus of the play salutes him with the most vil­lainous titles. And an oracle is cooked up, which prophesieth that theyshall never get rid of Cleon, till he is overpowered by a greater scoundrelthan himself. A dealer in black-puddings is at last procured to be hiscompetitor. The contest is carried on with all the ribaldry and scurrilitythat unbridled wit could forge for such characters, and Cleon is at lengthdefeated. This is the event upon the stage, but was by no means so in theState of Athens. The wit of Aristophanes seldom hurt knaves and scoun­drels i it wounded and was mischievous only to the ablest ministers andthe warmest patriots







OCR Output








108 THE PELOPONNESTAN WAR.


" to remonstrate, but actually to give us law. They command" us—to quit the blockade of Potidaea, to permit iEgina to" govern itself by its own model, and to repeal the decree
" against the Megareans Nay, this their last and peremp-
" tory embassy authoritatively enjoins us—to restore the Gre-" cians to their former independence. But, let not one of you" imagine that we excite a war for a trifling concern, if weM refuse to repeal that decree against the Megareans. The" stress they lay upon it, that, if it be repealed, a war shall" not ensue, is nothing but a colour: Nor think there will be" any ground for self-accusation, though for so trifling a con-" cern you have recourse to arms ; since that concern, trifling" as it is, includes within it the full proof and demonstration" of Athenian spirit. If, for instance, you condescend to this" demand, you will immediately be enjoined some other con-" descension of greater consequence, as if this your compliance" was owing to the prevalence of your fear. But, if at once" you strenuously refuse to hearken to them, you will convince" them in a manner clearly to be understood, that they must" treat with you for the future as with men who are their"^equals.
" From the present crisis, I exhort you, therefore, to form" a resolution, either timely to make your submission, before" you begin to suffer ; or, if we shall determine for war" (which to me seemeth most expedient), without regarding" the pretext of it, be it important or be it trifling, to refuse" every the least concession, nor to render the tenure of what" we now possess precarious and uncertain. For not only" the greatest, but the most inconsiderable demand, if au-" thoritatively enjoined by equals upon their neighbours, be-" fore justice hath decided the point, hath the very same" tendency to make them slaves. But, from the posture in" which the affairs of both parties are at present, that we may" risk a war with a prospect of success as fine and as inviting
" as our rivals can suffer me distinctly to set the reasons
" before you, and be «onvinced of their weight.
" The Peloponnesians are a people, who subsist by their







OCR Output








244 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" party; since you yourselves have inforced the precedent," that punishment must fall upon the heads, not only of the" guilty, but even of the innocent. Whereas indeed, though" they had been guilty, we ought to have dissembled our" knowledge of it, that we might not force the only party" which ever takes our side into utter enmity and aversion." And I esteem it much more conducive to the firm support" of empire, rather to connive at the wrongs we may have"felt, than in all the-severity of justice to destroy those per-" sons whom in interest we ought to spare. And thus, that" union of justice to others and duty to yourselves in this in-" stance of punishing the Mitylencans, as alleged by Cleon," is plainly found to be grossly inconsistent, to be utterly im-" possible.
" Own yourselves therefore convinced, that the greatest" advantages will result from the conduct which I have re-" commended ; and, without giving too wide a scope to" mercy or forbearance, by which I could never suffer you" to be seduced, follow my advice, and in pursuance of it re­solve " To judge and condemn, at your own discretion,
"those guilty Mityleneans whom Paches hath sent hither" to attend your decisions, and to let the others continue as" they are." These are expedients of your future welfare," and of immediate terror to your foes. For they who can" form the soundest deliberations, stand stronger up against" hostile opposition, than the men who rush to action with" indiscreet unpremeditating strength."
Diodotus ended here. And when these two opinions,diametrically opposite to one another, had been thus deliv­ered, the Athenians had a stiff contest in support of each,and, upon holding up of hands, there seemed near anequality j but the majority proved at last to be along withDiodotus.
Upon this they immediately sent away another trireme,enjoining all possible dispatch, lest this second, not comingin time, might find the city already destroyed, as the other


u







OCR Output








B. IV. 393 YEAR IX. BEFORE CHRIST 423.


the town to secure it, and then repassed to Torone. Butsoon after he transported thither the greater part of his force,designing with the aid of the Scioneans to make attemptsupon Mende and Potidaea. He concluded however that theAthenians would lose no time in throwing in a succour asinto an island, and so he endeavoured to be beforehand withthem.
He had already formed an intelligence to the prejudice ofthose cities to get them betrayed: and he was now intent onexecuting his schemes against them. But during this pause,Aristonymus dispatched by the Athenians, and Athenaeusby the Lacedaemonians to circulate the news, arrive in a tri­reme, and notify to him the suspension of arms. His forceswere then transported back to Torone.
The persons employed communicated the articles of thcstruce to Brasidas, and all the Lacedaemonian confederatesin Thrace declared their acquiescence in what had beendone. Aristonymus was well satisfied in other respects, butfinding, by computing the days, that the revolt of the Scio­neans was too late in point of time, he protested againsttheir being intitled to the benefit of the truce. Brasidas onthe other hand urged many arguments to prove it prior intime, and refuseth to restore that city. When thereforeAristonymus had reported this affair at Athens, the Athe­nians in an instant were ready to take up arms again for thereduction of Scione. But the Lacedaemonians, by an em­bassy purposely dispatched, remonstrated that " they should" regard such a proceeding as a breach of the truce," andasserted " their right to the city as they reposed entire cre-" dit on Brasidas ; however, they were ready to refer the" dispute to a fair arbitration." The others refused to abideby so hazardous a decision, but would recover it as soon aspossible by force of arms. They were irritated at thethought, that persons seated as it were upon an island shouldpresume to revolt from them, and place such confidence inthe unprofitable land power of the Lacedaemonians. There







OCR Output








92 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. *


"for war. The oracle of a God prescribeth it; that
" God himself hath promised his assistance ; and the rest" of Greece is ready to join you in the contest, some from" a principle of fear, and some from a principle of interest." Neither on you will the first breach of the peace be charged."The God who adviseth war plainly judgeth that to be" already broke: You will only act to redress its violation." For the breach is not to be charged on those who arm to" revenge it; but on those who were the first aggressors.
" Since then war, considered in every light, appears hon-" Durable in regard to you, ye Lacedaemonians; since we," with united voices, encourage you to it, as most strongly
" requisite for our general and separate interests defer no
" longer to succour the Potidaeans, Dorians by descent, and" besieged by Ionians (the reverse was formerly the case), and" to fetch again the liberty of others. The business will ad-44 mit of no longer delay, when some already feel the blow ;" and others, if it once be known that we met here together," and durst not undertake our own defence, will in a very" little time be sensible of the same. Reflect within your-" selves, confederates, that affairs are come to extremities," that we have suggested the most adviseable measures, and44 —give your ballot for war. Be not terrified at its im-" mediate dangers ; but animate yourselves with the hope of" a long lasting peace to be procured by it. For a peace" produced by war is ever the most firm; but from tranquility" and ease to be averse to war, can by no means abate or"dissipate our danger. With this certain conclusion, that*4 a state in Greece is started up into a tyrant, and aims indif-" ferently at the liberty of us all, her arbitrary plan being" partly executed and partly in agitation—let us rush against" and at once pull her down. Then shall we pass the remainder" of our lives exempt from dangers, and shall immediately re-" cover liberty for those Grecians who are already enslaved."
In this manner the Corinthians spoke : and the Laceda-monians, when they had heard them all deliver their severalopinions, gave out the ballots to all the confederates that







OCR Output








224 fat peloponnesiAn WAR.


ranees of those who turned back, that " they are all to a mancut off," dispatch a herald, as soon as it was day, to demanda truce for fetching off the dead ; but learning hence the truestate of the affair, they remained well satisfied. And in thismanner the9e men of Plataea, by thus forcing a passage,wrought their own preservation.
About the end of this winter, Salaethus, the Lacedaemoni­an, Was dispatched in a trireme from Lacedaemon to Mity-ferte ; who, being landed at Pyrrha, went from thence by land,and having passed the Athenian circuhivallation by favour ofa breach made in it by a torrent of water, gets undiscoveredinto Mitylene. His commission was, to tell the governors ofthe place, that, " at the same time, an incursion will be made" into Attica, and a fleet of forty sail be sent to their relief," according to promise ; that he himself was dispatched be-" forehand, to assure them of these, and to take all proper" care of other points." Upon this the Mityleneans resumedtheir spirits, and grew more averse to any composition withthe Athenians.
The winter was now past, and in this manner ended thefourth year of the war, of which Thucydides hath compiledthe history.
YEAR V.
IN the beginning of the ensuing summer—after that thePeloponnesians had dispatched Alcidas, admiral appointed,and the forty-two ships under his command, to the relief ofMitylene, with the most pressing orders—they and their con­federates invaded Attica. Their design was, by this diver­sion to give the Athenians so much employ on all sides,that they might be unable to give any obstruction to theirsquadron bound for Mitylene. This present invasion wasled by Cleomenes, who was his father's brother, in theright of Pausanias son of Pleistionax the king, but yet inhis minority. They now utterly destroyed those parts ofAttica that had been ravaged already. Whatever again be-







OCR Output








-280 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


from this colony; and the reason was this : The Thessalians,who were masters of all the country round about it, and up­on whose very land it was built, fearing lest this new settle­ment might prove too powerful a neighbour at last, gave itall possible annoyance, and harassed the new inhabitantswith continual war, till from the large number they were atfirst, they mouldered into nothing. When the Lacedaemo­nians first declared the colony, the whole world was eagerto get a settlement in the city, which they thought wouldwant no support. Not but that its sudden decay was owingalso in great measure to the Lacedaemonian leaders. Fromthe first moment of their arrival they had spoiled every thingwherein they meddled ; they reduced their numbers to ahandful of men, because their fears had driven away the rest,as the government was always severe, and not always just.The neighbouring people, surprising them in such a state,prevailed against them with the utmost ease.
The same summer, and even during that interval of timethe Athenians were employed at Melos, the Athenians ofthe fleet of thirty sail who were upon the Peloponnesiancoast, in the first place, having placed an ambush at Elo-menus of Leucadia, intercepted and cut off a part of thegarrison. In the next place, with an augmented force theycame up to Leucas, being attended now by the wholestrength of the Acarnanians except the Oeniadae, by the Za-cynthians and Cephallenians, and fifteen sail of Corcyreans.The Leucadians, though their territory was laid waste bothwithout and within the Isthmus, where the city of Leucas andthe temple of Apollo are seated, yet durst not venture outagainst such superior numbers. Upon this, the Acarnani­ans vehemently pressed it upon Demosthenes the Atheniangeneral, to block them up by a wall of circumvallation ;imagining they might easily reduce them, and rid them­selves of a city, which had been their eternal foe. But De­mosthenes chose rather to hearken at this time to the sug­gestions of the Messenians ; " how glorious it would be, as he







OCR Output








DISCOURSE I. xxxix


finished. The eighth, though moulded into due form, hathplainly not had a final revisal, and breaks off abruptly. Thewhole work is said to have fallen into Xenophon's possession,who, at the time of the death of Thucydides, was exiled fromAthens: And Xenophon is also said to have made it public.This carries a great air of probability with it, since Xenophonbecame the continuator of Thucydides, not in so lofty andmajestic, but in a sweeter and more popular style. There isa chasm indeed between the time the History of Thucydidesbreaks off, and the Grecian- History of Xenophon begins.There is no accounting for this but by conjecture. May Iventure to offer one, I believe entirely new, but which, forthat reason, I shall readily give up to the first person of judg­ment, who thinks it hath no foundation ? It is this—ThatThucydides left somewhat more behind him than now ap­pears. How it came to be suppressed or lost, I will not pre­tend to guess. It is natural to imagine, that his acknow­ledged continuator resumed the subject at the very spotwhere his predecessor had left off. Nearly two years arehowever wanting, in which several important incidents tookplace. It is pity, but we have no redress. General histo­rians are by other means enabled to supply the deficiency;but the loss of any thing from so masterly a hand is still tobe regretted.
The place of the death and interment of Thucydides wasmost probably Scaptesyle in Thrace. Long habitude mighthave made him fond of a spot, where he had passed so manyyears in studious and calm retirement. The hurry and bus­tle and engagements of Athens could not have been much tothe relish of so grave, and now so old a man. His monu­ment there among the Cimonian confirms this opinion, sincemost writers agree, it had the mark upon it which shewed itto be a cenotaph, and the words, Here lieth, were not in theinscription*. I have nothing to add about his family. It is
• M&rcellinus.







OCR Output








B. III. 225 YEAR. V.—BEFORE CHRIST 427.


gan to flourish, and whatever had been spared in former in­cursions, now fell before their fury. And this incursion, nextto the second, was the sharpest they ever made upon theAthenians. For, having continued their stay so long, as togive time to their squadron to arrive at Lesbos, and sendthem news of their success, they had leisure to extend theirdevastations over almost all the country. But when all theirexpectations ended in disappointment, and forage began tofail, they withdrew, and were disbanded to their respectivecities.
In the mean time the Mityleneans, when they saw nothingof the squadron from Peloponnesus (which was loiteringin the course), and their provisions began to fail, are neces­sitated to capitulate with the Athenians, upon this occasion—Salaethus, who had also himself given up all hopes of relief,causeth the populace, who before were light-armed, to puton heavy armour, with a design to make a sally on the Athe­nians. But they, so soon as they had received their armour,would no longer obey their governors, but assembling togetherin bodies, ordered those in authority either publicly to pro­duce what provisions they had and divide equally amongthem, or otherwise they would immediately make their ownterms with the Athenians, and give up the city. Those incommand being sensible that they had not force sufficient tohinder this, and that their own danger would be extreme,should they by standing out be excluded the capitulation,join with them in procuring the following terms from Pachesand the Athenians—
" That it should be submitted to the people of Athens to44 determine as they please in relation to the Mityleneans.
" That the Mityleneans should immediately receive their" army into the city—and dispatch an embassy to them to" know their pleasure.
" That sufficient respite should be indulged for this," during which Paches should put no one Mitylenean in







OCR Output








B. III. YEAR V. BEFORE CHRIST 427.


44 bare character of a man less enlightened indeed, but quite" as honest. If he be charged with corruption, his point" he may carry, but his honesty will ever be suspected ; and" if his point be lost, he must pass for knave and blockhead" both. Such methods can never be conducive to the pub-" lie good. The men, best able to advise, are by this means" intimidated : Though the public welfare would then be" best secured, if every person of so disingenuous a temper" was not able to open his mouth ; for then, by his seduce-" ments, the public could never be misled. But it is the" duty of every true patriot to despise the slanders of oppo-" nents, and on fair and impartial views to get his own" advice accepted. It is the duty of every well-regulated" public, not indeed to load a man with honours for having44 given the best advice, but never to abridge him of his" present portion; and if he cannot prevail, by no means" to disgrace, much less to punish him: For then, neither" would the successful debater, from a view of inhancing44 his own personal honours, ever speak against conscience," or aim merely at applause ; nor would he, who hath been44 unsuccessful in his motions, be greedy of proposing what-" ever may cajole, and so earn popularity for himself. But" the method in vogue with us is the reverse of this ; and" what is worse, if a person be suspected of corruption," though he advise the most prudent expedients, yet the" odium raised against him upon the weak suggestion of" lucre, quite weighs him down, and we are deprived of" the manifest service he could do to the State. Nay, such" is our method, that even the best advice, if readily of-" fered, can escape suspicion no more than the worst. And" hence it is necessarily incumbent, as well upon him who44 would persuade the public into the most prejudicial mea-44 sures, to seduce the people with art; as upon him whou would advise the best, to disguise the truth in order to" prevail. Amidst these jugglings, the public alone is de-44 barred the service of its most able counsellors, since in a







OCR Output








158 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


Thus did the pestilence give their first rise to those ini­quitous acts which prevailed more and more in Athens.For every one was now more easily induced openly to dowhat for decency they did only covertly before. They saw#ie strange mutability of outward condition, the rich un­timely cut off, and their wealth pouring suddenlv on the in­digent and necessitous ; so that they thought it prudent tocatch hold of speedy enjoyments and quick gusts of plea­sure ; persuaded that their bodies and their wealth might batheir own merely for the day. Not any one continued reso­lute enough to form any honest or generous design, whenso uncertain whether he should live to effect it. Whateverhe knew could improve the pleasure or satisfaction of thepresent moment, that he determined to be honour and in­terest. Reverence of the Gods or the laws of society laid norestraints upon them ; either judging that piety and impietywere things quite indifferent, since they saw that all menperished alike; or throwing away every apprehension ofbeing called to account for their enormities, since justicemight be prevented by death ; or rather, as the heaviest ofjudgments to which man could be doomed, was alreadyhanging over their heads, snatching this interval of life forpleasure, before it fell.
With such a weight of calamity were the Athenians atthis time on all sides oppressed. Their city was one sceneof death, and the adjacent country of ruin and devastation.In this their affliction they called to mind as was likely theyshould, the following predict ion, which persons of the greatestage informed them had been formerly made,
Two heavy judgments will at once befall,
A Doric war without, a plague within your wall.
There had indeed been a dispute before whether theirancestors in this prediction read Am)*®* a plague, or Auw3>- afamine. Yet in their present circumstances all with proba­bility agreed that a»7,««!^ a plague, was the right: For they







OCR Output








X PREFACE.


All men have neither the turn of mmd, nor the leisure, tomake themselves proficients in the dead and learned lan­guages. Such as have are certainly honestly, perhaps bene­ficently, employed, in holding out light to others. The Greekhistorians, as they take a precedency in time, lay further astrong claim to precedency in merit. Thucydides is the mostinstructive of these ; and, since the restoration of letters inthe western world, each nation, that hath piqued itself at allabout humanity or politeness, as his manner was soon foundto be excellent, have given thanks to those who have endea­voured to investigate his matter and lay it open to publicview.
It is to the honour of the French, that they took the lead.The first translation of Thucydides into French, published atParis in 1527, was that of Claude de Seyssel, bishop of Mar­seilles. However performed, it went, within the space of lit­tle more than thirty years, through four impressions. It issaid to have been done at the command of Francis I. king ofFrance; and, to have been carried about with him in hiswars, and diligently studied by the Emperor Charles V. TheGermans had also a translation of him soon afterwards in theyear 1533. In 1545, Francis di Soldo Strozzi published anItalian translation dedicated to Cosmo di Medicis. The firstEnglish translation made its appearance in London in 1550•but, in fact, was only the translation of a translation, since itwas intitled a version from the French of Claude de Seyssel.In 1564, he was published in Spanish. A second Frenchtranslation by Louis Jonsaud d'Usez was published at Gene­va in 1600. The second into English, by the famous Mr.Hobbes of Malmsbury, was first published in the year 1628,about which it will be necessary immediately to inlarge. Athird French translation, by the Sieur d'Ablancourt, waspublished at Paris in 1662, and hath since gone throughfour editions. There is a Danish translation, which clo-seth the list given of them in the Bibliotheca Graca of Fa­bric i us.







OCR Output








lyviii A Survey of the History.


gin its operations. In the mean time, the Athenians are tobe amused with embassies and negotiations merely to gaintime and save appearances. Frivolous they really are, butour author minutely details them, as they give him an op­portunity of introducing some notable passages relating toCylon, Pausanias, and Themistocles. He then shifts thescene to Athens; and introduces Pericles, the most com­manding orator, the greatest general, the most consummatestatesman, and at this time prime minister of the republic—introduces Pericles, I say, in the assembly of the people, togive them an insight into the schemes of their enemies, anda plan for their own conduct; to encourage them to a braveand steady resistance, in strict adherence to such methods,as in the end will infallibly not barely secure but aggrandizetheir State.
The thoughts in this speech of Pericles are so grand, sonervous, so emphatically and concisely just, that if the rea­der be not immediately struck into an adequate conceptionof them, I know no method of opening his eyes or enlarginghis understanding. He says but little, but says every thingin that little. He demolisheth all the assertions of the Co­rinthians in their last speech at Sparta, as if he had heardthem speak. Perhaps Thucydides here hath not sufficientlyconcealed his art in writing. But the speech is intirely incharacter, compleatly suited to the heart and hsad andmouth of Pericles. Pericles, I observe it with pleasure, isan Englishman both in heart and judgment. England hathadhered and will adhere to the lessons which Athens ne­glected and forgot—" Of vast consequence indeed," (says thisenlightened statesman,) " is the dominion of the sea. But," consider it with attention. For, were we seated on an" island," (as the force of his argument evidently implies,)" we could never be subdued. And now you ought to think," that our present situation is nearly as possible the same,." and so to evacuate your houses and lands in Attica, and" to confine your defence to the sea." If this can need a







OCR Output








lxxxiv A Survey of the History.


harvest.—He relates other incidents, until he comes to aremarkable scene of war in iEtolia, where Demosthenes theAthenian commander is totally defeated.—He describes thepurification of the isle of Delos by the Athenians ; and hathfound the art to make it a cheerful and entertaining piece,for the relief of the reader, after he hath been engaged inso many scenes of horror and destruction, and is soon goingto be engaged in more.—The battles of Olpe and Idomeneare sufficiently stored with slaughter, to glut any reader whodelights in blood. The armies in this- history have beenoften thought not to be sufficiently numerous. They makeno havoc ; they do not knock one another on the head fastenough to preserve attention. But these old Greeks weremen and not brutes. And it is pity, that the history of menshould be so much a history of the destruction of the humanspecies.
Book IV. In the Fourth Book, the Athenians and La­cedaemonians, principals in the war, are matched directlyagainst one another. Demosthenes, a wise and brave com­mander, had seized and fortified Pylus in the territories of thelatter, had placed such a garrison in it as annoyed the wholecountry, and in the end might wound the very vitals of thatState. The Lacedaemonians slight it at first, as if their bareappearance would remedy all. But upon trial, their land-armies and their squadrons are unable to dislodge the enemy.It is with the true martial spirit of an experienced and gal­lant commander, that Demosthenes harangues his smallbody of Athenians, when he draws them up on the beach ofthe sea, to beat off the ships of the enemy. Thucydidesshines on these occasions ; in him the addresses are alwaysmade, and pertinently made, to the soldiers who are present;they interest and animate, but never run out into declama­tion and common-place.—The turns of war at Pylus are sud­den, and engage attention. They fight by land, and fightby sea; nay, what is more, land-battles are fought from thewater, and naval battles fought from off the shore. The eye







OCR Output








B. I. 59 INTRODUCTION.


when the Lacedaemonians had thus heard the accusationsof their allies against the Athenians, and what the Athe­nians had urged in their turn, ordering all parties to with­draw, they proceeded to serious consultation amongst them­selves. The majority agreed in the opinion, that "theAthenians were already guilty of injustice, and that a warought to be immediately declared." But Archidamus theirking, esteemed a man of good understanding and temper,
standing forth, expressed his own sentiments thus
" I HAVE learned myself by the experience of many" wars, and I see many of you, ye Lacedaemonians, as great" proficients in years as I am, that no one should be fond of" an enterprize because it is new, which is a vulgar Weak-44 ness, judging it thence both advisable and safe. The war," which is at present the subject of your -consultation, you" will find, if examined discreetly, to bode a very long con-" tinuance. Against Peloponnesians, it is true, and bor-M derers upon ourselves, we have ever a competent force" in readiness, and by expeditious steps con advance against" any of them. But, against a people whose territories are" far remote, who are farther most expert in naval skill, who" with all the expedients of war are most excellently pro-" vided, with wealth both private and public, with shipping," with horses, with arms, and with men, far beyond what" any other state in Greece can singly pretend to, who, more" than this, have numerous dependent states upon whom" they levy tribute—where is the necessity sanguinely to" wish for war against such a people ? and wherein is our44 dependence, if thus unprepared we should declare it" against them ? Is it on our naval force ? But in that we44 are inferior: And if to this we shall apply our care, and44 advance ourselves to an equality with them, why this will" be a work of time. Or, is it on our wealth ? In this we" are yet much more deficient: and neither have it in any" public fund, nor can readily raise it from private purses.44 But the confidence of some may perhaps be buoyed up







OCR Output








102 THE PELOPONNESIANTVAR.


siding chiefly at Argos, though he frequently visited otherparts of Peloponnesus, they send a party along with the La­cedaemonians, who readily joined in his pursuit, with orders toseize him wherever they could find him. Themistocles, ad­vised in time, flieth out of Peloponnesus into Corcyra, towhich people he had done a signal kindness*. The Corcy-reans expressing their fear of giving him refuge, lest it mightexpose them to the resentment both of Lacedaemonians andAthenians, he is conveyed away by them to the opposite con­tinent. Now, pursued by those who were appointed to do it,and who had by enquiry discovered his route, he is compelledby mere distress to turn in to Admetus king of the Molos-siansf, who was by no means his friend. It happened thatAdmetus was not at home ; and Themistocles, the suppliant,addressing himself to the wife, is by her directed to take theirchild in his hand, and sit himself down upon the hearth. Ad­metus returning soon after, he tells him who he was, andconjures him—" though he had formerly opposed him in a" suit he had preferred to the people of Athens, not to take
" revenge upon an exile. To make him suffer now, would
" be taking those advantages over a man in distress, which he" ought to disdain—The point of honour consisted in equals" revenging themselves upon equal terms—He had, it is" true, stood in opposition to him, but merely in a point" of interest, and not where life was at stake—But if he now" gave him up" (telling him by whom, and why he was perse­cuted) " he deprives him of the only resource he had left to" preserve his life." Admetus, having heard him, bids him
of the (utracitm. I have mentioned those points only which are universallyagreed.
• At the time of the Persian invasion, the Corcyreans had refused tc jointhe common cause of Greece. The Grecians therefore had afterwards adesign to fall upon and destroy them. But Themistocles interposed, andsaved them by remonstrating, that by such proceedings Greece would beplunged into greater calamities, than it would have suffered under the des­potic power of Xerxes.
t Admetus had formerly negotiated an alliance at Athens, but was re­jected by the influence of Themistocles.







OCR Output








THE HISTORY


OF THE
PELOPONNESIAN WAR,
■
TRANSLATED FROM THE GREEK OFTO WHICH ARE ANNEXED,
THREE PRELIMINARY DISCOURSES.
I. On the Life of Thucydides.II. On his Qualifications as a Historian.III. A Survey of the History.


BY WILLIAM SMITH, D.D.
DEAN OF CHESTER,
qF LOSOISU8 Ojr THE SUBLIME, XEBOFHOh's AFFAIBSOF GBEECE, &C.


TO WHICH IB PREFIXED THE
LIFE AND CHARACTER OF THE TRANSLATOR.IN TWO VOLUMES.
VOL. I.


PHILADELPHIA:PUBLISHED BT EDWARD EABLE.
T. H. Palmer, printer.
1818.







OCR Output








388 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAS.


Whole flowing garments sweep the sacred pile,Whose grateful concourse gladdens all the isle,Where champions fight, -where dancers beat the ground,Where cheerful music echoes all around,Thy feast to honour and thy praise to sound.
That there was also a musical game to which artists resortedto make trials of the skill, he fully eheweth in other verses tobe found in the same hymn: For having sung the Delianchorus of females, he closeth their praise with these lines, inwhich further he hath made mention of himself;
Hail! great Apollo, radiant god of day ;
Hail! Cynthia, goddess of the lunar sway ;
Henceforth on me propitious smile ! and you
Ye blooming beauties of the isle, adieu !
When future guests shall reach your happy shore.
And refug'd here from toils lament no more ;
When social chat the mind unbending chears,
And this demand shall greet your friendly ears—
" Who waa the Bard, e'er landed on your coast,
" Who sung the sweetest, and who pleas'd you most i"
With voice united, all ye blooming fair,
Join in your answer, and fur me declare ;
Say—" The blind bard the sweetest notes may boast,
" He lives at Chios, and he pleas'd us most."
Such an evidence hath Homer left us, that in early timesthere was a great concourse and festival at Delos. But after­wards the people of the islands and the Athenians sent in theirparties for the chorus with victims. But the usual games,and most of the solemn rites, had been disused, throughsome sinister events, till the Athenians now made a fresh in­stitution of this solemnity, with the addition of a chariot-racewhich had not formerly been a part of it.
The same winter, the Ambraciots, in pursuance of theirengagements with Eurylochus, who waited their motions,march away with three thousand heavy-armed against theAmphilochian Argos. Accordingly, breaking into Argia,they seize Olpae, a strong place, situated on an eminence on







OCR Output








DISCOURSE III. Cl


-


" the charge of inslaving projects on the Syracusans, who" now are eager to deprive the rest of Sicily of their best" defence, by raising distaste towards the Athenians. He" spares no artifice, omits no topic that is likely to affect," He proves a notable advocate for his Athens, pompously" celebrates her passion and her care for liberty, and most" ingeniously strives to conceal her present ambition under a" veil of most generous and disinterested principles."
The issue is, that the orators have just counterpoisedone another's arguments, and the Camarineans declare a.neutrality.
The embassies from Syracuse succeed much better in Pe­loponnesus. The Corinthians are zealous and active intheir behalf; and they have now got an advocate to rouseup and inflame the phlegmatic Spartans, who was born tobe of every party, and to be the best support of whateverparty he by times espoused. It is the exiled Alcibiades,who pleads most effectually in their behalf at a grand con­sultation at Sparta. His speech on this occasion is a mas­terpiece. " He insinuates himself into the favour and con-" fidence of men who had feared and hated him. Whilst" he is making his own personal justification, he praiseth" and magnifieth himself. He betrays all the schemes of" Athens, discloseth all her plan, points out her weak and" unguarded parts, directs towards them the attack of her* foes ; and, full as he is of resentment against, and skilful" to annoy her, she totters whilst he speaks." Syracuse andSparta are now to grow famous by the debasement of thismighty and imperial Republic. Her glory hath reached itssummit: It immediately will begin to sink, and her laurelswill fade away apace.
In the summer of the eighteenth year of this war, theAthenians stand away from Catana, and land by night atSyracuse. They instantly march, and seize Epipolae, a strongpost that commanded the city. The Syracusans fight, butwithout success, to beat them from it. The siege now com­







OCR Output








B. I. INTRODUCTION. 7


It is farther my opinion, that the assemblage of that ar­mament by Agamemnon was not owing so much to the at­tendance of the suitors of Helen in pursuance of the oathsthey had sworn to Tyndarus, as to his own superior power.4t is related by those who received from their ancestors themost certain memorials of the Peloponnesian affairs, thatPelops, arriving there from Asia with abundance of wealth,soon gained so great an influence over those needy people,that, though a foreigner, he had the honour to have theCountry called after his own name ; and that the power thusgained by him was successively enlarged by his posterity.Eurystheus indeed, whose mother was the sister of Atreus,perished in Attica by means of the Heraclida e ; and Euryst­heus, when he departed on that expedition, left the govern­ment of Mycenae and his kingdom, because of his affinity,in the care of Atreus, who then resided with him, havingfled from his father upon the murder of Chrysippus. Whentherefore the return of Eurystheus was prevented by death,and the Myceneans from a dread of the Heraclida e were wellinclined to Atreus, as a person of great abilities and deep inthe affections of the people, he easily obtained the kingdomof Mycenae and all the territories which had belonged toEurystheus ; and from hence the family of Pelops quiteoverpowered the family of Perseus. To these enlargementsof power Agamemnon succeeding, and being also superiorto the rest of his countrymen in naval strength, he wasenabled in my opinion to form that expedition more fromawe than favour. It is plain that he equipped out the largestnumber of ships himself, besides those he lent to the Arca­dians. Homer is my witness here, if his testimony have anyforce ; who hath farther at the delivery of the sceptre, styledhim,
" Or many isles, and sf all Argos king."
And a king who lived upon the continent could not possiblybe lord of islands, except such as were adjacent, the numberof which must needs be small, unless he had a competent







OCR Output








186 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


imagined that the Athenians with their twenty ships durst pre­sume to attack them who had forty-seven. Yet when they sawthem steering the same course on the opposite shore, they keptfirst along their own coast, and afterwards from Patrae ofAchaia stretched over to the opposite side in order to make forAcarnania. Butnow again they descried them standing direct­ly against them from Chalcis and the river Evenus, and foundthey had observed their anchoring the night before. Thus arethey compelled to come to an engagement in the midst of theopen sea*. The ships of every state were under the com­mand of those who had been appointed by their principals :Over the Corinthians were Machon, Isocrates, and Agathar-chidas. The Peloponnesians drew up their ships in form of acircle, as large as they possibly could, without leaving open apassage for the ships of the enemy. The heads of the shipsstood to sea, the sterns were turned inwards. Within wereranged the small vessels that attended the fleet and five shipsthat were prime sailers, which were to start out at narrowpassages, wherever the enemy should begin the attack. TheAthenians drawing up their ships in a line, and sailing quiteround them, brushed along by them in their passage, andmaking successive feints of engaging, forced them to drawinto a smaller compass. Phormio had beforehand givenstrict orders not to engage without the signal: for he hopedthe enemy could not long preserve that order of battle like
• Phormio was watching to catch them in the open sea, it tv ti/f u^af <'«,as Thucydidea words it above. They were now out of the gulf, stretchingacross the sea, in the midst of which Phormio came up to them, and en­gaged, *ara aurti r x-oftftit. The sea without the capes that form themouth of the gulf of Crissa, is indeed a narrow sea, or ttiptfiiir, but thenit was open sea in regard to the gulf within the capes, and gave Phormioall the advantages which more expert seamen knew how to use. As thePeloponnesian Heet stood out from Petra in Achaia, and the Athenian fromChalcis in ittolia, the situation of those two places easily guides to theplace of the engagement. Phormio got a deal of honour by this action,which Plutarch, in his piece about the glory of the Athenians, reckons upamongst the most remarkable exploits related by our historian.







OCR Output








JB. I. IKTRODUCTION. 31


" been decided by arms. And it was not before they had" besieged that city, but when they thought that we were in-" tent on saving it, that they had recourse to the specious" pretence of a fair arbitration. And here they are at pre-" sent, by no means content with the wrongs they have there" committed, presuming to ask conjunction from you, not" in league but in violence, and on the merit of being rebels" against us to beg your protection. Then was the proper" time for such an address to you, when their affairs securely" flourished ; not now when we have been outraged by them," and they are beset with dangers ; not when you, who have" shared no benefit from their former power, are to relieve" their distress, and by no means their accomplices in crimes," are to come in for an equality of censure from us. A" prior conjunction of force justly entitleth to a share of what" may be the event: But those who had no participation in" the guilt ought to be exempted from the consequences of
" it. And thus we have clearly shewn, that we have ad-
" dressed ourselves before you with all the requisites of a" rightful cause, and that their proceedings are violent and" rapacious.
" It is now incumbent upon us to convince you, that you" cannot with justice receive them into alliance. For, grant-" ing it to be expressly stipulated in the treaty, that any of" the states not particularly mentioned may go into either" league at their own discretion, yet the intent of the stipu-" lation reacheth not to those who join one party to the pre­judice of another, but to such as having withdrawn from" neither side are in need of protection—to such as bring not" war instead of peace to those who receive them,—if they" know their interest. And yet the latter must be your por-" tion, if our arguments lose their influence: For you will" not only become auxiliaries to them, but enemies also to" us who are your allies by treaty. Of necessity, if you joina with them, our vengeance must be levelled at them withoutseparating you. Right above all things it would be for youto keep yourselves at a distance from us both ;—if that will


 


u







OCR Output








B. II. YEAR III. BEFORE CHRIST 429. 179


sheep-skins and hides of beasts, to defend the workmenfrom missive weapons, and to preserve the wood from beingfired by the enemy. This work within was raised to a greatheight, and the mount was raised with equal expedition•without. Upon this, the Plataeans had recourse to anotherdevice. They broke a hole through the wall, close to whichthe mount was raised, and drew the earth away from underit into the city. But this being discovered by the Pelopon-nesians, they threw into the hole hurdles made of reeds andstuffed with clay, which being of a firm consistence couldnot be dug away like earth. By this they were excluded,and so desisted for a while from their former practice. Yetdigging a subterranean passage from out of the city, whichthey so luckily continued that it undermined the mount,they again withdrew the earth from under it. This prac­tice long escaped the discovery of the besiegers, who stillheaping on matter, yet the work grew rather less, as theearth was drawn away from the bottom, and that above fellin to fill up the void. However, still apprehensive, that asthey were few in number, they should not be able long tohold out against such numerous besiegers, they had recourseto another project. Thev desisted from carrying on thegreat pile which was to counterwork the mount, and beginningat each end of it where the wall was low, they run anotherwall in the form of a crescent along the inside of the city,that if the great wall should be taken this might afterwardshold out, might lay the enemy under a necessity of throwingup a fresh mount against it, and that thus the further theyadvanced the difficulties of the siege might be doubled, andbe carried on with increase of danger.
When their mount was compleated, the Peloponnesiausplayed away their battering-engines against the wall ; andone of them they worked so dextrously from the mount againstthe great pile within, that they shook it very much, andthrew the Platreans into consternation. Others they appliedin different parts against the wall, the force of which was







OCR Output








B. I. 17 VNTRODUCTIBN.


delightful to the ears. But it will afford sufficient scope tothose who love a sincere account of past transactions, of suchas in the ordinary vicissitude of human affairs may fully oc­cur, at least be resembled again. I give it to the public asan Everlasting Possession, and not as a contentious in­strument of temporary applause.
Of former transactions, the greatest was that against theMedes, which however, by two engagements at sea and asmany at land, was brought to a speedy conclusion. But thecontinuance of this war ran out into a much greater length ;and Greece in the course of it was plunged into such cala­mities as were never known before in an equal space. Neverhad so many cities been made desolate by victories, some byBarbarians and some by the violence of intestine feuds ; tosay nothing of those where captivity made room for newpossessors: Never so many instances of banishment; neverso many scenes of slaughter either in battles or seditions.Such calamities farther, as were known only by report, buthad rarely been felt in fact, now gained credit from experi­ence : Earthquakes, for instance, which affected the largestpart of the habitable globe, and shook it with the utmost vio­lence-: Eclipses of the sun, which happened more frequentlythan former times had remembered ; Great droughts in someplaces, the consequence of which was famine: And, whatmade not the least ravage, but did its share of destruction,the noisome pestilence. For all these things ensued inthe sequel of this war, which was carried on between theAthenians and Peloponnesians, after breaking the thirtyyears truce concluded between them upon the reduction ofEuboea.
The reasons for which this truce was broke, and theircourse of Variance, I have in the first place thought properto write, that none may be at a loss about the origin of somomentous a war among the Grecians. The growth of theAthenian power I conceive to have been the truest occasionof it, though never openly avowed: The jealousy struck by







OCR Output








B. III. 209 YEAR IV. BETORE CHRIST 428.


did also the Imbrians and Lemnians and some few other oftheir allies.
The Mityleneans once indeed made a general sally withall their people against the station of the Athenians. Here­upon a battle ensued, after which the Mityleneans, thoughby no means worsted, yet durst not continue all night in thefield, but diffident of their own strength retreated behindtheir walls. After this they kept themselves quiet, unwill­ing to run any more hazards, till they had got some addi­tional strength from Peloponnesus, and were in other re­spects better provided. By this time Meleas a Lacedaemo­nian and Hermaeondas a Theban are arrived among them,who had been dispatched on some business before the re­volt, and unable to compass the return before the Athenianfleet came up, had now in a trireme got in undiscoveredsince the battle. It was the advice of these to dispatch ano­ther trireme and embassy in company with them, which isaccordingly done. But the Athenians, as the Mityleneansremained in so quiet a posture, became more full of spiritsthan before, and sent summons of aid to their confederates,who came in with more than ordinary alacrity, as they sawsuch an appearance of weakness on the side of the Lesbians.Having now formed a station on the south side of the city,they fortified by a wall two camps, which invested the placeon both sides, whilst their shipping was so stationed as toshut up both the harbours. By this means the communica­tion by sea was quite cut off from the Mityleneans. Ofthe land indeed the Mityleneans and other Lesbians, whohad now flocked to their aid, were for the most part masters.The quantity which the Athenians had occupied by theircamps was but inconsiderable, as the station of their shippingand their market was held chiefly at Malea: And in thisposture stood the war against Mitylene.
About the same time this summer, the Athenians sendout thirty sail of ships against Peloponnesus, under thecommand of Asopius the son of Phormio, in pursuance of







OCR Output








78 THE PELOPONNESIAN'WAR.


tiona* son of Pausanias their king who was yet a minor;and having forced the Phocians to surrender upon terms thetown they had taken, were preparing for their return. Now,in case they attempted it by passing over the sea in the gulfof Crissa, the Athenians having got round with a squadronwere ready to obstruct it. Nor did they judge it safe to at.tempt it by way of Geranea, as Megara and Pegai were inthe hands of the Athenians ; for the pass of Geranea is everdifficult, and now was constantly guarded by the Athenians ;and should they venture this route, they perceived that theAthenians were there also ready to intercept them. They de­termined at last to halt for a time in Boeotia, and watch foran opportunity to march away unmolested. Some citizensof Athens were now clandestinely practising with them, toobtain their concurrence in putting a stop to the democracyand the building of the long-walls. But the whole body ofthe Athenian people rushed out into the field against them,with a thousand Argives and the respective quotas of theirallies, in the whole amounting to fourteen thousand. Theyjudged them quite at a loss about the means of a retreat; andthe design also to overthrow their popular government beganto be suspected. Some Thessalian horsemen came also upto join the Athenians, in pursuance of treaty, who afterwardsin the heat of action revolted to the Lacedaemonians.
They fought at Tanagra of Boeotia, and the victoryrested with the Lacedaemonians and allies; but the slaughterwas great on both sides. The Lacedaemonians afterwardstook their route through the district of Megara; and havingcut down the woods, returned to their own home throughGeranea, and the Isthmus.
On the sixty-second day after the battle of Tanagra, theAthenians had taken the field against the Boeotians, underthe command of Myronides*. They engaged them, and
• Plutarch in his Apothegm relates, that when Myronides was puttinghimself at the head of the Athenians on this occasion, his officers told him" they were not all come out yet into the field," he replied briskly, " Allare come out that will fight," and marched oft'.







OCR Output








B. IV. 355 YEAR VIII. BEFORE CHRIST 424.


the victory might declare. In both these respects, theyjudged their present posture the most judicious ; because itwas not their own business to attack, or voluntarily to run intoconflict and danger; and thus having manifestly exhibitedtheir alacrity to act defensively, a victory might justly be as­cribed to them without the expence of a battle. In re­gard further to the Megareans the consequence could notbut be fortunate: For, in case the latter had never beheldthem thus prompt in their succour, they would have stoppedall farther risk, and so undoubtedly they should have lostthe city, as men completely vanquished: But now, shouldthe Athenians decline an engagement, the points for whichthey themselves came thither must be secured without a blow ;which proved to be the result. For the MegarCans, whenthe Athenians came out and drew up in order close to thelong walls, and then, as the enemy did not advance to at­tack them, stood quiet in their ranks ; their commanders alsojudging the hazard by no means equal, and themselves, whohad so far been successful, not at all concerned to begin anengagement against superior numbers, in which, shouldthey prevail, they could only take Megara; but, should theymiscarry, must lose the flower of their domestic strength,especially as their opponents would act in probability withmore daring resolution, since, as the large strength they hadnow in the field consisted only of quotas from several con­stituents, they hazarded but little ; thus facing one anotherfor a considerable space, and neither side presuming to makean attack, till each at length wheeled off, the Athenians firsttowards Nisaea, and the Peloponnesians again to their for­mer post.—Then, I say, the Megareans in the interest of theexiles, regarding Brasidas as victor, aud animated by therefusal of attack on the Athenian 'side, open the gates ofMegara to Brasidas himself, and the several commandersfrom the auxiliary states; and, having given them admission,proceed with them to consultation, whilst the partizans ofthe Athenian interest were in the utmost consternation.







OCR Output








B. III. TEAK IV.—BEFORE CHRIST 428. 211


" we are sensible of that method of procedure, which hath" hitherto prevailed amongst the Grecians—Revolters whilst" a war is on foot, and deserters from a former alliance, they" readily receive, and so long as their own interest is further-" edby it, abundantly caress them: Yet, judging them trai-" tors to their former friends, they regard them as persons" who ought not to be trusted. To judge in this manner iscertainly right and proper, where those who revolt and thoseM from whom they break asunder happen to be equal to one" another in turn of principle, in benevolent affection, and" well matched together in expedients of redress and military" strength, and no just reason of revolt subsists.—But the" case is quite different between us and the Athenians. And" we ought not to be treated with censure and reproach, from" the appearance of having deserted them in extremities, af-" ter having been honourably regarded by them in the season" of tranquillity. This our conduct to justify and approve," especially as we come to request your alliance, our words" shall first be employed, as we know that friendship can be" of no long continuance in private life, nor public associa-" tions have any stability unless both sides engage with an" opinion of reciprocal good faith, and are uniform in princi-" pie and manners. For out of dissonancy of temper, diver-" sities of conduct continually result.
" An alliance, it is true, was formerly made between us" and the Athenians, when you withdrew yourselves from" the Median war, and they stayed behind you to compleat" what was yet to be done. We grant it—we made an alli-
suspect nothing from the presence of the Mityleneans, who were equallybound in duty to attend. The Lacedaemonians and allies had thus an op.port unity of assembling together to receive complaints, and to encouragerevolts from Athens, without danger of suspicions or a detection of theircounsels, till they were ripe for execution. " The Lacedaenlonians, (it is"a remark which will afterwards occur in this history,) amongst one ano-" ther and in paying all due regard to the laws of their country, gave am-'' pie proofs of honour and virtue. But in regard to the rest of mankind," they reputed as honourable the things which pleased them, and as just" the things which promoted their interest."







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAR IX. BEFORE CHRIST 423. 399


that marched with him to advance full speed up that hillwhich he thought was most practicable and possess them­selves of it, and this with the utmost expedition, each as hewas able without regarding form, and endeavour to drive theBarbarians thence, who were already posting themselvesupon it, before they were joined by larger numbers andcould invest him on all sides. They did so, attacked, andmade themselves masters of the hill, which enabled the mainbody of the Grecians to march up without obstruction. Fornow the Barbarians were thrown into consternation, whentheir detachment had in this manner been beat off from theeminence. And here they discontinued the pursuit, imagin­ing the enemy had already passed the frontier, and securedtheir retreat.
Brasidas, when once he was master of the eminences,marched on without molestation; and the very same dayreached Arnissa, the first place within the dominions of Per-diccas. His soldiers indeed, who were exasperated againstthe Macedonians for having thus precipitately abandonedthem, whatever yokes of oxen they met with on their route,or whatever baggage lay dropped upon the ground, (as suchthings it was likely should happen in a retreat by night andconfused by fear), the former they unyoked and cut to pieces,and secreted the latter as lawful plunder. Here, Perdiccasfirst began to regard Brasidas as his enemy, and ever afterforced himself against his inclinations to hate the Peloponne-sians ; not indeed in his judgment preferring the Athenians,but prevailed upon by the exigencies of his own affairs, hecast about for the means of being again reconciled to the lat­ter, and disentangling himself from the former.
Brasidas, having retreated through Macedonia to Torone,findeth the Athenians already in possession of Mende. Judg­ing it impossible now to pass over into the Pallene and driveout the enemy, he chose to remain there and securely togarrison Torone. For, during the time of the expedition intoJL.yncus, the Athenians had put to sea against Mende and







OCR Output








B. t. INTRODUCTION. 29


-


" we are not to be abandoned: There are but three naval" powers amongst the Grecians of any consideration, your" own, our own, and that of the Corinthians. If you indo-" lently suffer two of these to be incorporated, by leaving us" a prey to the Corinthians, you must for the future make" head against the Corcyreans and Peloponnesians both:" But, if you grant your alliance to us, the contest will lie" against them alone, and your own naval strength be con-" siderably augmented."
In this manner the Corcyreans spoke ; and when theyhad concluded, the Corinthians took their turn as follow-eth
" SINCE these Corcyreans have not confined their dis-" course merely to solicit the favour of your alliance, but" have enlarged it with invectives against our injustice iri" making war upon them, we also lie under a necessity to" make some previous observations on both of those points," before we proceed to other matters. By this means you" will perceive your own great security in complying with" our demands, and what weighty reasons you have to reject" their importunate solicitations.
" They allege it as a maxim of prudence that they have" been hitherto averse to any foreign alliance: But their" motives in this were founded upon malice^ and not upon" virtue. They would have no ally to be a witness of the" wrongs they do ; they declined the society of such as" might put them to the blush. Their very island farther," which is finely situated for such arbitrary tempers, suffer-" eth them alone to judge those outrages they themselvesu commit: exempting them from fair and equitable trials," because they seldom go abroad to visit their neighbours," as their harbours are the constant and necessary resort of" others. Here then lieth the modesty of their unassociating"maxim: It was designed to prevent their having anypart-" ners in violence, that they might have it all to themselves ;" that, when they were superior, they might oppress without
Vol. I. S







OCR Output








1. IV. YEAR VII. BEFORE CHRIST 425. 309


" nians. That they should refrain from making any attempt" whatever upon the fortress, either by sea or land."
" That the Athenians should permit the Lacedaemonians" on the main-land to carry over a stated quantity of provi-" sions to those in the island, two Attic chanixes of meal" with two cotyls of wine*, and a piece of flesh for every" Spartan, and a moiety of each for every servant. These" provisions to be carried thither under the inspection of the" Athenians ; and no vessels whatever to cross over without" permission."
" That the Athenians, notwithstanding, be at liberty" to continue their guard round the island, but not to" land upon it: and should refrain from giving any annoy-" ance to the army of the Peloponnesians either by sea or" land."
" That if either party should violate these conditions, either" in the whole or any part whatever, the truce to be immedi-" ately void ; otherwise, to continue in force till the return of" the Lacedaemonian embassy from Athens."
" That the Athenians should convoy that embassy thither" and back again in a trireme."
" That upon their return the truce should be ended," when the Athenians should restore the ships now delivered" to them, in the same number and condition as they were" in before."
On these conditions a suspension of arms took place, inpursuance of which the ships were delivered up to the num­ber of sixty, and the ambassadors dispatched away, who, ar­riving at Athens, addressed themselves as followeth:
" HITHER, O Athenians, we are sent on the part of the" Lacedaemonians, to negotiate with you in behalf of their" citizens in the island, and to propose an expedient which" will tend very much to your advantage, and will at the same" time preserve as much as possible our own honour, in the" great calamity with which we are at present beset. It is
• More than two pints of meal, and one pint of wine, Engtish niea--iir«.
Vol. I. 3 G







OCR Output








2j2 • THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


teus the son of Pellicas, Callicrates the son of Callias, andTimanor the son of Timanthes: Those of the land forceswere Archetimus, the son of Eurytimus, and Isarchidas theson of Isarchus.
When they were come up as far as Actium, in the districtof Anactorium, where standeth the temple of Apollo, in themouth of the gulf of Ambracia, they were met by a herald,dispatched expressly in a row-boat by the Corcyreans, forbid­ding them " at their peril to proceed." But at the same timethe Corcyreans were busied at home in manning their ownships, repairing such as were old, to make them fit for service,and equipping the rest with the utmost expedition. Whenthe herald brought back nothing pacific from the Corinthians,and their squadron was now compleated to eighty ships (forthey had forty employed in the siege of Epidamnus), theysailed in quest of the enemy, and drawing up against them,came to an engagement. The victory fell beyond dispute tothe side of the Corcyreans, and fifteen ships of the Corinthi­ans were utterly destroyed.
Their good fortune was such, that on the very same day Epi­damnus was surrendered to the besiegers upon a capitulation,by which " all the strangers in the place were to be sold for slaves," but the Corinthians to be detained prisoners at discretion."
After the engagement at sea, the Corcyreans havingerected a trophy* upon Leucimna, a promontory of Cor-
• This was constantly done by the Grecians upon a victory. Nay, whenthe victory was claimed on both sides, both sides erected trophies, of whichseveral instances occur in Thucydides. The trophies for a victory at landwere decked out with the arms they had taken : Those for a victory at sea,with arm s also, and the shatters of the enemy's ships. "To demoKsh a tro-" phy was looked on as unlawful, and a kind of sacrilege, because they were" all consecrated to some deity : Nor was it less a crime to pay divine ado." ration before them, or to repair them when decayed, as may be likewiseCl observed of the Roman triumphal arches : This being the means to revive" the memory of forgotten quarrels, and engage posterity to revenge the" disgrace of their ancestors : For the same reason, those Grecians, who" tirst introduced the custom of erecting pillars for trophies, incurred a se-'• vere censurr from the ages thry lived in." Putter's Archwlogia, vol. ii. c. 1.2-







OCR Output








334 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


The number of Corinthians slain in the battle was twohundred and twelve ; that of Athenians somewhat less thanfifty.
The Athenians, leaving the islands, appeared the sameday before Crommyon, situated in its territory, and distantfrom the city of Corinth one hundred and twenty stadia*.They landed and ravaged the country, and that night re­posed themselves there. The day following they sailedalong the coast, first to Epidaurus ; and, after a kind of de­scent there, arrived at Methone, which lies between Epidau­rus and Troezen. Possessing themselves there of the isthmusof Cherronesus on which Methone is situated, they run upa wall across it, and fixed a garrison of continuance in thatpost, which for the future extended their depredations overall the districts of Troezen, Halias, and Epidaurus. But thefleet, when once this post was sufficiently secured, sailed awayfor Athens.
During the space of time which co-incided with thesetransactions, Eurymedon and Sophocles, who with the shipsof the Athenians had quitted Pylus to proceed in the voyageto Sicily, arrived at Corcyra. They joined the Corcyreansof the city, marching out against those who were posted onthe mount of Istone, that party who repassing soon after thesedition were at this time masters of the country, and corn-two bodies was, according to that writer, an actual renunciation of the vic­tory ; since it was against all rules for persons who had condescended tosuch a submission, to erect a trophy. But, without disparaging the goodqualities of Nicias, or his obedience to the institutions of his country in re­gard to the dead, which were ever most sacredly observed, it may be ques­tioned, whether he renounced the victory on this occasion. Thucydidessays the trophy was already erected, which ascertained, without doubt, thehonour of the victory, and nothing is said of its demolition by the Corinthi­ans, when they received this request of truce from Nicias. His re-em­barking in a hurry seems a distinct affair. It had no connexion with thelate battle, which had been clearly and fairly won ; but was owing to afresh army coming into the field on the side of the enemy. This stoppedhim indeed from gaining any fresh honour, but surely did not deprive himof what he was already possessed of.
• About 12 English miles.







OCR Output








40 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


"•to hinder our course, either against Corcyra, or«ny other'" place whither we are willing to go, and so violate treaties," take us first who are here in your power, and treat us as" enemies."
The persons sent thus delivered their message: and thewhole company of the Corcyreans who heard it, shouted outimmediately to " apprehend and put them to death." Butthe Athenians returned this answer:
" We neither begin war, ye men of Peloponnesus, nor vio-" late treaties. We are come hither auxiliaries to these Cor-" cyreans our allies. If therefore you are desirous to sail to" any other place, we hinder you not. But, if you go against" Corcyra, or any other place belonging to it, we shall endea-" vour to oppose you to the utmost of our power."
UPON receiving this answer from the Athenians, theCorinthians prepared for their return home, and erected atrophy at Sybota on the continent. But the Corcyreanswere employed in picking up the wrecks and bodies of thedead, driving towards them by favour of the tide and thewind, which, blowing fresh the night before, had scatteredthem all about; and, as if they too had the victory, erectedan opposite trophy at Sybota in the island. The reasonsupon which each side thus claimed the victory were these—The Corinthians erected> a trophy, because they had thebetter of the engagement till night, and so were enabled topick up most of the shatters and the dead ; they had, further,taken a number of prisoners, not less than a thousand, andhad disabled about seventy ships of the enemy.—The Cor­cyreans did the same ; because they also had disabled aboutthirty; and, upon the coming up of the Athenians, had re­covered all the wreck and dead bodies driving towards them jand because the Corinthians, tacking about, had retired fromthem the night before, so soon as they descried the Athenianships ; and when they came to offer them battle at Sybota,durst not come out against them. In this manner did bothsides account themselves victorious.







OCR Output








32Q THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" an errand was quite superfluous, since opportunities might" be lost by so dilatory a measure: if they were really" convinced of the truth of the report, they should at once" put to sea against their enemies." He then proceeded toa malicious glance against Nicias, son of Niceratus, who atthat time presided over the military affairs. He hated him,and sneered him thus—That " if their generals were really" men, it would be any easy matter to sail thither with an" additional strength, and make a seizure of those in the44 island; for his own part, was he in command, he would" do it in a trice." The Athenians began immediately toclamour and rail at Cleon, for not instantly setting aboutthat enterprise himself, which to him appeared so easy.This Nicias laying hold of, chagrined at the same time bythe sneer upon himself, called upon him aloud—" To take" what force he pleased, and to perform the service in his" stead." Cleon, imagining this to be a mere verbal offer,declared himself ready. But when he found that Niciaswas earnest in the point of resignation, he drew back, al­leging, that " it could not be, since not he but Nicias was" general." He trembled now, since he never suspectedthat the other would venture to give up his office to him.—Nicias however called a^ second time upon him, and for­mally surrendered his office to him, so far as related to Pylus,desiring the Athenians to be his witnesses. The people now(for such is the temper of the multitude) the more painsCleon took to decline the voyage, and disentangle himselffrom his own bravados, called out so much the more vehe­mently upon Nicias to give up the command, and roaredaloud at the other to go on board. Unable now to extricatehimself, he intimates his acceptance of the employ, andstanding forth, averred, that " he was not under the least" dread of the Lacedaemonians, would not be accompanied" by so much as one Athenian, but would take only what" Lemnians and Imbrians were at hand, and those targeteers" who were come to their aid from iEnus, and the four hun­







OCR Output








290 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


by night into Argia. They afterwards passed undiscoveredbetwixt the city of the Argians, and the post of the Acarna-nians at Crenae, and so perfected their junction with the Am-braciots at Olpae. After this junction, their numbers beinglarge, they take possession next morn, at break of day, of apost called Metropolis, and there fix their encampment.
Not long after this the Athenian squadron of twenty sailcomes into the bay of Ambracia, to succour the Argians.Demosthenes also arrived, with two hundred heavy-armedMessenians, and sixty Athenian archers. The station ofthe fleet was fixed under the fort of Olpae. But the Acar-nanians, and some few of the Amphilochians, who had al­ready gathered into a body at Argos (for the majority ofthem was obstructed by the Ambraciots), got every thing inreadiness to engage the enemy. They elect Demosthenes tobe the commander of the whole associated force, with theassistance of their own generals. He caused them to ad­vance near Olpae, and there encamped them. A great hol­low lay between the armies. For five days they remainedm a state of inaction, but on the sixth both sides drew up inorder of battle. The Peloponnesians were more numerous,and their line of course was further extended. Demos­thenes therefore, that he might not be inclosed, placeth anambuscade of the heavy and light-armed, to the number inall of about four hundred, in a hollow way overgrown withshrubs and bushes, with orders that in the heat of the chargethey should rise up and attack the over extended line of theenemy in their rear. When all things were ready on bothaides, they came to blows. Demosthenes led the right wing,composed of the Messenians, and his few Athenians. Theother consisted of the Acarnanians, drawn up in the orderthey happened to fall into as they came up, and the Am-philochian darters who were at hand. But the Peloponne­sians and Ambraciots were drawn up promiscuously, exceptthe Mantineans. The Mantineans stood embodied ratherto the left, but not in the extremity : For Eurylochus, with a







OCR Output








B. I. TNTRODOCTIOW 39


up, and then they also fell back themselves: For now itbegan to be dark, and the Corinthians being turned about,had dissolved their order. In this manner were they sepa­rated from one another: And the naval engagement endedWith the night*
The Corcyreans having recovered their station at Leucym-na, those twenty ships from Athens, under the command ofGlauco the son of Leager, and Andocides the son of Leogo-ras, having passed through floating carcases and wrecks, cameup to the station not long after they had been descried. Yetthe Corcyreans (for now it was night) were in great conster­nation lest they should be enemies: But they were soonknown, and then came to anchor.
Next morning the thirty Athenian ships, accompanied bysuch of the Corcyreans as were fit for sea, weighed away andmade over for the haven at Sybota where the Corinthians lay,designing to try whether or no they would engage again. TheCorinthians, putting their ships from off the shore, and draw­ing up into order in the deeper water, remained there withoutadvancing. They had no design or inclination to begin an­other engagement, as they were sensible of the junction of thefresh Athenian ships, and of the numerous difficulties withwhich they were beset, about the custody of the prisonerswhom they had on board, and the want of necessary materialsto repair their ships upon this desert coast. Their thoughtswere more employed upon their return home, and the methodto accomplish it, from the apprehension lest the Athenians,judging the league to be broke as they had come to blows, mightobstruct their passage. For this reason they determined be­forehand to dispatch a boat with proper persons, though with­out the solemn protection of a herald, and so to sound theirintentions. The message to be delivered was this :
" YOU are guilty of injustice, ye men of Athens, in be-" ginning war and violating treaties: For you hinder us" from taking due vengeance upon our enemies, by lifting" up your arms against us. If you are certainly determined







OCR Output








B. I. INTRODUCTION.


This was the pollution which the Lacedaemonians requiredthem to drive away; with a face indeed of piety, as vindicat­ing the honour of the Gods; but knowing at the same timethat Pericles the son of Xantippus was tainted with it by theside of his mother; and thence concluding that if he could beremoved, the Athenians would more easily be brought to anaccommodation with them. They could not carry their hopesso far as actually to effect his banishment, but to raise againsthim the public odium, as if the war was partly owing to themisfortune they suffered in him. For, carrying with himthe greatest sway of any Athenian then alive, and presidingentirely in the administration, he was most steady in opposi­tion to the Lacedaemonians, dissuading the Athenians fromany concession, and exciting them to the war.
The Athenians in return required the Lacedaemonians" to drive away the pollution contracted at Taenarus." Forthe Lacedaemonians some time ago, having caused their sup­plicant Helots to rise out of Neptune's temple at Taenarus,had led them aside, and slew them. And to this action theythemselves impute the great earthquake, which happened af­terwards at Sparta.
They further required them " to drive away the pollutionof the Chalciaecan Pallas," the nature of which was this:
When Pausanias the Lacedaemonian, upon his being firstrecalled by the Spartans from his command in Hellespont!and brought to his trial before them, was acquitted of thecharge of male-administration, but was no longer intrustedwith the public commission; fitting out an Hermionian tri­reme on his own private account, he arriveth in Hellespont,without any authority from the Lacedaemonians. He gaveout that he did it for the service of the Grecian war; but hisintention was to carry on his negotiations with the king,which, aspiring to the monarchy of Greece, he had begunbefore. He had formerly conferred an obligation upon theking, from which the whole of his project took its date.When, after the return from Cyprus, during his first appear­


 







OCR Output








23ft THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" of mere necessity dependent on the Athenians: that, uh-" less he changed his conduct, he would bring over but few" of his enemies into friendship, but turn a far greater num-
" ber of friends into enemies." He was wrought upon by
this remonstrance, and set all the Chians and others, whomhe had yet reserved, at liberty. For those, who had at anytime descried this squadron, had never thought of flying, butboldly approached it as certainly Athenian. They really hadno ground to imagine, that whilst the Athenians were mas­ters of the sea, a Peloponnesian fleet should dare to put overto Ionia.
From Ephesus, Alcidas made the best of his way, or ra­ther fled outright; for he had been discovered by the Sa-laminian and the Paralus, whilst he lay at anchor nearClaros. These vessels happened at that time to be on acourse from Athens. He was now apprehensive of a chace,and so stretched out to sea; determining, if possible, not tomake any land again till he had reached Peloponnesus.Notice of him came first to Paches and the Athenians fromErythraea; it was then repeated from all parts. For as thecountry of Ionia is quite unfortified, the sight of the Pelo-ponnesians on that coast, had struck a panic, lest, thoughtheir intention was not to continue there, they should atonce assault and destroy their cities. The Salatninian* alsoand Paralus, after they had descried him at Claros, camevoluntarily to notify the tidings. Paches set upon the chacewith warmth, and pursued it as far as the isle of Latmos.But there giving up all hope of reaching him, he turnedback again for his post; and since he had not been able to
! • These two vessels seem to have been the packets or yachts of the Stateof Athens. Their force was small in comparison of the ships of war, asthey were chiefly designed for nimbleness and expedition. They carriedambassadors to and fro, went on all public errands, whether of a civil orreligious nature, and transported magistrates and generals to and from theirposts. They were navigated only by free-born citizens of Athens, who be-sides receiving more pay, esteemed it also a greater honour to serve onboard these vessels, which were sacred.







OCR Output








24 THE FELOPONNESIAN WAR.


embassy at the same time also to Athens, instructed by anymeans to prevent the junction of the Athenian to the navalstrength of the Corcyreans, which might hinder them frombringing this war to a successful issue. The Athenians beingmet in general assembly*, both embassies rose up to pleadtheir own cause; and the Corcyrean spoke as followeth:
• The lx*.X>>ri* or assembly of the people. In this the sovereignty wasvested ; and it is proper the English reader should grow acquainted withthis particular form in the Athenian democracy.
The people of Athens were divided into ten tribes, which presided byrotation. The year was divided into ten courses, and each tribe presidedabout five weeks. The tribe in course elected fifty persons to manage bytheir authority and in their name : These were called Prytanes. This beingtoo large a number for business, they were subdivided into tens, each ofthese divisions presiding for a week : and these were called Proedri. Oneof the Proedri presided or was in the chair for a day, and was stiled Epis-tates. For that day, and he never enjoyed this pre-eminence a second timein his life, he was invested with the highest trust in the government. Hekept the public seal and the keys of the citadel and treasury. In the as-sembly of the people he ordered all the proclamations, regulated proceed­ings, put the question, and declared the majority.
The assemblies of the people were of two kinds, ordinary and extraordina­ry. Of the first kind, four were regularly held during each presidency ofthe tribes, and at the third of them ambassadors from foreign states hadpublic audience. The latter were occasionally convened by the president!in course, or by the generals of the state. Some days before-hand, noticewas publicly given by the senate or council of five hundred upon what sub­jects they were to deliberate; but this could not be observed upon suddenemergencies.
They met early in the morning, generally in the Pnyx, at the summons ofthe public crier. At the second summons they were obliged to attend attheir peril. For then the proper officers ran along the forum with a ropestretched across, and rubbed over with vermilion, and all upon whom a markwas found were fined ; but those who attended early and regularly, receivedhalf a drachma each for attendance. The number which attended gene­rally amounted to five or six thousand.
The assembly opened with the sacrifice of a young pig to Ceres, and theblood was sprinkled round by way of purification. Then a prayer was pro­nounced aloud by the crier for the prosperity of the commonwealth ofAthens ; which ended, a curse was next pronounced on every citizen whodid sny thing to the prejudice of his country. Then the presidents of theweek opened the points upon which they were convened, and the assem­bly proceeded to business.







OCR Output








140 THE PELOP0NNESIAN WAR.


ed from Athens Procne, the daughter of Pandion, nor did theyboth belong to the same part of Thrace. Tereus lived inDaulia, a city of that province which is now called Phocis,and which in his time was inhabited by Thracians. Here itwas that the women executed the tragical business of Itys ;and many poets who make mention of the nightingale, do it bythe name of the Daulian bird. And it is more probable thatPandion matched his daughter to a person at this lesser dis­tance from him, from the view of mutual advantage, than toone seated at Odrysa?, which is many days journey furtheroff. But Teres, whose name is not the same with Tereus, wasthe first king of Odrysae, and compassed the regal power byviolence. This man's son Sitalces, the Athenians admittedinto their alliance, hoping he might gain over to their sidethe cities of Thrace and Perdiccas. Nymphodorus arrivingat Athens finished the alliance with Sitalces, and made his sonSadocus an Athenian. He also undertook to bring the warhow in Thrace to an end, and to persuade Sitalces to send tothe Athenians a body of Thracian horsemen and targeteers.He also reconciled Perdiccas to the Athenians by procuringfor him the restitution of Therme : Immediately after which,Perdiccas joined the Athenians and Phormio in the expedi­tion against the Chalcideans. Thus was Sitalces the son ofTeres, a Thracian king, and Perdiccas, the son of Alexander,a Macedonian king*, brought into the Athenian league.
The Athenians in the fleet of one hundred sail, still con­tinuing their cruize on the coast of Peloponnesus, took So­lium a fort belonging to the Corinthians, and delivered theplace with the district of land belonging to it to the Paliren-
• Macedonia at.this time was not reckoned a part of Greece, and bothking and people were regarded as Barbarians. Alexander, father of thisPerdiccas, was obliged to plead an Argive pedigree, in order to assist atthe Olympic games And Perdiccas now himself, whose successor Alex­ander the Great, not many years af4er, was leader of Greece and conqueror,of Asia, was at this time balancing between the Lucedxmonians and Athe­nians, important to either merely as a neighbour to their colonies in Thrice.The Greek generals will be sometimes seen in this history to use themonarch of Macedonia very cavalierty.







OCR Output








XVlii SOME ACCftUNT OF DR. SMITH.


ministry, he took Deacon's orders at Grosvenor Chapel inWestminster, on Sunday, the first of June, 1735, from Benja­min Bishop of Winchester. On the 10th of September fol­lowing, he was presented by his Patron, James Earl of Der­by, to the Rectory of Trinity Church in Chester. On the14th of the same month he took Priest's orders in the Cathe­dral Church of Chester, from Samuel the Bishop of that See:was instituted the same day, and inducted the next.
Mr. Smith's first publication was* " Dionysius Longinuson the Sublime, translated from the Greek, with Notes andObservations, and some Account of the Life, Writings, andCharacter of the Author:" in one volume 8vo. inscribed tothe Right Hon. the Earl of Macclesfield. The anony­mous Author of " the History of the Works of the Learned,"for May, 1739, says of this work :—" The Translation of" Longinus is, according to the most impartial judgment I" can frame of it, after a comparison with others, the most" elegant version that has been made of that Author into the" English tongue. The preliminary Discourse excels that of" the celebrated Boileau, which he has prefixed to his edition."Father Philips, in " A Letter to a Student at a Foreign Uni­versity," published 1756, recommending, among other books,Longinus on the Sublime, says:—" A late English Translation" of the Greek Critic, with Notes and Observations by Mr." Smith, is a credit to the Author, and reflects a lustre on" Longinus himself. As conversant as you are in the original" language, you cannot but be highly pleased with this per-" formance." In the " Weekly Miscellany" by RichardHooker,of the Temple, Esq. No. 363, dated Saturday, Decem-
• The fourth is the best edition of Longinus. The Dean corrected txco co­pies of the third edition : the one for the Printer to follow, the other forhimself to keep; the Dean's copy I possess. I shewed the Dean Mr.Troup's aitictsm of his Translation. The Dean knowing Troup to be in thewrong, thought him not worth answering-; he said, " I followed Pearce,and Pearce is the best. I shall lake no notice of Troup." The frontispieceto Longinus describes the power of eloquence. It was delineated, not by aprofessed limner, but by Dr. Wall of Worcester, an eminent physician,







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAR VIII. BEFORE CHRIST 424. 347


" spreads amongst us ; deterred further by these hopes already" blasted, which assured us alternately of success against one" another, had not they interfered to obstruct and controul" us ; let us send far away from Sicily these enemies that are" hovering about us ; let us enter into firm and lasting uni-" on with one another; at least, let us conclude a truce for" so long a time as can possibly be agreed, and defer our" own private disputes to a remote decision. In a word, let" us acknowledge, that, if my advice takes place, we shall" continue free in our respective communities, where, mas-" ters of ourselves and accountable to none besides, we shall" be enabled to recompence both our friends and our foes ac-" cording to their deserts. But, in case it be obstinately re­jected, and the mischievous insinuations of others prevail," why then adieu henceforth to the just vindication of our" own wrongs ; or, if we are violently bent upon effecting it," we must strike up a friendship with unrelenting foes, and" must range ourselves in opposition there, where nature hath" most closely attached us.
" For my own part, who now (as I observed at settingu out) represent the greatest of the Sicilian states, and in" this character am more accustomed to attack another than" to defend myself, I here, in her name, conjure you to make" use of conviction and unite together in a speedy accom-" modation, nor so eagerly to thirst after the damage of our" foes as to plunge ourselves into irreparable mischiefs. I" am not conscious to myself of that foolish haughtiness of" heart, which expects to be absolute in its own private will;" or that fortune, whose master I am not, should attend my" orders ; but I am ready to give way to good sense and rea-" son. And I require you all respectively thus to give way" to one another, and not to wait till you are compelled to" do so by your enemies. It can argue no baseness, for" kinsmen to give way to kinsmen, a Dorian to a Dorian, or" a Chalcidean to others of his own race. Nay, what is" most comprehensive, we are all neighbours, all joint-in­







OCR Output








B. III. 229 YEAR V*. BEFORE CHRIST 427.


come up with them by sea, thought a great point was carried,in. not finding them refuged in any harbour, where theymust have been under a necessity to fortify their station, andoblige him to a regular procedure and attack.
In sailing back he touched at Notium of the Colopho-nians, in which at this time the Colophonians resided, theupper city having been taken by Itamenes and the Barba­rians, who had broke in by favour of an intestine sedition.It was taken about the time, that the Peloponnesians madetheir second incursion into Attica. But in Notium asecond sedition broke out, between those who resorted thitherfor refuge and the old inhabitants. The latter having ob­tained an aid of Arcadinns and Barbarians from Pissuthnesskept within a part separated by a traverse wall, and themanagement of affairs was in the hands of some Colophoni­ans of the upper city, who were in the Medish interest, andhad been received amongst them as an aid. But the former,who had resorted hither for refuge, and were a body ofexiles, apply to Paches for protection. He invited Hippias,the commander of the Arcadians within the transverse wall,to come out to a conference, assuring him, " if they came" to no agreement, he would replace him within both safe" and sound." Upon this Hippias came out; And Pachesimmediately put him under an arrest, but laid no bonds uponhim. This done, he on a sudden assaults the wall: by favourof the surprize carries it; and puts all the Arcadians andBarbarians within to the sword. After this, he replacethHippias within, in the same state he had promised; butwhen he had him there, immediately apprehends him againand shoots him to death with arrows. Notium he deliversinto the hands of the Colophonians, excluding those onlywho were in the interest of the Mede. In process of time,the Athenians having sent leaders thither on purpose, anddeclared Notium an Athenian colony, settled in it the Colo­phonians that were any where to be found, under the accus­tomed regulations.
Vol. I. 2 V







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAR VII. BEtORE CHRIST 425. 331


(for Pylus is a part of the ancient Messenia), infested Laconia ,with depredations and did them vast damage, the more be­cause they spoke the same dialect*.
As for the Lacedaemonians, who never knew before whatit was to be thus plundered, war in such a shape being newto them, and their Helots deserting continually to the foe ; ap­prehensive farther, lest such unusual proceedings within theirown district might draw worse consequences after them—they had a painful sense of their present situation. Thiscompelled them to send their embassies to Athens, desiroushowever at the same time to conceal what they really thoughtof their own state, and spare no artifice for the recovery ofPylus and their people. But the Athenians grew more un­reasonable in their demands, and after many journeys to andfro sent them finally away with an absolute denial. Such wasthe course of proceedings in relation to Pylus.
The same summer, and immediately on the close of theformer event, the Athenians set out to invade Corinth witha fleet of eighty ships which carried two thousand heavy-armed of their own people, and with some horse-transportson board of which were two hundred horsemen. They werealso attended by some of their confederates, by the Milesiansand Andrians and Carysthians. Nicias the son of Niceratuswith two colleagues commanded this armament. At theearly dawn of morning they came to anchor between Cherro-nesus and Reitus, on the shore of that place which the Soly-gian hill overhangs, of which formerly the Dorians possess­ing themselves made war upon the Corinthians then in Co­rinth who were of iEolian descent. Upon that eminencethere is now a village called Solygia. From the shore wherethe armament came now to anchor, this village was distantabout twelvej, the city of Corinth sixtyf, and the Isthmustwenty stadia^.


'The Doric. f Near 1J mile. \ 6 miles. §2 miles.







OCR Output








B. III. YEAR V. BEFORE CHRIST 427. 5247


used it as a garrison. But it was the scheme of Nicias, tofix the post of observation for the Athenians there, as beingmuch nearer situated, and to remove it from Budorus andSalamis. This would prevent the sudden courses of thePeloponnesians, frequent from thence; would curb the pi­ratical cruizers ; and, at the same time, stop all importationsinto Megara. Beginning therefore with the two forts de­tached from Nisaea, he took them by means of the engines heplayed against them from the sea; and having thus openedthe channel between them and the island, he took in by a wallof fortification that part of the main land from whence, onlyby crossing the morass and the help of a bridge, a succourcould be thrown into the island, which lay at a very smalldistance from the continent. This work was compleated ina few days, after which Nicias, leaving behind in the islanda-sufficient garrison to defend the works, drew off the rest ofhis army.
About the same time this summer, the Plataeans, whoseprovisions were quite spent, and who could not possibly holdout any longer, were brought to a surrender in the following
manner The enemy made an assault upon their wall,
which they had not sufficient strength to repel. The Lace­demonian general being thus convinced of their languidcondition, was determined not to take the place by storm.In this he acted pursuant to orders sent him from Lacedae-mon, with a view, that whenever a peace should be conclu­ded with the Lacedaemonians, one certain condition of whichmust be reciprocally to restore the places taken in the war,Plataea might not be included in the restitution, as havingfreely and without compulsion gone over to them. A heraldis accordingly dispatched with this demand—" Whether they" are willing voluntarily to give up the city to the Lacedae-" monians, and accept them for their judges who would pun-" ish only the guilty, and contrary to forms of justice not" even one of those."—The herald made this demand aloud.And the Plataeans, who were now reduced to excessive weak­ness, delivered up the city.







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAR VII. BEFORE CHRIST 425. 307


armed soldiers, the harbour also to be occupied by the shipsof the enemy, which lay quiet in their posts, than perplexedhow to act they sailed back for the present to the isle ofProne not far distant and desart, and there spent the night.
The day following, being formed into the order of bat­tle, they shewed themselves again as ready for engagement,should the enemy venture to stand out against them into theopen sea ; and if not, were determined to force their wayinto the harbour. The enemy still kept in the same quietposture, nor set about executing their former design of bar­ring the entrances. They continued in their usual positionalong the shore, when they had manned their vessels, andgot every thing ready to engage the assailants should theybreak into the harbour, where there was no danger of beingstraitened for room. The Athenians, perceiving their in­tent, broke into the harbour at both entrances. Fallingthere upon the greater number of vessels now advanced intodeep water to obstruct the passage, they put them to flight;and following the chace, which could be but short, theyshattered several, and took five, one of which had herwhole crew on board. They proceeded to attack the rest,which had fled amain towards the shore. Some moreover,which had just been manned, were disabled before theycould launch into the deep. Others, deserted by the mari­ners who had fled along the shore, they fastened to theirown, and towed away empty. The Lacedaemonians seeingthese things, and prodigiously alarmed at the sad event,lest now the communication should be cut off with the bodyin the island, rushed down with all their force to preventit. Armed as they were they plunged into the water, andcatching hold of the vessels in tow pulled them back to­wards the shore. It was now the apprehension of everysoul amongst them, that the business flagged wherever hehimself was not present. Great was the tumult in this con­test for the ships, inverting the general custom of both con­tending parties. For the Lacedaemonians, inflamed and







OCR Output








B. III. 233 YEAR V. BEFORE CHRIST 427.


" ver decreed; or, instigated by lucre, will endeavour to" seduce you by the elaborate and plausible artifice of" words. In such contentions, the State indeed awards the" victory to whom she pleaseth, but she sustains all the da-" mage herself. You are answerable for this, Athenians !" You! who fondly doat on these wordy competitions !" You ! who accustomed to be spectators of speeches and" hearers of actions. You measure the possibility of futureM effects by the present eloquence of your orators ; you"judge of actions already past, not by the certain conviction" of your own eyes, but the fallible suggestions of your" ears, when soothed by the inveigling insinuating flow of" words. You are the best in the world to be deceived by" novelty of wit, and to refuse to follow the dictates of the44 approved judicious speaker,—slaves as you are to whatever" trifles happen always to be in vogue, and looking down" with contempt on tried and experienced methods. The" most earnest wish that the heart of any of your body ever" conceived is, to become a speaker; if that be unattaina-" ble, you range yourselves in opposition against all who" are so, for fear you should seem in judgment their infe-" riors. When any thing is acutely uttered, you are ready" even to go before it with applause, and intimate your own" preconception of the point, at the same time dull at dis-" cerning whither it will tend. Your whole passion, in a" word, is for things that are not in reality and common" life; but of what passeth directly before your eyes you" have no proper perception. And, frankly, you are quite" infatuated by the lust of hearing, and resemble more the" idle spectators of contending sophists, than men who meet" to deliberate upon public affairs. From such vain amuse-" ments endeavouring to divert you, I boldly affirm, that" no one city in the world hath injured you so much as Mi-44 tylene.
" Those who, unable to support the rigour of your go-44 vernment, or who, compelled to do it by hostile force,







OCR Output








». IV. YEAR VII.—BEFORE CHRIST 425. 315


sea when the weather was tempestuous. And to strengthentheir guard, they had now received a reinforcement of twenty-sail from Athens, so that the number of their shippingamounted in the whole to seventy. The Peloponnesiansmaintained their post on the continent, and made frequent as­saults upon the fort: intent all along to seize the first favour­able opportunity, and to accomplish the preservation of theircountrymen.
In Sicily, this while, the Syracusans and confederates,augmenting the number of their guard-ships on the stationof Messene with another squadron they had since equipped,from Messene renewed the war. The Locrians spared nopains to spur them on from the great aversion they bore tothe Rhegians. They had now broke into the territories ofthe latter with their whole force. They had even a mind tohazard a naval engagement against them, as they saw thenumber of Athenian ships at hand to be very inconsiderable,and had received intelligence that the larger numbers design­ed for this service were stopped for the present to block upthe isle of Sphacteria. For should they once get the betterat sea, they hoped, as they then might attack Rhegium bothby sea and land, to find it an easy conquest, and so the pos­ture of their own affairs would be considerably strengthened.For as Rhegium, which is a promontory of Italy, lies at avery small distance from Messene in Sicily, they could thenprevent the approach of the Athenians, and be entirely mas­ters of the strait. This strait is that part of the sea whichruns between Rhegium and Messene, and over which lies theshortest cut from Sicily to the continent. It is the placewhich was formerly called Charybdis, and through whichUlysses is said to have sailed. As the current here sets instrongly from two great seas, the Tyrrhene and Sicilian, andruns with great rapidity, it is not at all strange that it shouldhave been esteemed a dangerous passage.
Yet in the very middle of this strait the Syracusans and







OCR Output








366 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" not expose you to our resentments ; if you allege that the" dangers through which your liberty must be sought to over-" balance the prize; that in justice it ought only to be pro-" posed to such as are able to embrace the offer, but that no
" one ought to be compelled against his own inclinations;
" I shall beseech the tutelary gods and heroes of this island44 to bear me witness, that whereas I come to serve you, and" cannot persuade, I must now, by ravaging your country," endeavour to compel you. And, in acting thus, I shall not" be conscious to myself of injustice, but shall justify the" step on two most cogent motives:—For the sake of the" Lacedaemonians ; lest whilst they have only your affections," and not your actual concurrence, they may be prejudiced" through the sums of money you pay to the Athenians:—" For the sake of all the Grecians ; that they may not be ob-" structed by you in their deliverance from bondage. This" is the end we propose, and this will justify our proceedings." For without the purpose of a public good, we Lacedaemo-" nians ought not to set people at liberty against their wills." We are not greedy of empire, but we are eager to pull down" the tyranny of others. And how could we answer it to the" body of Greece, if, when we have undertaken to give libertv" to them all, we indolently suffer our endeavours to be tra-" versed by you ?
" Deliberate seriously on these important points, and ani-" mate yourselves with the glorious ambition of being the" first who enter the list for the liberties of Greece, of gain-" ing an eternal renown, of securing the uninterrupted pos-" session of your private properties, and investing the State" of which you are members with the most honourable of" all titles*."
Here Brasidas concluded. And the Acanthians, whohad already heard this affair largely discussed on both sides,and secretly declared their votes—the majority, because thearguments of Brasidas were prevailing, and because they
• Free.







OCR Output








DISCOURSE III. lxil


comment, Xenophon will give it in his Polity of the Athe­nians.—»"Tn one point (says he) the Athenians are deficient." ¥iif, beside their being sovereigns of the sea, they were" seated on an island, it would be ever in their power to ra-" vage others at pleasure, and yet they could not be ravaged" themselves so long as they held the mastery at sea; their" lands could never be laid waste, no enemy could post" themselves upon them. But now the occupiers of lands" and the wealthy Athenians fly before invaders ; whilst the4 people in general, conscious they have nothing to be burnt" and nothing to be plundered, live exempt from fear nor" fly before an invader. The expedient used on such occa-" sions is, that the former deposit their most valuable ef-" fects in the isles, and trusting to their superiority at sea," slight all the devastations an enemy can make in Attica."England is complete where Athens was deficient. And howfond must both Pericles and Xenophon have been of theisland and maritime power of Great Britain ? I will not pre­tend to anticipate the reader's pleasure by descending intomore particularities. It may suffice to add, that the finalanswer of the Athenians is drawn up by the advice of Pe­ricles, that " they will do nothing by command; they had" already offered to refer all disputes to a fair judicial deci-" sion; so far only, but no farther, compliance must be ex-
" pected from Athens." Here all negociation comes to
an end; and the war will very soon commence.
Thus I have endeavoured to give some idea of the firstbook of Thucydides. It is a grand piece of work beyond alldenial. But Rapin thinks our author hath overdone it " out" of a desire of prefixing a too stately portal to his his-" tory." Could the portal have been thought too stately, ifthe whole fabric had been compleatly finished ? To form aright judgment here, we should examine the Resign and notthe execution: The latter is imperfect, is broke off. So,look at it from the park, the Banqueting-house at Whitehallk too big and towering for what stands near it. But hath







OCR Output








civ A Survey of the History.


a time on a spot of ground, where nothing but ruin and de­struction could befal them ? Men so dispirited can makebut faint opposition against an always high-spirited and nowsuccessful enemy. They soon lose another battle, and thedecisive engagement is fast approaching.
But before it is fought, Thucydides, animated with morethan historic spirit, emulates his admired Homer, reviewsthe parties concerned, and catalogues the troops now warringagainst and in defence of Syracuse. This catalogue is farfrom being a mere muster-roll of names. It is full of suchstrokes as must imprint many useful and moral reflections inthe mind. His little incidental sketches represent mankindin a true light, as Homer's do the world of nature. Homerpaints the soil, and Thucydides the people.
The mouth of the harbour is now barred up by theenemy. The Athenians must fight their way out; or, burnall their ships and march off by land. It is determined toattempt the former: and the consequence is the battle with­in the harbour of Syracuse. A more striking, more astonish­ing battle-piece was never exhibited ; and a masterly pencil,though none but a masterly one, might exactly delineate itfrom this description. The present temper of the comba­tants on both sides is strongly marked in the harangues be­fore the engagement. Nicias then said all, and the Athe­nians in action did their best; but all was unavailing. Ishall say no more about it, since the reader hath nothingto do but to turn his eye towards it, and distinctly view itthrough the whole of its process, till the Syracusans sail intriumph to their city, and raise the most glorious of all theirtrophies.
The wretched perplexities of the Athenians, the raisingof the siege, the mournful decampment, the good heart ofNicias sympathising in all their distress, and endeavouringto chear a little their desponding minds, their laboriousmarches whilst the enemy is harassing them both in frontand in rear and on all sides, the surrender of the column







OCR Output








B. III. 249 YEAR V.—BEFORE CHRIST 427.


" though never was persuasion so much to be despaired of" as at present. Were we indeed, who are the persecuted" party, entirely unknown to our judges, we might then al-" lege such evidence as through ignorance you could not" overturn, and so further our defence. But now we must" speak before men who are informed of every point. Nor" do our fears result from the prior knowledge you have had" of us, as if you were now proceeding against us for having" in valour been inferior to yourselves ; but, from our own" sad forebodings, that we are cited to a tribunal which hath" already condemned us, to gratify others. Yet, what we" can justly say for ourselves in regard to all our differences" with the Thebans, we shall boldly allege ; the good ser-" vices we have done to you and the rest of Greece we shall
" fairly recite and strive, if possible, to persuade.
" To your concise demand—Whether we have done any" good service in this war to the Lacedaemonians and their" allies ?—we answer thus : " If you interrogate us as ene-" mies, though we have done you no good, yet we have" done you no harm ; If you regard us as friends, you have" offended more than we, in making war upon us."—In re-" gard to the peace and against the Mede, we have ever" honestly performed our duty: The peace was not violated" first by us against him, we alone of all the Breotians at-" tended you in the field to maintain the liberty of Greece." For, though an inland people, we boldly engaged in the" sea-fight at Artemisium ; and in the battle, fought upon" this our native ground, we assisted you and Pausanias;' and" whatever the danger to which Greece, in that trouble-" some period of time, was exposed, in all we bore a share" beyond our strength. To you in particular, O ye Lace-" daemonians, in that greatest consternation Sparta ever felt," when after the earthquake your rebellious Helots had" seized upon Ithome, we immediately dispatched the third" part of our force for succour. These things you are bound" in honour never to forget. For thus upon former, and" those most critical occasions, we with honour shewed our­







OCR Output








B. III. 281 YEAR VI. BEFORE CHRIST 426.


" was now at the head of so large a force, to invade the ALto-" lians, who were such plagues to Naupactus ; and, if their" reduction could be compleated, the rest of that continent" might easily be brought into the Athenian subjection. For," though the iEtolians were a great and warlike people, yet," as they dwelled in open villages remote from one another," as light armour only was in use amongst them, they pre-" sumed he might easily complete their reduction, before any" succour could reach them." They advised him further," to begin with the Apodoti, to take the Ophionians next, then" to proceed to the Eurytanians (which is the most numerous" people of iEtolia, reported also to speak in a most barbarous" dialect, and to feed upon raw flesh); that, if these could be" surprised, the rest of /Etolia would submit of course." Hetherefore—willing to oblige the Messenians, and incited aboveall by the thought, that without exposing the Athenian forces,after he had done with the ./Etolians, he might march with theallied strength of the continent and penetrate by land as far asBoeotia, through the Locrians of Ozoli, to Cytinium in Doris,keeping Parnassus on his right till he got down amongst thePhocians,who he reckoned, from their constant friendship withthe Athenians would readily join him, or, however, might ea­sily be compelled to do it; and then, that Boeotia borders nexton the Phocians :—Demosthenes, I say, weighing from Leu-cas with his whole force, to the great regret of the Acarnani-ans, coasted along to Solium. He there communicated his planto the Acarnanians, in which they refused to join beause hehad refused the blockade of Leucas. Demosthenes, with hi3other force, the Cephallenians, and Messenians, and Zacyn-thians, and three hundred soldiers draughted from on boardthe Athenian ships (the fifteen Corcyrean were already de­parted), set about this expedition against the iEtolians. Hebegan it from Oeneon in Locris: For the Locrians, calledOzoke, were allies, and had notice to meet the Athenians withall their force in the midland parts. These, being not only-borderers, but using also the same kind of arms with the iEto-lians, were judged most proper to accompany the expedition,







OCR Output








362 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


foreign trust, and approved in all respects as a worthy man,he left behind him a strong presumption, that the rest of hiscountrymen are like himself*.
So soon therefore as it was known at Athens, that hewas arrived to take upon him the conduct of affairs inThrace, the Athenians declare Perdiccas their enemy, as­cribing this expedition to his cabals, and by strengtheningtheir garrisons kept a strict watch over all their dependantsin that quarter.
But Perdiccas with his own forces, and accompanied bythe body under Brasidas, marcheth against a neighbouringpotentate, Arribaeus son of Bromerus, king of the Macedo­nian Lyncestians: Enmity was subsisting between them, andthe conquest of him was the point in view. When he wasadvanced with his army, and in conjunction with Brasidas,to the entrance of Lyncus, Brasidas communicated his in­tention to hold a parley with Arrilwcus, before he proceededto act offensively against him ; and (if possible) to bringhim over to the Lacedaemonian alliance ; For Arribaeus hadalready notified by a herald, that he was willing to referthe points in dispute to the arbitration of Brasidas. TheChalcidean embassadors also, who followed the camp, werecontinually suggesting to him, that, " he ought not to plunge" himself rashly into difficulties for the sake of Perdiccas,"designing to reserve him more intire for their own service.And besides this, the ministers of Perdiccas had declared itat Lacedaemon to be their master's intention, to bring overall the neighbouring States into this alliance : So that itwas entirely with public views, that Brasidas insisted upontreating with Arribaeus. But Perdiccas urged in opposition,that " he had not brought Brasidas to be the judge of his" controversies, but to execute his vengeance on the ene-" mies he should point out to him ; that it would be unjust
• When Brasidas was beginning his march for Thrace, he wrote this let­ter to the Ephon at Sparta;—" 1 will execute your orders in this war, ordie." Plutarch's Laconic Apothegms.







OCR Output








310 THE PELOP0NNESIAN WAR.


" not our purpose to run out into a long unaccustomed flow" of words. We shall adhere to the rule of our country, to" spare many words where few may suffice ; and then only to" enlarge, when the important occasion requireth an exact de-" tail for the more judicious regulation of necessary acts." Receive therefore our discourse with an attention cleared of" enmity. Be informed as men of understanding ought ;" and conclude that you are only to be put in mind of that"judicious method of procedure, of which yourselves are"such competent judges.
" You have now an opportunity at hand to improve a pre-" sent success to your own interest and credit, to secure the" possession of what you have hitherto acquired, and to adorn" it with the accession of honour and glory. You are only" to avoid that insolence of mind so frequent to men who" have been, till the present, strangers to success. Such men" are ever apt to presume too much on larger acquisitions," though merely because their present prosperity was beyond" their expectation: Whilst they who have experienced the" frequent vicissitudes of fortune, have gained a more judi-" cious turn, and presume the least upon continuance of suc-" cess. And there is the highest reason to conclude, that ex-" perience hath improved the commonwealth of Athens and" us Lacedaemonians in this piece of wisdom, much more" than any other people.
" But be assured of it now, when you behold the calami-" ties with which we are at present environed; we, who are" invested with the highest honours and dignities of Greece," are this moment addressing ourselves to you, begging such" favours as we formerly thought were more peculiarly" lodged in our own dispensation. Not that we are thus re-" duced through failure of our strength, or through former" strength too haughtily exerted, but merely through the" weight of such unforeseen disasters as continually happen," and to which the whole of mankind alike are ever subject." And from hence it is right that you should learn, amidst







OCR Output








240 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" plain and open method they cannot possibly act, and artifice" must clear the way before them. For the man who openly" bestows any benefit upon it, is constantly suspected of doing" underhand a greater to himself.
" When affairs therefore of so high concern are before" you, when the general temper is so over-run with jealousy," we, who presume to advise, must enlarge our prospect" farther than you, who only assist at a transient consulta-" tion; because we are accountable for what we propose," and you are not accountable for the prejudices with which" you hear. For if not only he who proposed, but he who" complied, were equally answerable for events, your deter-" minations would be better framed than they are at present." But now, hurried along as you are by your hasty resent-" ments on any sinister event, you wreak your fury only upon" the single opinion of the person who advised, and not upon" your own joint opinions, by concurrence of which the mis-" carriage was incurred.
" For my part, I neither stand up to deny certain facts" in favour of the Mityleneans, nor to waste the time in" fruitless accusations. We are not debating now what" wrongs they have done us, since that would be a reproach" to sense ; but what determination about them is best." For though I can prove, beyond a scruple, that they have" injured us in the most outrageous manner, yet I shall not" for that reason advise you to butcher them, unless it be" expedient; nor, were they objects of forgiveness, should" I advise forgiveness, unless I judged it for the interest of" the public. I apprehend, that our consultations turn" more upon a future than a present view. And Cleon" here most confidently asserts, that the surest expedient of" your future welfare is, to prevent all other revolts by in-" flicting death in doom of this; but, equally confident of" the just expedient of future security, I declare quite on" the other side. And I intreat you, by no means to reject" the real advantage of mine for tbe specious colourings of







OCR Output








100 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


rus as a suppliant, and refuge in a cell built double by a par­tition. In the inner part of this cell he hid some of the Epho­ri : And, Pausanias coming to him and demanding the reasonof his supplication, they heard distinctly all that passed. Theman complained bitterly to him about the clause in the let­ters relating to himself, and expostulated with him about eve­ry particular—" why he, who had been so trusty to him dur-" ing the whole course of his negotiations with the king," should now be so highly honoured, as to be murdered up-" on an equal rank with the meanest of his tools ?" Pausaniasconfessed the truth of all that he alleged ; begged him " not" to be exasperated with what at present appeared;" assuredhim " he should not be hurt if he would leave his sanctuary;"and earnestly intreated him, " with all possible speed to go" the journey, and not to obstruct the schemes that were then" in agitation." The Ephori, having exactly heard him,withdrew: And now beyond a scruple convinced, they de­termined to apprehend him in the city. But it is reported,that at the instant fixed for his arrest, as he was walkingalong, and beheld the countenance of one of the Ephori ap­proaching towards him, he immediately discovered his bu­siness ; and another of them out of kindness intimating thematter by a nod, he took to his heels, and fled away fasterthan they could pursue him. The Chalcitrcan happened tobe near, and into a little house within the verge of thattemple he betook himself, and sat quietly down to avoid theinclemency of the outward air. They, who had lost thestart, came too late in the pursuit. But afterwards, theystripped the house of its roof and doors ; and, watching theiropportunity when he was within, they encompassed himround about*, immured him within, and placing a constantguard around, kept him beset, that he might perish with hun­ger. When he was ready to expire, and they found in howbad a state he lay within the house, they led him out of the
• Alcithea, the mother of Pausanias, is said to have brought the firstatone on th'i9 occasion : Such was the spirit of the ladies at Lacedxmnn.







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








B. III. YEAR IV. BEFORE CHRIST 428.


battlements, and sheltering themselves in the turrets, as nearat hand and covered over-head, there they continued theirwatch. Such was the form of the work by which the Plataeanswere inclosed on every side.
The enterprising body, when every thing was ready, layinghold of the opportunity of a night tempestuous with windand rain, and further at a dark moon, marched out of theplace. The persons, who had been authors of the project,were now the conductors. And first, they passed the ditchwhich surrounded the town ; then they approached quite upto the wall of the enemy, undiscovered by the guards. Thedarkness of the night prevented their being seen, and thenoise they made in approaching was quite drowned in theloudness of the storm. They advanced also at a great dis­tance from one another, to prevent any discovery from themutual clashing of their arms. They were further armed inthe most compact manner, and wore a covering only on theleft foot, for the sake of treading firmly in the mud. Atoneof the intermediate spaces between the turrets they got underthe battlements, knowing they were not manned. The bear­ers of the ladders went first and applied them to the wall.Then twelve light-armed with only a dagger and a breast­plate scaled, led by Ammeas the son of Choraebus., who wasthe first that mounted. His followers, in two parties of sixeach, mounted next on each side of the turrets. Then otherlight-armed with javelins succeeded them. Behind cameothers holding the bucklers of those above them, thus to faci­litate their ascent, and to be ready to deliver them into theirhands, should they be obliged to charge. When the greaterpart of the number was mounted, the watchmen within theturrets perceived it. For one of the Plataeans, in fasteninghis hold, had thrown down a tile from off the battlements,which made a noise in the fall; and immediately was shoutedan alarm. The whole camp came running towards the wall,yet unable to discover the reason of this alarm, so dark was
Vol. I. 2 T







OCR Output








B. III. YEAR V.—BEFORE CHRIST 427. 275


old alliance and their Ionic descent, to send them a succourof shipping: For the Syracusans had now blocked them upboth by land and sea. The Athenians immediately sent one,giving out that they were bound in duty to take this step ; buttheir real motive was, to prevent the exportation of cornfrom thence to Peloponnesus, and also to sound the possibilityof bringing Sicily into their own subjection. Their squad­ron therefore, arriving at Rhegium on the Italian shore, sup­ported their allies in the present war; and in this the sum­mer ended.
In the beginning of the winter, the plague broke out a se­cond time at Athens, not that during this whole interval oftime it had wholly ceased, though its rage had very muchabated. But now the mortality began again and continuednot less than a year; but the former had raged for the spaceof two. There was nothing which lay upon the Athenians sohard as this, or so much impaired their strength. It appear­ed from the muster-rolls, that there perished four thousandand four hundred of those citizens who wore the heavy-ar­mour, and three hundred of the horsemen. The number ofthe lower people that died was not to be computed. Therehappened at the same time many earthquakes : at Athens ;in Eubcca; amongst the Boeotians, and especially at theBoeotian Orchomenus.
The same winter, the Athenians and Rhegians, on thecoast of Sicily, form an expedition with thirty sail, againstthose which are called the isles of iEolus. This was notfeasible in the summer-season, for want of water. These islesare inhabited by the Lipareans, who were a colony from Cni-dus. Their residence is chiefly in one of them called Lipare,though by no means large. They go from hence to the til­lage of the others, Didyme and Strongyle and Hiera. It
this occasion. It is a step, which draws great consequences after it.—Thucydides in the sequel will open all the plan, and give an exact detail ofthe operations of this new war, into which the Athenians are beginning toembark.







OCR Output








B. I. INTRODUCTION.


" other contents of your letter I am delighted. Let neither" night nor day relax your earnest endeavours to effectuate" those points you promise me : Nor stop at any expence of" gold or silver or greatness of military force, if such aid be" any where requisite. But confer boldly with Artabazus, a" trusty person, whom I have sent to you, about mine and your" own concerns, that they may be accomplished in the most" honourable and most advantageous manner for us both."
Upon the receipt of this letter, Pausanias, who before hadbeen in high credit with the Grecians, through the lustre ofhis command at Plataea, was elevated much more than ever,and could no longer adjust his demeanor by the modes andcustoms of his native country. He immediately dressed him­self up in Persian attire, and quitting Byzantium, travelledthrough Thrace, attended with Persian and Egyptian guards;and refined his table into Persian elegance. His ambition hewas unable any longer to conceal, but by short sketches mani­fested too soon, what greater schemes he had formed in hismind for future accomplishment. He then shewed himselfdifficult of access, and let his anger loose so violently and soindiscriminately upon all men, that no one could approachhim. And this was not the least motive to the confederacyfor going over to the Athenians. But the Lacedaemonians,informed of this, recalled him the first time upon the accountof such behaviour ; and, when he was returned again in theHermionian vessel without their permission, he plainly ap­peared to have re-assumed again his former practices. Andwhen forced to remove from Byzantium by the oppositionraised against him by the Athenians, he went not back toSparta ; But withdrawing to Colona e of Troas, information wasgiven that " he was negotiating with the Barbarians, and had" fixed his residence there for very bad designs." Upon thisthey could no longer be patient, but the Ephori dispatched hima herald and the Scijtak*, with an order—" Not to stay be-
• The Scytale is a famous instrument peculiar to the Lacedaemonians, andused by them for the close conveyance of orders to their ministers abroad.







OCR Output








292 THE PELOPONNEStAN WAR.


up their own dead to the number of about three hundred.But a truce for their departure was not openly granted tothem all. Demosthenes, in concert with the Acarnaniangenerals, agreed to a secret article with the Mantineans andMenedaeus and the other Peloponnesian officers, and as manyOthers as were of any consideration—that " they should de­part immediately." His policy was, to have the Ambraciotsand the promiscuous body of mercenaries left quite destitute,wishing above all things for such a pretext to calumniate theLacedaemonians and Peloponnesians amongst the Grecians ofthose parts, " as men who wilfully abandon their friendsj" from a mere selfish treacherous regard to their own safe-" ty." Having leave therefore to fetch off their dead, theyinterred them all so well as their hurry would admit. Andthose in the secret were busy in concerting the means of theirdeparture.
But now intelligence is brought to Demosthenes and theAcarnanians, that the Ambraciots of the city with their wholecollected force had, in pursuance of the former summons, be­gan their march for Olpae, through Amphilochi, designing tojoin their countrymen at Olpae, and quite ignorant of the latedefeat. Upcn this he immediately detacheth a part of hisarmy, to beset all the passes, and to seize all the advantageousposts upon their route, and got ready at the same time to marchagainst them with the remainder of his force.
In the mean time, the Mantineans, and those compre­hended in the secret article, going out of the town upon thepretext of gathering herbs and fuel, went gradually off insmall parties, gathering what they pretended to come out foras they passed along. But when they had thus straggledto a considerable distance from Olpae, they moved away in amore nimble pace. The Ambraciots and others, who ingreat numbers came out in their company, when they per­ceived them thus stealing off, felt an inclination to follow,and so taking to their heels, ran speedily after them. TheAcarnanians imagined at first, that they vere all equally







OCR Output








8. I. INTRODUCTIQN. 2/


" If, farther, they tax with a breach of justice your pre-" suming to interfere with their colonies; let them learn, that" every colony, whilst used in the proper manner, payeth ho-4* nour and regard to its mother-state, but, when treated with" injury and violence, is become an alien. They are not sent" out to be the slaves, but to be the equals of those who remain" behind. Their violence and injustice require no proofs." For, invited by us to submit the business of Epidainnus to" a judicial trial, they chose rather to prosecute their claims" at war than at equity. And let such behaviour towards tis," their relations, put you timely on your guard, that you may" not be over-reached by their collusions, nor hesitate one" moment to grant our petitions. For he who findeth the" least room to repent of having gratified his enemies, is most" likely to persevere in uninterrupted security.
" You will not break your treaty with the Lacedaemonians" by our admission, who are allied to neither of you. By that" treaty it is expressly stipulated, that—" If any of the states" of Greece be not at present in alliance with either of theu contracting parties, permission is given them to go into
Ci either league, at their own discretion." And terrible in-
" deed it is, if they must be at liberty to man their fleets out" of places in their alliance, nay more than that out of Greece" at large, and to no small amount, even out of your depend-" ents : and we must be debarred not only your most inviting" alliance, but every possible expedient of succour: then, after" all they must raise a cry of injustice, if we offer our re-" quests to you and have them granted. But much greater rea-" sons of complaint will lie with us, if we cannot prevail upon" you. For then you will throw at a distance those who are be-" set with dangers and never were your enemies; you will not" only not restrain the incroachments of enemies and invaders," but will behold them through your negligence assuming" strength out of your dominions, which you ought never to" endure. You ought either to hinder them from seducing" your subjects into their pay, or send an imipediate succour







OCR Output








B. II. TEAR III. BEFORE CHRIST 429. 195


first with this vessel, and fetching a compass round her, runsdirectly against the Leucadian that was chasing, and instantlysinks her. By this accident, so sudden and unexpected, thePeloponnesians are thrown into consternation; and havingbesides followed the chace without any regular order, as se­cure of victory, some of the ships now dropping their oars,stopped further motion. This was an unlucky expedientwhen so near the enemy; but their design was to wait forthe greater number of ships that were yet behind. Some ofthem, being ignorant of the coast, ran upon the shelves andwere stranded. When the Athenians saw them suffer thesedistresses, their courage began to revive. Shouting out aloudwith one voice, they encouraged one another to attack. Themiscarriages of which they were this moment sensible, andtheir irrecoverable disorder, prevented the others from mak­ing any long resistance. And they soon were forced to runback again towards the station of Panormus, from whencethey came. The Athenians, chasing them thither, took thesix ships that were most behind, and recovered their own,which were in the enemy's hands by having been run ashore,and afterwards brought off in tow. Some met) besides theykilled, and made some prisoners.
On board the Leucadian, which was sunk near the tradingvessel, was Timocrates the Lacedaemonian, who, when theship received the stroke that sunk her, immediately slew him­self*, and floated afterwards into the harbour of Naupactus.The Athenians, returning thither again, erected a trophy
• We have here a notable proof of the peculiar spirit and genius of theSpartans. They regarded the land aa their own element, in which theywere superior to the rest of the world. And yet now they were convinced,that without practice at sea, they should never be able to pull down thepower of Athens. Their first attempts are awkward and unsuccessful -The art shewn by the Athenians in tacking round, darting out again, andsinking a ship at one stroke, put them all to a stand; and it seems made sosudden and strong an impression on Timocrates, whose passion it was to diefighting, and with wounds all before, that he could not endure the thought ofperishing in a whole skin, and therefore snatched the mument, and killedhimself for fear he should be drown-d.







OCR Output








68 THE PELOP0NNESIAN WAR.


which formed the Lacedaemonian league should be disman­tled, or it be allowed that the things now done at Athenswere just and proper." The Lacedaemonians, upon hearingthis, curbed indeed all appearance of resentment against theAthenians:—They had not sent their embassy directly toprohibit, but 10 advise them to desist upon motives of gene­ral good: at that time also, they had a great regard for theAthenians, because of the public spirit they had shewn against
the Mede: But however, thus baffled as they were in their
political views, they were inwardly provoked; and the ambas­sadors on each side returned home without farther embroil­ments.
By this conduct the Athenians in a small space of timewalled their city around: And the very face of the structuresheweth plainly to this day that it was built in haste. Thefoundations are laid with stones of every kind, in some placesnot hewn so as properly to fit, but piled on at random. Manypillars also from sepulchral monuments and carved stoneswere blended promiscuously in the work. For the circuit ofit was everywhere enlarged beyond the compass of the city,and for this reason, collecting the materials from every placewithout distinction, they lost no time.
Themistocles also persuaded them to finish the Piraeus:For it was begun before this, during that year in which hehimself was chief magistrate at Athens*. He judged theplace to be very commodious, as formed by nature into threeharbours, and, that the Athenians, grown more than everintent on their marine, might render it highly conducive toan enlargement of their power. For he was the first person,who durst tell them, that they ought to grasp at the sovereignty
• The number of the Archons or Rulers was nine. They were annuallyelected by lot, and were required to be of noble birth, of a pure Attic des­cent, irreproachable both in ir.oral and political character, dutiful to theirparents, and perfectly sound in body. The first of the nine gave its stile tothe year, and was therefore called Eponymus or the Namer : The secondwas stiled King : The third Polemarch : The other six in common Thesmo-thettt. All the cm! and relipious affairs of the state belonged to their de­part merit. j







OCR Output








?0 TJJE PELOPONJJESIAN WAR.


questing them " from the tie of consanguinity to undertaketheir protection, and not to leave them thus largely exposedto the violence of Pausanias." This request was favourablyheard by the Athenians, who expressed their willingness toput a stop to such grievances, and to re-settle the general or­der, to the best of their power.—But during this the Lacedae­monians recalled Pausanias, that he might answer what waslaid to his charge. Many of the Grecians had carried to themaccusations against him for an unjust abuse of his power,since in his behaviour he resembled more a tyrant than ageneral. And it so fell out, that he was recalled just at thetime when the confederates, out of hatred to him, had rangedthemselves under the Athenian orders, excepting those troopswhich were of Peloponnesus. Upon his return to Lacedae-mon, he was convicted upon trial of misdemeanors towardsparticulars, but of the heaviest part of the charge he is ac­quitted : For the principal accusation against him was an at*tachment to the Medish interest: and it might be judged tooclear to stand in need of proof. Him therefore they no longerintrust with the public command, but appoint in his steadDorcis with some colleagues to command what little force oftheir own remained. To these the confederates would nolonger yield the supreme command; which so soon as theyperceived, they returned home. And here the Lacedaemoni­ans desisted from commissioning any others to take uponthem that post; fearing, lest those who should be sent mightby their behaviour still more prejudice the Lacedaemonian in­terest, a case they had reason to dread from the behaviour ofPausanias. They were now grown desirous to rid them­selves of the Medish war: they acknowledged the Athenianshad good pretensions to enjoy the command, and at that timewere well affected towards them.
The Athenians having in this manner obtained the su­preme command, by the voluntary tender of the whole con­federacy in consequence of their aversion to Pausanias ; theyF.xed by their own authority the quotas, whether of ships or







OCR Output








B.III. 219 YEAR IV. BEFORE CHRIST 428.


ther the Mityleneans were quite masters of the country, andthat their own soldiers were not numerous enough to bridletheir excursions—about the beginning of autumn send a re­inforcement of a thousand heavy-armed of their own peoplecommanded by Pachus, the son of Epicurus. These, havingrowed themselves the transports which brought them, arrive;and build a single wall in circle quite round Mitylene, and onthe proper spots of ground strengthened it by erecting forts.Thus was Mitylene strongly besieged on all sides, both by
sea and land And by this time it began to be winter.
But the Athenians, wanting money to carry on the siege,determined now to tax themselves, and by their first contri­bution* raised two hundred talentsf for the present service ;and at the same time dispatched twelve ships under the com­mand of Lysicles and four colleagues, to levy money abroad.He, intent on raising contributions, made a visit for this pur­pose to several places ; and, having landed at Myus, in Caria,intending to pierce through the plain of Maeander as far asthe hill of Sandius, he was attacked on his route by the Ca-rians and Anaeitans, where himself and a great part of his ar­my perished.
This winter the Plataeans—for they were still blocked up
by the Peloponnesians and Boeotians finding themselves
much distressed by the failure of their provisions, giving upall hope of succour from the Athenians, and quite destitute;of all other means of preservation, formed a project now inconcert with those Athenians who were shut up with them
' It was a voluntary contribution : The original term implieth it. Themanner was no doubt the same as was observed in succeeding times, whenthe necessities of the state called for an extraordinary supply. On such oc­casions the president* of the assembly laid before the Athenians the presentwant of money, and exhorted them with chearfulness and generosity tocontribute towards the national support. Such as were willing rose up inturn, saying, " I contribute so much," and naming the sum. Such as,though rich, were niggardly and strangers to all public spirit, sat silent onthese occasions, or as fast as they could stole out'of the assembly.
f 38,750/.







OCR Output








B. III. TEAR VI.—BETORE CHRIST 426. 283


was within their borders, they were all drawn together in anumerous body for their mutual defence: Nay, even themost distant Ophionians, who are seated upon the Meliacbay, the Bomiensians and Calliensians were already comeup.
The Messenians continued to amuse Demosthenes withthe same suggestions as at first: They still insisted, that theconquest of the iEtolians would be an easy performance, andadvised him to advance immediately against their villages,nor give them time to gather together in a body to opposehim, but to attack every place he came to, and take it. Thisadvice being quite to his own taste, and relying upon his owngood fortune, which hitherto had never been checked, with­out waiting for the Locrians, who were very much wanted,and were to have joined him (for he stood most in need oflight-armed darters), he advanced to iEgitium, and assault­ing, takes it by storm. The inhabitants made their escape,and posted themselves upon the hills which overlook thetown. It was situated amongst lofty eminences, and distantfrom the sea about eighty stadia*.
But now the iEtolians, who were come up for the pre­servation of iEgitium, running down in separate bodies fromdifferent eminences, made an attack upon the Athenians andallies, and poured in their javelins amongst them : And when­ever the Athenian army approached to charge, they plied be­fore them; when they again fell back, these again returned tothe charge. This kind of engagement continued for a longtime, a series of alternate pursuits and retreats, in both whichthe Athenians suffered most. So long however as theirarchers had darts, and opportunity to use them, they lost noground ; for the light armed iEtolians fell back to avoid thedarts. But when the chief of the archers dropped, his pajrtywas soon dispersed, and the whole army began to incline.Their strength was quite exhausted by so many repeatedrharges ; and now, the iEtolians pressing hard upon them,• About eight miles.







OCR Output








6. THE PELOPONNE5IAN WAR.


security from the insults of neighbouring people. But thoseof an earlier date, having been more subject to piratical de­predations, are situated at a great distance from the sea,not only on islands but also upon the main. For even thosewho lived upon the coast, though inexpert at sea, were usedto make excursions up into the country for the sake ofplunder: And such inland settlements are discernible to thisvery day.
But the people of the islands, that is the Carians and thePhoenicians, were by much the most expert at these piraticaladventures: For by them the greatest part of the isles wasinhabited. This is proved from the expiation solemnized atDelos in the course of this war ; on which occasion all thesepulchres of the dead in that island being broke open, morethan half of the number appeared to be Carians, known to besuch from the weapons found in their graves, and a particu­larity of interment* still used amongst them. It was not tillafter the equipment of fleets by Minos, that a communicationwas opened at sea. For by him the mischievous bandittiwas ejected from the islands, and many colonies of his ownplanted there in their stead. And from this period it wasthat the maritime people, grown more intent on the acquisi­tion of wealth, became also more fond of settled habitations ;And such of them as then surpassed in wealth strengthenedtheir settlements by walling them about. And this their pas­sion for gain continuing to increase, the poorer hired out theirservices to those who had affluence ; and the great, who hadall needful supplies at hand, reduced less powerful cities intotheir own subjection. And their power by these methodsgradually advancing, they were enabled in process of time toundertake the Trojan expedition.
• The Carians first invented the boss of shields and the crest of helmets.In remembrance of this, a small shield and a crest were always buriedwith them. By this means were the Carians known. The Ph4enicianswere distinguished by the manner of their interment. For, whereas<Uier nations laid the faces of their dead towards the east, the Phreniciansvf CersMl theposture, and laid thrm to the west. Scholiast.







OCR Output








B. II. 183 YEAR III. BEFORE CHRIST 429.


them, that—" if they would join them with a land and a" naval force at the same time, it would be impossible for" the Acarnanians to succour one another by sea; that" hence they might easily get all Acarnania into their power," from whence they might become masters of Zacynthus" and Cephallene, and a stop would then be made to the" Athenian cruizes on the coasts of Peloponnesus; nay,
" that there was even a hope of reducing Naupactus."
This scheme was pleasing to the Lacedaemonians, who or­dered Cnemus (yet their admiral) to sail thither with a fewships, having on board the heavy-armed ; and circulated or­ders to their confederates to fit out their ships, and repairwith all expedition to Leucas. The Corinthians were thosewho shewed most zeal for the Ambraciots, a colony of theirown; and the shipping of Corinth, Sicyon, and the adjacentplaces, was prepared with all possible expedition; but thatof Leucas, Anactorium, and Ambracia was already at Leu­cas, and waiting for the rest. Cnemus and the thousandheavy-armed performed their voyage undiscovered by Phor-mio, who commanded the Athenian fleet of twenty sail,stationed round Naupactus, and immediately landed his menfor the destined service. Besides the thousand Peloponne-sians he brought with him, he was now joined by the Am­braciots, Leucadians, Anactorians, of the Grecians; of
the Barbarians, by a thousand Chaonians, not subject to aregal government, but commanded by Photius and Nicanor,men of those families which had a right to command by an­nual election. With the Chaonians came the Thesprotians,who also had no king. Sabylinthus, guardian of their kingTharyps, yet a minor, led the Melossians and Antitanians.The Paravaeans were headed by their own king Ordoeus, whohad also the command of a thousand Orestians, subjects ofAntiochus, which served with his troops by the permission ofAntiochus. Perdiccas sent also a thousand Macedonians,of which the Athenians were ignorant, but these were notyet come up.







OCR Output








B. I. 65 INTRODUCTION.


necessary, not so much out of regard to the arguments urgedby their allies, as from their own jealousy of the growingpower of the Athenians. They dreaded the advancementof that power, as they saw the greatest part of Greece wasalready in subjection to them.
Now the method by which the Athenians had advancedtheir power to this invidious height, was this*:
After that the Medes, defeated by the Grecians both at landand sea, had evacuated Europe, and such of them as escapedby sea were utterly ruined at Mycale, Leotychides king ofthe Lacedaemonians who commanded the Grecians at My­cale returned home, drawing away with him all the confed­erates of Peloponnesus. But the Athenians, with the con­federates of Ionia and the Hellespont, who were now revolt­ed from the King, continuing in those parts, laid siege toSestus then held by the Medes ; and, pressing it during thewinter-season, the Barbarians at length abandoned the place.After this they separated, sailing away from the Hellespont,every people to their own respective countries.
But the Athenian community, when the Barbarians hadevacuated their territory, immediately brought back againfrom the places of refuge their wives and children and alltheir remaining effects, and vigorously applied themselves torebuild the city of Athens and the walls: For but a smallpart of these was left standing ; and their houses, most ofthem had been demolished, and but few preserved by way oflodgings for the Persian nobles. The Lacedaemonians, in­formed of their design, came in embassy to prevent it; part­ly to gratify themselves, as they would behold with pleasure
• The series of history on which Thucydides now enters, though nulstrictly within the compass of his subject, yet most needful to give it liglii.and to shew how present events are connected with, and how far tlicy re­sulted from preceding, is excellent in its kind. He states important factsin the clearest and most orderly manner ; he opens before us the source ofthe Athenian power, and by a neat and concise enumeration of notableevents, conducts it to that height, which excited the jealousy nf o'.l.erstates, and was the true political cause of the Succeeding \vs-.







OCR Output








xcii A Survey of the History.


" that principle on which conquerors and tyrants have al-" ways acted, and yet have been ashamed to own: They are" ever hunting for colourings and pretexts, and would fain" give to greedy power a little of the air of equity: But here," without the least shame or remorse, the Athenians assert" their right to inslave another community, because it suits" their own interest, and because they have power to do it." This is the principle from which they argue ; and, how" scandalous soever it be, they argue strongly from it. They" represent the politics of their own State, of the Lacedae-" monian State, nay of all mankind, as incroaching, oppres-" sive, rapacious, and totally estranged from humanity, good-" faith, and the least tincture of morality. The whole con-" ference yields perhaps a just representation of human na-" ture in the gross ; but then, the representation is distaste-" ful to a mind, that is cool and disengaged. Such a mind" must interest itself on the side of the Melians ; and be" sorry, that the Athenians have not more equity and hon-" our to qualify their power ; or, that the Melians, with the" regard they show to honour and justice, should not have" had more power, or been able to interest at least one ally" in defence of their liberties and rights. In short, through" the whole course of this History, the Athenians never" make so scandalous a figure as on this occasion."
Book VI. In the Sixth Book, a spacious theatre isopened for a renewal of the war. The scene is going toshift from Greece to Sicily. The Athenians, who have sobravely resisted all their enemies in Greece, are now goingto do for those enemies what they could not do themselves.No patriot, no statesman, no orator is able to dissuade themfrom lavishing their strength on the projects of sanguine am­bition and foreign conquests. Their enemies, in the meantime, are at leisure to note their indiscretions, and improvethem all to their own advantage, till the great name ofAthens is quite eclipsed, and an end is put to that empire ofthe sea, which she had maintained for seventy years withgreat lustre and reputation.







OCR Output








300 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


formerly called Messenia; but the name given it by theLacedaemonians is Coryphasium. The others replied, "There" are many barren capes in Peloponnesus, which those may" secure who have a mind to plunge the commonwealth into" needless expenses." This place however seemed to him tobe better marked out for this purpose than any other, asbeing possessed of a harbour ; and as the Messenians, whoformerly bore some relation to it, and still used the same dia­lect with the Lacedaemonians, might from hence give themgreat annoyance, and at the same time effectually keep pos­session of it. But when neither the commanders nor sol­diers, nor the inferior officers*, to whom he afterwards com­municated his project, would be brought to a compliance, hequietly let it drop till the mere love of employment, duringthe idleness of their suspended voyage, seditiously inclinedthe private soldiers to compass it with a wall. They tookthe work in hand, and plied it briskly. Tools they had nonefor hewing and fitting the stones ; but picked out and carriedsuch as they judged most proper for the work, and laid themone upon another as compactly as they could. The mud, thatwas any where requisite, for want of vessels they carried on.their shoulders, bending forwards as much as possible that itmight have room to stick on, and holding it up with bothhands clasped fast behind that it might not slide down. Theyspared no pains to prevent the Lacedaemonians, and to putthe place in a proper posture of defence, before they couldcome to their disturbance. For the largest part of it was sowell fortified by nature, that it stood in no need of the de­fence of art.
• The word in the original is Taxiarchi. They seem to be nearly thesame with Captains of a Company, in the modern stile, as their commandwas over aboutlone hundred men. Taxiarcht were also officers of a higherclass, in number ten, every Athenian tribe appointing one, whose businessit was to marshal the armies, to order the inarches and encampments, totake care of provisions, and to punish military offences. But the formerseem to be the ajji;ers to whom Demosthenes applied himself in the pre •' sent instance.







OCR Output








xcvi A Survey of the History.


At this juncture, some drunken frolics, in which Alcibi-ades was engaged, threw Athens into consternation. Theywere soon construed by his enemies into a plot to bring abouta revolution in the government. Informers came in, and hewas directly accused of being a party. He avowed his inno­cence, insisted on an immediate trial, which he was surewould end in his justification. The plot, which in fact was aplot against Alcibiades, was not yet ripe enough to ruin him ;and therefore, by a strange preposterous stroke of cunning, heis ordered to proceed in the expedition, and take his trial athis return.
Our author next describes the departure of the grand ar­mament in all its solemnity, and with all the medley of hopesand fears shewn by the whole people of Athens on this occa­sion. He lays open to our view the very hearts of the spec­tators. The prime flower of their strength, nay Athens itself,is now sailing out of the Pineus, never again to return.They make the best of their way to Corcyra, where they areleft for a time, that we may be made privy to the consulta­tions and defensive measures of Sicily. The scene is nowremoved to Syracuse, the most powerful state in that island,inhabited by Grecians, and if indeed inferior, yet second atthis time to no other State in Greece but Athens alone. Ithad frequently been harassed by seditions, had often beenplagued with tyrants, but was at present under a democraticconstitution.
Advice had been received there of the intended invasion.The people are convened about it. Harangues are made ;and the temper of mankind, when party is fermenting, justlyexemplified. Some are incredulous; others magisteriallypronounce it all a falsehood. At length Hermocrates risethup, and gives them his own sense of the affair.
He assures them " his country is eminently indangered," and neither incredulity nor ridicule shall awe him into si-" lence. To his certain knowledge, the Athenians are already" at sea. fully bent on the conquest of Sicily. The Syracusan"?







OCR Output








20 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


twenty-five ships, which were soon followed by another equip­ment, they command them " at their peril to receive theirexiles ;"—For those who had been driven out of Epidamnushad already been at Corcyra, where pointing to the sepulchres,and claiming the rights of consanguinity, they had intreatedthem to undertake their restoration:—" and to send away thegarrison and new inhabitants which they had received fromCorinth." The Epidamnians were quite deaf to thesehaughty commands. And upon this the Corcyreans, with asquadron of forty ships accompanied by the exiles whom theypretended to restore, and an aid of Illyrians, began hostili­ties. Having blocked up the city, they made proclamation," That all Epidamnians who were willing and the strangersmight depart without molestation, or otherwise they shouldbe treated as enemies." But this having no effect, the Cor­cyreans beset the place, which is situated upon an isthmus, onall sides, in regular siege.
The Corinthians upon the arrival of messengers fromEpidamnus with an account of the siege, dr&w their forcestogether. They also gave public notice, " That a new co­lony was going to Epidamnus, into which all that wouldenter should have equal and like privileges with their prede­cessors ; that, if any one was unwilling to set out immedi­ately, and yet chose to have the benefit of the colony, hemight deposit fifty Corinthian drachmas, and be excusedhis personal attendance." The number of those who enteredfor immediate transportation, and of these who depositedtheir money, was large. They sent farther to the Mega-reans, requesting a number of ships to enlarge their con­voy, that their passage might not be obstructed by the Cor­cyreans, from whom they received a supply of eight, andfour more from Pale of the Cephallenians. The same re­quest was made to the Epidaurians, who sent five. A singleship joined them from Hermione ; two from Troezene ; tenfrom the Leucadians ; and eight from the Ambraciots. Ofthe Thebanr, and Phliasians they requested money; of the







OCR Output








B. I. INTRODUCTION. 83


had thrown themselves into Nisaea ; and that the Megareanshad effected this revolt by a junction of Corinthians and Sicy-onians and Epidaurians." Upon hearing this, Pericles re-embarked with the utmost expedition, and brought back hisarmy from Euboea. And soon after, the Peloponnesians march­ing into Attica as far as Eleusis and Thria, laid the countrywaste, under the command of Pleistionax* the son of Pausa-nias king of Sparta: And then, without extending the ravageany farther, they withdrew to their own homes. Now againthe Athenians transported a military force into Euboea, underthe command of Pericles, and soon completed its reduction.The tranquillity of the rest of the island was re-establishedupon certain conditions ; but they wholly ejected all the inha­bitants of Hestiaea, and repeopled it with a colony of their own.—And not long after their return from Euboea, they concludeda peace for thirty years with the Lacedaemonians and their al­lies, in pursuance of which they restored them Nisaea and Chal-cis, and Pegae and Traezene; all which places, though belongingto the Peloponnesians, were in the hands of the Athenians.In the sixth year of this peacef a war broke out between


rise to that decree which excluded the Megareans from the ports and mar­kets of Athens. Others add, that they slew an Athenian herald, who wassent to expostulate with them on this account. Could such outrages bepocketed by Athenians ? Could Pericles dissuade the people of Athensfrom shewing resentment ? They decreed farther, though not explicitlymentioned by Thucydides, that the generals of the state should swear, at theirelection, to make an incursion twice a year into the Megaris. We shallsoon see that the Peloponnesians made it a pretext for the ensuing war, andthat Pericles justified the decree, and persuaded the Athenians to hazarda war rather than repeal it. This is the true history of the point, thoughcomedy and raillery and libelling, strangely vary tho account.
• As Pleistionax on this occasion evacuated Attica on a sudden, he wasbanished from Sparta, as having been bribed by the Athenians to quit theirterritory. Diodorus Siculus relates, that he did it by the advice of Clean-dridas his guardian, who attended him in the field on account of his youth ;and that Pericles afterwards passing his accounts at Athens, charged " tentalents properly laid out for the service of the state," which passed withoutfarther explanation or exception.
t Pericles here performed a great and signal service to his country. Themotives to this war are, according to our historian, sufficiently strong, upon







OCR Output








396 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


selves with Arribaeus. Upon which it was soon resolved be­tween them to retire, as there was reason to dread the ac­cession of men so renowned for military valour. Yet thedisagreement between them prevented their fixing on anycertain time for filing off. Night came on, in which theMacedonians and the crowd of Barbarians being struck witha sudden panic (as numerous armies are apt to be,, withoutany certain cause), and imagining that much larger numberswere coming against them than in fact was true, and thatthey were only not near enough to attack them, they in­stantly took to their heels and hurried homewards. Perdic-cas for a time knew nothing of the matter, and when in­formed of it, was compelled, by the flying troops, to dis­lodge in their company, without being able to get a sight ofBrasidas. For they were encamped at a distance from eachother.
At the dawn of day, Brasidas perceived that the Macedo­nians had dislodged, and that the Illyrians and Arribaeus wereapproaching to attack him. He therefore drew his forces to­gether, forming a square with his heavy-armed, in the centreof which he disposed all the crowd of light-armed; and inthis form he intended to retreat. He appointed the youngestmen to sally out, in case the enemy any where attacked them :And he himself, with a picked body of three hundred, deter­mined to bring up the rear in person, in order to sustain andmake good their retreat against the van of the enemy whoshould press upon their rear. And before the enemy camenear, as well as the hurry would admit, he animated his sol­diers thus:
" DID I not suspect, ye men of Peloponnesus, that thus" abandoned as you are and ready to be attacked by Barba-" rians, and those numerous too, you were in some conster-" nation, I should judge it needless to instruct or to encou-" rage you. But now, against this desertion of our friends," and this multitude of our enemies, I shall endeavour, by a" short admonition and exhortation, to raise within you the







OCR Output








274 THE PEL0PONNESIAN WAR.


their lives, to the number of about five hundred, havingseized their forts upon the opposite shore, got possession oftheir own land, on that side the water. Putting out hence,they plundered the Corcyreans in the island, and made suchhavoc that a violent famine ensued in the city. They furthersent a deputation to Lacedaemon and Corinth, to negociatethe means of their restoration. But nothing of this kind suc­ceeding, they got together afterwards a body of auxiliariesand transports, and so passed over to the island of Corcyra,to the amount of six hundred men. Having now set fire totheir transports, to preclude every other expedient but gain­ing firm footing where now they were, they marched up tothe mountain Istone, and having fortified themselves there,made cruel work with those in the city, and were masters ofthe country round about.
About the end of the same summer, the Athenians sentout twenty sail for Sicily, under the command of Lachesthe son of Melanopus and Charoeadas the son of Euphile-tus. A war was now on foot between the Syracusans andLeontines. Confederate with the Syracusans were, except­ing Camarina, all the Doric cities, which had formerly en­tered into alliance with the Lacedaemonians before this warbroke out, but had yet no where effectually joined them.With the Leontines were the Chalcidic cities, and Cama­rina. Of Italy, the Locrians sided with the Syracusans;and the Rhegians, from the motive of consanguinity, withthe Leontines. The allies therefore of the Leontines sentto Athens*, petitioning the Athenians in respect of their
• One of the persons, or the chief, employed on this occasion, is said tobe Gorgias of Leontium, the first rhetorician of that or of any age. Whenhe had his audience from the Athenians to deliver the reasons of his em­bassy, he made a speech so smooth and flowing-, so new in the manner ofits turns, so pretty in the expression, and so nicely diversified by a changeand opposition of figures, that he won their hearts, and succeeded in hisnegociation. Our historian indeed, who takes no notice of Gorgias, givestwo political reasons just after the ready compliance of the Athenians on







OCR Output








266 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


signed between both parties and the Athenians—" to have" the same friends and the same foes." Having so far carriedhis point, he was intent on immediate departure. But the?managers for the people made him a proposal, to leave fiveships of his squadron with them, to deter the enemy fromany fresh commotion, which should be replaced by five ofthe in own, which they would instantly man to attend himon .his station. With this proposal he complied ; and theynamed distinctly the mariners, who to a man were of theopposite party. Affrighted at this as a pretext to conveythem to Athens, they sit down in the temple of the Dioscuri.Nicostratus endeavoured to raise them up and chear theirdespondency. Yet all he could say was unavailing; and thepeople run again to arms, pretending that such a refusal toput to sea was a plain proof that their intentions were in­sincere throughout. Then they rifled their houses of all thearms they could find ; and some of them who fell into theirhands had immediately been butchered if Nicostratus had notinterposed.
A second party, terrified at these proceedings, take theirseats also as suppliants in the temple of Juno. The num­ber of these was not less than four hundred. The people,grown now apprehensive of some fatal turn, persuade themto leave their sanctuary ; and having prevailed, transportthem into that island which faceth the temple of Juno,whither every thing needful for their sustenance was care­fully sent them.
The sedition continuing in this posture, about the fourth orfifth day after the transportation of the latter body into theisland, the Peloponnesian ships, which had assembled at Cyl-lene after the voyage of Ionia, appear in sight to the numberof fifty-three. Alcidas was commander in chief as before,and Brasidas attended as his council. They came to anchorin the harbour of Sybota on the main ; and next morning, atbreak of day, steered directly for Corcyra.
Great was the tumult now at Corcvra : Thev were afraid







OCR Output








262 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


those surviving Plataeans who had been friends to the The-ban interest. But afterwards they levelled it with the earth,rooted up its whole foundation, and near to Juno's templeerected a spacious inn two hundred feet square, partitionedwithin both above and below into a range of apartments.In this structure they made use of the roofs and doors thathad belonged to the Plataeans ; and of the other moveablesfound within their houses, of the brass and iron, they madebeds which they consecrated to Juno, in whose honour theyalso erected a fane of stone one hundred feet in diameter.The land being confiscated to public use, was farmed out forten years, and occupied by Thebans. So much, nay sototally averse to the Plataeans were the Lacedaemonians be­come ; and this, merely to gratify the Thebans, whom theyregarded as well able to serve them in the war which wasnow on foot*. And thus was the destruction of Plataeacompleated in the ninety-third year of its alliance with Athens.
The forty sail of Peloponnesians, which had been sentto the relief of Lesbos, after flying through the open sea toavoid the pursuit from Athens, were driven by a tempest onthe coast of Crete ; and from thence they separately droppedinto Cyllene a Peloponnesian harbour, where they findthirteen triremes of Leucadians and Ambraciots, with Brasi-das the son of Tellis sent thither purposely to assist Alcidaswith his counsel. It was now the project of the Lacedae-
• Thucydides hath here been very sparing of his censure. Nothing badenough can be said of the Lacedaemonian behaviour on this occasion. Toput brave men to death coolly and deliberately, who had most gallantly de­fended themselves, and merely for their steady attachment to liberty andthe Athenians were hated by the Thebans, shews the public spirit of Spar­tans at this time to have been none at all. The city of Plataea, thus bar­barously demolished, was rebuilt after the peace of Antalcidas, which putan end to the Peloponnesian war. But not long after it was again demo­lished by the Thebans, for a refusal to join them against the Lacedaemoni­ans. However, Alexander the Great once more re-established it, in agenerous acknowledgment of the services that little State had renderedto Greece ; and the Hataeans continued, even in the time of Plutarch, tocelebrate the annual festival in honour of those, who at the famous battleof Platae* had died for the liberties of Greece.







OCR Output








156 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


of the carcases. But the dogs, because of their familiaritywith man, afforded a more notorious proof of the event.
The nature of this pestilential disorder was in general—for I have purposely omitted its many varied appearances, orthe circumstances particular to some of the infected incontradiction to others—such as hath been described. Noneof the common maladies incident to human nature prevailedat that time ; or whatever disorder any where appeared, itended in this. Some died merely for want of care; andsome, with all the care that could possibly be taken; norwas any one medicine discovered, from whence could bepromised any certain relief, since that which gave ease toone was prejudicial to another. Whatever difference therewas in bodies, in point of strength or in point of weakness,it availed nothing ; all were equally swept away before it, inspite of regular diet and studied prescriptions. Yet the mostaffecting circumstances of this calamity were—that dejec­tion of mind, which constantly attended the first attack ;for the mind sinking at once into despair, they the soonergave themselves up without a struggle—and that mutualtenderness, in taking care of one another, which commu­nicated the infection, and made them drop like sheep*.This latter case caused the mortality to be so great. For iffear withheld them from going near one another, they diedfor want of help, so that many houses became quite desolatefor want of needful attendance : And if they ventured, theywere gone. This was most frequently the case of the kind
• This passage is thus translated upon the authority of Dr. Mead, in histreatise on the Plague, which convinced me that the comma should be omit­ted in the original after x, and be governed of «Lucretius hath given it a different turn, as if the resemblance to sheep wasnot in their dying fast, but to the forlorn and solitary manner in whichthose creatures die ; and lie hath put before it wbut follow sa little after inThucydides.
Nam quicunque suos fugitabant visere ad aegros,
Vitai nimum cupidi, mortisque timentes,
Pccnibat puulo post turpi morte malaqoe
Dt'sertos, opis rxpertes, incuria maclans,
Lanigeraa taiiquam pecudes, ct bucera saecla.







OCR Output








B. II. YEAR I. BEFORE CHRIST 431.


and others apprehensive of falling under their subjection.'—With such preparations and such dispositions did they runinto the war.
The states in league with either party, upon the breakingout of the war, were these. In confederacy with the Lace­daemonians, were all Peloponnesians within the Isthmus, ex­cept the Argives and Achaeans, for these had treaties subsist­ing with both parties. But of the Achaeans, the Pellenianssingly were the first who went over, though they were after­wards joined by all the rest. Without Peloponnesus werethe Megareans, Locrians, Boeotians, Phocians, Ambraciots,Leucadians, Anactorians. Of these they were supplied withshipping by the Corinthians, Megareans, Sicyonians, Pel­lenians, Eleans, Ambraciots, Leucadians; with horse bythe Boeotians, Phocians, Locrians : and the other states fur­nished them with foot. This was the confederacy of the
Lacedaemonians. With the Athenians were the Chians,
Lesbians, Plataeans, the Messenians of Naupactus, most ofthe Acarnanians, the Corcyreans, Zacynthians, and otherstates tributary to them in so many nations: Namely, themaritime people of Caria, the Dorians* that border upon theCarians, Ionia, Hellespont, the cities on the coast of Thrace,all the islands situated to the east between Peloponnesus andCrete, and all the Cyclades, except Melos and Thera. Ofthese, they were supplied with shipping by the Chians, Les­bians, Corcyreans ; the rest supplied them with foot and withmoney. This was the alliance on both sides, and the abilityfor the war.
The Lacedaemonians, immediately after the attempt onPlataea, sent circular orders to the states both within andwithout Peloponnesus, to draw their quotas of aid together,and get every thing in readiness for a foreign expedition, asintending to invade Attica. When all was ready, they as­sembled on the day appointed, with two-thirds of the force
• These were the Dorians, who were seated in the islands of Rhodes.Cqi, and Cnidui, according to the Schotintt.







OCR Output








B. II. 199 YEAR III.—BEFORE CHRIST 429.


mountains, and make use of scimetars, who are distinguishedby the name of Dians, and dwell most of them about Rho-dope. Some of these he took into pay, but some of themvoluntarily attended. He had levies also from amongst theAgrianians, Leaeans, and the other nations of Paeonia sub­ject to himself. These were the furthest people in his domin­ions, reaching up to the Graaeans and Leaeans of Paeonia andthe river Strymon, which deriving its source from mountScomius waters the Graaeans and Leaeans, and is the boun­dary of his empire from those Paeonians who still are free.Towards the Triballians, who are also a free people, theboundary is formed by the Trerians and Tilat«ans. Theselive to the north of mount Scomius, and reach westerly asfar as the river Oscius, which riseth out of the same moun­tain with the Nestus and the Heber, a great but barrenmountain adjoining to the Rhodope.
The kingdom of Odrysa is of this large extent alongthe coast, reaching from the city of Abdera to the mouth ofthe river Ister in the Euxine sea. The shortest cut roundits coast requireth four days and as many nights for a trad­ing-vessel, of the round-built, sailing directly before thewind. A good walker will also be eleven days in going thenearest way by land from Abdera to the Ister. So large wasits extent along the coast. But towards the continent, togo along it from Byzantium to the Leaeans and the Stry­mon, for so far does it run upwards from the sea, wouldcost an expeditious walker thirteen days continued journey.The yearly tribute exacted from this tract of Barbaric land,and his cities in Greece, by Seuthes, who succeeding Sital-ces in these dominions very much improved the revenue,amounted to four hundred talents of silver*, though it mightbe paid either in silver or gold. The presents constantlymade to him either of gold or silver were not less in value,besides gifts of vestments both figured and plain, and allkinds of furniture, which were not only made to him, but


• 78,940/. sterling.







OCR Output








1. II. TEAR II.—BEFORE CHRIST 430. 165


" launch out to sea. Why is not this extensive power re-" garded in balancing the loss of your houses and lands," those intolerable damages which you think you have suf-" fered ?—It is not so reasonable to grieve and despond un-" der such petty losses, as to despise from the thought, that"they are merely the trappings and embellishments of" wealth; to fix the firm remembrance within us, that liber-" ty, in defence of which we are ready to hazard our all," will easily give us those trifles again; and that by tamely" submitting to our enemies, the possession of all we have" will be taken from us. We ought not in either of these" respects to degenerate from our fathers. By toil and toil" alone they gained these valuable acquisitions, defended" themselves in the possession, and bequeathed the precious" inheritance to us. And to lose the advantages we have" possessed will be much more disgraceful than to have mis-" carried in their pursuit. But we ought to encounter our" enemies not with valour only, but with confidence of suc-" cess. Valour starts up even in a coward, if he once prevails" through lucky ignorance ; but such a confidence must be" in every mind, which is seriously convinced of its own" superiority, as is now our case. Nay even when the match" is equal, the certainty of what must be done arising from" an inward braver}-, adds the greater security to courage." Confidence then is not built on hope, which acts only in" uncertainty, but on the sedate determination of what it is" able to perform, an assurance of which is more guarded" against disappointments.
" It is further your duty to support the public character" (as in it to a man you pride yourselves) with which its ex-" tensive rule invests our community, and either not to fly" from toils, or never to aim at glory. Think not you have" only one point at stake, the alternative of slavery instead of" freedom; but think also of the utter loss of sovereignty," and the danger of vengeance for all the offences you have" given in the practice of it. To resign it is not in your
Vol. I. 2 M







OCR Output








160 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


he had embarked four thousand heavy-armed Athenians; andin vessels for transporting horse, now first fitted up for this ser­vice out of old ships, three hundred horsemen. The Chiansand the Lesbians joined in the expedition with fifty sail. Atthe very time this fleet went to sea from Athens, they left thePeloponnesians on the coast of Attica. When they were ar­rived before Epidaurus, a city of Peloponnesus, they ravagedgreat part of the country about it, and making an assault on thecity itself, had some hopes of taking it, but did not succeed.Leaving Epidaurus, they ravaged the country about Troexene,Halias, and Hermione ; all these places are situated on theseacoast of Peloponnesus. But, sailing hence, they came be­fore Prasiae, a fort of Laconia, situated upon the sea, aroundwhich they laid the country waste ; and having taken the fortby assault, demolished it. After these performances they re­turned home and found the Peloponnesians no longer in At­tica, but retired within their own dominions.
The whole space of time that the Peloponnesians wereupon the lands of the Athenians, and the Athenians employ­ed in their sea-expedition, the plague was making havocboth in the troops of the Athenians, and within the city.This occasioned a report, that the Peloponnesians, for fear ofthe infection, as having been informed by deserters that itraged in the city, and been witnesses themselves of theirfrequent interments, retired out of their territory with someprecipitation. Yet they persevered in this incursion longerthan they had ever done before, and had made the whole
" got on board hi; trireme, the sun was eclipsed. It soon grew so dark," that all men were astonished at so dreadful a prodigy. Pericles, seeing" his own pilot quite terrified and confounded, threw a cloak over his face," and wrapping him up in it, asked, Whether he saw any thing dreadful,'4 or any thing that portended danger ? The pilot answering in the nega-" tive,' What difference then (he went on) between this affair and that," unless that what hath darkened the sun is bigger than a cloak." Pericleshad easily learned of his preceptor, Anaxagoras, how to account for eclipses.But whether Plutarch hath placed this incident in right time, is a ques­tion : For Tbucydides, who is exact in these things, mentions no eclipseof the sun this summer.







OCR Output








INTRODUCTION. 69


of the sea; and immediately began to put the plan in execu­tion. And by his direction it was, that they built the wallround the Piraus of that thickness which is visible to thisday. For two carts carrying the stone passed along it byone another ; Within was neither mortar nor mud ; but theentire structure was one pile of large stones hewn square toclose their angles exactly, and grappled firmly together onthe outside with iron and lead ; though in height it was notcarried up above half so far as he intended. He contrived itto be, both in height and breadth, an impregnable rampartagainst hostile assaults ; and he designed, that a few, andthose the least able of the people, might be sufficient to manit, whilst the rest should be employed on board the fleet.His attention was chiefly confined to a navy ; plainly dis­cerning, in my opinion, that the forces of the King had amuch easier way to annoy them by sea than by land. Hethence judged the Piraus to be a place of much greater im­portance than the upper city. And this piece of advice hefrequently gave the Athenians, that " if ever they were press­ed hard by land, they should retire down thither, and withtheir naval force make head against all opponents." In thismanner the Athenians, without losing time, after the retreatof the Medes, fortified their city, and prepared all the neces­sary means for their own security.
Pausanias the son of Cleombrotus was sent out from La-cedaemon, as commander in chief of the Grecians, withtwenty sail of ships from Peloponnesus, joined by thirtyAthenians and a number of other allies. They bent theircourse against Cyprus, and reduced most of the towns there.From thence they proceeded to Byzantium garrisoned bythe Medes, and blockaded, and carried the place under hisdirections.
But, being now grown quite turbulent in command, theother Grecians, especially the Ionians and all who had latelyrecovered their liberty from the royal yoke, were highly cha­grined. They addressed themselves to the Athenians, re-
Vol. I. Z







OCR Output








B. IV. 339 YEAR VIII. BEFORE CHRIST 424.


furnished with all the expedients of war, nay, might act of­fensively from thence, might terribly annoy Lesbos whichlies near it, and reduce the iEolian fortresses along the coast.This was the plan which now they were intent to put inexecution.
The same summer the Athenians, with a fleet of sixtyships, and taking with them two thousand heavy-armed, afew horsemen, the Milesians, and others of their confede­rates, made an expedition against Cythera. The commandwas lodged with Nicias son of Niceratus, Nicostratus son ofDiotrephes, and Autocles son of Tolmaeus. Cythera isan island: it lies upon the coast of Laconia over-againstMalea. The inhabitants are Lacedaemonians, resorting thi­ther from the neighbouring coast. A magistrate was sentover yearly from Sparta by the stile of Judge of Cythera .the garrison of heavy-armed established there was regularlyrelieved ; and no care omitted in the good government andmanagement of the place. It was the port which their trad­ing ships first entered, in their return from Egypt and Libya.It was the chief security of Laconia against those piraticalparties which might infest it from the sea, from whencealone they are capable of doing them any mischief: for byits situation it hath intirely the command of the seas ofSicily and Crete. The Athenian armament therefore arriv­ing here, with a detachment of ten ships and two thousandheavy-armed, surprise a maritime town which is called Scan-dea. With the rest of their force they made a descent onthat part of the island which is opposite to Malea, and ad­vanced toward the city of Cythera situated also on the sea,and they found immediately that all the inhabitants weredrawn out into the field in readiness to receive them. Anengagement ensued, wherein the Cythereans maintainedtheir ground for a small space of time, but then turningabout, fled amain into their citadel. They soon afterwardscapitulated with Nicias and his colleagues, submitting to theAthenians at discretion, barring only the penalty of death.







OCR Output








xlvi On his Qualifications as a Historian.


whom he wrote, without fear of their resentment, and couldpraise without being in the reach of a requital. Human na­ture will not admit of a stricter independence.
His unconcern about the opinions of a present generation,is strong and clear. It looks as if he thought they wouldscarce give him a reading, so little care had he taken to soothor to amuse them. He had a greater aim than to be theauthor in vogue for a year. He hated contention, and scorn­ed short-lived temporary applause. He threw himself onposterity. He appealed to the future world for the value ofthe present he had made them. The judgment of succeed­ing ages hath approved the compliment he thus made totheir understandings. So long as there are truly greatprinces, able statesmen, sound politicians, politicians that donot rend asunder politics from good order and the generalhappiness, he will meet with candid and grateful acknow­ledgments of his merit.
Other historians have sooner pleased, have more diffu­sively entertained. They have aimed more directly at thepassions, have more artificially and successfully struck at theimagination. Truth in its severity, and Jteason in its robustand manly state, are all the Muses and Graces to whichThucydides hath done obeisance. Can we wonder, that hehath not been more generally read and admired ? or, couldwe wonder, if he had not been so much ? A great workplanned under such circumstances and with such qualifica­tions as I have been describing, cool serious judgment willalways commend as a noble design, even though executed itmay prove too cheerless to the more lively passions, its relishnot sufficiently quick for the popular taste, or piquant enoughto keep the appetite sharp and eager.
But to proceed. Thucydides hath been censured in re­gard to the choice of his subject. It hath occasioned thesolidity of his judgment and excellence of his taste to becalled in question. Dionysius of Halicarnassus hath exert­ed himself much on this account; hath tried him by laws,







OCR Output








1|8 tHE I'ELbPOKNEftlAN WAR.


" which would not amount to less than five hundred talents."—He mentioned further, " the great wealth that wa6 stored" up in other temples, which they had a right to use ; and if" this right should be denied them, they might have re-" course to the golden ornaments of the Goddess herself."He declared, " that her image had about it to the weight" of forty talents of gold without alloy, all which might be" taken off from the statue.—That, for the preservation of" their country it might lawfully be employed ;" but added" that it ought afterwards to be amply replaced." In thismanner did he render them confident that their funds of
money would suffice. -He told them further, that "they
" had thirteen thousand men that wore heavy armour, ex-" elusive of those that were in garrisons, and the sixteen" thousand on the guard of the city ;"—for so large a num­ber, draughted from the youngest and oldest citizens andsojourners, who wore the heavy armour, was employed inthis service upon the first invasion of their enemies. Forthe length of the Phalerian-wall to the place where it joinedthe circle of the city was thirty-five stadia*, and that partof the circular wall which was guarded was forty-threef inlength; but that which lay between the long wall and thePhalerian had no guard. The long walls continued downto the Piraeus are forty stadia}:, but the outermost of themonly was guarded. The whole compass of the Piraeus, in­cluding Munichia, is sixty stadia^, but then only one half
of this had a guard||. He then assured them, that "they
" had, including the archers that were mounted, twelve" hundred horsemen, sixteen hundred archers, and three" hundred triremes fit for sea."—So great in general, and


• About 3J English miles. f Above 4 miles.
\ About 4 English miles. § About 6 English miles.
|| The whole compass of the walls of Athens was 178 stadia, or above 22Attic miles. But, according to Dr. Arbuthnot, the Attic mile consisted ofbut 805 paces, whereas the English is 1056. Hence, the compass of Athensappears to have been about 17 English miles.







OCR Output








S. II. YEAR I. BEFORE CHRIST 431.


also is the fountain, now called the Enneakrounos or Nine-pipe, from the manner in which it was embellished by theTyrants*; but formerly, when all the springs were open,called Callirrhat; and which, as near at hand, they pre­ferred on the most solemn occasions. And that ancientcustom is to this day preserved, by making use of the samewater in connubial and many other religious rites. Andfurther, it is owing to such their ancient residence in thecitadel, that it is eminently called by the Athenians to thisvery day, The City.
In the manner above-mentioned, were the Athenians for along series of time scattered about the country, in towns andcommunities at their own discretion. And as not only themore ancient, but even the latter Athenians, quite down to thepresent war, had still retained the custom of dwelling aboutthe country with their families, the general removals into thecity, after they were formed into one body, were attendedwith no small embarrassment; and particularly now, whenthey had been refitting their houses, and resettling themselvesafter the Persian invasion. It gave them a very sensible griefand concern to think, that they must forsake their habitationsand temples, which, from long antiquity, it had been theirforefathers and their own religious care to frequent; that theymust quite alter their scene of life, and each abandon as itwere his native home. When they were come into the city,some few had houses ready for their reception, or shelteredthemselves with their friends and relations. The greater part
" pondence with the lunar or Attic." He says a deal on the subject so littleaffecting his countrymen, that since his death they have again thrown allthe Greek terms into the margin, and placed in the text the incongruousmodern ones, for the sake of familiar sounds. If the English reader be asdelicate, he may read April or May at his option. The ablest chronologcrsare unable to exchange them into currency with any tolerable exactness. Agreat deal of learning might be also displayed about the days of the monthand the Grecian method of counting them: But as it is exceeding easy totranslate these right, learning may be excused in a point where no light iswanting.
• The Pisistratidi.







OCR Output








B. IV. 397 YEAR IX. BEFORE CHRIST 423.


"full grandeur of your souls. Upon you it is incumbent to" behave with gallantry in every martial scene, upon the ac-" count, not merely of acting in the open field in the presence" of so many confederates, but of your own hereditary valour." Your souls ought not to be dismayed at a multitude of" foes, since you were not born under governments where the" many control the ferv, but where the few command the" many. And the only means by which you acquired this" noble privilege, was victorious perseverance in the fields of" battle. Yet of these Barbarians, your fears of whom are" the result of your ignorance, you ought to be informed," from what you have learned yourselves in former conflicts" against them with the Macedonians, as well as from what" I conjecture, and what I depend upon from the accounts of" others, that in action they will be by no means terrible." For when a hostile force, though in reality weak, carrieth" with it the appearance of strength, a true discovery of its" state is no sooner obtained, than it redoubleth the courage" of their opponents. But men, in whom valour is firmly im-" planted, none can assault with extraordinary spirit but such" as know them not. These enemies of yours are dreadful" for a while, merely till brought to trial. Their multitude" rendereth them terrible to the sight; the loudness of their" shouts is insupportable to the ear. Their weapons, bran-" dished about and clashing in the air, have a frightful and" menacing look. But their spirit will not answer their shew," when charging against such as will sustain their shock." They are not drawn up with skill, nor will they blush"when compelled to quit their ground. To fly from or to" fly after an enemy is equally a matter of glory to them :" By such things is their valour established and rescued" from reproach. For a battle, where every combatant is" his own commander, leaveth a specious and handsome" opportunity to each of providing for his safety. They this"moment judge it more safe to intimidate us at a distanceVol. I. S S







OCR Output








88 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


to Delphi, to enquire of the God, "Whether their war" would be successful ?" He is reported to have returnedthis answer, That " if they warred with all their might," they should at last be triumphant, and he himself would" fight on their side, invoked and uninvoked."
They had now again summoned their confederates to at­tend, and designed to put it to a general ballot, " Whether" the war should be undertaken ?" The ambassadors fromdie several constituents of their alliance arrived and as­sembled in one general council. Others made what decla­rations they pleased, the majority inveighing against theAthenians, and insisting upon war: But the Corinthians(who had beforehand requested every state apart to ballotfor war) alarmed for Potidaea, lest for want of some speedyrelief it might be utterly destroyed, being present also atthis council, stood forth the last of all, and spoke to this effect:
" WE can no longer, ye confederates, have any room to" complain of the Lacedemonians, since their own resolu-" tion is already engaged for war, and they have summoned" us hither to give our concurrence. For it is the duty of a"governing and leading state, as in private concerns they" observe the equitable conduct, so ever to keep their view" intent upon the general welfare, suitably to that superior" degree of honour and regard, which in many points they" pre-eminently receive.
" For our parts, so many of us as have quitted Athe-" nian friendship for this better association, we require no" farther trials to awaken our apprehensions. But those"amongst us, who are seated up in the inland parts, at a" distance from the coast, should now be convinced, that" unless they combine in the defence of such as are in lower" situations, they would soon be obstructed in carrying out" the fruits of their lands, and again in fetching in those" necessary supplies which the sea bestoweth upon an inland" country. Let them by no means judge erroneously of" what we urge as not in the least affecting them ; but look-" ing upon it as a certainty, that if they abandon the guard







OCR Output








180 THE PELOPONNES!AJi WAR.


broke by the Plataeans, who threw ropes around them ; theyalso tied large beams together, with long chains of iron atboth ends of the beams, by which they hung downwardsfrom two other transverse beams inclined and extended be­yond the wall ;—these they drew along obliquely, andagainst whatever part they saw the engine of battery to beaimed, they let go the beams with a full swing of the chains,and so dropped them down directly upon it, which by theweight of the stroke broke off the beak of the battering ma­chine. Upon this the Peloponnesians, finding all their en­gines useless, and their mount effectually counterworked bythe fortification within, concluded it a business of no littlehazard to take the place amidst so many obstacles, and pre­pared to draw a circumvallation about it.
But first they were willing to try whether it were not pos­sible to set the town on fire, and burn it down, as it was notlarge, by help of a brisk gale of wind; for they cast theirthoughts towards every expedient of taking it without a largeexpence and a tedious blockade. Procuring for this purposea quantity of faggots, they tossed them from their ownmount into the void space between the wall and the innerfortification. As many hands were employed in this busi­ness, they had soon filled it up, and then proceeded to tossmore of them into the other parts of the city lying beyond,as far as they could by the advantage which the eminencegave them. Upon these they threw fiery balls made of sul­phur and pitch, which caught the faggots, and soon kindledsuch a flame as before this time no one had ever seenkindled by the art of man. It hath indeed sometimes hap­pened, that wood growing upon mountains hath been soheated by the attrition of the winds, that without any othercause it hath broke out into fire and flame. But this wasexceeding fierce ; and the Plataeans, who had baffled allother efforts, were very narrowly delivered from perishingby its fury ; for it cleared the city to a great distance roundKbout, so that no Plataean durst approach it: And if the







OCR Output








B. IY. YEAR IX. BEFORE CHRIST 423. 391


" pass between them, to adjust the terms upon which the" war should be definitively concluded.
" That the generals of the State and the presidents in" course shall first at Athens convene an assembly of theM people, to adjust the terms upon which their embassy should" be empowered to put an end to the war. And
" That the ambassadors, who were now present in the as-" sembly, shall give a solemn ratification that they will" punctually abide by this truce for a year."
The Lacedaemonians and their allies agreed to these arti­cles, and pledged their oath for the observation of them tothe Athenians and their allies at Lacedaemon, on the twelfthday of the month Gerastius.
The persons who settled the articles and assisted at thesacrifice were,
For the Lacedaemonians—Taurus the son of Echetimi-das, Athenaeus the son of Periclidas, Philocharidas the sonof Eryxidaidas. For the Corinthians—./Eneas the son ofOcytus, Euphamidas the son of Aristonymus. For the Si-cyonians—Damotimus the son of Naucrates, Onasimus the6on of Megacles. For the Megareans—Nicasus the son ofCecalus, Menecrates the son of Amphidorus. For the Epi-daurians—Amphias the son of Eupaeidas. For the Athe-nians^-Nicostratus the son of Diotrephes, Nicias the son ofNiceratus, Autocles the son of Tolmaeus, Generals of theState.
In this manner was a suspension of arms concluded, duringwhich they continued without interruption to hold conferen­ces with one another, about settling the terms of a firm andlasting peace. '
During the interval these matters were thus in agitation,Scione a city in the Pellene revolted from the Athenians toBrasidas. The Scioneans indeed in the Pellene give outthat they are of Peloponnesus ; that their ancestors whosettled in these other seats were driven there originally by astorm, which in their return from Troy dispersed the Achaeans.







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








36 THE PEtOPONNESIAN WAR.


of Barbarians: For the people on that coast have ever con­tinued their friends. When every thing was in order amongthe Corinthians, taking in provisions for three days, theyweigh by night from Chimerium with a design to fight; andhaving sailed along till break of day, they discover the shipsof the Corcyreans already out at sea, and advancing againstthem. When thus they had got a view of each other, bothsides form into the order of battle. In the right wing ofthe Corcyreans were the Athenian ships; the rest of the fleetwas all their own, ranged into three squadrons, each ofwhich were respectively under the orders of the three com­manders : In this manner was the order of the Corcyreansformed. In the right of the Corinthians were the ships ofthe Megareans and Ambraciots; in the centre the otherallies in their several arrangements: The Corinthians formedthe left wing themselves, as their ships were the best sailers, tooppose the Athenians and the right of the Corcyreans.When* the signal-flags were hoisted on both sides, they rantogether and began the engagement; both sides havingstowed their decks with bodies of heavy-armed, with manyfurther that drew the bow or tossed the javelin. Their pre­parations still retained something of the awkward manner ofantiquity. The engagement was sharply carried on, yet
* To give the English reader, once for all, a proper light into theirI method of beginning an engagement, I shall quote the following para­graph from archbishop Potter's Archaologia,\o\. ii. c. 21.
'' Before they joined battle, both parties invoked the Gods to their assist­ance by prayers and sacrifices ; and the admirals going from ship to shipin some of the lighter vessels, exhorted their soldiers in a set oration tobehave themselves like men : Then all things being in readiness, the sig­nal was given by hanging out of the admiral's galley a gilded shield, as weread in Plutarch, or a red garment or banner, which was termed ctlfmvrifwitt. During the elevation of this the fight continued, and by its de­pression or inclination towards the right or left, the rest of the ships weredirected in what manner to attack their enemies, or retreat from them.To this was added the sound of trumpets, which was begun in the admi­ral's galley, and continued round the whole navy; it was likewise usual forthe soldiers, before the fight, to aing a paran or hymn to Mars, and, afterthe fight, another to Apollo."







OCR Output








B. III. 267 TEAR. V. BEFORE CHRIST 427.


of the malccontents within, and the hostile fleet approach­ing the city. They got sixty ships immediately on float,and each so fast as it was manned advanced to meet the foe.The Athenians indeed proposed, to put out first to sea them­selves ; and that the Corcyreans should afterwards comeout and join them, when they had got all their ships toge­ther. But, as they advanced in a straggling manner to­wards the enemy, two ships went directly over to them ; andon board others the mariners were at blows with one another.In short, there was no manner of order in any of their mo­tions. The Lacedaemonians, perceiving how it was, withtwenty of their ships drew up to engage the Corcyrdans, andopposed the remainder to the twelve Athenian, two of whichwere only the Salaminian and the Paralus.
The Corcyrians, who charged in this disorderly manner,and with few ships in a line, were on their side terribly dis­tressed ; whilst the Athenians, fearing, lest the other, vastlysuperior in number, might quite surround their little squa­dron, would not venture to attack them when altogether, norto break upon the middle of the enemy's line ; but, assault­ing them towards one of the extremities, sink one of theirships. Upon this, the Peloponnesians having formed a cir­cle, the Athenians sailed round and round, and endeavouredto break their order. Those who pursued the Corcyreansperceiving this, and fearing what had happened formerly atNaupactus, steered away from thence to support their ownsquadron. And now, with their whole embodied strength,they designed to pour upon the Athenians. They, havingalready shifted the helm, fell gradually away. They weredesirous to favour the flight of the Corcyrtans beyond thepossibility of a chace, and so they fell off entirely at theirown leisure, keeping the enemy in their front still ranged inorder. Such was this engagement, which at the setting ofthe sun was quite ended.
The Corcyreans were afraid lest the enemy, in prosecu­tion of their victory, shoidd immediately assault the city, or







OCR Output








>. It. 147 TEAR I. BEFORE CHRIST 431.


" of life, there is a competent skill in the affairs of govern-" ment. For we are the only people who think him that" does not meddle in state-affairs—not indolent, but good for"nothing. And yet we pass the soundest judgments, and" are quick at catching tbe right apprehensions of things, not" thinking-that words are prejudicial to actions, but rather" the not being duly prepared by previous debate, before we" are obliged to proceed to execution. Herein consists our" distinguishing excellence, that in the hour of action we shew" the greatest courage, and yet debate beforehand the expe-" diency of our measures. The courage of others is the re-" suit of ignorance ; deliberation makes them cowards. And" those undoubtedly must be owned to have the greatest souls," who, most acutely sensible of the miseries of war and the" sweets of peace, are not hence in the least deterred from" facing danger.
" In acts of beneficence, further, we differ from the man)'." We preserve friends, not by receiving but by conferring" obligations. For he, who does a kindness, hath the advan-" tage over him, who by the law of gratitude becomes a debtor" to his benefactor. The person obliged is compelled to act44 the more insipid part, conscious that a return of kindness is" merely a payment and not an obligation. And we alone" are splendidly beneficent to others, not so much from inte-" rested motives, as for the credit of pure liberality. I shall
" sum up what yet remains by only adding that our Athens
" in general is the school of Greece ; and, that every single" Athenian amongst us is excellently formed by his personal" qualifications for all the various scenes of active life, acting44 with a most graceful demeanor, and a most ready habit of" dispatch.
" That I have not on this occasion made use of a pomp44 of words, but the truth of facts, that height to which, by44 such a conduct, this State hath rose, is an undeniable" proof. For we are now the only people of the world wh©44 are found by experience to be greater than in report—the







OCR Output








DISCOURSE I. XXX111


His own Introduction, of itself, in a great measure esta­blished the fact. He perceived the storm was gathering;he knew the jealousies of the States which composed theLacedaemonian league; he also knew the real strength ofAthens, and heard all the preventive measures recommend­ed by Pericles to put his countrymen in a proper posture ofdefence. He himself seems to have been alert for the con­tention, and ready both with lance and pen, not only to bearhis share in the events, but also to perpetuate the memory ofthem. His own words (iati«-««- and TiKn*ie*nit»r) seem todenote the great earnestness and attention of his mind to thewide field of matter, which was now going to be opened.He longed to become a historian ; he saw a fine subject forhistory fast approaching ; he immediately set about noting alloccurrences, began at once to collect materials ; and was re­solved to write the History of The Pehponnestan War beforeit was actually on foot.
Can we doubt then of his residence during this portion oftime at Athens ? He was arrived, at the breaking out ofthis war, to the full vigour and ripeness of his years andunderstanding, according to his chronologist (Mr. Dodwell)was just forty years old. We learn from himself*, that heknew personally the whole series of things ; he was everpresent at the transactions of one or other of the contend­ing parties; more, after his exile, at those of the Pelopon-nesians ; and consequently, before his exile, at those of theAthenians. He speaks of Pericles, as one who was an eye­witness of his conduct; as one who heard him harangue inthe assembly of the people, convincing that a war therewould necessarily be, and for that reason they ought not toweaken themselves by ill-judged concessions, but gallantlyto exert that naval power, which had made Athens enviedand dreaded, and which alone, as it had made, could keepher great. He must regularly have taken his post upon thewalls, and seen the Peloponnesians, in the first year of the■ Book the fifth.
Vol. I. E







OCR Output








B. III. 297 TEAR VI. BEFORE CHRIST 426.


as a reinforcement for Sicily. Their motive was, not onlyto bring the war in those parts to a speedy determination, butalso to keep their own mariners in constant practice. Pytho-dorus, one of the admirals appointed for this service, theysent immediately off with a few ships : Sophocles, son of Sos-tradites, and Eurymedon, son of Thucles, were soon to fol­low with the main body of the fleet. But Pythodorus, whohad now took the command from Laches, steered about theclose of the winter, against that fortress of the Locrians whichLaches had taken before. But, being defeated at his land­ing by the Locrians, he returned again to his station.
About the spring of the year, a torrent of fire overflowedfrom mount ./Etna, in the same manner as formerly, whichdestroyed part of the lands of the Cataneans, who are situ­ated at the foot of that mountain, which is the largest in allSicily. It is said that fifty years intervened between thisflow and the last which preceded ; and that in the whole, thefire hath thus issued thrice since Sicily was inhabited by theGrecians. Such were the occurrences of this winter, at theend of which the sixth year also of this war, the history ofwhich Thucydides hath compiled, expired.







OCR Output








346 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" which all the world allovveth ;—what hindereth us then, why" we should not firmly establish it with one another ? or, do" you rather imagine, that if the condition of one man be" happy and that of another be wretched, tranquillity will not" contribute sooner than warfare to amend the state of the" latter, and to preserve the state of the former from a sad" reverse! or, that peace is not better calculated to preserve4* unimpaired the honours and splendors of the happy, and all" other blessings, which, should we descend to a minute de-" tail, might largely be recounted, or might be set in the" strongest light by opposing to them the calamities which" ensue from war ? Fix your minds therefore on these con-" siderations, that you may not overlook my admonitions, but*4 in compliance with them look out respectively in time for" expedients of prevention.
" In case it be presumed, that success must result from" power, without taking into debate the justice or violence" of the cause, let me detect the dangerous fallacy of such a" sanguine hope, which must be blasted in the end. Many" are they, it is well known, who would have gratified their" revenge on violent oppressors, and many who have exerted" their utmost force for their own aggrandisement; yet the" first, so far from accomplishing their revenge, have met" destruction in its pursuit; and it hath been the fate of the" latter, instead of inlarging, to suffer the loss of what they" already possessed. For revenge is not certain, because"justly sought after to retaliate violence; nor is power as-" sured of its end, because invigorated with sanguine expec-" tation. Events are for the most part determined by the" fallible unsteady balance of futurity; which, though de-" ceivable as deceit can be, yet holds out before us the most" instructive hints. For thus, armed equally beforehand" with needful apprehension, we embark into mutual contests" with wise premeditation. Now therefore, checked by the" gloomy dread of the yet invisible event, and awed on all" sides by the terrors which the presence of these Athenians







OCR Output








ft. M. TEAR III. BEFORE CHRIST 429. 201


the greater part were foot, but about a third of them werehorse. The greatest share of the horse was provided by theOdrysians, and next to them by the Getae. Of the foot,the free Thracians that came from about mount Rhodope,and used scimetars^ were the most valiant: All the rest thatfollowed were a mixt crowd, formidable only in their num­ber. All these therefore were got together at Doberus, andpreparing to break in to the lower Macedonia, subject toPerdiccas, under the ridge of the mountains. For in thegeneral name of Macedonians are comprised the Lynces-tians and Helimiotians, and other nations lying upwards,allied to and dependent upon the rest, yet governed as dis­tinct kingdoms. The dominion over the maritime Mace­donia was first obtained by Alexander, father of Perdiccas,and his ancestors the Temenidae, who derived their originalfrom Argos. These, by a successful war, had driven thePierians out of Pieria, who afterwards fixed their residenceat Phagres under mount Pangaeus, on the other side theStrymon, and at other places ; for which reason, the tractof ground lying under Pangaeus towards the sea is still calledthe gulf of Pieria. From the region called Bottia they alsoexpelled the Bottiaeans, who now live upon the confines ofthe Chalcideans. And further, they seized in Paeonia, nearthe river Axius, a narrow tract of land running along fromthe mountains down to Pella, and the sea; and got posses­sion of that which is called Mygdonia, lying between theAxius and the Strymon, by driving away the Edonians.They expelled the Eordians out of what is now called Eordia(of whom the greatest part were destroyed, but a smallnumber dwell now about Physca); and out of Almopia, theAlmopians. These Macedonians also conquered other na­tions, of which they are still in possession, as Anthemus,Grestonia, and Bisaltia, and a large part of the territoriesbelonging to the other Macedonians. But this whole tractof country hath the general name of Macedonia, and Per­diccas, son of Alexander, reigned over them when Sitalce*formed this invasion.







OCR Output








B. I. INTRODUCTION. 113


" That a war shall not begin, but will retaliate upon those" that do.
" Such an answer is agreeable to justice, and becomes" the dignity of the Athenian state. But you ought to be" informed, that a war unavoidably there will be; that the" greater alacrity we shew for it, the more shall we damp the" spirits of our enemies in their attacks; and, that the" greatest dangers are ever the resource of the greatest hon-" ours to communities as well as individuals. It was thus" that our fathers withstood the Medes, and rushing to arms" with resources far inferior to ours, nay abandoning all their" substance, by resolution more than fortune, by courage more" than real strength, beat back the Barbarian, and advanced" this state to its present summit of grandeur. From them" we ought not to degenerate, but by every effort within our" ability avenge it on our foes, and deliver it down to posteri-" ty, unblemished and unimpaired."
In this manner Pericles spoke; and the Athenians, judgingthat what he advised was most for their interest, decreed inconformity to his exhortation. They returned a particularanswer to the Lacedaemonians, according to his directions,nay in the very words of his motion ; and in fine concluded—that " they would do nothing upon command, but were readyto submit the points in contest to a judicial determination, ac­cording to treaty, upon a fair and equal footing." Upon this,the ambassadors departed; and here all negotiations came toa conclusion.
Such were the pretexts and dissensions on both sides pre­vious to the war, and which took their first rise from the busi­ness of Epidamnus and Corcyra. These however never in­terrupted their commercial dealings nor mutual intercourse,which still were carried on without the intervention of heralds,but not without suspicions. For such incidents manifestlytended to a rupture, and must infallibly end in war*.
• As the Athenians -were a free people, they made use of their libertyon all occasions to asperse, calumniate, and ridicule the great men amongstthem. They were at this time exhibited on the stage by name ; and At is-







OCR Output








DISCOURSE III.


lemn parley held at their approach. Archidamus is at thehead of this ungenerous enterprise. The malice of the The-bans must be gratified, since the alliance of Boeotia in thiswar is of mighty consequence, and to be purchased at anyrate. Archidamus indeed struggles hard for the Plataeans ;he would fain spare them, could he persuade them to a neu­trality. But the Plataeans have too much honour and gra­titude to be neutral, when Athens, their faithful guardianand ally, is principally struck at. They remonstrate in vainfrom the topics of honour, justice, gratitude, the glory andsanction of the great progenitors on either side. The siegeis formed, and strenuously plied, though without success.Our author always shines in exact description : No methodof annoyance or defence is omitted. It is at length turnedinto a blockade, and a sufficient body of troops left behindto carry it on, when the main army marcheth off.
The war grows warm in more remote quarters; in Thrace,and in Acarnania. An Athenian squadron, stationed atNaupactus in the bay of Crissa, awed all the motions of theCorinthians and allies on their own coasts ; and it was de­termined, to clear away this annoyance. Accordingly, theylaunch out against it with more than double the number ofvessels. The Athenians, at one exertion of skill, drive themall on a heap, defeat them, and make prizes of twelve. TheLacedaemonians, excellent land-men but very awkward sea­men, think this an unaccountable event. They send downtheir most active commanders to refit and reinforce the fleet,and to try their fortune again at sea. Much artifice is em­ployed on both sides. The short harangues of the admiralslet us into all the views and designs of either party. Phor-mio at length is snared; the enemy blunders; then Phormioextricates himself, and gives them a second defeat. Thereader sees every tack, and the motion of every vessel.
Disconcerted here, they form a bold project indeed tosurprise the Piraeus by night, and to finish the war in a mo­







OCR Output








76 THE PELOP0NNESIAN WAR.


the Libyans bordering upon Egypt, taking his route fromMaraea, a city beyond the Pharos, had seduced the greatestpart of Egypt into a revolt from king Artaxerxes. He him­self was constituted their leader, and he brought over theAthenians to associate in the enterprize. They happened atthat time to be employed in an expedition against Cyprus,with a fleet of two hundred ships of their own and theirallies: But relinquishing Cyprus, they went upon this newdesign. Being arrived on that coast, and sailed up the Nile,they were masters of that river, and two thirds of the city ofMemphis, and were making their attack upon the remainingpart, which is called the White-wall. It was defended bythe Persians and Medes who had resorted thither for refuge,and by those Egyptians who had stood out in the general de­fection.—
The Athenians, further, having made a descent at Haliae,a battle ensued against the Corinthians and Epidaurians, inwhich the victory was on the Corinthian side.—And after­wards the Athenians engaged at sea near Cecryphelea with afleet of Peloponnesians, and compleatly gained the victory.—A war also breaking out after this between the iEginetaeand Athenians, a great battle was fought at sea by these twocontending parties near iEgina. Both sides were joined bytheir respective confederates ; but the victory remained withthe Athenians; who, having taken seventy of their ships,landed upon their territory, and laid siege to the city, underthe command of Leocrates the son of Stroebus. The Pelo­ponnesians, then desirous to relieve the iEginetae, transportedover to .<Egina three hundred heavy-armed, who before wereauxiliaries to the Corinthians and Epidaurians. In the nextplace they secured the promontory of Geranea. The Co­rinthians now with their allies made an incursion into thedistrict of Megara, judging it impossible for the Atheniansto march to the relief of the Megareans, as they had so largea force already abroad in iEgina and in Egypt; or, if theyWere intent on giving them relief, they must of necessity







OCR Output








192 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" league, merely to preserve their own reputation, have" dragged numbers hither to fight against their will: other-" wise, they durst never have attempted to engage us a" second time, after receiving so signal a defeat. Frighten" not yourselves with extravagant suspicions of their courage" —but rather strike a panic into them ; a panic, for which" they have more ample reason, as you have already gained" a victory over them, and as they are certain you would not44 give them another opportunity to fight, unless you had" some grand design to execute. An enemy, that like them
. " exceeds in number, in action depends more on their '" strength than on their conduct. They who are far inferior" in strength of numbers, and dare, though uncompelled,4 to fight, must do it through the prevalence of some exten­sive views. This they cannot but know, and hence dread
~\jnore this our diminutive than they would an equal force.** Large armies defeated, through defect of skill, or some-" times through defect of courage, by an inferior force, are" cases that have often happened. Yet neither of these de-" fects can be imputed to us. For my own part, I shall not" willingly hazard the event within the gulf, nor will I sail" into it. For I am not ignorant that want of sea-room is" very improper for a few ships that sail best and are best" managed, against a number which those on board them" know not how to govern. In such a situation, no one can" pour down to an attack in the proper manner for want of" having a clear view of the enemy; nor, if he is forced to" sheer off, can he do it with safety. There is no room to" break through, or to tack at pleasure, which is the business" of ships that are better sailers ; but the fight must of ne-" cessity be the same with a battle at land, and in this case" the greater number of ships must have the advantage. I" shall take the greatest care I am able to prevent these in-" conveniences. And you I expect to stand regularly to" your posts on board every ship. Receive your orders with" alacrity, especially as we lie so near our enemy ; and above







OCR Output








230 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


Paches, being returned to Mitylene, compleated the re­duction of Pyrra and Eressus ; and having aprehended Sa-laethus the Lacedaemonian, who had been concealed in thecity, sends him to Athens along with those citizens of Mity­lene from Tenedos, whom he had kept in safe custody there,and all others who appeared to have been concerned in the re­volt. As an escort to these he sends away also the greaterpart of his army. With the remainder he himself stayed be­hind to regulate the affairs of Mitylene and the rest of Les­bos, to the best of his discretion.
When the authors of the revolt and Salitthus were ar­rived at Athens, the Athenians instantly put Salaethus todeath. He made them many fruitless proposals to save hislife; and amongst the rest, that the siege of Plabea shouldbe raised, which was still besieged by the Peloponnesians.They next entered into consultation, what should be donewith the revolters; and in the warmth of anger decreed—" That not only those who were now at Athens should be" put to death, but the same sentence should extend to all" the men of Mitylene who were adult; and the women and" children be sold for slaves. They were exasperatedagainst them not only because they had revolted, but be­cause they had done it without the provocation which othershad received in the rigour of their government. The Pelo-ponnesian fleet added the greater impetuosity to this theirresentment, as they had dared to venture so far as Ionia i»aid of the Rebels. For it plainly appeared to them, thatthe revolt had not been made without much previous delibera­tion. In short, they dispatch a trireme to notify their de­cree to Paches, with orders to see it put in immediate exe­cution upon the Mityleneans.
. The day following, repentance on a sudden touchedtheir hearts, moved by the reflection, that they had passeda savage and monstrous decree in dooming a whole city tothat destruction, which was only due to the authors of theguilt. This was no sooner perceived by the Mitylenean







OCR Output








38 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


having not yet discovered the defeat of their right, theyslaughtered through ignorance their own friends. For thenumber of ships being large on either side, and covering awide extent of sea, after the first confusion of the engage­ment they were not able easily to distinguish which werethe victors or which the vanquished: Since Greciansagainst Grecians had never at any time before engagedat sea with so large a number of vessels. But after the Co­rinthians had pursued the Corcyreans to land, they returnedto look after their shattered vessels and their own dead. Andmost of these they took up and carried to Sybota, where alsolay the land force of their Barbarian auxiliaries: This Sy­bota is a desert haven in Thesprotis. Having performed thisduty, they gathered together again into a body and went inquest of the Corcyreans, who, with those- damaged vesselsthat yet could swim, and with all that had no damage, toge­ther with the Athenians, came out to meet them, fearinglest they might attempt to land upon their shore. It wasnow late in the day, and they had sung their pcean as goingto attack, when on a suden the Corinthians slackened*their course, having descried a reinforcement of twenty sailcoming up from Athens. This second squadron the Athe­nians had sent away to support the former ten, fearing (whatreally happened) lest the Corcyreans might be vanquished,and their own ten ships be too few for their support. TheCorinthians, therefore, having got a view of them, and sus­pecting they came from Athens, and in a larger numberthan they yet discovered, began gradually to fall away.They were not yet descried by the Corcyreans (for the coursekept them more out of their ken) who were surprized to seethe Corinthians thus slacken their course, till some, who hadgained a view, informed them that such ships are coming
• The original is trpifittit Upttotlt, they knocked the hind-deet, a phraseelegantly applied by Thucydides to those that retreat fighting, and stillfacing their enemies. It was done by running their ships backwards upontheir hind decks in order to tack about. See Potttt't Architolagia, vol. ii. c. 20.







OCR Output








». II. 189 YEAR III. BEFORE CHRIST 429.


chor just without it. This cape belonged to the Athenianalliance, but the other cape*, over against it, belonged to thePeloponnesians. The arm of sea which divides them isabout seven stadiaf over; and this is the mouth of the gulfof Crissa. The Peloponnesians with a fleet of seventy-sevenships rode also at anchor under the cape of Achaia, whichis not far distance from Panormus, where their land-forceslay. When they had here a sight of the Athenians, bothparties lay for six or seven days over-against each other, in­tent on the needful preparations for engaging. The schemeon each side was this: The Peloponnesians, struck withtheir former defeat, would not sail from without their capes
into the open sea: The Athenians would not enter into
the straits, judging it would be an advantage to the enemyto fight in a narrow compass. At length Cnemus, Brasidas,and the other Peloponnesian commanders, desirous to comesoon to an engagement, before the Athenian squadron shouldreceive a reinforcement, called first their soldiers together,and seeing some of them not yet recovered from the terroroccasioned by the former defeat, and by no means eager tofight again, endeavoured to animate and rouse up their cou­rage by the following harangue
" If the former engagement, ye men of Peloponnesus," affects any of you with sad apprehensions about the event" of another, know that it by no means affords you any rea-" sonable ground for such desponding thoughts. That was" owing, as you well know, to a deficiency in all needful" preparations ; for you were not then fitted out for service" of sea, but for the service of land. We then were dis-" tressed in several respects by the adverse turns of fortune;" and in some, we who fought for the first time at sea run" into errors through want of skill. It thus happened that" we were defeated, but not through any cowardice of our
• The cape on the Peloponnesian side was called Rhium, or the Rhiumof Achaia: the opposite cape Antirrhiuni, or Molychrium.t About three quarters of a mile.Vol. I. 2 P







OCR Output








376 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


to the Atheniaa jurisdiction, and yet that it was impossiblefor them to be carried off by force; and truce farther theywould grant none, where the point related to Athenianground ; that it was therefore the most proper reply—" they should quit their territory, and so obtain their de-" mands." The herald of the Athenians having heard this,departed without effect.
Immediately after, the Boeotians, having sent for dartersand slingers from the Melian bay, and being reinforced bytwo thousand heavy-armed Corinthians, and the Pelopon-nesian garrison which had evacuated Nisaea, and a party ofMegareans, all which had joined them since the battle,marched against Delium, and assaulted the fortification.They tried many methods, and took it at last by the help ofa machine of a very particular structure.—Having splitasunder a large sail-yard, they hollowed it throughout, andfixed it together again in a very exact manner, so as to re­semble a pipe. At its extremity they fastened a caldron byhelp of chains, into which a snout of iron was bent down­wards from the yard. The inside, farther, of this woodenmachine was lined almost throughout with iron. Theybrought it from a distance to the fortification on carriages,and applied it where the work consisted chiefly of vines andtimber. And when near enough, they put a large bellowsto that extremity of the yard which was next themselves,and begun to blow. But the blast, issuing along the boreinto the caldron, which was filled with glowing coals andsulphur and pitch, kindled up a prodigious flame. This setfire to the work, and burnt with so much fury, that not asoul durst any longer stay upon it, but to a man they aban­doned it and fled away amain: and in this manner was thefortress carried. Of the garrison, some were put to thesword, but two hundred were made prisoners. The bulk ofthe remainder, throwing themselves on board their vessels,escaped in safety to Athens.
It was the seventeenth day after the battle that Delium







OCR Output








B. III. 273 YEA* V.—BETORE CHRIST 427.


despised them so far as to neglect a proper guard, and socontributed to their own destruction.
Many such daring outrages were now by way of prece­dent committed at Corcyra; nay, all whatever, that men,who are wreaking revenge upon such as before were theirmasters, and had exerted their superiority with savagenessmore than humanity, can in turn retaliate upon them, wereexecuted there.—Some joined in these acts of violence toprocure a discharge from their former poverty ; but the great­er number, through a passionate desire to seize the propertyof their neighbours. Or, though they were not lured bythe lust of rapine, but engaged in the contest upon fair andopen views, yet hurried to wild extravagance through madand undisciplined anger, they proceeded to cruel acts, anc^;with inexorable fury. The whole order of human life wasfor a season confounded in this city. The human temper,too apt to transgress in spite of laws, and now having gainedthe ascendant over law, seemed pleased with exhibiting thispublic manifestation, that it was too weak for anger, too strongfor justice, and an enemy to all superiority. Men could nototherwise have awarded the preference to revenge over righ­teous duty, and to lucre over that habit of justice in whichenvy never yet had power to annoy them. But more thanthis, when the point in view is revenge upon others, menhaughtily make precedents against themselves, by infringingthose laws which are binding by the ties of nature, and fromwhich alone any hope of safety can be extracted for themselvesin a plunge of misery, precluding thus all possibility of re­dress, should they be reduced in some future extremity tomake the same appeal.
And thus the Corcyreans continued to execute the rage ofsuch cruel passions, upon the heads of one another, withinthe precincts of their own city, of which this was the first ex­ample in Greece, till Eurymedon, with the Athenian fleetunder his command, put out again to sea.
But, after his departure, they who by flight hr.d preserved







OCR Output








112 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" against superior numbers. Should we be thus victorious," we must fight it over again with another body not inferior;" and should we be vanquished, at that instant we lose all our" dependents, the very essence of our strength. For the mo-" ment we cease to be able to awe them by our forces, they" will be no longer obedient to our commands. We ought" not to wail and lament for the loss of our houses or our" lands, but for the lives of our people : Because lands and" houses can never acquire men, but arc by men acquired.
" Durst I presume on a power to persuade, I would ex-" hort you to march out yourselves, with your own hands to" execute the waste, and let the Peloponnesians see that for" things of such value you will never think of compliance." I have many other inducements to hope for victory, if in-" tending this war alone, you will forbear the ambition of en-" larging your dominions, and not plunge into voluntary su­perfluous hazards. For, in truth, I am more afraid of our" own indiscretions than the schemes of the enemy. But the" explanation of what at present I only hint at, shall be re-" served till due occasions offer in the course of action. Let" us now dismiss the ambassadors with the following an-" swer
" That we will open our market and harbours to the Me-" gareans, provided the Lacedaemonians, in their prohibition" of foreigners, except us and our confederates: For neither" was that act in us, nor will this act in them be contrary to" treaty.
" That we will suffer the states to govern themselves at" their own discretion, if they were possessed of that right" when the treaty was made, and so soon as ever they relax" the necessity they lay upon the states in their own league" of governing themselves by that model, which suits best" the Lacedaemonian interest, and allow them the choice of" their own polity.
" That, farther, we are willing to submit to a judicial de-" termination, according to treaty.







OCR Output








150 THE JMXOPONNESIAN WAR.


"country could stand in need of any thing their valour" could do for it, and so made it the most glorious present." Bestowing thus their lives on the public, they have every" one received a praise that will never decay, a sepulchre" that will always be most illustrious—not that in which" their bones lie mouldering, but that in which their fame" is preserved, to be on every occasion when honour is the" employ of either word or act, eternally remembered." This whole earth is the sepulchre of illustrious men ; nor" is it the inscriptions on the columns in their native soil" alone that shews their merit, but the memorial of them," better than all inscriptions, in every foreign nation, repo-" sited more durably in universal remembrance, than on" their own tomb. From this very moment, emulating"these noble patterns, placing your happiness in liberty," and liberty in valour, be prepared to encounter all the" dangers of war. For to be lavish of life is not so noble" in those whom misfortunes have reduced to misery and" despair, as in men who hazard the loss of a comfortable" subsistence, and the enjoyment of all the blessings this" world affords, by an unsuccessful enterprize. Adversity," after a series of ease and affluence sinks deeper into the" heart of a man of spirit, than the stroke of death insensibly" received in the vigour of life and public hope.
" For this reason, the parents of those who are now gone," whoever of them may be attending here, I do not bewail,
" 1 shall rather comfort. It is well known to what un-
" happy accidents they were liable from the moment of their" birth ; and that happiness belongs to men who have reach-" the most glorious period of life, as these now have who" are to you the source of sorrow,—these, whose life hath" received its ample measure, happy in its continuance, and" equally happy in its conclusion. I know it in truth a diffi-" cult task to fix comfort in those breasts, which will have" frequent remembrances in seeing the happiness of others," of what they once themselves enjoyed. And sorrow







OCR Output








348 THE PELOPONNESIAtf WAR.


" habitants of the same land, a land washed round by the" sea, and all stiled by the same common name of Sicilians." Wars indeed in the course of time I foresee we shall wage" upon one another, and future conferences will again be held," and mutual friendship shall thus revive. But when foreign-" ers invade us, let us be wise enough to unite our strength," and drive them from our shores: For to be weakened in" any of our members, must endanger the destruction of the" whole; and to such confederates and such mediators we" will never for the future have recourse.
" If to such conduct we adhere, we shall immediately" procure a double blessing for Sicily. We shall deliver her" from the Athenians, and a domestic war. For the future" we shall retain the free possession of her in our own hands," and more easily disconcert any projects that hereafter may" be formed against her."
THE Sicilians acknowledged the weight of these argu­ments thus urged by Hermocrates, and all the several partiesjoined in one common resolution " to put an end to the war," each retaining what they were at present possessed of; but" that Morgantina should be restored to the Camarineans," upon the payment of a certain sum of money to the Syra-" cusans." Such also as were confederated with the Athe­nians, addressing themselves to the Athenian commanders,notified their own readiness to acquiesce in these terms, andtheir resolution to be comprehended in the same peace.These approving the measure, the last hand was put to theaccommodation.
The Athenian fleet, which had no longer any businessthere, sailed away from Sicily. But the people at Athensmanifested their displeasure against the commanders at theirreturn home, by passing a sentence of banishment againstPythodorus and Sophocles, and subjecting Eurymedon, whowas the third, to a pecuniary mulct; as if, when able tohave perfected the reduction of Sicily, they had been bribedto desist. They had enjoyed so long a career of good for­







OCR Output








B. IV. TEAR VII. BEFORE CHRIST 425. 313


" to be obliged rather than compelled. Reflect within" yourselves how many benefits must in all probability re-" suit from such a lucky coincidence. For you cannot but" know, that when we and you shall act with unanimity, the" rest of Greece, conscious of inferiority, will pay us the ut«" most honour and regard."
The Lacedaemonians talked in this strain upon the pre­sumption, that the Athenians had formerly been desirous ofpeace, and had been obstructed merely through their oppo­sition ; but now, thus freely tendered, they would accept itwith joy, and give up the men. The Athenians, on the con­trary, reckoning the Spartans in the island already in theirpower, imagined that a peace would be at any time in theirown option, and were now very eager to improve their pre­sent success. But such a measure Was insisted upon most ofall by Cleon the son of Cleaenetus, the greatest demagogueat this time, and most in credit with the people. It was hewho persuaded them to return the following answer.
" THAT, previous to all accommodation, the Spartans" shut up in the island must deliver up their arms and their" persons, and be brought prisoners to Athens. When this" was done, and the Lacedaemonians had surrendered Nisaea" and Pegae, and Troezene and Chalcis, (of which places" they had not possessed themselves by arms, but in pursu-" ance of a former treaty, when distress exacted compliance" from the Athenians, and they had been obliged upon any" terms to purchase peace), then they might fetch away" their countrymen, and conclude a peace for whatever term" both parties should agree."
To this answer the Lacedaemonians made no direct re­ply*, they only requested that a committee might be appoint-
• Diodorus Siculus, 1. 12. says further, That the Lacedsmonian ambas­sadors offered to set at liberty an equal number of Athenians, who werenow their prisoners. And, when this offer was rejected, the ambassadorsreplied freely, "It was plain they set a higher value on Spartans than on•' their own citizens, since they judged an equal number of the latter not" to be an equivalent." „







OCR Output








312 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" humanity, and having succeeded by valour quite beyond" their expectations, determine the contest with temper and" moderation. Then the foe, who hath not felt the extremity" of force, is henceforth disarmed by the strength of grati-" tude, and is more securely bound by the affections of his" own mind to abide for the future by all his compacts." Such ready deference mankind are more apt to shew to-" wards those who have been with a remarkable superiority" their enemies, than to such as they have opposed in more" equal competition. It is natural, when men take the me-" thod of voluntary submission, for the pleasing contest of" generosity to be kindled between them ; but to hazard the" last extremities, and even grow desperate against that" haughtiness which will not relent.
" Now, if ever, is the crisis come to effect such a pleasing" reconciliation between us both, before the intervention of" some incurable event to ulcerate our passions, which may" lay us under the sad necessity of maintaining an eternal" enmity, both public and private, in regard to you, and you" lose the benefit of those advantageous offers we now lay" within your option. Whilst the event is yet undetermined," whilst the acquisition of glory, and of our friendship is" within your reach, whilst yet we only feel the weight of a" supportable calamity, and are clear from foul disgrace, let" us now be mutually reconciled ; let us give the preference" to peace over war, and effectuate a cessation of miseries to" the other Grecians. The honour of such an event will by" them be more abundantly ascribed to you. At present" they are engaged in a perplexing warfare, unable yet to" pronounce its authors. But, in case a reconciliation now" take place, a point for the most part within your decision," they will gratefully acknowledge you for generous bene-" factors.
" If then you thus determine, you gain an opportunity" to render the Lacedaemonians your firm and lasting" friends, since now they request your friendship, and choose







OCR Output








B. I. INTRODUCTION. $3


" point wherein so many lives, so vast an expence, so many" states, and so much honour are at stake. But let us more" leisurely proceed, which our power will warrant us in doing" more easily than others. Dispatch ambassadors to the" Athenians concerning Potidaea; dispatch them concerning" the complaints our allies exhibit against them ; and the" sooner, as they have declared a readiness to submit to fair" decisions. Against men who offer this we ought not to" march before they are convicted of injustice. But, during" this interval, get every thing in readiness for war. Your" resolutions thus will be most wisely formed, and strike into" your enemies the greatest dread."
Archidamus spoke thus. But Sthenelaidas, at that timeone of the Ephori, standing forth the last on this occasion,gave his opinion as followeth:
" THE many words of the Athenians, for my part, I do" not understand. They have been exceeding large in the" praise of themselves; but as to the charge against them, that" they injure our allies and Peloponnesus, they have made no" reply. If, in truth, they were formerly good against the" Medes, but are now bad towards us, they deserve to be" doubly punished; because, ceasing to be good, they are" grown very bad. We continue the same persons both then" and now, and shall not, if we are wise, pass over the injuries" done to our allies, nor wait any longer to revenge them, since
" they are past waiting for their sufferings. But other
" people, forsooth, have a great deal of wealth, and ships, and
" horses .We too have gallant allies, whom we ought not
" to betray to the Athenians, nor refer them to law and plead-" ings, since it was not by pleadings they were injured : But" we ought, with all expedition and with all our strength, to" seek revenge. How we ought to deliberate when we have" been wronged, let no man pretend to inform me: It would" have better become those who designed to commit such" wrongs to have deliberated a long time ago. Vote then the" war, Lacedaemonians, with a spirit becoming Sparta. And







OCR Output








B. II. 205 YEAR III. BEFORE CHRIST 429.


Apollo, by an oracle, made a grant of this land to Alcmaeonthe son of Amphiaraus, when a vagabond, after the murderof his mother, telling him, that " he never should be freed" from the terrors that haunted him, till he found a place for" his residence, which at the time he slew his mother had" never been seen by the sun, and then was not land ;" be­cause every other part of the earth was polluted by the par­ricide. After great perplexities, he at length, as it is said,discovered these rising heaps of sand at the mouth of theAchelous, and thought enough cast up to suffice for his sup­port, after the long course of wandering about to which hehad been necessitated ever since he murdered his mother.Fixing therefore his residence in the parts about the Oeniadae,he grew powerful, and left to the whole country the name ofAcarnania from his son Acarnas. This account of Alcmaeonwe have given exactly as we have received it from tradition.
The Athenians and Phormio weighing from Acarnania,and touching again at Naupactus, very early in the springreturned to Athens. Thither they brought all the freemenwhom they had made prisoners in the late naval engage­ments (these were afterwards exchanged man for man) andthe ships taken from the enemy.
And thus the winter ended, and with it the third year ofthe war, the history of which hath been compiled by Thucy-dides.


Vol. 1 2 R







OCR Output








124 THE PEL0PONNESIAN WAR.


of every state, at the Isthmus. When the whole army wasthus drawn together*, Archidamus king of the Lacedimo-nians, who commanded in the expedition, convened the com-manders from all the auxiliary states, with all those that werein authority, and most fitting to be present, and addressed
them as follows
" PELOPONNESIANS and allies, many are the expe-" ditions in which our fathers have been engaged both with-" in and without Peloponnesus. Even some of us, who areu more advanced in years, are by no means unexperienced" in the business of war. Yet never before did we take the" field with a force so great as the present. But, numerous" and formidable in arms as we may now appear, we are how-" ever marching against a most powerful state. Thus is it in-" cumbent upon us to shew ourselves not inferior in valour" to our fathers, nor to sink below the expectations of the" world. The eyes of all Greece are fixed attentively on
* our motions. Their good-will to us, their hatred of the
" Athenians, make them wish for our success in all our un-" dertakings. It is therefore our business, without placing" too great confidence in superior numbers, or trusting to the" presumption that our enemies dare not come out to fight" us—for no reasons like these, to relax our discipline, or" break the regularity of our march—but, the commander" of every confederate body and every private soldier ought" to keep within himself the constant expectation of being" engaged in action. Uncertain are the turns of war ; great" events start up from a small beginning, and assaults are" given from indignation. Nay, frequently an inferior num-" ber engaging with caution hath proved too hard for a more" numerous body, whom contempt of their enemy exposeth" to attacks for which they are not prepared, Upon hostile" ground, it is always the duty of soldiers to be resolutely" bold, and keep ready for action with proper circumspection.
• Plutarch informs us, tbat the number amounted to sixty thousand,







OCR Output








B. I. " INTRODUCTION. 9


expressly informed us, that every person of the crews be­longing to the ships of Philoctetes were both mariners andsoldiers, since he hath made all who plied at the oar to beexpert at the bow. It is not probable that any ships carriedsupernumeraries, excepting kings or persons in command,especially as their point was a mere transportation with all thenecessary habiliments of war, and as their ships were notdecked, but built entirely in the fashion of the old piraticalcruizers. If therefore a mean be taken between the largestand smallest rates, the number of the whole will turn out*of small account for quotas sent in general from the wholeof Greece. The reason of this was not so much a scarcityof men as want of money. They adjusted the number ofmen to the slender store of provisions they already had, andthe probability of procuring a competent subsistence in thecourse of the war. On their first landing they got the bet­ter in fight; the proof is, that they could not otherwise havefortified their camp with a wall. Neither doth it appear thatthey exerted all their strength at once, numbers being de­tached for supplies of provisions, to till the Chersonesus,and to forage at large. Thus divided as they were, the Tro­jans were better able to make a ten years resistance, beingequal in force to those who were at any time left to carryon the siege. For had the stores of provision at the first land­ing been ample enough for the whole number of men theybrought, and had they been able to prosecute the war freefrom the avocations of foraging and tillage, their superiorityin the field must have given them an easy and expeditiousconquest. Cut in fact they did not ply the work with alltheir number, but only with a part constantly reserved forthe purpose : Had they formed the siege with their wholeforce, in less time and with less difficulty they must havetaken Troy. Through want of money tt was that expedi-
• Thucydides makes it of small account, in repardtotliewar which is hissubject. But the number of men employed in the expedition against Troywas 102000. For the mean between 120 and 50 is 85, and 85 x by 1200= 102000.







OCR Output








On the Life of Thucydides.


said he left a son, but the very name of that son is merelyconjectural. I have collected every thing that carries anyconsistency with it about the Man ; I shall proceed with morepleasure to view him in a clearer and more steady light, andmark the character, in which it was his ambition to be distin­guished, that of a Historian.







OCR Output








. II. YEAR III. BEFORE CHRIST 429. 19"


out of the Nisaean dock ; but instead of making directly forthe Piraeus, as they at first intended, dismayed with thedanger of the attempt, and, as it is said, forced by a con­trary wind to steer another course, they went over to thatpromontory of Salamis which faceth Megara. Upon thispromontory was a fort, and three ships were stationed belowto prevent all importation and exportation at Megara. Thisfort they assaulted, and carried the three ships, thoughempty, away with them. Other parts of Salamis they plun­dered, as the inhabitants never dreamed of this invasion.
The lights*, that signify the approach of enemies, werehowever held up and waved towards Athens, which causedas great a consternation there as was known during all theseries of the war. Those in the city imagined the enemyto be already within the Piraeus. Those in the Piraeus con­cluded the city of the Salamanians to be taken, and thatthe enemy was only not within their port, which indeed theymight easily have been, had they not been hindered by theirown fears and a contrary wind. At break of day, the Athe­nians ran down in general concourse to the Piraeus. Theygot their ships afloat, and leaping on board with the utmostexpedition and uncommon tumult, sailed away for Salamis,but left what land-forces they had to guard the Piraeus.When the Peloponnesians had notice of the approach ofthis succour, having now over-run great part of Salamis,and got many prisoners and a large booty, beside the threeships stationed at Budorus, they made the best of their wayback to Nisaea. They were afraid of trusting too much totheir ships, which having been long laid up were becomeleaky. After thus getting back to Megara, they returned
• These (according to the Scholiast) were lighted torches, which personson the walls reared aloft in the air, to notify to neighbouring and confederateplaces that they discerned the approach of enemies, in order to put then)on their guard. The same thing was also done at the approach of friends,to notify what succour was at hand. In the latter case, they held the lightssteady and unmoved; in the former they waved them to and fro, as an in.,dicalion of fear.
Vol. I. 2 q







OCR Output








386 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


sidas caused proclamation to be made to those Toroneanswho had fled for refuge to the Athenians, that " such as were" willing might return to their old habitations, and should" enjoy their rights without any molestation." But to theAthenians a herald was sent expressly, commanding them" to evacuate Lecythus which rightfully belonged to the" Chalcideans, and a truce should be granted them to re-" move themselves and their baggage." An evacuation theyabsolutely refused, but requested one day's truce to fetch offtheir dead : He solemnly accorded two. During this spacehe was very busy in strengthening the houses adjacent toLecythus, and the Athenians did the same within.
He also convened the Toroneans to a general assembly,and harangued them very nearly in the same manner as hehad done at Acanthus,—that " it was unjust to look upon"those, who had been his coadjutors in the surprisal of the" city, as men worse than their neighbours, or as traitors ;" they had no inslaving views, nor were biassed to such a" conduct by pecuniary persuasions ; the welfare and liberty" of the city had been their only object. Neither should" they, who had no share in the event, be more abridged*4 than those who had. He was not come thither to destroy" the city, or so much as one private inhabitant of it. For" this very reason he had caused the proclamation to be made" to those who had sheltered themselves amongst the Athe-" nians, because such an attachment had not in the least im-" paired them in his esteem, since it was entirely owing to" their ignorance that they had thus undervalued the Lace-" daemonians, whose actions, as they were always more just," would for the future entitle them much more to their be-" nevolence ; their terror hitherto had been merely the result" of inexperience." He then exhorted them in general " to" take care for the future to be steady and firm allies, since" should they henceforth offend, they would be made answer-" able for the guilt. They were not chargeable for the past,'4 as they had rather been sufferers themselves from superior







OCR Output








56 THE PEiOPONNESIAN TiR.


" the invader without a struggle would have leisurely deter-" mined the fate of Greece.
" Do we then deserve, Lacedaemonians, that violence of" envy with which the Grecians behold us, for the courage" we manifested then, for our judicious resolution, and the" superior power we now enjoy ? That power, superior as it" is, was by no means the effect of violent encroachments." You would not abide with us to glean away the relics of" the Barbarian war. To us the associated states were" obliged to have recourse, and intreat us to lead them to" its completion. Thus, by the necessary exigence of af-" fairs, obliged to be in action, we have advanced our power" to what it now is ; at first, from a principle of fear; then" from the principle of honour; and at length from that of" interest. When envied by many, when obliged to reduce" to their obedience some who had revolted, when you, no" longer well-disposed towards us, were actuated by jealousy" and malice ; we thought it not consistent with our own se-" curity to endanger our welfare by giving up our power," since every revolt from us was an accession of strength to" you. No part of mankind will fix any reproach on men" who try every expedient to ward off extremities of danger." Nay, it is your own method also, Lacedaemonians, to ma-" nage the states of Peloponnesus as suits your own interest" best, and to prescribe them law. And, had you abided" with us, and persevered in that invidious superiority as we" have done, we are well convinced that you would soon have" grown no less odious to your allies ; and so obliged either" to have ruled with rigour, or to have risked the loss of" your all. It followcth, therefore, that we have done no-" thing to raise surprise, nothing to disappoint the human" expectation, in accepting a superiority voluntarily assured," in firmly maintaining it thus accepted, upon those most pre-" vailing principles of honour, and fear, and interest.
" The maxim by which we have acted was not first" broached by tts, since it hath been ever allowed, that in­







OCR Output








B. II. TEAR I.—BEFORE CHRIST 431. 125


" Thus will they be always ready to attack with spirit, and" be most firmly secured against a surprise.
" We are not marching against a people who are unable" to defend themselves, but excellently well qualified for it" in every respect; so that we may certainly depend upon" their advancing against us to give us battle ;—not yet per-" haps in motion, so long as no enemy appears ; but most" assuredly so when once they see us in their territory," wasting and destroying their substance. All men must" kindle into wrath, when uncommon injuries are unex-" pectedly done them, when manifest outrage glares before" them. Reflection then may indeed have lost its power,"but resentment most strongly impels them to resistance."Something like this may more reasonably be looked forM from Athenians than from other people. They esteem" themselves worthy to command others, and their spirit is" more turned to make than to suffer depredations. Against" so formidable a people are we now to march ; and by the" event, whatever it be, shall we acquire the greatest glory or" disgrace for our ancestors and ourselves.—Let it therefore" be the business of every man to follow his commander, ob-" servant in every point of discipline and the rules of war," and obeying with expedition the orders you receive. The" finest spectacle and the strongest defence is the uniform ob»" servation of discipline by a numerous army."
When Archidamus had finished his oration and dismissedthe assembly, the first thing he did was sending to AthensMelesippus a Spartan, the son of Diacritus, to try, whetherthe Athenians were grown any thing more pliant, since theyfound an army upon the march against them. But theywould not allow him to come into the city, nor grant him apublic audience. For the advice of Pericles had before thisgained the general assent, that " no herald or embassy shouldbe received from the Lacedaemonians so long as they werein the field against them." They send him back thereforeunheard, and ordered him " to quit their territories that very .
Vol. I. 2 G







OCR Output








294 THE PJELOPONNESIAN WAR.


fled amain towards the mountains. But the passes were allbeset; and more than this, the Amphilochians, who were wellacquainted with their own country, were pursuing in the lightenemies who were encumbered with the heavy armour. Quiteignorant of the country, nor knowing whither they were flying,they rushed headlong into hollow ways, into all the ambus­cades laid ready by the enemy, to their own destruction.Yet as no possible method of escape was unattempted, someof them turned towards the sea, which was not greatly dis­tant. And when they beheld the Athenian ships movingalong the shore, in so fatal a concurrence for their ruin, theyplunged into the water, and swam up to them, choosing ra­ther, in the present consternation, to be destroyed by theAthenians on board those ships, than by Barbarians and theirmost inveterate foes, the Amphilochians. Through such aseries of misfortunes, but few out of the numerous body ofAmbraciots were so happy as to escape to- their own home.The Acarnanians having stripped the dead, and erected thetrophies, marched back to Argos.
On the following day they were addressed by a herald,sent from those Ambraciots who had escaped from Olpae,and were now in the Agrei's. His commission was to obtainthe bodies of the dead who had been killed since the firstengagement, as they were attempting without permission toescape along with the Mantineans and others who weregoing off by agreement. This herald casting his eyes uponthe arms of the Ambraciots from the city, was astonishedat the number. He knew nothing of that fresh calamity,but concluded they all belonged to the party for whom hewas now employed. Somebody asked him the reason of hissurprise, and what he judged to be the number of the dead !Now he who asked the question supposed the herald to havebeen sent by those of Idomene. " Not more than two hun-" dred," says the herald. The demandant then replied, " It" should seem otherwise by the arms, for these are the arms" of more than a thousand men." The herald rejoined,







OCR Output








xlviii On his Qualifications as a Historian.


mired him, and I hope will continue to admire him gratis :We are bound to thank him, and never to lose sight of thatgrand political scheme, formed by a Themistocles, andwarmly and successfully pursued by an Aristides, a Cimon,and a Pericles; the swerving from which at Athens drewafter it the loss of the sovereignty at sea, then sunk her intoa petty State, and made her end at last in a mere academy,though most excellent in its kind.
From such considerations it will also follow, that the hitory of Thucydides is more useful than that of Livy ; atleast, that we have more reason to applaud the choice of theformer. I design no comparison between these two histori­ans. The performance of the Jesuit Rapin on that point isin general reading. Livy's history is certainly more au­gust, more splendid, more amazing: I only insist that it isnot more useful. And, though Livy be happier in his sub­ject, this ought not to degrade Thucydides, who seized theonly fine subject that could offer itself to him: In regard tohim, it was either this or none at all. The parallel shouldbe only drawn in regard to execution, where much hath beensaid on both sides, and the superiority still remains unde­cided.
This brings me to the inward abilities of genius and un­derstanding, which capacitated my author to execute hiswork. His genius was certainly of the highest order: It wastruly sublime. Here the critics unanimously applaud. Inthe arrangement of his matter he emulated Homer. In thegrandeur of his thoughts and loftiness of his sense he copiedPindar. He is ever stately and majestic; his statelinessperhaps too formal, his majesty too severe. He wrote, ashe thought, far beyond an ordinary person. He thinksfaster than he can utter: His sentences are full-stored withmeaning: And his very words are sentences. Hence comeshis obscurity. Where pure thought is the object, he connectstoo fast, nor is enough dilated for common apprehension.But this is not the case with the narrative part of his his­







OCR Output








252 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. -


" upon us whose reputation is yet unblemished; take care" that you do not incur the general abhorrence, by an inde-" cent sentence against valuable men, though you yourselves" are more to be valued ; nor reposit in her common tem-" pies those spoils you have taken from us the benefactors" of Greece. How horrible will it seem for Plataea to be de-" stroyed by Lacedaemonians ! that your fathers inscribed the" city upon the tripod of Delphos in justice to its merit, and" that you expunged its very being from the community of" Greece to gratify the Thebans ! To such excess of misery" have we been ever exposed, that if the Medes had prevail-u ed we must have been utterly undone ; and now must be" compleatly ruined by the Thebans, in the presence of you" who were formerly our most cordial friends! Two of the*4 sharpest, most painful trials we are to undergo, who but" latelv, had we not surrendered our city, must have gradu-" allv perished by famine ; and now stand before a tribunal" to be sentenced to death. Wretched Plataeans, by all man-" kind abandoned ! We, who beyond our strength were once" the supports of Greece, are now quite destitute, bereft of" all redress! Not one of our old allies to appear in our behalf;" and even you, O ye Lacedaemonians, you our only hope, as" we have too much reason to apprehend, determined to give" us up!
" But, by the Gods, who witnessed once the social oaths" we mutually exchanged ; by that virtue we exerted for the" general welfare of Greece ; by those we abjure you to be" moved with compassion, and to relent, if with the Thebans" you are combined against us. In gratitude to us, beg the"favour of them, that they would not butcher whom you" ought to spare ; demand such a modest requital from them" for your base concurrence, and intail not infamy upon" yourselves, to give others a cruel satisfaction. To take" away our lives will be a short and easy task ; but then, to" efface the infamy of it, will be a work of toil. You have" no colour to wreak your vengeance upon us as enemies,







OCR Output








L4 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


tenth year after that, the Barbarian (Xerxes) again with avast armament invaded Greece in order to inslave it. Hang­ing then on the very brink of ruin, the Lacedaemonians, onaccount of their pre-eminent power, took the command of allthe Greeks combined together in their own defence ; whilstthe Athenians, on the approach of the Medes, having alreadydetermined to abandon their city and laid in their necessarystores, went on board their ships, and made head against himby sea. Having thus by their common efforts repulsed theBarbarian, the Grecians, not only those who revolted fromthe king, but those also who had combined together againsthim, were soon after divided among themselves, siding eitherin the Athenian, or in the Lacedaemonian league : For themastery appeared plainly to be in their hands, since thesewere the most powerful by land and those by sea. Theagreement between the Athenians and Lacedaemonians wasbut of short continuance ; variance ensued ; and they enteredthe lists of war one against another, each with the additionalstrength of their own respective allies : And hence, if any otherGrecians quarreled, they went over in parties to these astheir principals. Insomuch that from the invasion of theMedes quite down to the breaking out of this war, one whilestriking up truces, another while at open war either with oneanother or the confederates revolting from either league,they had provided themselves with all military stores, andmuch improved their skill by constant practice exercised indangers.
As for the Lacedaemonians, they gave law to their con­federates without the heavy imposition of tributes. Theirstudy was only to keep them well-affected to themselves, byintroducing the oligarchy among them. But the Athenianslorded it over theirs, having got in course of time the shipsof all those who might oppose them into their own handsexcepting the Chians and the Lesbians, and imposed onthem a certain payment of tribute. And their own particu­lar preparations for the present war were more ample than







OCR Output








B. IV. 385 YEAR VIII. BEFORE CHRIST 424.


These after an interval of time wondered at the delay, andby gradually advancing were got close to the city. Such ofthe Toroneans within, as acted in concert with those whohad entered, when once the postern was burst, and thegates leading to the forum were thrown open after burstingthe bar, in the first place conducting some of them aboutled them in at the postern, that they might strike a suddenpanic on the ignorant inhabitants when attacked in rear andin flank and on all sides. This done they lifted up theappointed signal of fire, and gave instant admittance to therest of the targeteers through the gates which led to theforum.
Brasidas, when once he saw the signal, roused up his armyand led them running towards the place, shouting all at oncealoud, and thus striking the greatest consternation into theinhabitants. Some immediately rushed in at the gates ;others mounted over the square wooden machines, which, asthe wall had lately fallen down and was now rebuilding, layclose to it for the raising of stones. Brasidas, with the bulkof his force, betook himself immediately to the upper parts ofthe city; intending to seize the eminence, and possess him­self effectually of the place. The rest dispersed themselvesequally through every quarter.
Amidst this surprisal, the majority of the Toroneans, quiteVgnorant of the plot, were in vast confusion. But the agentsin it and all their party were quickly ranged with the assail­ants. The Athenians, (for of them there were about fiftyheavy-armed asleep in the forum,) when they found whatwas done, some few excepted who were slain instantly on thespot, fled away for preservation; and some by land, others inthe guard-ships stationed there, got safe into Lecythus, a fortof their own. They kept this in their own hands, as it was theextremity of the city towards the 6ea stretched along on anarrow isthmus. Hither also those of the Toroneans, whopersevered in their fidelity, fled to them for refuge.
It being now broad day and the city firmly secured, Bra­







OCR Output








132 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


were forced to settle in the less frequented quarters of the city,in all the buildings sacred to the Gods and Heroes, exceptthose in the citadel, the Eleusinian, and any other from whencethey were excluded by religious awe. There was indeed uspot of ground below the citadel, called the Pelasgic, whichto turn into a dwelling-place, had not only been thought pro-faneness, but was expressly forbid by the close of a line in aPythian oracle, which said,
hi" Best is Pelasgic empty."
Yet this sudden urgent necessity constrained them to convertit to such a use. To wrr, I own, that oracle seems to havecarried a different meaning from what they gave it. For thecalamities of Athens did not flow from the profane habitationof this place, but from the war which laid them under a ne­cessity of employing it in such a manner. The oracle makesno mention of the war, but only hints that its being some timeinhabited would be attended with public misfortune. Manyof them, further, were forced to lodge themselves within theturrets of the walls, or wherever they could find a vacant cor­ner. The city was not able to receive so large a conflux ofpeople. But afterwards, the Long-walls, and a great part ofthe Piraeus, were portioned out to them for little dwellings.At the same time they were busied in the military preparations,gathering together the confederate-forces, and fitting out a fleetof one hundred ships to infest Peloponnesus. In affairs ofsuch great importance were the Athenians engaged.
The Peloponnesian army, advancing forwards, came upfirst to Oenoe, through which they designed to break intoAttica. Encamping before it they made ready their engines,and all other necessaries for battering the walls. For Oenoe,being a frontier-town between Attica and Boeotia, was walledabout, since the Athenians were used, upon the breaking outof war, to throw a garrison into it. The enemy made greatpreparations for assaulting it, and by this and other meansspent no little time before it.
This delay was the occasion of drawing very heavy cen­sures on Archidamus. He had before this been thought







OCR Output








190 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" own. There can be no reason for men, who were not con-" quered by superior courage, but wh6 can explicitly account" for the means of their defeat, to let their spirits be sunk by" a calamity merely accidental; but they ought to reflect," that though fortune may disconcert the human enterprizes," yet that men can never be deserted by their own valour ;" and where true valour is, they ought not to catch a plea" from want of experience to palliate what signs of cowardice" they betray. Inferior skill in you is by no means a balance" for your superior valour. The expertness of your enemies," which you so much dread, if it be accompanied with va-" lour, will indeed direct them in a performance of their" duty, amidst all the- hazards of war; but if it wants true" valour, those hazards will be too hard for all human art." For fear banisheth the remembrance of what ought to be" done ; and art without strength is quite unavailing. Place" therefore your own superior valour in the balance against" their superior skill; and remove the apprehensions flowing"from your defeat by the recollection that you were not pre-•4 pared to fight. You have now the advantage of a larger" number of ships, and an opportunity of fighting on your" own coasts, in sight of a land-army of your own. Victory" is generally obtained by those who are most in number" and best provided. So that, upon close examination, no" reason appears why we should dread the event. Our for-'' mer miscarriages make not against us ; nay, the past com-" mission of them will instruct us now. Let every mas-" ter, therefore, and every mariner act his part with manly" resolution; let each take care to perform his duty, nor quit" the post to which he is appointed. We shall take care to" order the engagement, in no worse a manner than our pre-" decessors have done ; and shall leave no man any reason to" excuse his cowardice. Yet, if any one will be a coward, he" shall certainly receive the punishment he deserves ; but the" valiant shall be honoured with rewards proportioned to their•* merit."







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








B. a. 119 TEAR I.—BEFORE CBRIST 431,


prevented their escape, so that many of them perished.The gates by which they entered, and which only had beenopened, one of the Plataeans had barred fast by thrustingthe point of a spear into the staple instead of a bolt, so thatthey could not possibly get out there. Thus pursued aboutthe city, some of them got upon the walls, and threw them­selves over, but most of these were killed by the fall: Someof them found a gate unguarded, and a woman supplyingthem with a hatchet, they cut the bolt in pieces unperceived,though few only escaped by this means, for they were soondiscovered. Others were separately slain in the differentquarters of the city. But the greatest part, and chiefly thosewho had kept in a body, threw themselves into a great housecontiguous to the walls, the doors of which happened to beopen, imagining the doors of this house to be the city-gates,and a certain passage to a place of safety. When the Pla­taeans saw them thus shut up, they consulted together, whe­ther they should fire the house and burn them all in theirinclosure, or reserve them for some other punishment. Butat last these and all the other Thebans yet surviving, whowere scattered about the city, agreed to give up their arms,and surrender themselves to the Plataeans prisoners at discre-* tion. Such was the issue of this attempt on Plataea.
The other Thebans, who ought during night to have comeup with all their strength, to reinforce the first body in casethey miscarried, and were still upon the march, when thenews of this defeat met them, advanced with all possibleexpedition. Plataea is distant from Thebes about seventystadia*, and the rain which fell that night had retarded theirmarch ; for the river Asopus was so much swelled by it thatit was not easily fordable. It was owing to the march insuch a heavy rain and the difficulty of passing this river,that they came not up till their men were either slain ormade prisoners. When the Thebans were convinced of that


About seven English miles.







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAR VIII. BEFORE CHRIST 424. 383


mankind when their passions are warm, to give themselvesup to blind and sanguine hope, and to throw aside with de­spotic scorn whatever seemeth to be counter to their wishes.It was but lately that the Athenians had been vanquishedby the Boeotians ; and Brasidas had been making such re­citals as might persuade, though in fact they were collusive,that at Nisaea with his single force he offered battle to theAthenians and they declined it. This made them confident,and they became perfectly convinced, that there was nolonger a strength sufficient to chastise them. But what hadthe greatest influence on their thoughts, and disposed thementirely to run all hazards, was the immediate pleasure theypromised themselves in a change, and that now they weregoing for the first time to experience the sweets of Lacedae­monian friendship.
These inclinations were perceived by the Athenians, whosent garrisons into each of these cities in order to curb them,with as much expedition as the shortness of time and thewintry season would permit.
Brasidas also had sent to Lacedaemon, soliciting a speedyreinforcement, and was busy himself in providing materials tobuild triremes in the Strymon. But the Lacedaemonians ne­glected to supply him, partly through the envy which theleading men at Sparta had conceived against him, and partlybecause their attention was principally confined to the recove­ry of their people made prisoners in Sphacteria, and to bringthe war to a conclusion.
The same winter, the Megareans having recovered theirlong -walls, which were in the possession of the Athenians,levelled them with the ground.
Brasidas thus master of Amphipolis gathereth togetherthe allies, and leadeth them into the district called Acte. Itis the tract, which stretcheth out into the sea from the canalwhich was dug by Xerxes, and Athos the highest mountainin Acte is its utmost verge upon the iEgean sea. The citiesin it are ; Sane, a colony of Andrians, seated close to the ca­







OCR Output








DISCOURSE III. CV


under Demosthenes, the carnage in the river Asinarus of thetroops under Nicias, his surrender too, the butchery of thegenerals, and the miseries of the captivated residue of onceso flourishing and gallant an army.—These are the severalincidents of this book, for which an attentive reader will givethe highest commendation to the Historian, when he hathread them through: He will have no leisure until then tothink of Thucydides.
Book VIII. The catastrophe hath now taken place in thishistory, and the reader is assured how all will end. Thewings of this soaring republic of Athens are clipped, neverto reach their full growth again: Yet, like an eagle in thesame situation, she will struggle hard a long time (as it were)with beak and talons, and would yet repulse her assailants,did she not grow sick at heart. Intestine faction will assisther enemies to finish her ruin, as a State imperial and com­mercial. A regular deduction of such incidents as these isthe subject of the Eighth and last book of Thucydides. As awriter he now performs in a more faint and less engagingmanner, compared with what hath gone before. He hath butdrawn his lines, but just sketched his pieces : But the draw­ings and sketches will still manifest the master's hand. Wewill give them a cursory view: The reader will give them amore exact and deliberate perusal.
He sets out in his usual grave and solemn manner, to de­scribe the people of Athens, dispirited and distressed as theyare bv the overthrow in Sicily. All the passions and emo­tions of the human nature take their turn. They are incre­dulous ; they are angry; they are convinced ; and then, theydespond ; they pluck up their spirits again, and are resolvedto stand it out, nor abandon their own preservation. Theynow cast their thoughts towards every resource, and prepareagain for war with spirit and resolution. All the rest ofGreece is ready to concur with the victorious party ; all areeagerly running in to share the glory and the spoil. Theirown dependents are meditating revolts, and some make them
Voi. I. O







OCR Output








DISCOURSE I. xxxvii


he scorned to be angry with his country. His complexionwas not at all choleric or resentful; there appears not the leastsign of any gall in his constitution. Discharged of all duties,and free from all public avocations, he was left without anyattachments but to simple truth, and proceeded to qualifyhimself for commemorating exploits, in which he could haveno share. He was now eight and forty years old, and intirelyat leisure to attend to the grand point of his ambition, that ofwriting the history of the present war; a calm spectator offacts, and dispassionate observer of the events he was deter­mined to record.
To judge of him from his history, (and we have no otherhelp to form our opinion about him,) he was so noblycomplexioned as to be all judgment and no passion. Nomurmur or complaint hath escaped him upon account ofhis severe undeserved treatment from his country. Greatsouls are congenial; their thoughts are always of a similarcast.
Sweet are the uses of adversityt
Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,
Wears yet a precious jewel in his head-Shakespeare hath thus expressed what Thucydides, as itis highly probable, must have thought. " Exile, according to" Plutarch*, was a blessing which the Muses bestowed upon" their favourites. By this means they enabled them to" compleat their most beautiful and noble compositions."He then quotes our author for the first proof of his observa­tion—" Thucydides the Athenian compiled his History of" the Peloponnesian War at Scaptesyle in Thrace." At thatplace he fixed his residence. It lay convenient forQtakingcare of his private affairs, and overlooking his mines: Theylay not within the dominions of Athens ; for then they wouldhave been forfeited to the State. Hence he made excursions
• Of Banishment.







OCR Output








354 THE PELOPONNESIAH WAR.


cessary hazards, they might join their own favourite partyif victorious.
Brasidas, when he could not prevail, withdrew again tothe main of his army. By the succeeding dawn the Boeo­tians joined him, who had resolved to succour Megara, evenprevious to the summons sent by Brasidas, since they re­garded the danger that place was in as their own. Theywere actually advanced with their whole force as far asPlataea ; and the messenger having met with them here,they became much more eager than before. They sent for­wards a detachment of two and twenty hundred heavy-armed, and six hundred horsemen, but dismissed the multi­tude to their own homes. When the whole force was thusunited, consisting of at least six thousand heavy-armed, andthe heavy-armed Athenians stood drawn up in order nearNisaea and the sea-shore, whilst their light-armed werestraggling about the plain, the Boeotian cavalry made anunexpected sally against those stragglers, and chaced themto the shore : For hitherto no aid whatever had taken thefield in behalf of the Megarfcans. The Athenian cavalryclapped spurs to repel the Boeotian, and a battle ensued.The horse were a long time thus engaged, and both sidesclaimed a victory. For the general of the Boeotian cavalry,and a small number of his party the Athenians drove be­fore them to Nisaea, where they put them to the swordand rifled them. They remained masters of the dead bo­dies, gave them up afterwards by truce, and erected a tro­phy : But neither side so keeping their ground as to renderthe action decisive, they retreated as it were by consent ;the Boeotians to their main-army, and the Athenians toNisaea.
Brasidas, after this, advanced nearer to the sea, and tothe city of Megara with his army. Having occupied theresome advantageous gronnd, they drew up in order and stoodstill, imagining the Athenians would attack them; and as­sured, that the Megareans were intently observing for whom







OCR Output








JDISCOVRSE III. ixiii


0
V They had ever been the most strenuous, most disinterested,44 and most gallant champions for liberty. They pompously" detail their battles of Marathon and Salamis ; their evacu-" ating Athens on the last occasion: and, when they had no" polity of their own subsisting, fighting ardently and success-" fully for the other communities of Greece. Their power" had been nobly earned; and, must they forego it, because" it was envied ? They had honourably gained and justly" used it; much more jusdy, than the Lacedaemonians had it" either in will or ability to have done. They are calumnia-44 ted merely from that spite and discontent so common toft mankind, who ever hate and abuse their superiors, and ever" repine at subjection though to the most gentle masters.—*4 Lacedaemonians have neither skill nor judgment for large" command, and though most eagerly grasping at it, are un-M able to manage it with any measure of dexterity and address." They should reflect again and again, before they ventured" upon war: It might last longer, and involve them in more«4 calamities, than they seemed willing to apprehend. They" had better submit their complaints to fair arbitration: If*4 not, the Athenians invoke the Gods to witness their readi-" ness to defend themselves, whenever and however their*4 enemies shall attack them."
All parties now withdraw ; and the Lacedaemonians go tocouncil amongst themselves. Exasperated by the Corinthi­ans, and mortified. by the speech of the Athenians, the ma­jority are for an immediate declaration of war. Archidamus,one of their kings, rose up to temper their fury. And thespeech of his Spartan majesty on this occasion, carries allthe marks of a good king, an able statesman, and a thoroughpatriot: It does honour both to his heart and head. A Spar­tan king never made a royal figure but at the head of anarmy: Then he reigned indeed. And yet, Archidamus re­tains no selfish considerations ; they are lost in his regard forthe public welfare.
He tells them, " he is not fond of war himself; raw un­







OCR Output








ft. IV. 30G YEAR VII. BEFORE CHRIST 425.


the opposite shore ; for by these dispositions the Athe­nians would be incommoded from the island, and excludedfrom landing on the main land: And as on the oppositecoast of Pylus without the harbour there is no road whereships can lie, they would be deprived of a station fromwhence to succour the besieged: And thus, -without thehazard of a naval engagement, it was probable they should getpossession of the place, as the quantity of provisions in itcould be but small, since the seizure had been executed withslender preparation.—Acting upon these motives they threwthe body of heavy-armed into the island, who were draughtedby lot out of all the bands. These for a time were succes­sively relieved by others. But the last body, who guardedthat post, and were forced to continue in it, consisted ofabout four hundred and twenty exclusive of the Helots whoattended them, and these were commanded by Epitadas, theson of Molobrus.
Demosthenes perceiving by these dispositions that theLacedaemonians would attack him by land and sea, providedfor his own defence. The triremes yet remaining with himhe drew ashore, and ranged them by way of palisade be­fore the fortress. The mariners he armed with bucklers,sorry ones indeed, as most of them were only twigs of osierplaited. Better arms were not to be procured in so desart aplace. And even these they had taken out of a cruizer ofthirty oars and a light packet belonging to Messenians, whohappened accidentally to put in. The Messenians on boardwere about forty heavy-armed, whom he ranged amongst hisown body. The greater part therefore of the unarmed aswell as some who had armour, he placed on the strongestparts of the fortress towards the continent, with orders tobeat off the land army whenever they approached. Andhaving selected from his whole number sixty heavy-armedand a few archers, he marched out of the fortress to that partof the beach where he supposed the enemy would endeavourto land. The shore indeed was rough and rocky, and bor­







OCR Output








404 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


was seized for applying them*. However the alarm wastaken before he could possibly scale, upon which he drewoff his army without loss of time, not caring to wait for thereturn of day. And thus ended the winter; and with itthe ninth year of this war, of which Thucydides hath com­piled the History.
• The officers regularly went their rounds to see that all the centinelswere at their posts. When they approached any of them, a little bell wasrung to which the centinel was to answer, in proof that he was at his postand awake. The interval between the rounds was so considerable, andthe vigilance of the centinel, as the bell was just gone by, might be so re­laxed, that Brasidas hoped he might execute his scheme.


 


-


END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.







OCR Output








184 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


With these forces Cnemus began his march, withoutwaiting the arrival of the ships from Corinth, and passingthrough Argia, they destroyed Limnaea, a village unfortified.They march next for Stratus, the capital city of Acarnania,judging that if they first took this, all other places wouldreadily submit. The Acarnanians, finding a large armybroke in amongst them by land, and more enemies comingto attack them by sea, gave up all view of succouring oneanother, and stood separately on their own defence. Theysent information to Phormio, and requested him to come upto their relief. He sent them word, " he could not possibly" leave Naupactus without a guard, when a fleet was ready" to sail from Corinth." The Peloponnesians and theirallies, dividing themselves into three bodies, advanced to­wards the city of the Stratians, with a design to appear beforeit, and if it did not surrender at once, to storm it withoutloss of time. The Chaonians and the rest of the Barbariansmarched in the middle; to the right were the Leucadians,Anactorians, and their auxiliaries; to the left, Cnemus withhis Peloponnesians, and the Ambraciots ; each body at sogreat a distance from the rest, that sometimes they were outof one another's sight. The Grecians, in their march, keptfirm within ranks, and guarded all their motions, till theycame up to the spot fit for their encampment. But the Cha­onians, confident of their own bravery, and valuing them­selves as the most martial people in that part of the world,could not bear the delay of encamping, but, with the rest ofthe Barbarians, rushing eagerly forwards, thought to take thetown at a shout, and carry all the honour. The Stratiansfinding them thus advanced, thought, that could they masterthem, thus detached, the Grecians would become more averseto attack them. With this view they place ambuscades inthe approaches of the city; and when the enemy was near,rush up at once from the places of ambush, and out of thecity, charging them on all sides. The Chaonians are throwninto consternation, and many of them are slain. The rest







OCR Output








82 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


Citium: And being come up to the height of Salamis in Cy­prus, they engaged at one time a united force of Phoeniciansand Cyprians and Cilicians, both by land and sea. They gainedthe victory in both engagements: and being rejoined by thedetachment they had sent to Egypt, returned home.
After this, the Lacedaemonians engaged in that which isknown by the name of the holy war; and having recoveredthe temple of Delphi, delivered it up to the Delphians. Butno sooner were they withdrawn, than the Athenians marchedout in their turn, retook it, and delivered it into the hands ofthe Phocians.
At no great interval of time from hence, the Athenianstook the field against the Boeotian exiles, who had seized Or-chomenus and Chaeronaea, and some other cities of Boeotia.Their force, sent out upon this service, consisted of a thou­sand heavy-armed of their own with proportional quotas fromtheir allies, and was commanded by Tolmidas the son of Tol-maeus. Having taken and enslaved Chaeronaea, they placeda fresh garrison in it, and so withdrew. But upon theirmarch, they are attacked at Coronea by a body of men con­sisting of the Boeotian exiles sallying out of Orchomenus, join­ed by Locrians and the exiles from Euboea and others of theirpartizans. After a battle, the victory remained with the lat­ter, who made great slaughter of the Athenians, and tookmany prisoners. Upon this, the Athenians evacuated Boeotia,and to get the prisoners released consented to a peace. TheBoeotian exiles, and all others in the same circumstances,were by this re-settled in their old habitations, and recoveredtheir former liberty and rights.
It was not a great while after these last occurrences thatEuboea revolted from the Athenians. And Pericles was nosooner landed upon that island with an Athenian army tochastise them, than news was brought him that " Megara alsohad revolted ; that the Peloponnesians were going to make anincursion into Attica; that the Athenian garrison had beenput to the sword by the Megareans*, excepting those who
• This revolt of Megara, a little republic almost surrounded by the do­minions of Atbens, leagued closely with her, and under her protection, gave







OCR Output








B. III. YEAR V.«--BEFORE CHRIST 427. 269


had lodged without ; and, having ordered the ships whichthey had manned to come about into the Hyllaic harbour,whilst they were going about in pursuance of this order,they put all the adverse faction whom they found to thesword. Those further, who had took on in the ships at theirpersuasion, they threw into the sea and then retired. Theyafterwards went to Juno's temple, and persuaded a party ofsuppliants there, to the amount of fifty, to undergo a judicialtrial, in which they were all condemned to die. The majo­rity of suppliants, who refused to hear such persuasion, nosooner saw the fate of their brethren, than they either slewone another within the temple, or hung themselves up uponthe trees within its verge; each finding some expedient forhis own dispatch. During those seven days that Euryme-don with his reinforcement continued at Corcyra, the peo­ple of that city extended the massacre to all whom theyjudged their enemies. The crime oh which they justifiedtheir proceedings, was their attempt to overturn the demo­cracy.
Some perished merely through private enmity; some forthe sums they had lent, by the hands of the borrowers.Every kind of death was here exhibited. Every dreadfulact usual in a sedition, and more than usual, was perpetratednow. For fathers slew their children; some Were draggedfrom altars; and some were butchered at them. And anumber of persons immured in the temple of Bacchus werestarved to death. So cruel was the progress of this sedition,and so excessively cruel did it appear, because the first of soblack a nature that ever happened. But afterwards the con­tagion spread, one may say, through the whole extent ofGreece, when factions raged in every city, the popular de­magogues contending for the Athenians, the aspiring fenfor the Lacedaemonians. In peace, it is true, they werevoid of all pretext, of all opportunity to invite these rivals.But now, amidst declared hostilities, and the quest of al­liance to afflict their enemies and add an increase of strength
Vol. I. 3 B







OCR Output








PREFACE.


their applause, the clamour of some will not terrify, nor thesilence of others mortify at all. The bookseller, it is true,forms his own judgment, and then dictates to the judgmentof others from the sale. And it must be owned, that everyoriginal writer as well as every copyist is heartily glad to re­ceive that mark of public approbation.
The present translation of Thucydides Is accompanied witha few notes, and three preliminary Discourses. Concerningeach of these something must be added.
The notes are only designed for the English reader, to givehim light into that antiquity, with which he may be little ac­quainted : And therefore the first time that any thing rela­ting to the constitution or forms of the Athenian republic, orpeculiar to their fleets and land armies occurs, I have endea­voured in a note.to give him a competent perception of it.I have done the same in regard to the characters of the chiefpersonages in the history, which seemed to need a fartheropening than what Thucydides hath given them. The per­sons were well known when he wrote : But a modern readermay not be displeased to be regularly introduced, and earlyto be made acquainted with the characters of the principalagents in these busy and important scenes. In notes of ver­bal criticism or mere learning I have been very sparing,judging they would never be read with patience.
Of the preliminary Discourses, the two first were due, by -Vthe rules of decorum observed by editors and translators, tothe author. In the last, I have thrown into one continueddiscourse what might have been broke into pieces, and inter­spersed occasionally by way of notes. The method observedappeared most eligible, as it will give the reader a clear pros­pect of the whole history ; preparing him for or inciting himto a close and attentive perusal of it; or enabling him, afterhe hath perused it, to recollect the most instructive passagesand most material occurrences. By this means also, a morelively and succinct account could be given of the speakers and







OCR Output








Xti PREFACE.


are used, which Thucydides ever studiously avoided. Suchfrequently occur in the midst of some grand circumstance,which they throw into a kind of burlesque, and may excite areader's laughter. The English language has gone througha great variation, hath been highly polished, since Mr. Hobbeswrote. Hence, though his terms be in general very intelli­gible, yet they have not that neatness, precision, and dignity,to which the polite and refined writers within the last centuryhave habituated our eats. And, after all, I am inclined tothink, that Mr. Hobbes either executed in great haste, or per­formed his revisals in a very cursory and negligent manner.I am inclined to think so from the very many passages, neces­sary and emphatical periods, nay sometimes in the veryspeeches, which to my great surprise I have found omittedin his translation. A particle, an epithet, or even a comma,may with the greatest attention sometimes be dropped in along work. But the omissions in Mr. Hobbes are too nu­merous and important, to be excused in any tolerable con­sistence with repeated care and circumspection.
Monsieur Bayle hath ascribed the translation of Thucy­dides by Mr. Hobbes to a motive of which he hath not leftthe least hint himself in his preface ;—" in order to shew the" English, in the history of the Athenians, the disorders and" confusions of a democratical government." Mr. Hobbescould not possibly, so long before they happened, foresee thestrange revolutions, that were soon to take place in the go­vernment of his country. The very actors in them couldnot possibly discern the consequences of their own embroil­ments. Some violent incroachments had indeed been madeon the liberty and property of Englishmen, and a spirit of dis­content began to spread throughout the nation. But it can­not be supposed, that the plan of a commonwealth was form­ed at that time, or for several years after. The history ofThucydides abundantly shews, how dangerous and destruc­tive is faction in a State ; that severe or wanton power maymake men desperate ; and that liberty abused may make







OCR Output








■l II. YEAR I.—BEFORE CHRIST 431.


pompus the son of Clinias, who, making several descents,plundered many maritime places, and took Thronium. Hecarried from thence some hostages, and at Alope defeated abody of Locrians who were marching to its relief.
The same summer, the Athenians transported from iEginaall the inhabitants, not only the men but the children and thewomen, reproaching them as the principal authors of the pre­sent war. And judging they might securely keep possessionof iEgina, which lay so near to Peloponnesus, if they peopledit with a colony of their own—with this view, not long after,they fixed some of their own people in possession of it. TheLacedaemonians received the iEgineta e on their expulsion, andassigned them Thyraa for their place of residence, and thecountry about it for their subsistence, not only on account oftheir own enmity to the Athenians, but the particular obliga-tions they lay under to the .(Eginet*, for the succour they hadgiven them in the time of the earthquake and the insurrec­tion of the Helots. The district of Thyraa lies between Ar-gia and Laconia, declining quite down to the sea. Here someof them fixed their residence, but the rest were dispersed in­to other parts of Greece.
The same summer, on the first day of the lunar month, atwhich time alone it can possibly fall out, there was an eclipseof the sun in the afternoon. The sun looked for a time likethe orescent of the moon, and some stars appeared, but thefull orb shone out afterwards in all its lustre.
The same summer also, the Athenians, who had hithertoregarded as their enemy Nymphodorus, the son of Pythes ofAbdera, whose sister was married to Sitalces, and who had agreat influence over him, made him their public friend, and in­vited him to Athens. They hoped by this to gain over Sital­ces, the son of Teres king of Thrace, to their alliance. ThisTeres, father of Sitalces, was the first who made the kingdomof Odrysa the largest in all Thrace: For the greater part ofthe Thracians are free, and governed by their own laws. Butthis Teres was not in the least related to Tereus, who marri­







OCR Output








276 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


is believed by those people, that Vulcan keeps his forge inHiera*, because in the night it visibly throws forth a greatquantity of fire, and in the day of smoke. These isles aresituated over-against the shore of the Siculi and the Messe-nians, and were allied with Syracuse. The Athenians hav­ing plundered the soil, and finding the inhabitants would notcome in, put back again to Rhegium.—And here the win­ter ended, and the fifth year of this war, the history of whichThucydides hath compiled.
YEAR VI.
THE following summer, the Peloponnesians and confede­rates assembled at the Isthmus, in order to make the usualinroad into Attica ; and Agis, son of Archidamus, king ofthe Lacedaemonians, was there ready for the command. Butthe frequent earthquakes which happened about this time,caused them to return back, and entirely put a stop to thedesigned incursion.
About the same space of time shocks of earthquakeswere felt in Euboea, where at Orobi* the sea breaking overwhat was then land with impetuous swells, laid a part ofthat city under water: Some of which stagnated there,though some washed its way back: however a tract nowcontinues sea which before was land. All those who couldnot reach the higher grounds in time, by running beforethe surge, were drowned.—A similar inundation happenedat the isle of Atalanta, amongst the Locrians of Opus,where it washed away the Athenian fort, and of two ves­sels that lay dry upon the beach staved one to pieces. . -
• So Virgil, L viii. 416.
Insula sicanium juxta latus /EoliamqueErifritur Liparum fumantibus arrlua saxis:Qiiam subter specus & Cyclopum exesa caminisAntra £tnxa tonant, valadique incudibus ictusAuditi referunt gemitum, striduntque cavernisStricturx Chalvbiim, & f'ornacihus ignis anhelntVulcani domus, & Vulcania nomine tt-llus.







OCR Output








B. III. YEAR V. BEFORE CHRIST 427. 261


"juries wc have suffered, requiting so that chearful friend-" ship we have ever shewn you ; and let not their flow of" words overturn our just demands. Make now a precedent" for Greece hereafter to follow. Shew them, that deci-" sions must be formed, not according to what men may say," but according to what they have done: If their actions" have been right, that a short simple narration may at any" time suffice: But if those actions have been wrong, that" all studied ornamental periods are intended to disguise the" truth. If those who preside at judgments, as you at pre-" sent, would proceed in a summary way, to a general de-" termination against the guilty, little room would be left to" disguise unjustifiable actions by plausible speeches."
In this manner the Thebans replied ; and the Lacedae­monian judges agreed in the resolution, that the question,—" Whether they had received any good service from them" in the war ?"—was properly and fairly conceived. Theygrounded this, upon the former proposal made to them toremain neutral according to the old treaty of Pausanias afterthe Medish invasion, and upon another more lately, whichthey had offered before they had blocked them up, to becommon friends to both sides in conformity to the sametreaty. But after this double refusal, looking upon them­selves as no longer bound to observe those articles, whichothers had deliberately infringed to traverse their interest,—they now proceed again to bring them forwards man byman, and put the question—" Whether they had done good" service to the Lacedaemonians and allies in the present" war?"—and upon their answering -iVo, led them aside andslew them. Not one of the number did they exempt; sothat in this massacre there perished of Plataeans not fewerthan two hundred, and twenty-five Athenians who had beenbesieged in their company ; and all the women were soldfor slaves. The Thebans assigned the city, for the space ofa year, to be the residence of certain Megarfeans, who hadbeen driven from home in the rage of a sedition, and to
Vol. I. 3 A







OCR Output








PREFACE. Xlii


them insolent and mutinous. It detects and exposeth venalorators and false patriots ; but it exhibits men, who are stu­dious and eloquent in behalf of public welfare, and active insupport of liberty and honest power, in full beauty and pro­portion. And his lessons lie not so apposite and ready forthe application of any State now existing in the world, as forthat of Great Britain.
The reader may by this time have caught a glimpse ofseveral reasons, for which the present translation of Thucy-dides was finished and is now made public. No care hathbeen omitted to make it as correct as possible. It hath beenattentively reviewed ; the narrative part, more than once ;the oratorial part, with repeated endeavours to reach thespirit and energy of the original. In the former, the Authorhath been followed step by step : Bold deviations here mightimperceptibly have misrepresented or distorted the facts, andquite banished the peculiar stile and manner of the author.In the latter, it hath been often judged necessary to dilatethe expression in order fully to include the primary idea;though, where it seemed possible, the studied conciseness ofthe author hath been imitated, provided the thought could beclearly expressed, and the sententious maxim adequatelyconveyed. The turns and figures of expression have beenevery where diligently noted, and an endeavour constantlymade at imitation. This was judged a point of duty ; or apoint at least, where though something may be permitted toa translator's discretion or to the genius of a modern language,yet he must not indulge himself in too wide a scope, lest,when what ought to be a copy is exhibited, the prime dis­tinctions of the original be lost, and little or no resemblancebe left behind.
It is very just and true what Mr. Hobbes hath observed,that " this author so carrieth with him his own light through-" out, that the reader may continually see his way before htm," and by that which goeth before expect what is to followAnd he, who applies to any commentator but Thucydidt s







OCR Output








182 THE PELOPOVNESIAN WAR.


a faction they had within. But a contrary party, havingsent in good time to Olynthus, had procured from thence anaid of heavy-armed and other force for their protection.These even made a sally out of Spartolus, and forced theAthenians to a battle under the walls of the town. Theheavy-armed Chalcideans, with some of their auxiliaries, aredefeated by the Athenians, and retire into Spartolus. Thehorse and light-armed Chalcideans get the better of thehorse and light-armed Athenians; but they had with thema small number of targeteers from the province called Cru-sis. On the first joining of battle other targeteers came totheir assistance from Olynthus. The light-armed of Spar­tolus seeing this reinforcement just come up, and reflectingthat they had received no loss before, with reanimated cou­rage again charge the Athenians, in conjunction with theGhalcidean horse, and the fresh reinforcement. The Athe­nians retire to the two companies which they had left toguard the baggage. Here they drew up again, and when­ever they thought proper to charge, the enemy fell back ;when they retreated from the charge, the enemy pressedupon and infested them with missive weapons. The Ghal­cidean horse rode up where they thought they could breakthem, and falling in without fear of a repulse, put the Athe­nians to flight, and pursued them to a great distance. TheAthenians fly for refuge to Potidaea ; and afterwards, obtain­ing a truce to fetch off their dead, return with their shatteredarmy to Athens. In this action they lost four hundred andthirty men, and all their commanders. The Chalcideansand Bottiaeans erected a trophy, and having taken propercare of their dead; separated to their own cities.
Not long after this, in the same summer, the Ambraciotsand Chaonians, who aimed at the total reduction of Acar-nania, and to compass a general defection there from theAthenians, prevailed upon the Lacedaemonians to supplythem with shipping from their confederate cities, and tosend a thousand heavy-armed into Acarnania. They told







OCR Output








188 THE PELOPONKESTAN WAR.


his naval conduct, ordering him to get ready for a more suc­cessful engagement, and not to leave the dominion of the seato such a small number of ships. For their late defeat ap­peared to them quite unaccountable, especially as this wasthe first trial they had of an engagement at sea; nor couldthey think it so much owing to a want of skill in naval affairs,as to a want of courage, never balancing the long experienceof the Athenians with their own short application to thesematters. These persons therefore they sent away in anger,who, coming to Cnemus^ issued their circular orders to thestates for new quotas of shipping, and refitted what was al­ready there for another engagement. Phormio also sendsmessengers to Athens with an account of these preparations,and to report the victory they had already gained ; request­ing a further reinforcement of as many ships as they couldexpeditiously dispatch, since he was in daily expectation ofanother fight.
Twenty ships were the number they agfee to send him,but they ordered him who was to carry them to touch by theway at Crete. For Nicias a Cretan of Gortys, a publicfriend of the Athenians, had persuaded them to appear be­fore Cydonia, assuring them that this place, which had beenan enemy to them, should soon be their own. This he in­sinuated merely to gratify the Polychnitae, who borderedupon the Cydonians. The commander therefore with theseships went to Crete, and joining the Polvchnita?, ravaged theterritory of the Cydonians ; by which, together with adversewinds and weather unfit for sea, no little time was unseasona­bly wasted away.
The Peloponnesians at Cyllene, (lining the time that theAthenians lay weather-bound in Crete, having got everything in readiness for another engagement, sailed along thecoast of Panormus of Achaia, where the land-forces of thePeloponnesians were come to forward their attempts. Phor­mio likewise, with the twenty ships which had fought theformer battle, sailed up to cape Molychrium, and lay at an­







OCR Output













OCR Output








B. I. INTRODUCTION. 107


" peace there may be, if you will permit the Grecians to go-" vern themselves at their own discretion."
The Athenians summoned an assembly, where every onewas invited to deliver his opinion. They determined, afterdeliberate consultation on all the points in contest, to returnone definitive answer. Several others spoke on this occasion,and were divided in their sentiments ; some insisting on thenecessity of a war; others, that peace should not be obstructedby that decree, which ought to be repealed. At length, Pe­ricles, the son of Xantippus, standing forth, who was at thattime the leading man at Athens, and a person of the greatestabilities both for action and debate, advised them, thus:
" I FIRMLY persevere, Athenians, in the same opinion
" that I have ever avowed to make no concessions to the
" Lacedaemonians—though at the same time sensible, that" men never execute a war with that warmth of spirit through" which they are first impelled to undertake it, but sink in" their ardour as difficulties increase. I perceive it, however," incumbent upon me, to persist in the same uniform advice :" And I require those amongst you who are influenced by it," as they concur in the measures, either to unite their effortsM for redress, if any sinister event should follow; or else, upon" a series of success, to make no parade of their own discern-" ment. It is usual enough for accidents unforeseen to baffle" the best concerted schemes ; since human intentions are by" nature fallible. And hence it comes to pass, that whatever" falls out contrary to our expectations, we are accustomed to" throw all the blame upon fortune.
" The treacherous designs of the Lacedaemonians, formerly," against us were visible to all; nor are they, this very mo-" ment, less clear than ever. For, notwithstanding that ex-" press stipulation—That, upon controversies between us, we" should reciprocally do and submit to justice, each party re-" maining in their present possessions—yet, they have never" demanded justice, nor accept the offer of it from us. Their" allegations against us they are determined to support by" arms and not by evidence: And here they come no longer







OCR Output








B. IV. 319 YEAR VII. BErORE CHRIST 425.


unpractised on either side ; some being ever intent to carryprovisions over, and others to intercept them.
At Athens, in the mean time, the people being informedof the hardships to which their own forces are reduced, andthat those in the island receive supplies of provision, wereperplexed how to act. They were full of apprehensions lestthe winter should put a stop to their siege, being conscious ofthe impossibility of procuring them subsistence from anypart of Peloponnesus ; and more so, as the soil about themwas barren, and that even in summer they were not able tofurnish them with necessary supplies; that further, as noharbours were in the parts adjacent, there would be nocommodious road for their shipping; so that, in case theyrelaxed their guard, the besieged would go securely away;or otherwise, they might get off, by the favour of stormyweather, in those vessels which brought over provisions.But they were most of all alarmed at the conduct of the La-cedaemonians, who, because they had now a safe resourcein prospect, had discontinued all manner of negotiation.—In a word, they highly repented the refusal of their for­mer offers.
Cleon, conscious to himself that the blame of bafflingthat accommodation would be thrown upon him, taxed themwho brought the last advices as broachers of falsehoods.But those who had been sent to make the report, demanded," since they could not be credited, that a deputation might" be sent to know its truth." For which office Cleon him­self was nominated by the Athenians, in conjunction withTheogenes.
But now he plainly saw, that he must either be necessi­tated to make the same report as those had done whom hehad charged with falsehood ; or, should he report differently,must soon be convicted of a lie. He perceived also, thatthe inclinations of the people were mostly bent on an am­ple reinforcement; upon which he ventured to give themthis further advice—That " sending a deputation on s«eh







OCR Output








383 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


Mercinus also, a city of Edonia, revolted to him uponthe death of Pittacus king of the Edonians, who was killed bythe sons of Goaxis and his own wife Braures. Gapselus soonafter did the same, and Oesyme: They are colonies of theThrasians. These events were owing to the practices ofPerdiccas, who came thither in person immediately afterthe surrender of Amphipolis.
The loss of that city cast the Athenians into great con­sternation, and with reason, because it was a place of greatimportance to them, since from thence they had materialsfor building ships and a pecuniary revenue ; and farther, be­cause, after a safe conduct through Thessaly, the route wasnow open to the Lacedaemonians as far as the Strymon, toannoy their dependents. Yet had they not possessed them­selves of the bridge, the large lake formed above by the ri­ver, and the check given by the triremes stationed at Eion,would have hindered the Lacedaemonians from penetratingfurther. But all obstacles appeared to the Athenians nowquite easy to be surmounted ; and their apprehensions, thattheir dependents would revolt, alarmed them much. ForBrasidas in the rest of his conduct gave constant proofs ofan excellent temper ; and the declaration was ever in hismouth, " that he had been sent thither to restore the liberty" of Greece." Accordingly the cities, which were subjectto the Athenians, had no sooner heard of the surrender ofAmphipolis together with the brave exploits and the mildengaging deportment of Brasidas, than they conceived themost ardent inclination to shake off the yoke. They se­cretly dispatched their agents to him, earnestly desiring avisit from him,- with respective assurances from each, thatthey w<5uld be the first to revolt. They judged, therewas no longer room to apprehend any bad consequencesfrom such a step; falsely estimating the Athenian powerto be much less considerable than it afterwards appeared.But this their judgment was founded more upon uncertainpresumption than deliberate prudence. It is the turn of







OCR Output








. DISCOURSE in. cvii


not fall immediately into their hands, through the violenceof her own intestine seditions. But the new administrationproved of short continuance ; the democracy, though on amodel somewhat varied, is again established ; and Athensthus obtains a respite.
Full of matter as this part of the history is, Thucydideshath kept his narration clear and unembarrassed. But then,it is a simple, unadorned narration, and never received thefinishing hand. There are scattered occasionally through­out it some short accounts, in what manner the principalagents delivered their sentiments at important junctures.They seem to have been memorials, laid down as the ground­work, for regular and full orations. The reader will be sorrythe author was hindered, by what accidents can only beguessed, from drawing out some of them at least into fullproportion; particularly that of the deputation from thearmy at Samos to Athens, in which " the people are per-" suaded to part with their darling democracy „•" of Thrasy-bulus to the troops at Samos, when they mutiny in favourof the democracy, in which, " he must pathetically have" expatiated on the revolt of Athens from liberty and her" choicest patriots, who might now form another Athens at" Samos, and preserve her empire, though they had lost" the city;" that of Alcibiades further, when on his recal-ment he harangues the army at Samos which recalled him,where " he deplores the malignity of his fate, magnifies his" ability yet to serve his country, and again shines in the" character of an able statesman, a subtle politician, and a" zealous patriot."
Upon the whole. One point more must be particularlydistinguished in honour of the Athenians. The characters ofthem and of the Lacedaemonians are strongly contrastedthrough the whole course of this History, and highly to thecredit of the former. Their spirits rise with difficulties, andpatriotism starts out of mutiny and faction. The Lacedae­monians are indolent in success, and shew neither alacrity







OCR Output








THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


Such an end had the lives of Pausanias the Lacedaemonian,and Themistocles the Athenian, who in their own age madethe greatest figure of any Grecians.
The Lacedaemonians, by their first embassy, had enjoined,what was as amply in turn required of them, to do as hathbeen above recited, concerning the expulsion of the sacrilegi­ous. But, coming a second time to the Athenians, they com­manded them—" to quit the blockade of Potidcea ;" and—" to permit iEgina to govern itself at its own discretion ;" and,above all other points, insist upon this, declaring most ex­pressly that in this case war should not be made.—" If theywould revoke their decree concerning the Megareans, inwhich they had been prohibited from entering any harbourwhatever in the dominion of Athens, and from the Atticmarkets."
But the Athenians listened to none of these demands, norwould revoke the decree, but reproached the Megareans fortilling land that was sacred, land not marked out for culture,and for giving shelter to runaway slaves.
At last, the final ambassadors arrived from Lacedaemon,namely, Ramphias and Melesippus and Agesander, who,waving all other points which they had formerly required,said thus—" The Lacedaemonians are desirous of peace, and
Each fleet return'd or setting out should joinIn owning all the naval glory thine ;It should command, high rais'd, yon wat'ry plain.And point that fight which gave us all the main.
I cannot end this note about Themistocles, without begging the reader toaccept a translation of an epigram in the Anthologia, which appears to havebeen written with a spirit worthy of this illustrious Athenian.
Be Greece the monument; and crown the heightWith all the trophies of the naval fight.Let Persia's Mars and Xerxes swell the base ;Such forms alone Themistocles can grace.Next, like a column of majestic size,His acts inscrib'd, let Salamis arise.Swell every part, and give the hero room,For nothing small should scandalize the tomb.







OCR Output








jj. I. INTRODUCTION; 87


War*." The Byzantines also came in, upon the engage­ment of being held only to such obedience as had formerlybeen required of them.
Not many years intervened between this period of timeand the rise of those differences above recited concerningCorcyra and Potidaea, and all occurrences whatever, onwhich the pretences of this Peloponnesian war were ground­ed. All these transactions in general, whether of Greciansagainst Grecians, or against the Barbarian, fell out in thecompass of fifty years, between the retreat of Xerxes and thecommencement of this present war; during which periodthe Athenians had established their dominion on a solid ba­sis, and had rose to a high exaltation of power. The Lace­daemonians were sensible of it, yet never opposed them, ex­cept by some transient efforts ; and for the most part of thetime were quite easy and indifferent about it. That peoplehad never been known in a hurry to run to arms: Theirwars were indispensably necessary; and sometimes theywere entangled in domestic broils. Thus they looked onwith indolent unconcern till the Athenian power was manifest­ly established, and encroachments were made upon their ownalliance. Then indeed they determined to be no longer patient:They resolved upon a war in which their utmost force shouldbe exerted, and the Athenian power, if possible, demolished.
ON these motives was formed the public resolution of theLacedaemonians—That " the treaty was violated, and the" Athenians were guilty of injustice." They had also sent
• Samoa thus reduced, which in maritime power vied with Athens her­self, and had well nigh defeated her grand plan of being mistress of the•ea, Pericles was received upon his return with all the honours a gratefulpeople could give him, and was pitched upon to make the funeral orationfor those slain in the war. He performed his part with high applause.The ladies in particular were loud in their acclamations, and were eagerlyemployed in caressing and crowning him with garlands. But for a smartpiece of raillery from one of them, on this occasion, and his smarter repar-tee, the reader may consult the Univertal Hittory, vol. vi. p. 429. the note.In the latter part of that note, the authors seem willing both to deny andto allow Pericles the meril of having strved his country in the reductionof Samos.







OCR Output








hnri A Survey of the History.


though soon after he lost his country, through the malice ofhis personal enemies and the enemies of his country in con­junction with them, yet the statesmen and patriots left behindpursued his plan of naval power: And the steps of its pro­gress and advancement are minutely traced out by our His­torian.
Themistocles had made all safe and secure at home.The Lorig-walls were built; the Piroeus, a spacious harbour,opened and fortified, a magazine for traffic, and an arsenalfor war. Aristides, as true a patriot as ever lived, made allsecure abroad. Through his honest management, all Greecesubmitted to an annual tax, for the guard of their commonliberty against future invasions; and the leaders at sea weremade collectors and treasurers of this naval fund. The isleof Delos was the place, at first, of lodging this fund; but itwas soon after removed to Athens ;—a shrewd political step,yet capable however of an ample if not full justification.The war is briskly carried on against the Persian monarch ;the isles and seas are cleared of the common enemy; thecities on the coast are regained or conquered. Cimon alsoperforms his part nobly; he earns two victories the same day,by sea and land, on the coast of Ionia, from the Persians.He compleated a negotiation with the petty maritime States,confederate with Athens, who were tired of incessant war­fare, for accepting sums of money instead of ships and per­sonal attendance. By this means the shipping of thoseStates soon mouldered away, and their money was by theirown agreement sent thither, to increase and strengthen themaritime power of Athens. In spite of all the opposition,which the Corinthians and Boeotians gave them at home,whose rancour to them was never to be appeased, in thecourse of no large number of years, they had established avery extensive and formidable empire indeed. The isles andcoasts of the iEgtan sea were mostly their own. The bayof Sarone was intirely in their own jurisdiction: And, bybeing masters of Naupactus, they considerably awed the







OCR Output








cvi A Survey of the History.


at once without premeditation. The Lacedaemonians, amidstthe many applications made to them, are puzzled which ofthe revolving States they shall first countenance and assist.Alcibiades is busy at Sparta, advising proper measures, andguiding their counsels. Even the Persian monarch, by hislieutenants, enters into league against them; and some oftheir finest islands are immediately rent asunder from sub­jection to the Athenians.
The various turns of war at Chios, and on the coast ofIonia, are distinctly but concisely related, until Alcibiadesappears in action, and exerts his busy and intriguing genius.Suspected at length and hated by the Lacedaemonians, hebecame again their enemy, and turned all his projects on ac­complishing his return to Athens, and saving his countryfrom impending ruin. His partizans, in the fleet and troopsof Athens now lying at Samos, cabal in his favour. A changeof government is judged a necessary measure to bring abouthis recalment. It is the scheme of Alcibiades himself;but it is opposed, and disconcerted by Phrynichus; byPhrynichus, who soon after turns out a violent enemy tothe democracy, whilst Alcibiades is active and zealous in itssupport.
None but our author's pen could have so clearly unfoldedthat series of caballings, that fluctuation both in principle andconduct, and that horrid embroilment of the leading mem-t bers of the Athenian State amongst themselves, which broughton seditions amongst the troops abroad, and a revolution ofgovernment in the city of Athens. The democracy is atlength overturned : and an oligarchy, consisting of four hun­dred persons, erected in its stead. The Athenians atSamos,where the project was first laid, declare against the Atheni­ans at Athens. Alcibiades is grown again a hearty republi­can ; and Thrasybulus alone manifests throughout a sincerelove and regard for his country. Parties newly formed arebroke again into divisions ; and Athens was indebted to no­thing but the indolence of the Lacedaemonians, that she did







OCR Output








392 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


When they had notified their revolt to him, Brasidas passedover to Scione by night. A party of his friends sailed be­fore him in a trireme, and he followed at some distance in afly-boat, to the end that if he should fall in with any vessellarger than this boat, the trireme might make head againsther; but if another trireme of equal strength should comeup to them, he judged she would neglect his smaller boat,and would attack the ship, which would give him time toComplete his passage in security.
When he was safe landed, and had convened an asscm-bly of the Scioneans, he harangued them as had done beforeat Acanthus and Torone. But he added farther that " they" were a people most deserving of applause, since though" the communication with the Pallene, as being an isthmus," was cut off by the Athenians who were masters of Poti-" daea, and they were by this means become islanders to all" intents and purposes, yet they had, without prior solicita-" tion, advanced boldly towards liberty, nor could bear to"lie in cowardly inactivity till necessity forced them to" such measures as tended to their manifest welfare. This"was ample proof that they were ready to undergo any" other the greatest perils, to obtain the wished-for settle-" ment of their State. He therefore regarded them, as in" truth the most gallant friends of the Lacediemonians, and" would in all respects do proper honour to their worth."
The Scioneans were elevated by these handsome com­mendations. All of them became full of spirits, not eventhose excepted to whom the prior steps had been by nomeans agreeable. They chearfully determined to sustain allfuture war, and in every shape gave Brasidas honourableentertainment. By public vote they placed upon his heada golden crown as the deliverer of Greece, whilst everysingle Scionean was busy in adorning him with ribands,and caressing him like a victor in the solemn games. Hisstay at present was short; he only placed a small party in







OCR Output













OCR Output








1. III. 223 YEAR IV. BEFORE CHRIST 428.


those upon the turrets coming down last of all, and with dif­ficulty got also to the ditch. By this time the reserve of threehundred was come up to oppose them, by the light of torches.The Plataeans by this means, being in the dark, had a clearview of them, and, from their stand upon the brink of theditch, aimed a shower of darts and javelins at those parts oftheir bodies which had no armour. The Plataeans were allobscured, as the glimmering of lights made them less easyto be distinguished ; so that the last of their body got overthe ditch, though not without great difficulty and toil. Forthe water in it was froze, not into ice hard enough to bear,but into a watery congelation, the effect not of the northernbut eastern blasts. The wind blowing hard, had caused somuch snow to fall that night, that the water was swelled to aheight not to be forded without some difficulty. However,the violence of the storm was the greatest furtherance of theirescape.
The pass over the ditch being thus completed, the Pla­taeans went forwards in a body, and took the road to Thebes,leaving on their right the temple of Juno, built by Andro-crates. They judged it would never be supposed, that theyhad taken a route which led directly towards their enemies:And they saw at the same time the Peloponnesians pursuingwith torches along the road to Athens, by Cythaeron and theHeads of the Oak*. For six or seven stadiaf they continuedtheir route towards Thebes, but then turning short, theytook the road to the mountains by Erythrae and Hysiae ; andhaving gained the mountains, two hundred and twelve of thenumber completed their escape to Athens. Some of them,indeed, turned back into the city, without once attempting toget over; and one archer was taken prisoner at the outwardditch.
The Peloponnesians desisted from the fruitless pursuit,and returned to their posts. But the Plataeans within thecity, ignorant of the real event, and giving ear to the assu-• Drvoscephalac. t Above half a mile.







OCR Output








388 THE PELOPOKNESIAN WAR.


away, he consecrated the whole spot as sacred to her. Duringthe remainder of the winter, he provided for the security ofthe places already in his possession, and was planning futureconquests. And with the end of this winter the eighth yearof the war expired.
YEAR IX.
VERY early in the spring of the ensuing summer, theAthenians and Lacedaemonians made a truce to continue fora year. The motives on the Athenian side were these—That" Brasidas might no longer seduce any of their towns to re-" volt, before they were enabled by this interval of leisure to" act against him ; and besides, that if they reaped any ad-" vantage from this truce, they might proceed to a farther" accommodation." On the Lacedaemonian side it wasimagined that " the Athenians were under such terrors as" in fact they were ; and, after a remission of calamities and" misfortunes, would more eagerly come into some expe-" dients for a future reconciliation ; of course, would deliver" up to them their citizens, and come into a truce for a larger" term." The recovery of these Spartans was a point onwhich thev laid a greater stress than ever, even during thecareer of success which attended Brasidas. They foresawthat in case he extended his conquests, and even broughtthem to a balance with their foes, of those they must for everbe deprived, and the conflict then proceeding upon equaladvantages the dangers also would be equal, and the victorystill in suspence.
Upon these motives, both parties and their allies agreed toa truce of the following tenor :
" AS to the temple and oracle of the Pythian Apollo, it" seemeth good unto us, that access be granted to all who" desire it, without fraud and without fear, according to" the laws of our country. The same is approved of by" the Lacedxinonians and their allies now present; and







OCR Output








254 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" ries we are designed to suffer, but what persons they are for" whom they are designed! and to remember the uncertain" attack of calamity; upon whom, and how undeservedly" it may fall! To you, as in honour and necessity too ob-" liged, we address our intreaties ; invoking aloud the Gods" whom Greece at her common altars and with joint devo-" tion adores,—to accept our plea : alleging those oaths" which your fathers have sworn,—to pay them reverence." We are suppliants now at the sepulchres of your fathers," we call upon the dead reposited there, to be saved from" Thebans, that the kindest of friends, as we have been," may not be sacrificed to the most deadly foes. Again," we recal to memory that day, in which having performed" the most splendid achievements in company with them," we are yet this day in danger of the most deplorable fate." Conclude we must—though 'tis hard for men in our dis-" tress to conclude ; when the very moment their words are" ended, their very lives are most imminently endangered:" yet still we insist that we surrendered not our city to the" Thebans ; rather than that we should have chose the most" miserable end by famine: but confiding in you, into your" hands we gave it. And highly fitting it is, that if we" cannot prevail, you should reinstate us in it, and leave us" there at our own option to take our fate. But once more" we conjure you, that we, who are citizens of Plat«a," who have shewed ourselves the most steady patriots of44 Greece, and now, O Lacedaemonians, your suppliants,—" may not be turned over, out of your hands, out of your•4 protection, to the Thebans, our unrelenting enemies ;—that" you would become our saviours, and not doom to utter de-" struction—the men to whom all Greece is indebted for her" freedom."
In this manner the Plataeans spoke ; and the Thebans,fearing lest their words might work so far upon the Lace­daemonians as to cause them to relent, stood forth, and de­clared a desire to be also heard, " since the Plataeans, as







OCR Output








352 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" instantly determined by blows." They gave not the leasthint as if they had discovered the design, but strenuouslyinsisted that their own measure was most adviseable, andstood firm together for the security of the gates. Thus it•was no longer possible for the conspirators to put their plotin execution.
The Athenian commanders, being sensible that the pro­ject had been somehow crossed, and that they were not ablethemselves to take the city by storm, immediately run up awall to invest Nisaea; concluding, that could they carry itbefore any succours came up, it would be impossible forMegara to hold out much longer. Iron and workmen, andall proper materials, were quickly supplied them from Athens.They begun at the wall which they had lately surprised,they ran it along for some time parallel with Megara, andthen down to the sea on both sides of Nisaea. The work,both of ditch and wall, was divided amongst the army.They made use of the stones and bricks of the suburbs, andhaving felled some trees and wood, they strengthened whatwas weak with an additional palisade. The houses of thesuburbs, being topped with battlements, served the use ofturrets. This whole day they plied hard at the work ; andabout the evening of the succeeding day it was only not com­pleted. The garrison within Nisaea was in great consterna­tion. They laboured already under a scarcity of provisions,which they had been used to fetch daily from the upper city.Thus concluding that the Peloponnesians could not succourthem with sufficient expedition, and imagining the Mega-reans were combined against them, they capitulated with theAthenians on the following terms:
" To be dismissed every man at a certain ransom, after"delivering up their arms."
" But as for the Lacedaemonians, their commander, and" every other person in that number, these to be disposed of" by the Athenians at discretion."
These terras being agreed to, they evacuated Nisaea. And







OCR Output








9i THE PELOPONNESiAN WAR.


however, that he had the true sense of the oracle, he put hisenterprize in execution. The Athenians, taking the alarm,ran out of the country in one general confluence to put astop to these attempts, and investing the citadel quite block­ed them up. But in process of time, being wearied out withthe tediousness of the blockade, many of them departed,leaving the care of it to the nine Archons, with a full powerof " acting in whatever manner they should judge most ex­pedient :" For at that time most parts of the public adminis­tration were in the management of the Archons. The partywith Cylon, thus closely invested, were reduced very lowthrough scarcity of bread and water. Cylon therefore andhis brother privately escape. But the rest, reduced to extre­mities, and some of them had already perished by famine, setthemselves down as suppliants by the altar in the citadel.The Athenian guard, having ordered them to arise as theysaw them just ready to expire in the temple, to avoid theguilt of profanation, led them out and slew them. But someof the number, who had seated themselves at the venerablegoddesses, at the very altars, they murdered in the act of re­moval*. And for this action not only the persons concernedin it but their descendants also were called the sacrilegiousand accursed of the Goddess. The Athenians indeed banishedthose sacrilegious persons out of the city: Cleomenes the La­cedaemonian drove them out again, when he was at Athens,on account of a sedition; nay, on this occasion they notonly drove away the living, but even dug up the bones of thedead, and cast them out; Yet, in process of time^ they re­turned again, and some of their posterity are still in Athens.
• When these suppliants were ordered to come out, they tied a stringround the altar in the citadel, and keeping hold of it were come as far asthe altars of the venerable goddesses. Just there the string happened tobreak, upon which the Archons rushed in to seize them, as if Minerva hadthrown them out of her protection. Some of the number sat instantlydown for fresh protection at the altars of the venerable goddesses: It was anunavailing resource, and they were immediately slain upon the spot. iVu-Tkrch in .Wen.







OCR Output








THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" those which progressively improve must, like all the works" of art, be ever the best. Were indeed the continuance of" peace ensured, unvarying manners would certainly be pre-" ferable : But such people as are liable to frequent vicissi-" tudcs of foreign contest, have need of great address to vary" and refine their conduct. For this cause, the manners of" the Athenians, improved by a long tract of experience, are" formed in respect of yours upon a model entirely new." Here therefore be the period fixed to that slow-moving" policy you have hitherto observed. Hasten to the relief of" others, to that of the Potidaeans, as by contract you are" bound. Invade Attica without loss of time, that you may" not leave your friends and your relations in the mercy of" their most inveterate foes, and constrain us through your" sloth to seek redress from a new alliance. Such a step," if taken by us, could neither scandalize the gods who take" cognizance of solemn oaths, nor men who own their ob-" ligation: For treaties are not violated by those who" left destitute by some have recourse to others, but by such" as being sworn to give it, withhold their assistance in the" time of need. Yet, if you are willing and ready to per-" form your parts, with you we firmly abide. In changing" then we should be guilty of impiety; and we never shall" find others so nicely suited to the disposition of our own" hearts. Upon these points form proper resolutions ; and" exert yourselves, that the honour of Peloponnesus be not"impaired under your guidance, who have received from" your ancestors this great pre-eminence."
To this effect the Corinthians spoke. And it happenedrthat at this very juncture an Athenian embassy was at Lace-daemon, negotiating some other points; who, so soon as theywere advertised of what had been said, judged it proper todemand an audience of the Lacedaemonians. It was nottheir design to make the least reply to the accusations pre­ferred against them by the complainant-states, but in generalto convince them, that " they ought not to form any sudden







OCR Output








32 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" not please, to reverse your proceedings, and join with us in" opposition to them—For, to the Corinthians you are bound" by firm and lasting treaties, with the Corcyreans you have" never yet transacted even for a truce, and by no means to" establish a new law for receiving rcvolters from the other" league. We ourselves did not, upon the Samian revolt," give our suffrage against you, when the rest of the Pelo-" ponnesians were divided upon the question—whether they" ought to be supported: But we openly maintained, that" every state had a right to proceed against its own depend-" ents. For if you receive and undertake the defence of" those who have behaved amiss, the event will shew that*- the greater number will come over to our side, and that" you establish a law prejudicial to yourselves much more" than to us.
" The points of justice we have thus sufficiently cleared" up to you, according to the general laws of Greece. We" have only to add a word of advice and the claim of a fa-" vour, such a one as we now affirm upon a principle of grati-" tude ought not to be denied us who are neither your ene-" mies so far as to hurt you, nor ever were your friends so" far as to burden you. When formerly, before the invasion" of the Medes, you were in want of long ships in your war" against the iEginetae, you were supplied by the Corinthians" with twenty. The service which we then did you, and" that other more recent about the Samians, when we pre-" vented their receiving any support from the Peloponnesi-" ans, enabled you in their turns to vanish the iEgineta e and" to chastise the Samians. And these services were done you" at a season when the human attention, fixed intirely on war," regardeth nothing but what tendeth to victory. Whoever" forwardeth this, men esteem their friend, though he was be-" fore their foe ; and him who checketh it their foe, though" perhaps he may be their real friend. For even domestic" affairs are sorrily conducted at a time when the mind is in-" flamed by contention.
" Recollect these things. Let the young man learn the







OCR Output








154- THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


an exact detail of them ; having been sick of it myself, andseen many others afflicted with it.
This very year, as is universally allowed, had been morethan any other remarkably free from common disorders; orwhatever diseases had seized the body, they ended at length inthis. But those who enjoyed the most perfect health were sud­denly, without any apparent cause, seized at first with head-achs extremely violent, with inflammations, and fiery rednessin the eyes. Within—the throat and tongue began instantly tobe red as blood; the breath was drawn with difficulty and hada noisome smell. The symptoms that succeeded these weresneezing and hoarseness ; and not long after the malady de­scended to the breast, with a violent cough; But when oncesettled in the stomach, it excited vomitings, in which wasthrown up all that matter physicians call discharges of bile, at­tended with excessive torture. A great part of the infectedwere subject to such violent hiccups without any discharge, asbrought upon them a strong convulsion, to some but of a short,to others of a very long continuance. The body, to the out­ward touch, was neither exceeding hot, nor of a pallid hue, butreddish, livid, marked all over with little pustules and sores.Yet inwardly it was scorched with such excessive heat, thatit could not bear the lightest covering or the finest linen upon it,but must be left quite naked. They longed for nothing somuch as to be plunging into cold water; and many of those whowere not properly attended, threw themselves into wells, hur­ried by a thirst not to be extinguished; and whether theydrank much or little, their torment still continued the same.The restlessness of their bodies and an utter inability of com­posing themselves by sleep never abated for a moment. Andthe body, so long as the distemper continued in its height,had no visible waste, but withstood its rage to a miracle, so thatmost of them perished within nine or seven days, by the heatthat scorched their vitals, though their strength was not ex­hausted ; or, if they continued longer the distemper fell in­to the belly, causing violent ulcerations in the bowels, ac­companied with an incessant flux, by which many, reduced







OCR Output








368 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


cut from within the precincts of the temple. They did thesame by the stones and bricks of the adjacent buildingswhich had been demolished, and omitted no expedient togive height and substance to the work. They erected woodenturrets upon such spots as seemed most to require it. No partof the old pile of the temple was now standing: The portico,which stood the longest, had lately fell down. They beganthe work the third day after their marching out from Athens.That day they plied it, and the following, and continued iton the fifth till the time of repast. Then, the work being forthe most part compleated, they drew off their army to the dis­tance of about ten stadia* from Delium, in order to returnhome. Their light-armed indeed, for the most part march­ed off directly, but the heavy-armed halting there sat downupon their arms.
Hippocrates stayed behind for the time necessary topost the proper guards, and to put the finishing hand tothose parts of the fortification which were not yet perfectlycompleated. But during all this space the Boeotians hadbeen employed in drawing their forces together to Tanagra.When the quotas from the several cities were come up, andthey perceived the Athenians were filing off towards Athens,the other rulers of Boeotia (for they were eleven in all) de­clared their resolution not to engage, since the enemy is nolonger on Boeotian ground: for the Athenians, when theygrounded their arms, were within the borders of Oropia.But Pagondas, the son of ^Eoladas, one of the Boeotian rulersin the right of Thebes, and at this time in the supreme com­mand, in concert with Arianthidas, the son of Lysimachidas,declared for fighting. He judged it expedient to hazard anengagement; and addressing himself to every battalion apart,lest calling them together might occasion them to abandontheir firms, he prevailed upon the Boeotians to march up tothe Athenians, and to offer battle. His exhortation to eachwas worded thus:
• About an English mile.







OCR Output








208 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


which he gets a quick passage to Mitylene, and on the thirdday after his setting out from Athens, gives notice to theMityleneans that such a fleet was coming to surprize them.Upon this they adjourned their festival, and patching uptheir half-finished walls and harbours as well as they could,stood ready on their guard. Not long after the Athenianfleet arrived, and finding the alarm had been given, the com­manders notified to them the injunctions they brought; withwhich as the Mityleneans refused to comply, they rangedthemselves for action.
The Mityleneans, unprepared as they were, and thus sud­denly necessitated to make some resistance, advanced onboard their ships a little beyond the mouth of their harbour,us willing to engage. But being forced to retreat upon theapproach of the Athenian fleet, they begged a parley withthe commanders, from a view, if it were possible upon easyconditions, to rid themselves of that fleet for the present.And the Athenian commanders readily accorded, from theapprehension, they had not sufficient strength to support thewar against all Lesbos.
Hostilities having thus ceased for a time, the Mityle­neans dispatched their agents to Athens, and amongst thenumber one of those persons who had sent intelligence oftheir motions, but had now repented of the step—to pro­cure, if possible, the recalment of the fleet, by assurances,that they were not bent on any innovations. But in themean time, undiscovered by the Athenian fleet, which layat anchor in the road of Malea, to the north of the city,they send away a trireme to carry an embassy to Laccd*-mon ; for they had no room to believe they should succeedin their negociation at Athens. This embassy, after a la­borious and dangerous voyage, arriving at Lacedaemon, be­gan to solicit a speedy succour. And when their agents
returned from Athens, totally unsuccessful, the Mityleneansand all the rest of Lesbos, excepting Methymne, preparefor war. This last place sent in aid to the Athenians, as







OCR Output








2 THE PELOPONKESIAN WAR.


by sea and land, as then the only view of culture was toearn a penurious subsistence, and superfluous wealth was athing unknown, as planting was not their employment, itbeing uncertain how soon an invader might come and dis­lodge them from their unfortified habitations, and as theythought they might every where find their daily necessarysupport, they hesitated but little about shifting their seats:And for this reason they never flourished in the greatness oftheir cities or any other circumstance of power. But therichest tracts of country ever were more particularly liableto this frequent change of inhabitants, such as that which isnow called Thessaly, and Boeotia, and Peloponnesus most­ly except Arcadia, and in general every the most fertilepart of Greece. For the natural wealth of their soil increas­ing the power of some amongst them, that power raisedcivil dissentions, which ended in their ruin, and at the sametime exposed them more to foreign attacks. It was onlythe barrenness of the soil that preserved Attica through thelongest space of time quiet and undisturbed, in one unin­terrupted series of possessors. One, and not the least con­vincing, proof of this is, that other parts of Greece, becauseof the fluctuating condition of the inhabitants, could by nomeans in their growth keep pace with Attica. The mostpowerful of those, who were driven from the other parts ofGreece by war or sedition, betook themselves to the Athe­nians for secure refuge, and as they obtained the privilegesof citizens*, have constantly, from remotest time, continuedto enlarge that city with fresh accessions of inhabitants, in-
• They were admitted to the same privileges with free born Athenians.But this was practised only in the infancy and early growth of that state.It was afterwards an honour veiy seldom and with difficulty granted. Thosewho came from other places to settle at Athens are distinguished frommAitmi citizens, by the name of fi-iroiKti sojourners. who had taken uptheir residence and cohabited with them. They performed several dutiesas subjects to the state which gave them protection, but never becameAthenians, or citizens of Athens, in the emphatical sense of those terms.The English reader will please to remember this, as the distinction oftenuccurs in the sequel of our history.







OCR Output








B. II. 141 YEAR I. BEFORE CHRIST 431.


sians, exclusively of other Acarnanians. They took also bystorm Astacus, of which Evarchus was tyrant, whom theyforced to fly away, and added the town to their own associa­tion. Sailing from hence to the island Cephallene, they re­duced it without a battle. Cephallene lies towards Acarna-nia and Leucas, and hath four cities; the Pallensians, Cra-nians, Sampans, Pronaeans. Not long after this the fleetsailed back to Athens.
In the autumn of this summer, the Athenians with alltheir forces, citizens and sojourners, made an incursion intothe territories of Megara, under the command of Pericles
the son of Xantippus. Those also who had been cruizing
about Peloponnesus in the fleet of one hundred sail (forthey were now at iEgina), finding, upon their return, thatall their fellow-citizens were marched in the general expe­dition against Megara, followed them with the fleet andcame up to them. By this means, the army of the Athe­nians became the largest they had ever at any time got to­gether, the city being now in its most flourishing state, and asyet uninfected with the plague: For there were of Atheniancitizens only no less than ten thousand heavy-armed, exclu­sive of the three thousand who were now at Potidaea: Thesojourners of Athens who marched out along with them,were not fewer than three thousand heavy-armed: They hadbesides a very large number of light-armed soldiers. Theylaid waste the greatest part of the country, and then returnedto Athens. Every succeeding year of the war the Atheniansconstantly repeated these incursions into the territory ofMegara, sometimes with their cavalry, and sometimes withall their united force, till at last they made themselves mas­ters of Nisaea.
In the close also of the Summer, Atalante, an island lyingnear the Locrians of Opus, till now uninhabited, was forti­fied and garrisoned by the Athenians, to prevent the piratesof Opus, and other parts of Locris, from annoying Eubcra.
Vol. I. 2 I







OCR Output








B. II. TEAR I. BEFORE CHRIST 431. 149


" it extends to the public ; their private demeanors reached" only to a few. Yet, not one of these was at all induced to" shrink from danger through fondness of those delights" which the peaceful affluent life bestows,—not one was the" less lavish of his life, through that flattering hope attend-" ant upon want, that poverty at length might be ex-" changed for affluence. One passion there was in their" minds much stronger than these, the desire of venge­ance on their enemies. Regarding this as the most ho-" nourable prize of dangers, they boldly rushed towards the" mark, to glut revenge, and then to satisfy those secon-" dary passions. The uncertain event they had already se-" cured in hope ; what their eyes shewed plainly must be" done they trusted their own valour to accomplish, think-" ing it more glorious to defend themselves and die in the" attempt, than to yield and live. From the reproach of" cowardice indeed they fled, but presented their bodies to" the shock of battle ; when, insensible of fear, but tri-" umphing in hope, in the doubtful charge they instantly" dropt—and thus discharged the duty which brave men owe" to their country.
" As for you, who now survive them—it is your business" to pray for a better fate—but, to think it your duty also to" preserve the same spirit and warmth of courage against"your enemies ; not judging of the expediency of this from" a mere harangue—where any man indulging a flow of" words may tell you, what you yourselves know as well as" he, how many advantages there are in fighting valiantly" against your enemies—but rather, making the daily-in-" creasing grandeur of this community the object of your" thoughts, and growing quite enamoured of it. And when" it really appears great to your apprehensions, think again," that this grandeur was acquired by brave and valiant" men ; by men who knew their duty, and in the moments" of action were sensible of shame ; who, whenever their" attempts were unsuccessful, thought it dishonour their
Vol. I. . 2 K







OCR Output








lxx A Survey of the Histori/.


it that appearance in the original plan of Inigo Jones forthe magnificent palace once designed to be erected ? Some­thing of this nature may justly be pleaded in favour of Thu-cydides, and teach us not to judge too hastily of a whole,when we cannot survey all the parts, because they neverwere finished. Moved by decorum, I would gladly justifymy author, but I by no means pretend to decide the point.
Book II. The Second Book opens with the first act ofhostility. The Thebans march by night, and enter by sur­prize the city of Plataea. This city and petty State, thoughjust within Boeotia, was not comprised in the union, of whichall the other cities of Boeotia were constituents with Thebesat their head, but had ever been firmly attached, even in theworst of times, to the common liberty of Greece, and wasunder the protection of and in fast alliance with Athens.This surprize of Plataea our author describes in all its turns,till its enemies are driven out or slaughtered, and a place issecured for the Athenians.
A rupture hath now been made, and the war is going tobe general. Thucydides sounds the charge in all the dis­position and spirit of Homer. He catalogues the allies onboth sides. He awakens our expectation ; and fast engagesour attention. All mankind are concerned in the impor­tant point now going to be decided. Endeavours are madeto disclose futurity. Heaven itself is interested in the dis­pute. The earth totters, and nature seems to labour withthe great event. This is his solemn and sublime manner ofsetting out. Thus he magnifies a war between two, as Ra-pin styles them, petty States ; and thus artfully he supports alittle subject by treating it in a great and noble method.
Writers who have been long contemplating the vast gigan­tic size of the Roman Empire, if they cast their eyes on theState of Athens even at the present juncture, are apt to forma low idea of it. Athens, it is true, was at this time in thehighest meridian of her power. Yet, why ever to be pitchingupon the most disadvantageous and incongruous parallels ?







OCR Output








30 THE PEL0PONNESIAN WAR.


" controul, when there were none to watch them they might44 engross the spoil, and might enjoy their rapine without" danger of a blush. Had they been those virtuous souls they" proclaim themselves, then, clear of every bad imputation" from their neighbours, they had a fine opportunity to" manifest their integrity to the world, by doing and by sub-44 mining to justice.
" But such neither we nor any other people have in fact" experienced them. For, though planted by us, they have" ever^isowned their^ allegiance to us, and now wage open" war against us, pleading that they were not sent abroad to" be maltreated and oppressed. We also aver in our own" behalf, that neither did we send them to receive their in-" jurious requitals, but to retain them in lawful dependence," and to be honoured and reverenced by them. Such duti-" ful returns the rest of our colonies punctually make us, and" by such no other people are so well respected as ourselves." From the great satisfaction therefore we give to all the" rest, it plainly appeareth, that we afford no reasonable dis-44 gust to these alone, and that without some glaring injury," we should have had no inclination to declare war against" them. But, though we had actually transgressed, it would" have been quite decent on their part to have shewn con-." descension when we were angry; and then it would have" been base in us to have pressed too far on such moderation.44 To their pride and the insolence of wealth their many" transgressions against us are justly to be ascribed. Hence" it was, that they laid no claim to Epidamnus, which be-" longeth to us, whilst harrassed with intestine feuds; but when" we came to its redress, then by force they seize and detain" it. And now they pretend that previous to that they were" willing to have submitted to a fair arbitration.—Such pleas" are not to be regarded, when offered by men who are44 already masters in possession, and on that security make ap-" peal to justice: They are only of weight, when facts and" words are equitably to be judged, before the point hath







OCR Output








170 THE PEL0P0NNESIAN WAR. »


honour their caprices, but could contradict and disregardtheir anger with peculiar dignity. Whenever he saw thembent on projects injurious or unreasonable, he terrified themso by the force of his eloquence, that he made them trembleand desist; and when they were disquieted by groundlessapprehensions, he animated them afresh into brave resolution.The State under him, though stiled a democracy, was in facta monarchy. His successors, more on a level with one ano­ther, and yet every one affecting to be chief, were forced tocajole the people, and so to neglect the concerns of the pub­lic. This was the source of many grievous errors, as mustunavoidably be the case in a great community and possessedof large dominion ;—but in particular of the expedition toSicily ; the ill conduct of which did not appear so flagrantlyin relation to those against whom it was undertaken, as to theauthors and movers of it, who knew not how to make the pro­per provision for those who were employed in it. For en­gaged in their own private contests for power with the people,they had not sufficient attention to the army abroad, and athome were embroiled in mutual altercations. Yet, notwith­standing the miscarriage in Sicily, in which they lost theirarmy with the greater part of their fleet, and the seditionwhich instantly broke out in Athens, they bravely resistedfor three years together, not only their first enemies in thewar, but the Sicilians also in conjunction with them, thegreater part of their dependents revolted from them, and atlength Cyrus the king's son, who favouring the Peloponnesi-:ins, supplied them with money for the service of their fleet;—nor would at last be conquered, till by their own intestinefeuds they were utterly disabled from resisting longer. Somuch better than any other person was Pericles acquaintedwith their strength, when he marked out such a conduct tothem as would infallibly have enabled the Athenian State tohave continued the war longer than the Peloponnesians couldpossibly have done.
The Lacedaemonians, in junction with their allies, thesame summer fitted out a fleet oi one hundred ships against







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








Pbormio in the gulf of Crissa ; and when reinforced beaten by him asecond time before Naupactus. A project to seize the Pirxus quite dis­concerted. War between Thracians and Macedonians. Motions inAcamania, with an account of that country . . p. 175
CONTENTS OF BOOK III.
Year IV. Attica invaded. Lesbos revolts from the Athenians : The latter
sent out a fleet to reduce them. Continuation of the siege of Platxa.
The escape of a body of Platxans over all the works of the besiegers
p. 200
Year V. Attica invaded. Surrender of Mitelene in Lesbos. A bloody
decree made at Athens against all the Mitylen£ans ; but re-considered,
and repealed; though very near being put in execution. Platxa surren­
ders ; and the inhabitants are put to death. The sedition at Corcyra.
The Athenians meddle in the wars of Sicily. The plague rageth again
at Athens . • • • • . p- 224
Year VI. Earthquakes. The affairs of Sicily. Expedition of Demosthenes
into ./Etolia, where he receives a total defeat. Delos purified by the Athe­
nians. Invasion of Argos in Amphilochia: Battle of Olpe: a second
battle, or rather slaughter of the Ambraciots at Idomene. Eruption of
mount iEtna ...... p. 276
CONTENTS OF BOOK IV.
Year VII. The Athenians seize and fortify Pylus in Laconia. The Lace­
demonians make slight of it at first, yet afterwards exert their utmost
efforts to dislodge them, though in vain. Their body thrown into Sphac-
teria is intercepted, and blocked up by the Athenian fleet. A suspension
of arms and a truce ensue, but soon broke. Proceedings in Sicily: A
naval engagement in the strait of Messene. At Athens, Cleon is drawn
in by his own bravado to undertake the reduction of Sphacteria. He
repairs thither, and compleats the work beyond all expectation. The
Lacedxmonians, terribly distressed, send many proposals for a peace, but
none are accepted. The Athenians invade the Corinthians. Battle of
Soligia. Tragical period of the sedition at Corcyra. Death of Artax-
erxes Longimanus ..... p. 298
Year VIII. Expedition against Cythera. Continuation of affairs in Sicily.The surprise of Megara unsuccessfully attempted. A project formedfor a total revolution in Bccotia- Brasidas beginneth his march for Thrace,and by his noble behaviour carries all before him. The battle of Delium.Successful progress of Brasidas in Thrace * . p. 33&
Year IX. Truce for a year. The affairs of Thrace continued p. 388







OCR Output








Jl. IV. YEAR VIII- BEFORE CHRIST 424. 351


Each of these Athenians afterwards, so fast as he got in, ad­vanced along the wall. The Peloponnesian guards, thoughfew in number, made head against them for a time; someof them soon dropped, and then the rest ran speedily off.They were dismayed at such an attack from their enemiesin the night; and, as the treacherous Megareans foughtagainst them, they concluded that all the Megareans werecombined together in betraying them. It happened farther,that an Athenian herald had proclaimed of his own accordthat " such Megareans as were willing to side with the Athe-" nians should throw down their arms." When the Pelopon-nesians heard this, they at once quitted their posts ; and, se­riously believing that all the Megareans had combined tobetray them, fled amain into Nisaea.
At the time of morning's dawn, the long walls beingthus surprised, and the Megareans within the city throwninto a tumult, the agents for the Athenians, in concert withall their accomplices in the plot, insisted on the necessityto throw open the city gates, and march out to battle ; sinceit had been agreed between them, that so soon as ever thegates were thus opened, the Athenians should rush in.There was a method to be observed on their side, in orderto be distinguished ; this was to besmear themselves withointment, that they might receive no harm. Their securitywould have been greater, had they opened the gates atonce ; for now four thousand heavy-armed Athenians andsix hundred horsemen, who had marched in the night fromEleusis, according to a prior disposition, were at hand. Butwhilst the accomplices, properly besmeared, stood ready atthe gates, one of their own party, who was privy to thewhole plot, discovereth it to the other Megareans. Thesedrawing up together, came forwards in a body, and denied" the expediency of marching out (since formerly, when" stronger than now, they durst not hazard such a step) or" running such a manifest risk of losing the city: and,♦•should any one affirm the contrary, the point should be







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAR VIII. BEFORE CHRIST 424. 367


dreaded the loss of their fruit, resolved to revolt from theAthenians. Then they required of Brasidas himself to swearthe oath of their security, which the Lacedaemonian magis­trates had at his departure injoined him to take, that " what-" ever people was brought over into their alliance by him" should remain in possession of their own liberties and laws,"and this done, they receive his army. Not long after, Sta-gyrus also, another colony of the Andrians, revolted. Andthus ended the transactions of this summer.
Very early in the succeeding winter, when the strong placesof Boeotia were to have been betrayed to Hippocrates andDemosthenes the Athenian commanders,preparatory to whichDemosthenes was to shew himself with his fleet before Siphae,and the other to march to Delium, there happened a mistakeabout the days prefixed for execution. Demosthenes indeed,who steered towards Siphae, and had on board the Acarna-nians, and many of the confederates of that quarter, is totallydisappointed. The whole scheme had been betrayed by Ni-comachus, the Phocian of Phanotis, who gave information ofit to the Lacedaemonians, and they to the Boeotians. AllBoeotians now taking up arms to prevent consequences (forHippocrates was not yet in their country to distress them onthat side), Siphae and Chaeronea are secured in time. Andso soon as the conspirators perceived that things went wrong,they gave up all farther thoughts of exciting commotions inthe cities.
Hippocrates, having summoned into the field the wholeforce of Athens, as well citizens as sojourners, not exceptingeven foreigners who chanced at that time to be there, ar-riveth too late before Delium, not before the Boeotians werereturned home again from Siphae. He incamped his forces,and set about fortifying Delium, the temple of Apollo, in thefollowing manner.—Round about the temple and its pre­cincts they sunk a ditch: Of the earth thrown up they formeda rampart instead of a wall. They drove into the ground oneach side a row of stakes, and then threw on the vines they







OCR Output








B. III. 255 YEAR V. BZrORE CHRIST 42?.


" they conceived, had been indulged in a much longer dis-" course, than was requisite to answer the question." Leaveaccordingly was given, and they proceeded thus—
" WE should not have requested your attention to any" thing we had to offer, if these Plataeans had replied in" brief to the question, and had not run out into slander and" invective against us ;—if they had not defended themselves" in points quite foreign to the purpose, and not at all charged" against them as crimes ; and launched forth into their own" praise, uncensured and unprovoked. But now it is incum-" bent upon us, in some points to contradict and in some to" refute, to prevent the bad effects which might result, either" from the criminations uttered against us, or the pompous" praise they have bestowed upon themselves ; that you, un-" der proper information with whom the greater truth re-" mains, may fairly decide between us.
" Our enmity against them we openly avow, as it proceed-" ed from just and honourable motives: since to us, who" were the founders of Plataea, after we had gained possession" of Baeotia and of other towns as well as Plataea, which, after" being purged from extraneous mixtures, remained in our"jurisdiction,—these men disdained to pay submission, and" scorned original and fundamental laws. They wilfully di-" vided from the other Boeotians, transgressing the laws of" their country, and, when likely to be forced back into their" duty, they went over to the Athenians, and in concert with" them accumulated wrongs upon us, which have since been"justly retaliated upon them.
" But, when the Barbarian invaded Greece, they were the
" only Boeotians who did not join the Mede. This they
" allege, and hence they arrogate applause to themselves," and lavish their calumnies upon us. We grant indeed" they did not join the Mede; and the reason was, because" the Athenians did not join him. Yet afterwards, when" with the same all-grasping ambition the Athenians invaded•4 Greece, they were the only Boeotians then who joined those







OCR Output








discourse in. xciii


The Sicilian war, which some critics* are inclined to thinkhath no connection with the subject of Thucydides, and to bemere digression, whatever it may appear at first, the readerwill at length be satisfied was an essential part of the Pelopon-nesian war, and hastened its decision. But, supposing itremote from the principal subject, it must however be ac­knowledged, that it is the history of a war nobly related, wellconnected, very closely followed, and full of incidents to en­gage attention, to alarm and interest the passions. Thucy­dides, in the course of it, which takes up the two followingbooks, which display the excellencies of the poet and thepainter as well as of the historian. Let his merit be regula­ted from this portion of his work, it is presumed that, with­out a negative, he will be allowed the master of History.
He begins with describing the theatre on which two mightyStates are going to enter the lists.—The geography and an­tiquities of Sicily could not in their nature be very entertain­ing, and therefore they are drawn up in the concisest manner.—The soaring enterprising genius of Alcibiades hath formeda superb plan for the aggrandizement of himself and hiscountry. Alcibiades could plan with all the magnificenceand wild ambition of an Alexander ; but a citizen of Athenscould not have the means of executing in so imperial a man­ner as the Monarch of Macedonia and Captain-General ofGreece. He was able soon to convince the younger and morenumerous part of the Athenian community, that the enter­prise was most inviting, and carried with it such a probabi­lity of success as over-balanced all expence and hazard. Itwas long the subject of general conversation; it gradually-inflamed the public ardour; and at length ingrossed all theirhopes and wishes. In a word, the expedition to Sicily is for­mally proposed and decreed in the assembly of the people.A second assembly is convened on ways and means. On thisoccasion a grand debate ensued, the managers of which areNicias and Alcibiades.
• See Rapin's comparison of Thucydides and Liry.







OCR Output








B. HI, 7EAR V. BEFORE CHRI8T 427. 227


" ble also that their land force is dispersed, in that negligent" manner which victory indulgeth, into the scattered houses" of refreshment. If therefore we can come upon them by" surprize and by night, I hope by the assistance of our" friends within, if really within we have a friend remaining," to give a new turn to our affairs. Let us not be staggered" at the danger of the attempt, but remember, that all the" turns of war are owing to some such reverse as this : which," that commander who is most on his guard against, and who" can discern and seize such critical moments for assaulting" his enemies, must be most frequently successful."
He gave his opinion thus, but it had no effect upon Al-cidas. Some other persons, exiles from Ionia, and some
Lesbians who were also on board, advised him further
" That since he seemed to be discouraged by the apparent" danger of that attempt, he should seize some city in Ionia," or Cyme in iEtolia: that, by favour of such a hold for war," they might bring about the revolt of Ionia: That in such" a step success might justly be hoped, as his presence would" be highly acceptable there: That, if they could cut off the" very great revenue which accrued thence to the Athenians," the loss, added to the expence of endeavouring a recovery," must drain their treasure.—That they further thought they" could prevail on Pissuthness, to join with them in the war."
But Alcidas would not listen to these proposals, and gota majority to support his own opinion—'• That, since it was" too late to succour Mitylene, they should, without loss of" time, return to Peloponnesus." Weighing therefore fromEmbatus, he put again to sea; and touching at Myonesusof the Teians, he there butchered in cold blood a number ofprisoners, whom he had taken in the voyage. Putting af­terwards into Ephesus, he was attended there by an embassyfrom the Samians of Anaea, representing to him—" That it" was no honourable method of vindicating the liberty of" Greece, to butcher men, who had not so much as lift up" the hand against him, who were not enemies in heart, but







OCR Output








148 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" only people who, repelling the attacks of an invading" enemy, exempts their defeat from the blush of indigna-" tion, and to their tributaries yields no discontent, as if" subject to men unworthy to command. That we deserve" our power, we need no evidence to manifest. We have" great and signal proofs of this, which entitle us to the ad-" miration of the present and of future ages. We want no" Homer to be the herald of our praise; no poet to deck" off a history with the charms of verse, where the opinion" of exploits must suffer by a strict relation. Every sea hath" been opened by our fleets, and every land hath been pe-" netrated by our armies, which have everywhere left bc-" hind them eternal monuments of our enmity and our" friendship.
" In the just defence of such a State these victims of*4 their own valour, scorning the ruin threatened to it, haveM valiantly fought and bravely died. And every one of" those who survive is ready, I am persuaded, to sacrifice" life in such a cause. And for this reason have I enlarged" so much on national points, to give the clearest proof" that in the present war we have more at stake than men" whose public advantages are not so valuable, and to il-" lustrate by actual evidence, how great a commendation is" due to them who are now my subjects, and the greatestw part of which they have already received. For the enco-" miums with which I have celebrated the State, have been" earned for it by the bravery of these, and of men like" these. And such compliments might be thought too high" and exaggerated, if passed on any Grecians but them" alone. The fatal period, to which these gallant souls are" now reduced, is the surest evidence of their merit—an" evidence begun in their lives and compleated in their" deaths. For it is a debt of justice to pay superior honoursu to men, who have devoted their lives in fighting for their" country, though inferior to others in every virtue but that*of valour. Their last service effaceth all former demerits.







OCR Output








B. II. YEAR II. BEFORE CHRIST 430. . 153


ness began first to appear amongst the Athenians, such as wasreported to have raged before this in other parts, as aboutLemnos, and other places. Yet a plague so great as this, andso dreadful a calamity, in human memory could not be paral­lelled. The physicians at first coidd administer no relief,through utter ignorance ; nay, they died the fastest, the closertheir attendance on the sick, and all human art was totallyunavailing. Whatever supplications were offered in the tem­ples, whatever recourse to oracles and religious rites, all wereinsignificant; at last, expedients of this nature they totally re­linquished, overpowered by calamity. It broke out first, asit is said, in that part of Ethiopia which borders upon Egypt;it afterwards spread into Egypt and Lybia, and into great partof the king's dominions, and from thence it on a sudden fell onthe city of the Athenians. The contagion shewed itself firstin the Piraeus, which occasioned a report that the Peloponne-sians had caused poison to be thrown into the wells, for as yetthere were no fountains there. After this it spread into theupper city, and then the mortality very much increased. Letevery one, physician or not, freely declare his own sentimentsabout it; let him assign any credible account of its rise, orthe causes strong enough in his opinion to introduce so terri­ble a scene 1 shall only relate what it actually was, and,
as from an information in all its symptoms, none may be quiteat a loss about it, if ever it should happen again, I shall give


to medicina timore." The letters of Hippocrates, which mention this af­fair, are certainly spurious: The facts they would establish are without anygrounds, as Le Clerc hath proved to conviction in his Histoirc de la nude-cine, 1. 3. They make the plague to have broke out first in Europe, and tohave spread from thence into the dominions of the king of Persia. This isquite contrary to the account of Thucydides, and to the experience of eve­ry age. All plagues and infectious distempers have had their rise inAfrica. Need I say more than that Dr. Mead hath proved it ! But whe­ther his account of this plague at Athens be duly succinct, not too minute,serious, affecting ; and, whether Thucydides hath well managed the op­portunity it gave him to moralize like a man of virtue and good sense, everyreader will judge for himself. The transtator hath chiefly endeavoured topreserve that solemn air, which he thought the prime distinction of theoriginal.


V







OCR Output








318 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR;


of them were forced to dig into the gravel upon the beachof the sea, and take up with such water as could thus begot. They were further very much straitened in their sta­tion for want of room. They had not road enough for theirships to ride in with tolerable convenience, so that alternatelyone division lay ashore to take their necessary repasts, whilstthe other launched more to sea. But what discouraged themmost was the length of the blockade, so contrary to whatthey had expected. They had imagined a few days siegewould have worn out a body of men shut up in a barrenisland, and having only salt-water for their drink. But thishad been redressed by the Lacedaemonians, who had, by apublic edict, encouraged all who were willing to carry overinto the island meal, and wine, and cheese, and any othereatable which might enable them to hold out, assigning alarge pecuniary reward for any successful attempt of thisnature, and promising freedom to every Helot who carriedthem provisions. This was performed through a series ofdangers by several; but the Helots were most active of all,who, putting off from Peloponnesus (wherever they chancedto be), landed by favour of the dark on the side of the islandwhich lies upon the main-sea. Their chief precaution wasto run over in a hard gale of wind. For whenever the windblew from the sea, they were in less danger of being disco­vered by the guard of triremes, which then could not safelylie quite round the island. In executing this service theyput every thing to hazard. As a prior valuation had beengiven in, they run their vessels on shore at all adventures;and the heavy-armed soldiers were ready to receive them atevery place most convenient for landing. Those, however,who ventured out when the weather was calm, were cer­tainly intercepted. Such, further, as were expert at diving,swam over through the harbour, dragging after them by astring bottles filled with poppies mixed up with honey andthe powder of linseed. These for a time escaped discovery,hut were afterwards closelv watched. No artifice was left







OCR Output








SOME ACCOUNT OF DR. SMITH. six


ber 8, 1739, we read:—Mr. Smith, Rector of Trinity in Ches­ter, "justly deserves the notice and thanks of the public for" his version of Longinus on the Sublime. Though the learned" will not be satisfied without tasting the beauties of the origi-" nal, which cannot be translated in all their perfection, yet" they may reap benefit and pleasure from the judicious sen-u timents and ingenuity of the Translator, in his account of" his Author, and from the notes which help to illustrate the" text, and discover the excellency of the rules. To the un-" learned also it may be of use, and give pleasure. It will" enable him to read with more satisfaction, when he can" read with more judgment and distinguish the perfections" and faults of a writer. He will be the better able to bear" his part in a rational conversation, and appear with credit," when his observations are just and natural. Such compo-" sitions, while they form the understanding to a true taste," kindle an inclination to literature, and excite an emulation" in mankind to distinguish themselves by such excellencies" as distinguish men from brutes. Athens and Rome were" even the glory of the whole world, when they were the44 universities of the whole world; and those were reckonedM the most accomplished gentlemen, who were the greatest*4 scholars, the deepest philosophers, the most eloquent ora-" tors, and the best moralists. In England—would I could" go on without reproaching my country." Mr. Hooker senta copy of this Miscellany to Mr. Smith, with the followingletter:
" Rev. Sir,
"Though I have not the happiness of being known" to you, yet as I perceive by your public writings, that you" are a gentleman of learning and parts, I take the liberty of" desiring your assistance in the public design* committed to" my care. Though it is the common concern of every one" who wishes well to Religion and the Church of England,
• Mr. Smith did not comply with Ihia request respecting the WeeklyMiscellany.







OCR Output








98 THE PELOPONMKSIAN WAR.


" hind the herald ; if he did, war was proclaimed against him" by the Spartans." And he, desirous to clear himself asmuch as possible from suspicion, and confident that with mo­ney he could baffle any accusation, returned the second timeto Sparta. The first treatment he met with there was, to bethrown into prison by order of the Ephori: For the Ephorihave so large an authority, even over ^king. But afterwards,by some private management, he procured his enlargement,and offers to submit to a trial against any who were willing toaccuse him. The Spartans indeed had no positive evidenceagainst him, not even his private enemies, nor the generalcommunity—none, to support them in proceeding capitallyagainst a person of the royal descent, and at that time investedwith the regal dignity: For, being uncle to Pleistarchus, theson of Leonidas, their king, though yet in minority, he wasregent-guardian. But, by his disregard of the laws, and hisaffectation of the Barbarian manners, he afforded them strongreasons to suspect, that he would never conform to the equalitythen in vogue. They called to remembrance those other pas­sages of his behaviour, in which he had at any time deviatedfrom the institutions of his country ; and that further upon thetripod at Delphi, which the Grecians offered as the choicestpart of the Persian spoils, he had formerly presumed, by hisown authority, to place this inscription 1
It was a long black stick, and the contrivance was this—" When the ma-" gistrates gave commission to any general or admiral, they took two round" pieces of wood exactly equal to one another ; one of these they kept, and" the other was delivered to the commander; to whom, when they had any" thing of moment to communicate, they cut a long narrow scroll of parch*" ment, and rolling it about their own staff, one fold close upon another," they wrote their business upon it; then taking it off, dispatched it away" to the commander, who applying it to his own staff, the folds exactly fell" in one with another, as at the writing; and the characters, which, before"it was wrapped up, were confusedly disjoined and unintelligible, appeared" very plain.-' Potter't Archteohgia, Vol. II c. 13.
If it be asked (says the Scholiast) how Pausanias came to have the Scy-tale with him now, as he was abroad without the public commission ; theanswer is, he had kept it ever since his former employments.







OCR Output








II. YEAR II. BEFORE CHRIST 430. 173


themselves under the protection of the Acarnanians, and bothtogether implored the succour of the Athenians, who sentthirty ships to their assistance under the command of Phor-mio. Upon Phormio's arrival they take Argos by storm,make all the Ambraciots slaves, and then both the Amphilo-chians and Acarnanians settle themselves together in the city.To these incidents was first owing the league offensive anddefensive between the Athenians and Acarnanians. Thechief cause of the inveteracy which the Ambraciots bore tothe Argives, was their having made them in this mannerslaves ; and which afterwards impelled them, in the confusionof this war, to form this invasion with the junction of theChaonians and some other neighbouring Barbarians. Ad­vancing up to Argos, they were entire masters of the wholeterritory, but in vain endeavoured to take the town by as­sault ; upon which they again returned home and dispersedto their respective nations.—Such were the transactions ofthe summer.
On the first approach of winter, the Athenians sent outtwenty ships to cruize on the coasts of Peloponnesus, underthe command of Phormio ; who, fixing his station beforeNaupactus, kept so strict a guard, that nothing durst pass innor out from Corinth and the gulf of Crissa.—Six other shipsthey send to Caria and Lycia, under the command of Mele-sander, to levy contributions there, and to stop the excursionsof the Peloponnesian privateers, harbouring in those parts,from molesting the course of their trading vessels from Pha-celis, Phoenicia, and the adjacent continent. MeUsander,with the Athenian and confederate force he had on board hisships, landed in Lycia, and was defeated in the first battle, inwhich he lost part of his army and his own-life.
The same winter, the Potidaeans, as they were no longerable to hold out the siege ; and as, besides, the irruptions ofthe Peloponnesians into Attica had not induced the Atheniansto raise it; their provisions being quite spent; and amongstother calamities to which their extremities had reduced them,
Vol. I. 2 N







OCR Output








308 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


terrified, fought a sea-fight (if it may be so expressed) fromthe shore: The Athenians, already victorious, and eager togive their good fortune its utmost completion, fought a land-battle from on board. The struggle on both sides was longand laborious, and blood was abundantly shed before thedispute could be ended. But at length the Lacedaemoniansrecovered all their empty vessels, excepting such as hadbeen taken on the first onset. Each party being retired totheir respective posts, the Athenians erected a trophy, anddelivered up the dead, and were masters of all the wreckand shatters of the action. Then, without loss of time, theyranged their vessels in circuit quite round the island, andkept a strict watch, as hnving intercepted the body of menwhich was posted there. But the Peloponnesians on themain-land, with the accession of their auxiliaries who hadnow joined them, remained upon the opposite shore nearPylus.
When the news of this action at Pylus was brought toSparta, it was resolved, as the great calamity was so urgent,that the magistrates in person should repair to the camp,and consult upon the very spot what resource they had left.And when their own eyes had shewed them the impossi­bility of relieving their men, and they were loth to leavethem in the wretched extremity either of perishing by fa­mine, or, overpowered by superior numbers, of being shame­fully made prisoners, it was concluded " to send to the" Athenian commanders to ask a suspension of arms at Pylus," whilst they dispatched an embassy to Athens to procure" an accommodation, and to obtain leave as soon as possible" to fetch off their Spartans." These commanders acceptingthe proposal, the suspension was agreed upon on the follow­ing conditions.
" THAT the Lacedaemonians should immediately deliver"up the ships in which they .had fought; and all the ships" of war in general, which they had any where in Laconia," they should bring to Pylus, and deliver up to the Athe­







OCR Output








86 THE PELOPOKNESIAN WAR.


of force, they landed upon the island, overthrew the Samiansin battle, invested their city with a triple wall, and at thesame time blocked it up by sea.
But Pericles, drawing off sixty of the ships from this ser­vice, steered away with all possible expedition towards Cau-nus and Caria, upon receiving advice that " a Phoenician" fleet is coming up against them." Stesagoras also andothers had before been sent from Samos with five ships tomeet that fleet. In this interval, the Samians launched outin a sudden sally, fell upon the unfortified station* of theAthenians, sunk the vessels moored at a distance, by way ofguard, and engaging those who put out against them, victo­riously executed their purpose, were masters of their own seafor fourteen days continuance, and made whatever importa­tions or exportations they pleased: But, as Pericles then re­turned, they were again blocked up by seaf. He afterwardsreceived fresh supplies from Athens, forty ships under Thu-cydides and Agnon and Phormio, and twenty under Tlepo-lemus and Anticles, beside thirty others from Chios andLesbos. And though after this the Samians ventured a shortengagement at sea, yet they now found all farther resistanceimpracticable, so that in the ninth month of the siege theysurrendered on the following terms—" To demolish theirwalls ; to give hostages ; to deliver up their shipping ; andto reimburse by stated payments the expences of the


• When the Grecians continued long on a station, or were apprehensiveof being attacked by an enemy, they fortified their naval station and camptowards the land with a ditch and rampart, and towards the sea with apalisade. At other time a number of their ships lay out more to sea, byway of guard or watch to the rest, which were generally dragged ashore,whilst the soldiers lay round them in their tents. Sometimes they wereonly moored to the shore, or rode at anchor, that they might be ready uponon alarm. See Potter'* Archxologia, Vol. II. c. 20.
f The manner of doing this was " to environ the walls and harbour" with ships, ranged in order from one side of the shore lo the other, and" so closely joined together by chains and bridges, on which armed men" were placed, that without breaking their order, there could be no pas-" asage from the town to the aea." Potter's Archtologia.







OCR Output








B. IV. TEAR IX.-—BEFORE CHRIST 423. 389


" they promise to send heralds on purpose, and to spare" no pains to procure the consent of the Boeotians and" Phocians.
" As to the treasure belonging to the God, care shall be" taken by us to find out those who have presumed to embez-" zle it; and this fairly and honestly, according to the laws" of our country, both by you, and by us, and by all others" who are willing ; all proceeding respectively according to" the laws of their several constitutions.
" It hath farther seemed good to the Lacedaemonians and" their other allies, if the Athenians agree to the truce, that" both parties shall keep within their own bounds, and hold" what we are at present respectively possessed of; that is to" say ; the former to keep in Coryphasium*, within the" mountains of Bouphras and Tomeus; the latter in Cythera;" without enlarging the communication for the procuring of" alliance, neither on our side against you, nor on your side" against us. That those in Nisaea and Minoa pass not be-" yond the road that leads from the gates of Megara adja-" cent to the temple of Nisus towards the temple of Neptune," and from the temple of Neptune carrieth directly to the" bridge laid across to Minoa: That neither the Megareans" nor their allies pass beyond the same road, nor into the island" which the Athenians have taken; both keeping within their" bounds, and upon no occasion whatever to have any inter-" course with one another: The Megareans still to retain" what they possess in Troezen, and whatever they hold by" compact with the Athenians ; to have farther the free use" of the sea upon their own coasts, and those of their al-" liance.
" That the Lacedaemonians and allies shall not navigate" the sea in a long shipf, but in any other vessels rowed" with oars, and of no larger burden than five hundred" talents}.
• In which stood the fort of Pylus. t A ship of war.
\ Five and twenty tons.Vol. I. 3 R







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAR VII.—BEFORE CHRIST 425.


In this manner the Corcyreans from the mountains weredestroyed by the people. And a sedition so extensive wasbrought to this tragical period, so far at least as relates to thepresent war. For nothing of the same nature broke out af­terwards so remarkable as to need a particular relation.
The Athenians departed from Corcyra, made the best oftheir way for Sicily, whither they were bound at first settingout, and prosecuted the war there in concert with theirallies.
In the close of this summer, the Athenians on the stationof Naupactus, marching in junction with the Acarnanians,possessed themselves of Anactorium, a city of the Corinthi­ans, situated on the mouth of the gulf of Ambracia. It wasput into their hands by treachery. In consequence of this,the Corinthian inhabitants were ejected, and the place repeo-pled by new inhabitants invited thither from all parts of Acar-nania. And the summer ended.
The ensuing winter, Aristides the son of Archippus, oneof those who commanded the squadrons which the Atheni­ans had put out to raise contributions among their depend­ents, apprehended Artaphernes, a noble Persian, at Eion onthe river Strymon. He was going to J-acedaemon on a com­mission from the King. Being conveyed to Athens, theAthenians had his letters, which were wrote in Assyrian,translated and read in public. Their contents were large,but the principal was this passage, addressed to the Lacedae­monians that " he was not yet properly informed what it
" was they requested of him. For though he had been at-" tended by frequent embassies, yet they did not all agree in" their demands. If therefore they were desirous to make" an explicit declaration, they should send some of their body" to him in company with this Persian." But the Atheniansafterwards sent Artaphernes back to F.phesus in a trireme,and with an embassy of their own, who meeting at that placewith the news that Artaxcrxes the son of Xerxes was lately







OCR Output








18 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


it into the Lacedaemonians made the contest necessary. Butthe pretences,, publicly alleged on either side for breaking thetruce and declaring open war, shall now be related.
EPIDAMNUS is a city on the right hand as you sail intothe Ionian gulf: Adjoining to it live the Barbarian Tau-lantii, a people of Illyria. The Corcyreans settled a colonyhere, the leader of which was Phalius the son of Herato-clidcs, a Corinthian by birth, of the lineage of Hercules,invited to the office out of the mother-city, according to thecustom of ancient times : and besides this, some Corinthiansand others of Doric descent joined themselves to this colony.In process of time, the city of the Epidamnians becamegreat and populous. Yet, having been afterwards harassedwith seditions of many years continuance, they were broughtvery low (according to report) by a war waged against themby the neighbouring Barbarians, and were deprived of thegreatest share of their power. But the most recent event atEpidamnus before the present war was, that the people therehad driven the nobles out of the city. These sheltering them­selves amongst the Barbarians, began depredations on thosewho remained behind, both by land and sea. The Epidam­nians of the place, suffering vastly from these depredations,dispatched ambassadors to Corcyra as their mother-city, be­seeching them, " Not to behold their destruction with eyesunconcerned, biit to reconcile their exiles to them, and todeliver them from this Barbarian war." The ambassadors,sitting down submissively in the temple of Juno, offered thesesupplications. ' But the Corcyreans, refusing to receive them,sent them home again without effect. The Epidamnians, thusconvinced that no redress could be had from Corcyra, andignorant how to proceed in their present perplexities, sentto Delphos to enquire of the God, " Whether they shouldsurrender their city to the Corinthians as their founders, andshould seek security from their protection ?" He answered,that " they should surrender and take them for their leaders."The Epidamnians, in pursuance of this oracle, arriving at







OCR Output








J04- THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


dered on the main sea; yet, as the wall was weakest in thisquarter, he judged it would soonest tempt and animate anassault. For never imagining they should be outnumberedin shipping, they had left the wall on this side but weak ; andshould the enemy now force a landing, the place would un­doubtedly be lost.
Sensible of this, and determined if possible to prevent theirlanding, Demosthenes posted himself with his chosen bandon the very edge of the water, and endeavoured to animatethem by the following harangue.
"MY fellow soldiers, here posted with me in this dan-" gerous situation, I conjure you, in so urgent an extremity,u to throw away all superfluous wisdom. Let not a soul" amongst you compute the perils which now inviron us," but regardless of the issue and inspirited by hope let him" charge the foe, and be confident of success. A situation" desperate like this alloweth no room for calm considera-" tion, but demands the most precipitate venture. Superior" advantages however are along with us ;—of this I am con-" vinced, provided we only stand firm together, and, scorn-" ing to be terrified at the number of our foes, do not wil-" fully betray those advantages which are now in our fa-" vour. The shore is most difficult of access :—This in my"judgment makes abundantly for us ;—This will support us," if we keep our ground. But if we give way, difficult as" it is now, their landing will be easy—when there are none" to obstruct it. Nay, what is worse, we shall make the" enemy more furious, when, if we may afterwards press" hard upon him, it is no longer in his power to re-em-" bark with ease. For so long as they continue on board they" may most easily be encountered ; whilst they are busy in" landing, they cannot so far overmatch us, as that we" ought to shrink before their numbers. Large though they"be, the spot of action will be small for want of ground to" draw up in order. What though their force be superior" for the land, that advantage will be lost in their present







OCR Output








B. III. YEAR V. BEFORE CHRIST 427. 251


" these incendiaries seem now a people well worth your gain-" ing ? There was a season, a most dangerous and critical sea-" son, when you yourselves, and the other Grecians, were" in different sentiments. Now indeed, incited by ambition," you aim the fatal blow at others ; but at that season, when" the Barbarian struck at inslaving us all, these Thebans" were then that Barbarian's coadjutors. And equitable cer-" tainly it is, that our alacrity at that season should be set in" the balance against our present transgressions, if transgres-" sors at present we have been. You then would find our" greater merits quite outweighing our petty offences ; and" our merits to be dated at a time when it was exceeding" rare to see Grecian braver)' ranged in opposition to the" power of Xerxes ; when praise was ascribed, not to those," who, intent on self-preservation, dropped all the means of" withstanding his invasion, but who chose, through a series" of danger, courageously to execute the most glorious acts." Of this number are we, and as such have been pre-emi-"nently, most honourably distinguished. And yet, from" this original we fear our ruin now may have taken its rise," as we chose to follow the Athenians from a regard to jus-" tice, rather than you from the views of interest. But so" long as the nature of things continues to be the same, you4* also ought to convince the world, that your sentiments" about them are not changed, that your principles still sug-" gest it to you as your greatest interest, that whenever your" gallant compatriots have laid upon you an obligation strong" enough to be eternally in force, something on every pre-" sent occurrence should be done for us by way of just ac-" knowledgement.
" Reflect further within yourselves, that you are now" distinguished by the body of Greece as. examples for the" upright disinterested conduct. Should you therefore de-" termine in regard to us what in justice cannot be support-" ed—for the eyes of the world are now intent on your pro-" ceedings, and as judges applauded for their worth you sit







OCR Output








306 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


couraged them on the contrary " to force their landing," though they dashed their vessels to pieces ;" begging theconfederates " in this juncture not to refuse bestowing their" ships on the Lacedaemonians in lieu of the great services" they had done them, but to run them ashore, and landing at" all adventures to seize the enemy and the fortress." Inthis manner he Animated others, and having compelled hisown pilot to run the vessel ashore he was at once upon thestairs, and endeavouring to get down was beat back by theAthenians. After many wounds received, he fainted withloss of blood ; and falling down upon the gunnel, his shieldtumbled over into the water. It was brought ashore andtaken up by the Athenians, who afterwards made it a part ofthe trophy, which they erected for this attack.
The others indeed with equal spirit endeavoured, but yetcould not possibly land, as the ground was difficult of access,and the Athenians stood firm, and no where at all gave way.Such now was the strange reverse of fortune, that the Athe­nians upon land, upon Laconic land, beat off the Lacedaemo­nians who were fighting from the water; and the Lacedaemo­nians from ships were endeavouring a descent upon their ownnow hostile territory against Athenians. For at this periodof time it was the general opinion, that those were landmen,and excelled most in land engagements, but that these wereseamen, and made the best figure at sea.
The attack was continued the whole day and part of then^xt before it was given up. On the third day, they de­tached some vessels to Asine to fetch timber for engines,hoping by them to accomplish the taking of the wall adja­cent to the harbour, which though of a greater height yetmight easier be approached by sea.
During this pause, forty sail of Athenians came up fromZacynthus. This fleet had been enlarged by the accessionof some guard-ships from off the station of Naupactus, andfour sail of Chians. These no sooner discovered the mainland about Pylus and the island Sphacteria to be full of







OCR Output








liv On his Qualifications as a Historian.


As to the Roman Historians, who saw what these mightyoriginals had done before them, I cannot judge it fair to formdecisive parallels. Time had enabled them to judge maturelyabout the defects and excellencies of their Greek predeces­sors. Yet every Roman historian shews plainly he is a Romanhimself; he stood not so aloof from his subject as Thucy-dides. The loss of a Peloponnesian writer is never regrettedin regard to the latter; the loss of Carthagenian and histo­rians of other nations is highly regretted in regard to theformer. National impartiality will admit no comparisonhere; though excellence of composition may admit a greatdeal. Sal ust is the only one, who seems to have had our au­thor ever in his eye, and to have been his professed imitator.Sal us t frequently translates his political maxims, copies himexactly in the conciseness and laboured energy of his phrase;and Salust, for that reason, is like him very often obscure.It is entirely in his manner, that he draws up his orations,contrasts his speakers, and fights his battles. Salust hathmany, hath deservedly many admirers : And I hope, if I amso fortunate as to bring Thucydides into more general ac­quaintance, that the admirers of the one will bestow regardupon the other, and pay due honour to his historic progenitor.
I shall wind up this essay on Thucydides as a Historianwith a passage from the Critic on the Sublime*, only desiringthe reader to keep Thucydides in remembrance, as Longinusextended his view to writers both in poetry and prose—
" I readily allow, that writers of a lofty and towering ge-" nius are by no means pure and correct, since whatever is" neat and accurate throughout, must be exceedingly liable to" flatness. In the Sublime, as in great affluence of fortune," some minuter articles will unavoidably escape observation." But it is impossible for a low and grovelling genius to be" guilty of error, since he never endangers himself by soaring" on high, or aiming at eminence, but still goes on in the same" uniform secure track, whilst its very height and grandeur• Longinus, Section 33.







OCR Output








326 THE PELOPONKESIAN WAR.


with excess of courage. Experience had now lessened thatterror in which they had been used to regard this foe. Theynow had met with no rough reception from them, whichfell out quite contrary to what they firmly expected at theirfirst landing, when their spirits had sunk very low at thethought, that it was against Lacedaemonians. Contemptensued ; and embodying, with a loud shout they rushed up­on them ; pouring in stones and arrows and darts, whatevercame first to hand. At such a shout, accompanied with soimpetuous a charge, astonishment seized their foes, quite un­practised in such a form of engagement; at the same time,the ashes of the wood, which had been burnt, were mountinglargely into the air. So that now each lost the sight of whatwas close before him, under the showers of darts and stonesthrown by such numbers, and whirling along in a cloud ofdust.
Amidst so many difficulties the Lacedaemonians nowwere solely distressed. The safe-guards on their heads andbreasts were no longer proof against the arrows, and theirjavelins were broke to pieces when poised for throwing.They were quite at a loss for some means of defence ; theywere debarred the prospect of what was passing just beforethem ; and the shouts of the enemy were so loud that theycould no longer hear any orders. Danger thus surroundingthem on all sides, they quite despaired of the possibility ofsuch resistance as might earn their safety. At last, a greatpart of that body being wounded, because obliged to adherefirmly to the spot on which they stood, embodying close,they retreated towards the fort on the skirt of the island,which lay at no great distance, and to their guard whichwas posted there. But when once they began to move off,the light-armed, growing more resolute and shouting louderthan ever, pressed hard upon their retreat; and whateverLacedaemonian fell within their reach, in the whole courseof the retreat, was instantly slaughtered. The bulk of themwith difficulty recovered the fort, and in concert with the







OCR Output








DISCOURSE III.


The Athenians are too high-spirited to recal their troops,and have too good an opinion of Nicias to dismiss him fromthe command. Though Attica was now invaded by the Pe-loponnesians, and a fortress raised by them within sight ofAthens itself for their lasting annoyance, they send a power­ful reinforcement to Nicias under the command of Demos­thenes. They empty Athens of the residue of her strength,so highly wanted for domestic support. The Syracusans,when advised of this reinforcement, redouble their alacrity,and hope to finish the war before it could arrive. Theyhad had a career of success against Nicias, had just beathim both by land and sea, when Demosthenes steered intothe harbour of Syracuse. The sight caused a strange alter­native of elevating hope and dreadful apprehensions in thecontending parties. The Syracusans again become the be­sieged ; and Demosthenes is intent to put an end to the siege,if possible, by vigorous and daring measures.
His attempt to re-take Epipohe is, in our author's de­scription of it, as fine a night-piece as can possibly bedrawn, and no pencil could express it stronger. The moonshines just bright enough to shew us the Athenians gainingthe ascent, and to give a glimpse of the approaches of thearmies and their first struggles with one another. The wholesoon becomes gloomy confusion and horrid tumult. Whata medley of singing their paeans, of conflict, of flight, ofpursuit! friends and countrymen routing one another, tillnumbers come tumbling down the precipices, and perish inthe fall! The hope of the Athenians is blasted: Syracuseerects her trophies fast.
Demosthenes is now convinced the most prudent stepthey could take is to raise the siege, and Nicias at last com-plies. The very moment they are going to embark theirtroops, the moon is eclipsed. Who but must pity the weak­ness of Nicias at so dangerous a crisis ? who but be sorry in­deed, that so good and amiable a man should stop an armyfrom a principle of superstition, and detain them for so long







OCR Output








DISCOURSE II. liii


graceful; his final colouring is neither bright nor cheerful.But, though his pieces are not so completely finished as tostand every test, yet they are certainly high-wrought in hisown peculiar style, and for greatness of design and strengthof expression are beyond every other hand.
I think no fair comparison can be made of him, exceptwith the historians who are his countrymen, who like him­self are original in their own way, and the first in their man­ner. These are only two, Herodotus and Xenophon. Inpoint of life, Thucydides was junior a little to the former,and senior to the latter. In stateliness, grandeur, and ma­jesty, he far surpasseth them both. The manner of Hero­dotus is graceful and manly; his address is engaging; heloves to tell a story ; and, however fabulous or trifling thatstory, he will be heard with pleasure. The course of hisHistory is clear and smooth, and yields a most cheerful pros­pect: That of Thucydides is deep, rapid, impetuous, andtherefore very apt to be rough and muddy. You may clearlyperceive the bottom of the one : But it is very hard to diveto the bottom of the other. Herodotus, like a master on thehorn, can wind a lofty air, and without any harshness sinkdown into the lowest and mellowest notes. Thucydidessounds the trumpet; his blasts are sonorous and piercing, andthey are all of the martial strain*. Xenophon never pretendsto grandeur; his character is a beautiful simplicity; he issweeter than honey ; he charms every ear; the Muses them­selves could not sing sweeter than he hath wrote. Eachbeats and is beaten by the others in some particular points.Each hath his particular excellence: That of Herodotus isgracefulness ; that of Thucydides, grandeur; that of Xeno­phon, sweetness itself. If generals and admirals and states­men were to award the first rank, it would undoubtedly begiven for Thucydides ; if the calmer and more polite gentry,it would go for Herodotus ; if all in general who can read orhear, Xenophon hath it all to nothing.
• Cam quodammodo Mlicum. Cicero in the Orator.







OCR Output








122 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


whole number of their shipping might be mounted to fivehundred.—They were farther to get a certain sum of moneyin readiness ; but in other respects to remain quiet: and tilltheir preparations could be compleated, never to admit morethan one Athenian vessel at a time within their ports.—TheAthenians made a careful survey of the strength of their ownalliance, and sent pressing embassies to the places roundabout Peloponnesus, to Corcyra, to Cephallene, to the Acar-nanians, and to Zacynthus ; plainly seeing, that if thesewere in their interest, they might securely attack Pelopon­nesus on all sides.—The minds of both parties were not alittle elated, but were eager after and big with war. For itis natural to man, in the commencement of every importantenterprize, to be more than usually alert. The young men,who were at this time numerous in Peloponnesus, numerousalso at Athens, were for want of experience quite fond ofthe rupture. And all the rest of Greece stood attentively atgaze on this contention between the two principal states.Many oracles were tossed about, the soothsayers sung abun­dance of predictions, amongst those who were upon thepoint to break, and even in the cities that were yet neutral.Nay, Delos had been lately shook with an earthquake, whichit had never been before in the memory of the Greeks. Itwas said, and indeed believed, that this was a prognostic ofsomething extraordinary to happen; and all other accidents ofan uncommon nature whatever were sure to be wrested tothe same meaning.
The generality of Greece was indeed at this time muchthe best affected to the Lacedaemonians, who gave out thespecious pretence, that " they were going to recover the li­berty of Greece." Every one made it both his private pas­sion and his public care, to give them all possible succourboth in word and act; and every one thought that the busi­ness certainly flagged in those places where he himself wasnot present to invigorate proceedings. So general an aver­sion was there at this time formed against the Athenians,when some were passionately desirous to throw off their yoke.







OCR Output








4 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


planted himself with colonies, having expelled the Carians,and substituted his own sons in their different commands.And then of course he exerted his utmost power to clearthat sea of pirates, for the more secure conveyance of hisown tributes.
The Grecja£s_ formerly, as well as those Barbarians who,though seated on the continent, lived upon the coast, andall the islanders, when once they had learned the method ofpassing to and fro in their vessels, soon took up the businessof j>iracy under the command of persons of the greatestability amongst them, for the sake of enriching such adven­turers and subsisting their poor. They landed, and plun­dered by surprise unfortified places and scattered villages,and from hence they principally gained a subsistence. Thiswas by no means at that time an employment of reproach,but rather an instrument of glory. Some people of the con­tinent are even to this day a proof of this, who still attri­bute honour to such exploits if genteelly* performed: soalso are the ancient poets, in whom those that sail along thecoasts are every where equally accosted with this question,Whether they are pirates ? as if neither they to whom thequestion was put would disown their employment, nor theywho are desirous to be informed would reproach them withit. The people of the continent also exercised robberiesupon one another, and to this very day many people ofGreece are supported by the same practices ; for instance,the Ozolian Locrians, and ./Etolians, and Acarnanians, andtheir neighbours on the continent: and the custom of wearingtheir weapons, introduced by this old life of rapine, is still re­tained amongst them.
The custom of wearing weapons once prevailed all overGreece, as their houses had no manner of defence, as tra­velling was full of hazard, and their whole lives were passed
• " With due respect, with humanity," as the scholiast explains it. Forthen they never made booty of, or carried away by stealth the labouringcattle: They never made their attacks by night, nor committed any mur.der.







OCR Output








332 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


The Corinthians, who had already been advised fromArgos of the approach of the Athenian armament, had longsince by way of prevention drawn their whole force togetherat the Isthmus, excepting what was in employ withoutthe Isthmus and the five hundred absent in the guard ofAmbracia and Leucadia. With all the rest of their peopleable to bear arms they were posted on the Isthmus to watchthe approach of the Athenians. But when the Athenian fleethad passed by undiscovered by favour of the night, and sig­nals notified their approach elsewhere, leaving half their forceat Cenchrea to obstruct any attempt of the Athenians uponCrommyon, they marched with all speed against the enemy.Battus one of their commanders (for there were two such inthe field) at the head of a separate body marched up to theopen village of Solygia in order to defend it, whilst Lycophronwith the remainder advanced to the charge. The Corinthiansfell first upon the right wing of the Athenians who were butjust landed before Cherronesus, and then proceeded to en­gage the whole of that army. The action was warm, andfought hand to hand. The right wing, consisting of theAthenians and also the Carysthians who were drawn up inthe rear, gave the Corinthians a warm reception, and withmuch difficulty repulsed them. Retreating therefore upwardsto a wall built of stone (for the ground was a continued as­cent), and being there above the enemy, they annoyed themwith stones ; and having sung their paean, rushed down uponthem again. The Athenians having stood the shock, theyengaged a second time hand to hand. But a band of Corin­thians being come up to the support of their own left wing,occasioned the rout of the right wing of the Athenians, andpursued them to the sea-side. But the Athenians andCarysthians now turned again, and beat them off from theships.
In other parts of the action the dispute was resolute onboth sides, especially where the right wing of the Corinthi­ans, with Lycophron at its head, was engaging the left wing







OCR Output








THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


nal and on that part which faceth the sea towards Euboea,Thyssus farther, and Cleone, and Acrothous, and Olophyxus,and Dyum, which are promiscuously inhabited by varioussets of Barbarians, who speak both languages. There is alsoa small number of Chalcideans amongst them, bnt the bulkare Pelasgians (the issue of those Tyrrhenes who formerlyinhabited Lemnos and Athens), and Bisaltians, and Cresto-nians, and Edonans : They reside in small fortresses. Mostof them went over to Brasidas; but Sane and Dium stoodout. He therefore made his army halt on their lands, andlaid them waste. Yet as this had no effect, he marched fromthence to Torone of Chalcidica then possessed by the Athe­nians. *He hastened thither at the invitation of a small party,who were ready to betray the city to him. Being arrivedwhilst yet it was dark, he sat down about break of day with hisarmy near the temple of the Dioscuri, which liethnotat mostabove three stadia* from the city. The bulk of the Torone-ans and the Athenian garrison were ignorant of his approach:But the accomplices, who knew he would be punctual, sentsome of their body unperceived to observe his approach. Whenthese were thus certainly assured he was at hand, they con­ducted back with them to their friends seven men armed onlywith daggers. Twenty had at first been selected for this ser­vice, but only seven of them now had the courage to proceed:Lysistratus the Olynthian was the person who commanded.They got in by the wall towards the sea without causing analarm, and ascending from thence slaughtered the guard inthe citadel which is seated upon the most eminent spot, thewhole city being built on the declivity of a hill, and burstopen the postern towards Canastraeum. Brasidas, havingsince advanced a little with the rest of his force, haltedagain. But he ordered a hundred targeteers to go before,that, when the gates should be opened and the signal givenwhich was before agreed on, they might break in first.
* Above a quarter of a mile.







OCR Output








J. I. INTRODUCTION. 43


junction of all their strength. And, to these people, thusabandoning their own homes, he made a cession of that partof Mygdonia which lieth round the lake of Bolbe, for theirsubsistence during the war with the Athenians. Havingthus demolished their own cities, they went to another placeof residence, and were employed in preparations for thewar.
The thirty ships of the Athenians, arriving on the coastsof Thrace, find Potidea and the other cities already re­volted. The commanders, judging it impossible with theirpresent strength to act against Perdiccas and the revoltedcities both, turn their course towards Macedonia, pursuingthe first design of the expedition. Landing there they joinedin the war with Philip and the brothers of Derdas, who withan army had made an irruption from the inland country.
In the mean time, Potidaea being now in revolt and theAthenian fleet on the Macedonian coasts, the Corinthians,anxious for the security of that place, and making the dan­ger their own, dispatched thither some volunteers of theirown people and other Peloponnesians taken into their pay,in all sixteen hundred heavy-armed* and four hundredlight-armed. The command of this body of men was givento Aristeus the son of Adimantus; since, out of their ownprivate affection to him who had ever been a steady friendto Potidaea, most of the volunteers from Corinth had under­taken the service : and the time of their arrival in Thrace wasthe fortieth day after the revolt of Potidaea.
An express soon arrived at Athens with the news of therevolt of the cities, and when afterwards they heard of the
* The heavy-armed wore a complete suit of armour, and engaged withbroad shields and long spears. They were the flower and strength cf theGrecian armies, and had the highest rank of military honour. The light-armed were designed for skirmishes and fighting at a distance. Theirweapons were arrows, darts, or slings. The targeteert, mentioned often inthis history, were a middle sort of soldiery, armed with targets or narrowshields and spears, neither large nor heavy.







OCR Output








64 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" neither suffer the Athenians to grow still greater, nor let us" betray our own confederates; but, with the Gods on our" side, march out against these authors of injustice."
Having spoke thus, by virtue of his office as presiding inthe college of Ephori*, he put the question in the Lacedaemo­nian council. But, as they vote by voice and not by ballot,he said " he could not amidst the shout distinguish the ma-" jority ;" and, being desirous that each of them, by plainlydeclaring his opinion, might shew they were more inclined to
war, he proceeded thus " To whomsoever of you, Lace-
" daemonians, the treaty appeareth broke, and the Athenians" to be in the wrong, let him rise up and go thither," point­ing out to them a certain place: " But, whoever is of the con-" trary opinion, let him go yonder." They rose up and weredivided ; but a great majority was on that side which votedthe treaty broke.
Upon this, calling in their confederates, they told them," They had come to a resolution that the Athenians were" guilty of injustice ; but they were desirous to put it again to" the vote in a general assembly of all their confederates, that" by taking their measures in concert, they might briskly ply" the war, if determined by common consent."
Matters being brought to this point, they departed totheir respective homes, and the Athenian ambassadors,having ended their negotiations, staid not long behind.This decree of the Lacedaemonian council that " the treatywas broke," was passed in the fourteenth year of the treatyeoncluded for thirty years after the conquest of Euboea.But the Lacedaemonians voted this treaty broke and a war
• The college of Ephori (or inspectors) at Sparta consisted of five. Theywere annually elected by the people from their own body, and were design,cd to be checks upon the regal power. They never forgot the end of theirinstitution, and in fact quite lorded it over the kings. In a word, the wholeadministration was lodged in their hands, and the kings were never sove­reigns but in the field, at the head of the troops. One of the Ephori hadthe honour to give its stile to the year, in the same manner as the firstArchon did at Athens.







OCR Output








PREFACE.


IT was not from a private choice, but from deference towhat was judged a public call, that the following translationof Thucydides was first undertaken. To explain the motivemore largely, might perhaps incur the imputation of imperti­nence or vanity. The performance, upon the whole, mustjustify the undertaking. In what manner it is done, and notwhy it was done, will be the point of public arbitration.
It will be also needless to tell the English Reader, howmany versions have been made of Thucydides into Latin.Their design was to bring the author more under the obser­vation of what is generally styled the learned world ; as thetranslations of him into modern languages have aimed at in­troducing him into general acquaintance, as a historian ca­pable of innocently amusing most ranks of men, but of use­fully instructing the persons, who from duty and frompassion would guard the rights or secure the welfare of pub­lic communities. The grand business of History is to makemen wiser in themselves and better members of society. Forthis purpose it recals past ages to their view; and thus opensa more extensive scope to reflection than any personal expe­rience can offer. To be well versed in a similarity of casesprepares men better for counsel or action on present contin­gencies. The statesman, the patriot, the friend to liberty andreason will be better enabled to plan and to regulate his ownmeasures, when he can see the tendency and consequence ofsuch as were followed on parallel occasions, and adjust thedegrees, in which they were either prejudicial or serviceableto public good.
Vox.. T. B







OCR Output








H. III. YEAR IV. BEFORE CHRIST 428. 217


first before the Isthmus in great parade, they displayed theirforce, and then made descents at pleasure all along the coast.The Lacedaemonians seeing them thus strong beyond whatthey had imagined, concluded that the Lesbians had pur­posely amused them with fictions ; and being perplexed howto act, as their confederates were not yet come up to jointhem, and as information was brought them, that the firstAthenian squadron consisting of thirty sail was laying wastethe territory round about their city, they retired to their ownhomes.
Afterwards they set about the equipment of a fleet to besent to Lesbos ; and ordered the confederate cities to send intheir contingents, the whole amounting to forty sail; andfurther appointed Alcidas to be admiral in chief, who wasready to put himself at the head of the expedition. TheAthenians departed off the coast with their hundred sail,when they saw their enemies had retreated.
cution of this design he divided the Athenians into four ranks, accordingto every man's estate; those who were worth five hundred medimns ofliquid and dry commodities he placed in the first rank, calling- them Pen-tacotiomedimni. The next were the horsemen, or Ifipeii, being such as wereof ability to furnish out a horse, or were worth three hundred medinuu.The third class consisted of those that had two hundred medimns, whowere called Zeugita. In the last he placed all the rest, called them Thetet,and allowed them not to be capable of bearing any office in the government,only gave them a liberty to give their votes in all public assemblies ; which,though at the first it appeared inconsiderable, was afterwards found to bea very important privilege ; for it being permitted every man after the de­termination of the magistrates to make an appeal to the people assembledin convocation, hereby it came to pass, that causes of the greatest weightand moment were brought before them. And thus he continued the powerand magistracy in the hands of the rich men, and yet neither exposed theinferior people to their cruelty and oppression, nor wholly deprived themof having a share in the government. And of this equality he himselfmakes mention in this manner :
What power was fit I did on all bestow,
Nor rais'd the poor too high, nor press'd too low i
The rich that rul'd and every office bore,
Confin'd by laws they could not press the poor :
Both parties I secured from lawless might,
So none prevail'd upon another's right."—Mr. Ciu.cca.







OCR Output








218 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


During the time this fleet was out at sea, though theAthenians at the commencement of the war had as large ifnot a larger number of ships, yet they never had their wholenavy so completely fitted out for service and with so muchpomp as now. One hundred of their ships were stationedfor guards round Attica and Euboea and Salamis ; and ano­ther hundred were coasting all along Peloponnesus, beside
those that were at Potidaea, and in other parts, insomuch
that the whole number employed this summer amounted totwo hundred and fifty sail. The expence of this, with thatof Potidaea, quite exhausted their treasure. For the pay^ ofthe heavy-armed who were stationed at Potidaea, was twodrachmas a day, each of them receiving a drachma* forhimself and another for his servant. The number of thefirst body sent thither was three thousand, and not fewerthan those were employed during the whole siege ;—but thesixteen hundred who came with Phormio were ordered awaybefore its conclusion. The whole fleet also had the samepay. In this manner was their public treasure now for thefirst time exhausted—and such a navy, the largest they everhad, compleatly manned.
The Mityleneans, during the time the Lacedaemonianslay at the Isthmus, with a body of their own and auxiliariesmarched by land against Methymne, expecting to have itbetrayed to them. Having assaulted the place, and beingdisappointed in their expectations, they marched back byway of Antissa and Pyra and Eressus. In each of theseplaces they halted for a while, to settle affairs in as firm or­der as possible, and to strengthen their walls, and then with*out loss of time returned to Mitylene.
Upon their departure, the Methymneans marched outagainst Antissa. The Antisseans with a party of auxiliariessallying out to meet them, gave them a terrible blow, so thatmany of them were left dead upon the spot, and those whoescaped made the best of their way back.
The Athenians—advised of these incidents, and that fur-
• Seven pence three farthings.







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAH VII. BEFORE CHRIST 425.


infesting them with their bows and darts and stones. Thesewould do execution from a distance: an enemy could not pos­sibly engage with them; since, even flying, they would pre­vail, and when the enemy retreated would return briskly totheir work. With so much address had Demosthenes previ­ously planned the order of landing, and in close adherence toit brought them now to action.
The body commanded by Epitadas, and which was thebulk of the whole force in the island, when they saw theiradvanced guard entirely cut off and the enemy advancingto attack them next, drew up in order and marched towardsthe heavy-armed of the Athenians, designing to engagethem. For the latter was so placed as to oppose them infront; the light-armed were posted on either of their flanks,and in the rear. But against those heavy-armed they couldnot possibly come to action, nor gain an opportunity to exerttheir own distinguishing skill. For the light-armed, pouringin their darts on either of their flanks, compelled them tohalt; and their opposites would not move forwards to meetthem, but stood quiet in their posts. Such indeed of thelight-armed, as adventured in any quarter to run up neartheir ranks, were instantly put to flight; however, they soonfaced about and continued their annoyance. They werenot incumbered with any weight of armour; their agilityeasily conveyed them beyond the reach of danger, as theground was rough, and ever left desart had never been level­led by culture. In such spots the Lacedaemonians, underthe load of their arms, could not possibly pursue. In thiskind of skirmish, therefore, they were for a small space oftime engaged.
When the Lacedaemonians had no longer sufficientagility to check the attacks of these skirmishing parties, thelight-armed soon took notice that they slackened in theirendeavours to beat them off. It was then, that their ownappearance, many times more large than that of their foes,and the very sight of themselves, began to animate themVol. I. 3 I







OCR Output








314 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


ed, with whom, after the arguments on each side should befreely offered and discussed, they might agree upon someexpedient to mutual satisfaction. Cleon upon this brokeout into loud invectives against them, affirming, " he knew" beforehand that they intended nothing just or fair ; but" now their view was manifest to all, as they had absolutely" refused to have any transactions with the body of the" people, and had thus expressed a desire to negotiate with" a small committee: If their views were fair and upright," he called upon them to explain themselves in the pre-" sence of all." But the Lacedaemonians perceiving thatnothing they could urge would have any influence on thepeople, and in case, to ward off the distress they feared, theyshould make too large proposals, these offered and unac­cepted, would expose them to the censure of their confede­rates; and that further, the Athenians would not complywith their demand on any reasonable terms ; they broke ofFall further conference, and quitted Athens. The very mo­ment they return to Pylus, the truce was at an end. TheLacedaemonians re-demanded their ships according to thearticle for that purpose agreed on. But the Athenians ob­jecting some infractions to them, such as an incursion to­wards the fortress, expressly prohibited by the articles, andsome other matters of little consequence, absolutely refuseda restitution. They justified the refusal upon this expressstipulation between them, that " if the conditions were in" any degree violated, the truce should immediately be" void." The Lacedaemonians protested against these pro­ceedings, and, charging the detention of their ships with thehighest injustice, broke off all further debate and preparedfor war.
Pylus was now the scene in which both these warringparties exerted their utmost efforts. The Athenians sailedthe whole day round the island with two ships in an oppo­site course : in the night, their whole fleet was stationedround it upon guard, except on that side towards the main







OCR Output








CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME.


Preface - •
Some account of Dr. Smith.
On the Life of Thucydides
On his Qualifications as a Historian
A Survey of the History .


Pageix


XVU
XXV
xli
lvi


CONTENTS OF BOOK I.
Introduction, containing the Author's reasons for writing this History,
upon a review of the affairs of Greece from the earliest times.—The
true reason of the Peloponnesian War was a jealousy of the Athenian
power. Those pretended were, I. The affair of Epidamnus, which is
opened at large ; II. The revolt of Potidxa, the circumstances of which
are exactly related. Consultations held at Sparta by the members of the
Lacedxmonian League, where at length War is decreed, but the rupture
protracted for a year. The Lacedemonians act from a dread of the
growing power of Athens. A Digression shewing how that power arose,
which gives the Author an opportunity to relate the history of fifty years
between the retreat of Xerxes, and the breaking out of this War. Em­
bassies accusing and recriminating are sent to and fro, in the account of
which are interwove the stories of Cylon, Pausanias, and Themistocles.
The Lacedemonians send a final demand to Athens ; and the Athenians,
at the persuasion of Pericles, return a resolute answer, upon which all
negotiations are ended, and an open rupture ensueth. , p. 1
CONTENTS OF BOOK II.
Year I. Hostilities begin. The Thebans by night surprize Platxa, but
are afterwards repulsed and slaughtered. The Peloponnesians invade
Attica: The Athenians in their turn cruize and make descents on the
coast of Peloponnesus. A public Funeral solemnized at Athens, for
those who fell in the first campaign, and the Oration spoke on that oc­
casion by Pericles ..... p. 116
Year II. Early the next year Attica again invaded. The Plague breaks
out in Athens. Its symptoms, progress, and mortality described. The
Athenians being greatly dejected murmur against Pericles : His justifi­
cation. The Ambraciots war against the Amphilocians. The surren­
der of Potidsea ...... p. 132
Year III. In the beginning of the third year the Peloponnesians appearbefore Platxa ; a parley without effect: The siege is begun and carriedon with great industry and art. The Peloponnesians beaten at sea by







OCR Output








B. II. 169 YEAR II. BET0RE CHRIST 430.


war was more and more acknowledged. For he had assuredthem the)7 could not fail of success, provided they would notmeddle by land, but apply themselves solely to their navy,without being solicitous to enlarge their territories in thiswar, or exposing Athens itself to danger. But they had re­course to schemes quite opposite to these, nay even to somethat had no connexion at all with this Avar, wherein privateambition or private interest pushed them to such managementas was highly prejudicial to themselves and their allies. When­ever these politic schemes succeeded, private persons carriedoff all the honour and advantage ;—whenever they miscar­ried, the hardships of the war fell more severely on the State.
The reason was this Pericles, a man of acknowledged
worth and ability, and whose integrity was undoubtedly proofagainst corruption, kept the people in order by a gentle ma­nagement, and was not so much directed by them as their prin­cipal director. He had not worked himself into power byindirect methods, and therefore was not obliged to sooth and
ent to most others, died of it. In his last moments lie shewed to ■ friendwho was visiting him a charm which the women had hung about his neck,as if he was sick indeed when he could submit to such foolery. Whenseveral of them were sitting round his bed, anil, thinking he did not hearthem, were enumerating the great exploits of his life, the shining incident!of his administration, his victories, and the nine trophies he had erected, heinterrupted them with these words, '' I wonder you lay stress upon such" actions, in which fortune claims a share along wilh me, and which many" others have performed as well as myself, and yet pass over the highest"glory and most valuable part of my character, that no citizen of Athens"ever put on mourning through me." The wonderful man, though en­gaged flirty years in business, and constantly attacked by every furious, se­ditious, and turbulent Athenian, had never amidst all his power given wayto the spirit of revenge. For this, as Plutarch finely observes, he in somemeasure deserved the lofty title of 0!;mpian, too arrogant in any otherlight for man to wear; since gentleness of manners and the hahils of mercyand forgiveness raise men to the nearest resemblance of the Gods. Plutarchadds, that the Athenians never regretted any man so much, and with somuch reason.—If the reader be willing to hear any more of Astasia, the samewriter tells us, that afier the death of Pericles, she married one Lysicles,u low and obscure man and a dealer in cattle, whom bowevei s'te improvedinto an Athenian of the first class.







OCR Output








THE FELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" tion may not be all our own, yet of a beneficial share we" ought not to be deprived. This shall boldly be averred;" not with a view of soothing you but doing justice to our-" selves, and giving you to know against what a State, if" your resolutions now are not discreetly taken, you are going" to engage. For we aver, that we alone adventured to en-" S^S^ (he Barbarian in that most dangerous field of Mara-" thon. And when, upon the second invasion, we were not" able to make head by land, we threw ourselves on ship-" board with all our people, to fight in conjunction with you" by sea at Salamis ; which prevented his sailing along the" coast of Peloponnesus, and destroying one by one your" cities, unable to succour one another against that formid-tfc able fleet. The truth of this the Barbarian himself hath" undeniably proved : For, thus defeated at sea, and unable" to gather together again so large a force, he hastily retired" with the greatest part of his army. In this so wonderful an" event, where beyond dispute the preservation of Greece" was atchieved at sea, the three most advantageous instru-
" ments were contributed by us the largest number of
" shipping a person of the greatest abilities to command
" and the most intrepid courage. For of the number
" of ships, amounting in all to four hundred, very near two" thirds were our own. Themistocles was the commander," to whom principally it was owing that the battle was" fought in the straits, which was undeniably the means of" that great deliverance : And you yourselves paid him ex-" traordinary honour* on that very account, more than ever
• Herodotus relates, that after the great victory at Salamis, " the Gre-" cians sailed to the Isthmus, to bestow the prize upon him who had de-" served best of Greece by his behaviour in the war. But upon their arri-" val, when commanders gave in their billets on the altar of Neptune, in" which they had wrote the name of him who had behaved best, and of" htm who was second, each of tbem had given the preference to his own" self, but most of them agreed in awarding the second place to Themis-"tocles. Thus, while each competitor was only honoured with his own•' single voice for the first place, Themistocles was clearly adjudged to de-" serve the second. Envy prevented ihe Grecians from proceeding to a" just declaration, and they broke up and departed, leaving the point un­







OCR Output








324 The peloponnesian war.


whole advanced guard to the sword, having surprised then!yet in their huts, and but seeking to lay hold of their arms.Their landing was yet undiscovered, since the enemy judgedtheir vessels to be only the usual guard which was everynight in motion.
No sooner also was the dawn completely broke, thanthe remainder of the Athenian force was landed from anumber of vessels somewhat more than seventy. All themariners came ashore, in their respective distinctions ofarms, excepting the rowers of the lowest bench*. Theywere eight hundred archers, and a body no less numerousof targeteers. The Messenian auxiliaries attended, andall in general who had been employed at Pylus, except suchas were necessarily detained for the guard of the fortress.
According to a disposition formed by Demosthenes, theyadvanced in separate bodies, consisting of near two hundredmore or less, and took possession of all the eminences. Thedesign was, thus to reduce the enemy to a plunge of distressby surrounding them on all sides, and puzzling them in theirchoice which party first to make head against, that at thesight of numbers on all sides they might be quite confound­ed; and, should they then attack the body in their front,they might be harassed by others in their rear; or, shouldthey wheel towards those on either flank, they might be ex­posed to the bodies both in front and rear. Which waysoever the enemy might turn, they were sure to have behindthem the light-armed and less martial of their opponents,
• It is in the original, excepting the Thalamii. The rowers on the differ­ent benches were distinguished by a peculiar name. Those of the upper­most were called Thramue ,- those of the middle, Zeugita,- and those ofthe lowest, Thalamii. The labour of the Thalamii was the least, thoughmost constant, because of ttieir nearness to the water, and the shortness oftheir OBrs. Much more strength and skill were required on the upperbenches, and most of all on the uppermost, who for that reason had betterpay. Those on the lowest bench seem to have been mere drudges at theoar, and quahfied for nothing better (-the others were more complete sea­men, and ready on all occasions for the duty both of rowing and fighting-







OCR Output








B. II. TEAR II. BEFORE CHRIST 430. 161


country one continued devastation ; for the time of their con­tinuance in Attica was about forty days.
The same summer, Agnon, the son of Nicias, and Cleo-pompus, the son of Clinius, joined in the command with Pe­ricles, setting themselves at the head of the force which hehad employed before, carried them without loss of timeagainst the Chalcideans of Thrace. But when they werecome up to Potideea, which was still besieged, they playedtheir engines of battery against, and left no method unat-tempted to take it. But the success in this attempt did notanswer expectation, nor indeed was the event in any respectthe least proportioned to their great preparations ; For theplague followed them even hither, and making grievous havocamong the Athenians, destroyed the army ; so that even thosesoldiers that had been there before, and had from the begin­ning of the siege been in perfect health, caught the infection
from the troops brought thither by Agnon. Phormio, and
the body of sixteen hundred men under his command, had be­fore this quitted Chalcidico, so that Agnon sailed back withthe ships to Athens, of his four thousand men the plaguehaving swept away one thousand and fifty in about forty days :But the soldiers who were there before were left to carry onthe siege of Potidaea.
After the second incursion of the Peloponnesians, theAthenians, whose lands were now a second time laid waste,who felt the double affliction of pestilence and war, had en­tirely changed their sentiments of things. The blame wasuniversally thrown on Pericles, as if at his instigatiou theyhad engaged in this war, and by him had been plunged in allthese calamities. They desired with impatience to make updie breach with the Lacedaemonians; but though they dis­patched an embassy for this purpose no terms could be agreedon. Thus grievously distressed, and no method of resourceoccurring to their minds, their resentments fell still heavieron Pericles. He, seeing them quite dispirited with their pre­sent misfortunes, and intent on such projects as he had reason







OCR Output








176 THE KLOPONNESIAN WAR.


" us in that state of independence which Pausanias justly
" established for us." To these words of the Plateans
Archidamus made this reply—
" What you have urged, ye men of Plateea, is just and rea-" sonable, if it be found agreeable to your actions. Let the" declarations of Pausanias be observed; be free and inde-" pendent yourselves, and at the same time vindicate their" own freedom to others, to those who, after participation of" the same common dangers, made that oath in your favour," and yet are now enslaved by the Athenians. To rescue" them and others from that slavery have our preparations" been made, this war hath been undertook. You who know" what liberty is, and are such advocates for it, do you abide" firmly by your oaths; at least, as we heretofore advised you," keep at quiet, enjoying only what is properly your own ;" side with neither party ; receive both in the way of friend-" ship, in the way of enmity neither.—To a conduct like this" we never shall object."
When the Plataean ambassadors had heard this reply ofArchidamus they returned into the city, and communicatingwhat had passed to the body of the citizens, they carriedback in answer to him—" That they could not possibly cora-" ply with his proposals, without the consent of the Athe-" nians, because their wives and children were in their
" power that they were apprehensive a compliance might
" endanger their whole community, since in such a case ei-" ther the Athenians might not confirm the neutrality, or" the Thcbans, who were comprehended in the same neutral" oath to the two principal powers, might again attempt to" seize their city."—Archidamus, to remove their apprehen­sions, spoke as follows " Deliver up your city and your
" houses to us Lacedaemonians; let us know the bounds of" your territory and the exact number of your trees, and" make as true a calculation as you possibly can of all thata belongs to you. Depart yourselves, and reside wherever" you please so long as the war continues ; at the end of it







OCR Output








TO HIS


ROYAL HIGHNESS
THE
PRINCE OF WALES.
SIR,
THE History of Thucydides hath been studiouslyread and admired by the greatest Princes, and maytherefore presume to lay some claim to the Protectionof Your Royal Highness. Great Britain, of all theStates now existing in the world, most nearly resem-bleth what Athens was at the time when the War,which is the Subject of it, broke out in Greece. Alove of Liberty, which hath erroneously been supposedto thrive and flourish best in a democratical Govern­ment, was then warm and active in every Athenian.Athens, it is true, had thus been raised to a great heightof maritime power, and was become a very formidableState; But Faction disjointed a noble Plan, and atlength brought on the loss of her Sovereignty at Sea.The Athenians soon ceased to be great, when they de­viated from those salutary maxims, which their worthiestPatriots and most consummate Statesmen had recom­mended to their constant observance.







OCR Output








178 THE HELOPONNESIAN WAS.


" blessings you sent down upon their prayers overcame the" Medes, and which you then made that fortunate field" whereon the arms of Greece were crowned with victory—" and that whatever we shall here undertake, our every step" shall be agreeable to justice. We have offered many ho-" nourable conditions to them, which are all rejected." Grant therefore our supplications, that the first trans-" gressors of justice may receive their punishment, and that" those who fight with equity may obtain revenge." Afterthis solemn address to the Gods, he roused up his army intoaction.
He first of all formed an inclosure round about themwith the trees they had felled, so that no one could get outof the city. In the next place, they raised a mount ofearth before the place, hoping that it could not long holdout a siege against the efforts of so large an army. Havingfelled a quantity of timber on mount Cithaeron, with it theyframed the mount on either side, that thus cased it mightperform the service of a wall, and that the earth might bekept from mouldering away too fast. Upon it they heapeda quantity of matter, both stones and earth, and whateverelse would cement together and increase the bulk. Thiswork employed them for seventy days and nights withoutintermission, all being alternately employed in it, so that onepart of the army was carrying it on, whilst the other tookthe necessary refreshments of food and sleep. Those Lace­daemonians who had the command over the hired troops ofthe other States, had the care of the work, and obliged themall to assist in carrying it on. The Plataeans, seeing thismount raised to a great height, built a counterwork of wood,close to that part of the city-wall against which this mountof earth was thrown up, and strengthened the inside of itwith bricks, which they got for this use by pulling down theadjacent houses. The wooden case was designed to keep itfirm together, and prevent the whole pile from being weak­ened by its height. They farther covered it over with







OCR Output








330 THE PELOPOKNESIAN WAR.


of Cleon, mad as it had been, was fully executed. For withinthe twenty days, he brought them prisoners to Athens, andmade his words good*.
The expectation of Greece was more disappointed by thisevent, than by any other occurrence whatever in the series ofthe war. It was generally presumed that neither famine nooany extremity could have reduced these Lacedaemonians todeliver up their arms, but that, sword in hand, and fightingto the last gasp, they would have bravely perished. Theycould not afterwards believe that those who surrendered werelike to those who were slain. Some time after, a soldier inone of the confederate bands of the Athenians, demandingwith a sneer of one of them who were taken prisoners in theisland, " if the slain were not men of true gallantry and cou-" rage ?" the other replied, that " a spindle, (by which he" meant an arrow) would be valuable indeed, if it knew how" to distinguish the brave ;" intimating by this answer, thatthe slain were such as stones and darts dispatched in the med­ley of battle.
When the prisoners were brought to Athens, it was thepublic resolution there " to keep them in bonds, till some" definitive treatv could be agreed on. And if, previously" to this, the Peloponnesians should repeat their inroad into" the Attic territory, they should all undergo a public exe-" cution." They established also a garrison for Pylus. Andthe Messenians of Naupactus sending thither the most pro­per of their own people, as into their own native country
• It should be added here, that he also robbed for the present a very ableand gallant officer of the praise he merited on this occasion. The wholeaffair of Pylus was planned, carried into execution, and brought to a suc­cessful and glorious issue by the conduct and bravery of Demosthenes.Aristophanes (in the A'nighttJ hath made a low comic character of the lat­ter, and introduced him venting sad complaints against Cleon for pilferingthe honour from him. " This Paphlagonian (says he) hath snatched from" every one of us whatever nice thing we had got to suit the palate of our" lord and master (the people J. 'Tis but the other day, I myself had cooked" up a nuble pasty of Lacedxmonians at P>lus, when this vilest of scouu-" drels came running thither, pilfered it away from me, and hath served it" up to table, as if it was of his own dressing."







OCR Output








B. IV. 4VEAR VIII. BEFORE CHRIST 424. 363


" in Brasidas to treat with Arribaeus, when he supported half" the expence of his troops." Yet, in spite of such remon­strances and in open defiance of him, Brasidas parleyed.And being satisfied with the offers of Arribaeus, he drew offhis troops, without so much as entering his dominions.—But henceforth Perdiccas, looking upon this step as an injuryto himself, reduced his contribution of support from a moietyto a third.
Brasidas however the same summer, without loss of time,continued the operations of war; and, a little before thevintage, being attended by the Chalcidcans, marched to­wards Acanthus, a colony of the Andrians. The inhabi­tants of this place were embroiled in a sedition about his re­ception ; a party who co-operated with the Chalcideans,were for it; but the people opposed. Yet, fearing the lossof their fruit which was not quite got in, the people were atlast prevailed upon by Brasidas, to grant entrance to him­self without any attendants, and after giving him audienceto resolve for themselves. Brasidas is admitted; and stand­ing forth in the presence of the people, for though a Lace­daemonian he was an able speaker, he harangued themthus :
*4 My commission from the Lacedaemonians and the" march of their troops hither under my command verify, O" ye Acanthians, the declaration made by us, when first we" begun this war against the Athenians, that we were going" to fight for the liberties of Greece. But if our appear-" ance here hath been too long deferred, it should be as-" cribed to the unexpected turns of war nearer home, where," as we hoped to demolish the Athenians speedily with-" out endangering you, we ought to be exempted from any" censure here. For now, you behold us opportunely at" hand, and intent in conjunction with you to pull these ty-" rants down.
" I am surprized indeed that your gates should be barred" against me, or that my presence should any way chagrin







OCR Output








B. II. 159 YEAR II. BEFORE CHRIST 430.


adapted the interpretation to what they now suffered.—But inmy sentiments, should they ever again be engaged in a Doricwar, and a famine happen at the same time, they will have re­course with equal probability to the other interpretation. Itwas further remembered by those who knew of the oracle givento the Lacedaemonians, that when they inquired of the God," whether they should engage in this war," his answer was,that—" if they carried it on with all their strength, they should" be victorious, and he himself would fight on their side ;"—and therefore they concluded that what now befel was the com­pletion of the oracle. The pestilence broke out immediately
upon the irruption of the Peloponnesians, and never extendeditself to Peloponnesus, a circumstance which ought to be re­lated. It raged the most, and for the longest time in Athens,but afterwards spread into the other towns, especially the mostpopulous.—And this is an exact account of the plague.
The Peloponnesians, after they had ravaged the inland parts,extended their devastations to those which are called TheCoast, as far as Mount Laurium*, where the Athenians hadsilver-mines. And here they first ravaged the part whichlooks towards Peloponnesus, and afterwards that which liestowards Euboea and Andros. But Pericles, who was then inthe command, persisted in the same opinion as before, in theformer incursion, that " the Athenians ought not to march outagainst them." Yet, whilst the enemy was up in the country,before they had advanced as far as the coast, he had equippeda fleet of a hundred ships to invade Peloponnesus ; and whenevery thing was ready, he put to seaf. On board these ships
• The silver-mines at Laurium originally belonged to private persons, butwere united to the public domain by Themistocles. A great number ofslaves were employed in working them, and the produce paid amply forall the labour bestowed upon them- Whether the state was much enrichedby them is a question ; the undertakers and proprietors of the slaves whowrought them drew great wealth from them, as we are told by Xenophonin his treatise of revenue.
t Plutarch relates in the life of Pericles that on this occasion, when allwus ready, " when the f >rces were shipped, and Pericles himself was jus'







OCR Output








298 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


gone over to Salynthius and the Agraeans. And afterwardsthe Acarnanians and Amphilochians concluded a peace andan alliance for a hundred years with the Ambraciots, uponthese conditions :
" That neither the Ambraciots should be obliged to join" the Acarnanians in any attempts against the Peloponnesians ;" nor the Acarnanians to act with the Ambraciots against the" Athenians.
" That if either were attacked, the others should march to" their defence.
" That the Ambraciots should restore all the places and" frontier belonging to the Amphilochians, which were at pre-" sent in their hands. And,
" That they should in no shape support Anactorium, which" was then in hostility with the Acarnanians."
These articles being mutually agreed to, the war came to aconclusion. But after this, the Corinthians sent a party oftheir own people, consisting of three hundred heavy-armed,commanded by Xenoclides the son of Euthycles, for the guardof Ambracia, who arrived, after great difficulties, as theymarched all the way over land. And this is the account oftransactions in Ambracia.
The Athenians in Sicily, the same winter, made a de­scent against Himeraea from their ships, whilst the Sicilians,pouring down from the upper country, were ravaging itsfrontier. They steered their course also against the isles ofiEblus. But when they were returned to their old stationat Rhegium, they found there Pythodorus the son of Isolo-chus, who was commissioned to take upon him the commandof the fleet, in the room of Laches. For the confederatesof Sicily had sent a deputation to Athens, to solicit a moreample succour of shipping. Because, as, m fact, the Syra-cusans were masters of all their lands, and they were alsoawed at sea by a few Syracusan vessels, they were now in­tent on gathering together such a naval force as might strikean effectual terror. The Athenians equipped out forty sail







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAR VIII. BEFORE CHRIST 424. 371


from whence, as an eminence lay between, they could haveno view of one another. There he drew up his men, andmade all ready for the attack.
When the news was brought to Hippocrates, who wasyet at Delium, that " the enemy is advancing to the charge,"he sendeth orders to the main-body to form into the orderof battle. And not long after he himself came up, havingleft about three hundred horse at Delium, to guard that placein case an attempt should be made upon it, or seizing a fa­vourable opportunity to fall upon the rear of the Boeotiansduring the engagement. Not but that the Boeotians hadposted a party of their own to watch their motions, and findthem employment. When therefore the whole dispositionwas perfected, they shewed themselves on the top of theeminence, and there grounded their arms, remaining stillin the same order in which they designed to attack, beingin the whole about seven thousand heavy-armed, more thanten thousand light-armed, a thousand horse, and five hun­dred targeteers. The right wing was composed of Thebansand those who ranked with them ; the centre of the Haliar-tians and Coroneans and Copiensians, and others that liveabout the lake (Copaeis) ; and the left of Thespiensians, Ta-nagreans, and Orchomenians. In the wings were posted thecavalry and light-armed. The Thebans were drawn up infiles of twenty-five ; the others variously, as circumstancesrequired. And such was the order and disposition of theBoeotians.
On the Athenian side, the heavy-armed, being in num­ber equal to their enemies, were drawn up in one entire bodyof eight in depth. Their cavalry was posted on either wing.But light-armed soldiers, armed as was fitting, the Athenianshad none at this juncture, neither in the field nor in thp city.The number which had taken the field at first to attend thisexpedition exceeded many times over the number of theenemy ; but then most of them had no arms at all, since thesummons had been extended to all who resided in Athens,







OCR Output








336 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


Hence afterwards they brought them out by twenties, andhaving formed two lines of soldiers, in all military habilements, facing one another, they compelled them to walk be*tween the lines, chained one to another, and receiving blowsand wounds as they passed along from those who formed thelines, and struck at pleasure so soon as they perceived the ob­jects of their hatred. They were followed by others who car­ried scourges, and lashed those forwards who moved not readi­ly along. Threescore persons had been brought forth and de­stroyed in this manner, before those who remained in the edi-*fice became sensible of their fate. For they had hitherto ima->gined, that those who fetched them out did it merely to shifttheir confinement. But when they learned the truth fromsome person or other whom they could not disbelieve, theycalled out aloud on the Athenians, and implored as a favourto be put to death by them. To stir from the place of theirconfinement they now absolutely refused, and averred, that tothe utmost of their power they would hinder every body fromcoming into them. But the Corcyreans had not the least in­clination to force an entrance by the doors. They mountedup on the top of the edifice, and tearing off the roof, flung thetiles and shot arrows down upon them. The others protectedthemselves to the best of their power; and many of them wereemployed in making away with themselves by cramming thearrows shot from above down their own throats. Others,tearing away the cordage from the beds which happened to bewithin, or twisting such ropes as they could from shreds oftheir own garments, so strangled themselves to death. Nomethod was omitted during the greatest part of the night (fornight dropt down upon this scene of horror) till, either dis­patched by their own contrivance, or shot to death by thoseabove, their destruction was completely finished. So soon asit was day, the Corcyreans, having thrown their bodies onheaps into carriages, removed them out of the city. But theirwives, so many as had been taken prisoners in company withtheir husbands, they adjudged to slavery for life.







OCR Output








B. I. INTRODUCTION. 33


" truth of them from his elders, and acknowledge that weft ought to be properly requited. Let him not entertain the" thought, that what we say is agreeable to equity, but that in" case of a war interest inclineth another way: For interest is" most surely to be found there where the least injustice is" committed. The contingency of that war, from the dread" of which the Corcyreans encourage you to act unjustly, lieth" yet in obscurity, and ought not to inflame you into open and" immediate hostilities against the Corinthians. It would be" prudent, farther, to lessen that jealousy we have already con-" ceived from the proceedings at Megara. For a latter obn-" gation, by the favour of time, though of less weight in itselfi" is able to cancel a charge of greater moment. Neither suf-" fer yourselves to be allured with the promise of a powerful" conjunction of naval force : For never to act unjustly against" equals is a firmer security of power than to be elevated upon" present plausibilities, and enlarge it through a scries of dan-" gers. Our present circumstances resemble those concerning" which we expressly declared at Lacedaemon, that every state" had a right to proceed against its own dependents: And now" we beg that liberty from you ; and that you, who have reaped" the benefit of such a suffrage from us, would not prejudice us"by yours. Render us for it the just requital ; remembering" that this is the critical season, in which he who aideth is the" best of friends, and he that opposeth the greatest foe. And," as for these Corcyreans, take them not into your alliance in" despite of us, nor abet them in the injuries they have done" us. By acting in this manner you will discharge the obli-" gations incumbent upon you, and will take those measures" which are most for your own advantage."
This is the substance of what was said by the Corinthians.
The Athenians having heard both parties*, met twice in fullassembly on this occasion. At the first meeting they thought
• Here the English reader should be informed in what manner businesswent on when difficulties, diversities of opinion, and consequently debatesensued.


 







OCR Output








B. III. 207 YEAR IV.—BEFORE CHRIST 428.


hospitable protection at Athens, had sent the Athenians ad­vice—" That they are compelling all Lesbos to go into Mi-" tylene, and are getting every thing in readiness for a re-" volt by the aid of the Lacedaemonians and their kindred" Boeotians ; and if timely prevention be not given, Lesbos" will be lost."
The Athenians, at present miserably distressed by theplague, and a war now grown very brisk and vigorous, knewthat the accession of Lesbos to their enemies, possessed as itwas of a naval force and fresh in strength, must be a terribleblow, and would not listen at first to the accusations sent,chiefly from the earnestness of their own wishes, that theymight be groundless. But when they had in vain dispatchedan embassy to the Mityleneans to put a stop to the forcedresort of the Lesbians thither and their other preparations,their fears were increased, and they became intent on someexpedient of timely prevention—and order thither, on asudden, forty sail that lay ready fitted out for a cruize on Pe­loponnesus. Cleippides, son of Deinias, with two colleagues,had the command of this fleet. Information had been giventhem, that the festival of Apollo Maloeis was soon to be ce­lebrated without the city, at which solemnity the whole peo­ple of Mitylene are obliged to assist.—It was therefore hoped,that they might surprize them on this occasion, and by onesudden assault complete the work. Should it so fall out, itwould be a happy turn ;—But, if this miscarried, they wereto order the Mityleneans to deliver up their shipping anddemolish their works, and in case they refused^to make in­stant war.
With these instructions the fleet went to sea. And theAthenians seized ten Triremes belonging to the Mityle­neans, which happened at that time to be lying in theirport as an auxiliary quota in pursuance of treaty, and castinto prison all their crews. But a certain person passingover from Athens to Euboea, and hastening by land to Ge-reestus, finds a vessel there ready to put off, on board of







OCR Output













OCR Output








b. in. 287 TEAR VI. BEFORE CHRIST 426.


a part of the army to flight, and slew a considerable num­ber.
After this, Laches and the Athenians, having made someattempts, and landed on the coast of Locris near the mouth ofthe river Caicinus, were engaged by a party of Locrians con*sisting of about three hundred, under Proxenus, the son ofCapaton. These the Athenians defeated, and having strip­ped them of their arms, went off the coast.
The same winter also the Athenians purified Delos, inobedience to an oracle. Pisistratus the tyrant had purifiedit formerly, not indeed the whole, but so much of theisland as lies within the prospect of the temple. The purifi­cation now was universal, and performed in the followingmanner.
They broke up all the sepulchres of the dead without ex­ception, and prohibited for the future any death or birth inthe island, both which were to be confined to Rheiuea. ForRhenaea lies at so small a distance from Delos, that Poly-crates the tyrant of Samos, who was formerly of great powerby sea, amongst other isles he reduced to his dominions,tookRhenaea also, which he consecrated to Delian Apollo, andfastened it to Delos by a chain. And after this purification,the Athenians made the first institution of the Delian gamesto be solemnized every fifth returning year. Not but that inthe earlier times there was used to be a great conflux of Io-nians and neighbouring islanders to Delos. They resortedto the solemn festivals there with their wives and children, inthe same manner as the Ionians do now to Ephesus. Gamesof bodily exercise and of music were actually celebrated, andcities exhibited their respective chorusses. For this we havethe testimony of Homer, in the following verses of his hymnto Apollo.
To thee, O Phoebus, most the Delian isleGives cordial joy, excites the pleasing smile ;When gay Ionians flock around thy fane ;Men, women, children, a resplendent train,







OCR Output








344 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" terests, if we would act like men of sense, is this present" congress opened ; but, to concert the best measures within" our reach to preserve (if possible) our country from falling," and as I judge, in great danger of falling, a sacrifice to" Athenian ambition. It is to convince you how unneces-" sary a reunion is, not so much from what I can urge, as" from the light these very Athenians themselves hold out" before you. Possessed of a power far superior to any other" Grecians, here they lie amongst us with a few ships, to note" down our indiscretions ; and, under the plausible pretext of" alliance, though with malice lurking in their hearts, they are" studying to improve them in a specious manner to their own" advantage. For should war be again our option ; and in it," should the assistance of men be accepted, who though un-" invited would be glad to invade us ; whilst we are harass-" ing and exhausting one another, and cutting open for these" Athenians a road to our subjection, it is much to be appre-" hended that, when once they behold our strength at the" lowest ebb, they will pay us a visit with more formidable" armaments, and exert their utmost endeavours to compleat" our destruction.
" It becomes each party amongst us, provided we know" what is really our interest, to form alliances and to launch" into hazardous attempts, rather to acquire what belongs" to others than to prejudice what themselves at present pos-" sesi ; and to rest assured that sedition must ruin our seve-" ral States, nay Sicily itself, of which we the joint possessors" are ready, are all of us ready to be supplanted by hostile" treachery, whilst mutually embroiled in our domestic"quarrels. It is high time we were convinced of this, that" every individual might be reconciled with his neighbour," and community with community, and all in general com-" bine together to preserve the whole ot Sicily; that our" ears be deaf to the mischievous suggestions, that those" amongst us of Doric descent are enemies to every thing







OCR Output








THE


PELOPONNESIAN WAR.
BOOK I.


INTRODUCTION.
THUCYDIDES, an Athenian, hath compiled the historyof the war between the Peloponnesians and the Athenians,as managed by each of the contending parties. He began towrite upon its first breaking out, from an expectation thatit would prove important, and the most deserving regard ofany that had ever happened. He grounded his conjectureon the earnestness of both the flourishing parties to make allnecessary preparations for it; and he saw that all the rest ofGreece was engaged on one side or the other, some joiningimmediately, and others intending soon to do it; for this wasthe greatest commotion that ever happened amongst the Gre­cians, since in it some Barbarians, and it may be said thegreatest part of mankind were concerned. The actions ofan earlier date, and those still more ancient, cannot possibly,through length of time, be adequately known; yet, from allthe lights which a search into the remotest times hath afford­ed me, I cannot think they were of any great importance,either in regard to the wars themselves, or any other consider­ations.
It is certain that the region now known by the name ofGreece was not formerly possessed by any fixed inhabitants,but was subject to frequent transmigrations, as constantlyevery distinct people easily yielded up their seats to the vio­lence of a larger supervening number. For, as to commercethere was none, and mutual fear prevented intercourse both







OCR Output








B. III. TEAR VI. BEFORE CHRIST 426. 279


themselves under the Athenian protection; but afterwards,apprehending they might not be hearty in their support,they made application to Lacedsrmbn by Tisamenus the de­legate appointed by them on this occasion. The Dorianstoo, from whom the Lacedaemonians are descended, senttheir embassadors also to accompany and join with him inthe negociation, for they likewise were infested by theseOetfeans. The Lacedaemonians, after an audience, resolvedto send out this colony, as a sure expedient not only to pro­tect the Trachinians and Dorians from insult, but to annoythe Athenians more sensibly, in the course of the war, froma city so commodiously seated. For thence they could atany time make an attack upon Euboea, as the passage wasbut short; and further, it lay most conveniently upon theroad to Thrace. In a word, they were very eager aboutbuilding this city. In the first place therefore, they beggedthe advice of the God at Delphi. His answer being favour­able, they sent out a colony composed of their own and theneighbouring people ; encouraging farther all Grecian adven­turers whatever to join in this settlement, except Ioniansand Achaeans, and some of foreign nations. Three Lace­daemonians are appointed to be the leaders of this colony ;Leon, and Alcidas, and Damagon. These arriving at thespot erect upon a new foundation and wall round the citywhich is now called Heraclea, distant about forty stadia*from Thermopyl*, and twenty from the sea. They proceed­ed next to build the naval docks ; and these they began atThermopylae close under the straits, since there the}' werecapable of the strongest defence.
The Athenians, when they saw the large resort to this co­lony, were at first under great apprehensions. They sus­pected it to be chiefly intended for the annoyance of Eu­boea, as the passage from it was short to Cenaeum in Eu-bcea ; though, in the sequel, their apprehensions proved en­tirely groundless. Not the least damage accrued to them* About four miles'.







OCR Output













OCR Output








xliv On his Qualifications as a Historian.


principles, and avers him a tight and sound royalist. Heis sure, that he least of all liked the democracy; as sure,he was not at all fond of an oligarchy. He founds this as­surance on a passage in the eighth book—" They decreed" the supreme power, to be vested in the Jive thousand, which" number to consist of all such citizens as were enrolled for" the heavy armour, and that no one should receive a" salary."—Thucydides just after pronounceth this, in hisown opinion, " a good modelling of their government, a" fine temper between the few and the many, and which" enabled Athens from the low state into which her affairs" were plunged to re-erect her head." If this passage provesany thing of the author's principles, it certainly proves themin a pretty strong degree republican. Mr. Hobbes howeversets out from hence to prove him a royalist. " For (says he)" he commendeth the government of Athens more, both" when Pisistratus reigned (saving that it was an usurped" power), and when in the beginning of this war it was de-" mocratical in name, but in effect monarchical under Pe-" ricles." He praiseth, it is true, the administration at boththese periods ; and he also praiseth the good effects resultingfrom an administration lodged in the hands of five thousandmen. Under Pericles it was lodged in more, but the extra­ordinary abilities and influence of the man had taught alltheir voices to follow the dictates of his heart. Yet, Pericleswas all the time a strong republican, and owned his masters.Plutarch says, he never harangued them without prayingbeforehand, that, " not a word might slip out of his mouth," that was not pertinent to the business in hand;" and thathe never put on his armour to lead them out into the fieldwithout saying to himself—" Remember, Pericles, you are" going to command free men and Grecians." I leave it tothe reader, whether the principles of Thucydides can thus bediscovered. It appears only, that he was always candid toa good administration, and might possibly think of govern­ment, as Mr. Pope hath wrote :







OCR Output








DISCOURSE III. XCI


at peace with Sparta, by means of truces for thirty years.Young Alcibiades doth all he can to promote the quarrel,till at length the troops of Sparta and Argos come to an en­gagement near the city of Mantinea. Thucydides intro-duceth the battle with all the spirit and precision of Homer.The -auxiliaries are marshalled, and animated by such exhor­tations, as are best suited to the peculiar circumstances ofeach. The Spartans are exhibited at last in all their glorv.Trained up for a camp and the day of battle, we shall viewthem in their discipline and actual exertion of their personalbravery. They were excellent combatants indeed ; and thereader will judge, whether Thucydides did not love goodsoldiers, and take a pleasure in doing them justice. It wasthe greatest battle, which for many years had been foughtin Greece. The Spartans, on this occasion, wiped off all theimputations that had lately been thrown on their bravery,because they had not been always successful: And theSpiring State of Argos is compelled to acquiesce in herusual rank, and still leave the contention for supremacy tothe leading States of Athens and Sparta.
This Book affords but one incident more, of consequenceenough to be particularly distinguished ; and that is theconquest of the isle of Melos by the Athenians, which fellout in the sixteenth year of the war. When the Athenianswere landed and encamped on that island, they summon theMelians to a conference, of which Thucydides hath drawnout the particulars. It is really an uncommon one, and hadsadly puzzled the critics, whether they should praise or con­demn it. But, is there any thing more unnatural in recitingwhat was said at it, than in holding a conference ? It is mybusiness only to look at the management of it, and not drawa veil over the Athenian politics, as they are avowed on thisoccasion, since my author was too impartial to do it. No­thing could tempt him to make palliating representations,or to suppress the truth.
" The Athenians, on this occasion, avow without a blush







OCR Output








204 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


paration of the Peloponnesian fleet, coasting from thence underthe command of Phormio, appeared before Astacus. Makingthere a descent, they pierced into the midland parts of Acarna-nia, with four hundred heavy-armed Athenians from on boardthe fleet, and four hundred Messenians ; and expelled fromStratus, Coronta, and other places, the disaffected part of the in­habitants ; and having re-established at Coronta, Cynes, theson of Theolytus, embarked again on board their ships. Theyjudged it not adviseable in the winter season, to undertakeany thing against the Oeniadae, the only people of Acarnaniawho had persisted in continual hostilities against them. Forthe river Achelous, that takes its rise from mount Pindus,and runs through Dolopia, the provinces of the Agraans andthe Amphilochians, and all the plains of Acarnania, passingabove by the city of Stratus, and discharging itself into the seanear the Oeniadae, renders all the adjacent country one conti­nued morass, and by a stagnation of water makes it impracti­cable for an army in the winter-season. Most of the isles ofthe Echinades lie over-against the Oeniade, not greatly distantfrom the mouth of the Achelous; insomuch that the riverbeing great, causeth a continual afflux of sand, and by it someof these islands are already joined to the main-land; and itis expected that all the rest in a short time will be so too :For the current is large and rapid, and brings down with itgreat quantities of sand. The isles stand thick ; and stopping,bind fast together from farther dissipation, the sands broughtdown by the current. They lie not in a line, but in an al­ternate situation one from another, preventing the straitcourse of the waters forwards into the sea. They are furtheruncultivated, and of no large extent. The tradition is—that
" all the time with Sitalces. He is an honest heart, and loves Athenians"dearly. In good truth, he is doatingly fond of you all: He is for ever" writing upon the walls, O rare Athenians J And his son, whom we made"an Athenian, longs mightily for some of your dainty sausages, and hath"pressed his father to succour his dear countrymen. He, at a solemn sa-" crifice, swore he would; and hath got such a numerous army at his
" heels, that the Athenians cry out What a vast swarm of gnats is
" coming along here !"







OCR Output








580 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


their commandant, who resided there by the orders of theAthenians to guard the place, they dispatch a messenger tothe other commander in Thrace, Thucydides the son ofOlorus, who compiled this history, and was then in Thasus(Thasus is an island, a colony of the Parians, and distantabout half a day's sail from Amphipolis), pressing him tocome instantly to their relief.
Thucydides no sooner received this notice, than, with theutmost expedition, he put to sea with seven ships that hap­pened to be at hand. He designed nothing so much as toprevent if possible the loss of Amphipolis; or, if that wasimpracticable, to throw himself into Eion, and secure it intime.
Brasidas in the mean while, fearing at the approach of thissuccour from Thasus, informed besides that Thucydidesdrew an ample revenue from the working of his gold-minesin this quarter of Thrace, and was on this account of greatcredit amongst the principal persons of this part of the con­tinent, tried all possible expedients to get possession of thecity before his arrival, lest his appearance amongst themmight animate the Amphipolitans with the hope of succourby sea and from Thrace, which the credit of Thucydidesmight easily obtain for their effectual preservation, and inpursuance of this they might refuse to capitulate. He sentthem therefore very moderate terms, ordering his herald toproclaim that " the Amphipolitans and Athenians within the" city should, if they desired it, be continued in the free pos-" session of their property, and of all their rights and liberties" whatever: But those, who refused to stay, should have the" space of five days allowed them to quit the town and re-" move their effects."
This proposal was no sooner heard, than the inclinationsof the many took a new turn. The Athenian interest hadbut a few supporters in the city: The bulk of the inhabitantswere a mixture of foreign nations. There were also withinmanv persons, relations of those who had been made prison­







OCR Output








fciBCbtrftsE in. lix


which he cleared the isles of the pirates, who had settled up*on them to set out readier from thence on their plunderingexcursions.—The grand fleet, that carried such a numerousarmy to Troy, was a mere collection of transports. Thucy-dides gives us a just and clear idea of that famous expedi­tion. After this celebrated sera*, the Corinthians were thefirst people of Greece, who became in reality a maritimepower, Theii1 peculiar situation gave them an inclinationand opportunity for commerce ; and commerce must havestrength to guard and support it. They first improved avessel of burden into a ship of warf, and set power afloat aswell as wealth.
Their neighbours in the isle of Corcyra soon followed theirexample, and, though originally a colony of their own, be*came a rival power at sea. They fought on their own dar-Jing element for superiority*.. This was the most ancientsea-fight, but it was not decisive. They continued for twc*Centuries more to be rival and jarring powers ; till a third*that of Athens grew up, which politically joined with one togain the ascendant over them both, and to assert the empireof the sea for itself.
The claim both of Corcyra and Corinth to the town ofEpidamnus had occasioned their most recent embroilment^,and a hot war, in which the Corcyreans applied for the al­liance and aid of Athens. On this was afterwards groundedthe first pretext for the Peloponnesian war, and thereforeour Author opens the affair at large. Athens held the ba­lance of power in her hands : How she came to be possessedof it will soon give room for as pertinent a digression asThucydides could have wished. Ambassadors from bothparties are soon at Athens; one, to negotiate alliance andaid; the other, to traverse their negotiation. The people ofAthens, in whom the supreme power was vested, admitthem both to audience, and orations of course must follow.
• Before Christ 904. f Before Christ 697.
\ Before Christ 657. § Before Christ 433.







OCR Output








B. II. TEAK III. BEFORE CHRIST 429. 187


a land-army, but that the ships must fall foul upon one ano­ther, and the small vessels within give them no little embar­rassment ; that further, the wind would blow out of the gulf,as was usual every morning ; in expectation of which he con­tinued to sail round about them, and then they could not pos­sibly keep firm in their stations for any time. He thoughtfarther, that the time of engagement was entirely in his ownpower, as his ships were best sailers, and that it was most ad-viseable to begin at such a juncture. As soon as that wind be­gan to rise, and the greater ships, now contracted into a nar­row circle, were disordered both by the wind and the smallervessels within, one falling foul upon another, the poles ap­plied to push them off again ; amidst the noise caused by this.confusion, calling out to take care, and cursing one another,they could no longer hear the orders of their commanders ortheir masters ; and the sea beginning to run so high as to ren­der useless the oars of unexperienced mariners, as they were,they left the unmanageable ships to the pilots' art. Exactlyat this juncture Phormio gives the signal. The Atheniansengage, and at the first shock sink one of the admiral-ships,and several more afterwards in the different parts of the en­gagement: They pursued their success with so much fury,that amidst the general disorder not one durst think of resist­ing, but all with the greatest precipitation, fled towards Pa-tra e and Dyme of Achaia. The Athenians pursuing, andtaking twelve of their ships, and having slaughtered most ofthe crews, draw off to Molychrium ; and having erected atrophy on the promontory, and consecrated a ship to Nep­tune, returned to their station at Naupactus.
The Peloponnesians, without loss of time, crept alongthe coast with the remnant of their fleet saved at Patra andDyme, to Cyllene a dock belonging to the Eleans ; whither,after the battle of Stratus, arrived also from Leucas, Cnemusand the ships of that station, which ought to have beenjoined by these other. The Lacedaemonians send thitherTimocrates, Brasidas, and Lycophron to assist Cnemus in







OCR Output








B. III. * YEAR V. BEFORE CHRIST 427. 271


lany, or could persuade a well-designing person to it, wassure to be applauded.
Men now, who were allied in blood, were less valued orcaressed, than such as were connected by voluntary combim -tion; since the latter, unscrupulous, and uninquisitive, weremore ready to embark in any scheme whatever. For now as­sociations were not formed for such mutual advantage as isconsistent with, but for the execution of such rapines as arecontrary to human laws. In mutual trust they persisted,not out of any regard to religious obligation, but from thebond of communicated guilt. To the fair and honest propo­sals of adversaries they hearkened indeed, when such by ac­tive strength could controul them, but never through candidingenuity. Revenge upon another was a more valued pos­session than never to have suffered injury. Oaths, if evermade for present reconciliation, had a temporary force, solong as neither knew how to break them ; but never wheneither party had power to abet their violation. He who, atinviting opportunity, durst first incur the perjury, if the ad­versary was off his guard, executed his rancour with higherspirit, than from enmity open and avowed. Such a step wasthought most secure ; and, because he had thus surpassed inguile, it was certainly extolled as a master-piece of cunning.Large is the number of villains, and such obtain more easilythe reputation of dexterity than their dupes can that of good­ness : The latter are apt to blush ; the former most impudent­ly triumph.
The source of all these evils is a thirst of power, in con­sequence either of rapacious or ambitious passions. Themind, when actuated by such, is ever ready to engage inparty-feuds. For the men of large influence in communi­ties avowing on both sides a specious cause, some standingup for the just equality of the popular, others for the fairdecorum of the aristocratical government, by artful soundsembarrassed those communities for their own private lucre.Both sides, intent on victory, carried on the contention with







OCR Output








THE
PELOPONNESIAN WAR.
BOOK IV.
YEAR VII—BEFORE CHRIST 425.
THE ensuing summer, when the corn was beginning toear, ten sail of Syracusan, joined by an equal number of Lo-erian vessels, at the invitation of the inhabitants, stood awayfor Messenein Sicily, and took possession of the place. Andthus Messene revolted from the Athenians. But this eventwas chiefly owing to the practices of the Syracusans ; who,foreseeing that this town might open the way for the re­duction of Sicily, were greatly afraid lest the Atheniansshould get established there, and with augmented forcespour out from thence upon them. The Locrians assisted outof enmity to the Rhegians, whom they were desirous to haveit in their power to attack both by land and sea. At thesame time also these Locrians broke in upon the territory ofthe Rhegians with their intire force, to deter them from anyattempt to save Messene, and to gratify also those fugitivesfrom Rhegium, who acted now in combination with them.For Rhegium had for a long time been embroiled in sedition,and so was unable to take the field against these invaders,who for the same reason were more eager to distress them.When the ravage was compleated, the Locrians marchedtheir land-forces back, but their ships were stationed on theguard of Messene. They also were very busy in the equip­ment of an additional number, which were to repair to thatstation, and be ready to move from thence to any futureoperations of war.







OCR Output








63 TH&PELOPONNESIAN WAR,


" set out without proper preparations. The state of which" we are the constituents, hath ever been free and most cele-" brated by fame: And that reproach can at most be nothing" but the inborn sedateness of our minds. By this we are" distinguished as the only people who never grow insolent" with success, and who never are abject in adversity. And" when again they invite us to hazardous attempts by uttering" our praise, the delight of hearing must not raise our spirits" above our judgment. If any, farther, endeavour to exas-" perate us by a flow of invective, we are not by that to be" provoked the sooner to compliance. From tempers thus" evenly balanced it is, that we are warm in the field of bat-" tle, and cool in the hours of debate : The former, because" a sense of duty hath the greatest influence over a sedate" disposition, and magnanimity the keenest sense of shame:" And good we are in debate, as our education is not polite" enough to teach us a contempt of laws, and by its severity" giveth us so much good sense as never to disregard them.--*4 We are not a people so impertinently wise, as to invalidate" the preparations of our enemies by a plausible harangue," and then absurdly proceed to a contest; but we reckon the" thoughts of our neighbours to be of a similar cast with our" own, and that hazardous contingencies are not to be de-" termined by a speech. We always presume that the pro­jects of our enemies are judiciously planned, and then se-" riously prepare to defeat them. For we ought not to found" our success upon the hope that they will certainly blunder" in their conduct, but that we have omitted no proper step" for our own security. We ought not to imagine, there is so»" mighty a difference between man and man; but that he is" the most accomplished who hath been regularly trained" through a course of needful industry and toil.
" Such is the discipline which our fathers have handed*" down to us ; and by adhering to it, we have reaped consi-" derable advantages. Let us not forego it now, nor in a" small portion of only one day precipitately determine a







OCR Output








B. I. INTRODUCTION.


gained a compleat victory at Oenophyta*; in consequenceof which, they seized all the territories of Bosotia and Phocis,and levelled the walls of Tanagra. They took from the Lo-crians of Opus one hundred of their richest persons for hos­tages ; and had now completed their own long-walls at
Athens.
Soon after, the iEginete surrendered to the Athenians uponterms.—They " demolished their fortifications, gave up theirshipping, and submitted to pay an annual tribute for thefuture."
The Athenians, farther, in a cruize, infested the coast ofPeloponnesus, under the command of Tolmidas, the son ofTolmaeus. They burnt a dock of the Lacedaemonians, tookChalcis, a city belonging to the Corinthians, and landingtheir men, engaged with and defeated the Sicyonians.
During all this interval, the army of the Athenians andallies continued in Egypt, amidst various incidents and events
of war. At first, the Athenians had the better of it in Egypt.
Upon this, the king] dispatched to Lacedaemon, Megabazus,a Persian noble, furnished with great sums of money, in orderto prevail upon the Lacedaemonians to make an incursion intoAttica, and force the Athenians to recal their troops fromEgypt: When Megabazus could not prevail, and some moneyhad been spent to no manner of purpose, he carried backwhat was yet unexpended with him into Asia. He then send-
• This battle is represented by some as more glorious to the Atheniansthan even those of Marathon or Plataea. In the latter they fought, accom­panied by their allies, against Barbarians ; but here, with their own singleforce, they defeated a far more numerous body of the choicest and bestdisciplined troops in Greece. Plato hath marked it in his Funeral Oration,and told us those who fell in this battle were the first who were honouredwith a public interment in the Ceramicus. " These brave men (says he,'' as translated by Mr. West), having fought against Grecians for the liber-" ties of Grecians, and delivered those whose cause they had undertaken" to defend, were the first after the Persian war upon whom the common-" wealth conferred the honour of being buried in this public cemetery."
t Alexander Longimanui







OCR Output








B. I. INTRODUCTION. 15


former times had known, even during the greatest vigour oftheir state, and the most perfect harmony between them andtheir allies.
Such are the discoveries I have made concerning the an­cient state of Greece; which, though drawn from a regularseries of proofs, will not easily be credited: For it is the cus­tom of mankind, nay even where their own country is con­cerned, to acquiesce with ready credulity in the traditions offormer ages, without subjecting them to the test of sedate ex­amination. Thus, for instance, it is yet a received opinionamongst the bulk of the Athenian People, that Hipparchuswas the tyrant, and therefore slain by Harmodius and Aris-togiton; and they have not yet discovered, that Hippias thengoverned by virtue of his being the eldest of the sons of Pi-sistratus, and that Hipparchus and Thessalus were his bro­thers. Harmodius and Aristogiton, on the very day appoint­ed, and just at the crisis, suspecting that information hadbeen given to Hippias by some who were privy to the design,made no attempt upon him as put already on his guard. Yetwilling, before they were apprehended, to shew their resolu­tion and contempt of danger, they accidentally found Hippar­chus at the Leocorium superintending the Panathenaical pro­cession*, and immediately slew him. There are many otherthings of a more recent date, and of memory not yet invali­dated by time, about which the other Grecians are verywrong in their notions; such as, that the Lacedaemoniankings had each of them a double and not a single vote inpublic questions ; and, that amongst them the Pittanate was aa military band, which never yet existed. So easy a task tonumbers is the search of truth ; so eager are they to catchat whatever lieth next at hand !
• This procession was made at the great Panathenxa, which festival wascelebrated once in five years in commemoration of the union of all the peo­ple of Attica by Theseus. The lesser Panathenxa was celebrated everythird year, some say every year, and was lengthened out by public games.These were also used at the great Panathenxa, in which the greatestsplendour and magnificence were employed, and the procession added,here mentioned by Thucydides, and of which the curious reader may seea particular account in Potter's Archxologia, vol. i. p. 421.







OCR Output








DISCOURSE II.


ON HIS QUALIFICATIONS AS AHISTORIAN.
IT is now to be considered, how well qualified Thucydideswas, to undertake that nice and arduous task of writing His­tory. No one certainly was ever better fitted for it by out­ward circumstances ; and very few so enabled to perform itwell by the inward abilities of genius and understanding.
Lucian, in his celebrated treatise " How a History oughtto be written," is generally supposed to have had his eyefixed on Thucydides. And every person of judgment, wholoves a sincere relation of things, would be glad, if it werepossible, to have the writer of them abstracted from allkind of connection with persons or things that are the sub­ject-matter ; to be of no country, no party ; clear of all pas­sions ; independent in every light ; intirely unconcerned whois pleased or displeased with what he writes; the servantonly of reason and truth.
Sift Thucydides carefully, and we shall find his qua­lifications in all these respects very nearly, if not quite, com-pleat. .
No connection with, no favouring or malevolent bias to­wards any one person in the world can be fixed upon him.Never man so intirely detached, or proceeded so far (if Imay use the expression) in annihilating himself. He hada father indeed, whose name was Olorus; he was an Athe­nian born ;—But, who are his relations ? who were his as­sociates? what rival or competitor doth he sneer? what
Vol. I. F







OCR Output








194 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


full expectation of intercepting the whole fleet. Eleven ofthe Athenian ships, which were a-head of the rest, being tooquick for the wing of the Peloponnesians and the shifting oftheir course towards the open sea, ran safely off*. Yet in­tercepting all the rest, they run them aground and so disabledthem. The Athenians on board, who could not escape byswimming, were slaughtered to a man: Some of these emptyships they got off again and carried away in tow ; and onethey had already took with the whole crew on board. TheMessenians got down to the succour of some of them. Theywaded with their arms through the water, and climbing onboard and fighting from the decks saved some which werealready in tow.—In this manner did the Peloponnesians de­feat and destroy the Athenian ships.
Their twenty ships which were of the right wing, gavechace to the eleven Athenians, which on the shifting of thecourse had ran off amain. But all these, excepting oneship, outsailed them, and got safe into Naupactus. Havinggained their harbour, they tacked about under the templeof Apollo, and stood ready to defend themselves, in case theenemy should make an attempt upon them so near theshore. Soon after, they appeared, sailing along and sing­ing their paean, as having gained a victory. One ship be­longing to Leucas was shot far a-head of the rest, givingchace to that only ship of the Athenians which was left be­hind. It happened that a trading vessel was then lying outat anchor before the harbour. The Athenian ship came up
• The Latin translators, whose chief aim is a grammatical construction,have made a slip here in point of chorography ; they say, " Suhtcrfugeruntorfugerunt in apenum mare." But it is surprizing that Mr. Hobbet shouldbe guilty of so much inadvertence, as to make eleven Athenian ships " getout into open sea." The Peloponnesians made their tack toward* the opensea, on purpose to prevent them from getting out of the gulf, which gaveopportunity to the foremost ships in the Athenian line to run away up thegulf towards Naupactus, for the sake of securing which they had thoughtthemselves obliged, though contrary to their judgment and inclination, tocome within the capes. Had they run o»it to sea, they never could havereached Naupactus, but would have run directly from it.







OCR Output








THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" tions, nor by self-desertion utterly to efface their native dig-" nity. The world will always have equal reason to condemn" the person who sinks from a height of glory by his own" pusillanimity, and to hate the person who impudently pre-" tends to what he never can deserve. It must be therefore" your duty to suppress this too keen a sensibility of your own" private losses, and with united fortitude to act in the de-" fence of the public safety. Let us therefore bravely un-" dergo the toils of this war ; and if the toil increaseth, let" our resolution increase with it. And let these, added to all" those other proofs of my integrity I have exhibited on other" occasions, suffice to convince you that your present censures-" and suspicions of me are rash and groundless.
" I shall now lay before you a point, which, so far as I" can judge, you have as yet never properly considered, nor" have I in any former discourse insisted upon—" the" means within your reach, of rising to supreme dominion."" Nor should I meddle even now with a point*, pompous be-" yond poetic visions, did I not see you beyond measure fear-" ful and dejected. You think you are only masters of your" own dependents; but I loudly aver that you are greater" masters now both at land and sea, those necessary spheres" for carrying on the services of life, than any other power ;" and may be greater yet, if so inclined. There is not now" a king, there is not any nation in the universal world, able"to withstand that navy, which at this juncture you can
• Pericles here is about to convince the Athenians, that they may rise tosupreme dominion in consequence of their naval superiority. It was his ambi­tion to execute the grand extensive plan which was formed originally byThemistocles. And the words, in which he introduceth this topic are so
full of energy, that they bear hard upon a translator. He calls it a point
KtnTrHfartpaet ix"l4 r\m ir^oiraeitiTii. My first attempts at them werevery faint and imperfect. I was soon convinced of it by the greatest geniusof the age, who did me the honour to read over this speech in manuscript,and who, as he thinks and speaks like Pericles, could not endure that any ofhis words should be depreciated. I hope now I have expressed all theideas which the original words include. Mr. Hobbcs hath entirely droppedthem in his translation.







OCR Output








SOME ACCOUNT OF DR. SMITH.


" yet I find the observation strictly verified, that what is every" body's business is nobody's business; and whilst it is" generally presumed that I have a great deal of help, I have" in fact little or none, though I stand much in need of it. I" hope you will excuse the notice I have taken of you in my" paper. In hopes of your correspondence, I am, Sir, with" respect, your very humble servant,
"R. HOOKER."
On a state fast, the 4th of February, 1740, our Authorpreached in Trinity Church on Prov. xiv. 34. " Righteous­ness exalteth a nation, but sin is a reproach to any people."This Sermon was printed at the request of his parishioners,and inscribed to them. The Right Hon. Edward Earl ofDerby had succeeded that nobleman who presented Mr. Smithto Trinity Church: but Mr. Smith still continued to be es­teemed at Knowsley, notwithstanding Knowsley had changedits master. He, who had been long considered as the Earlof Derby's Chaplain, was constituted in form, by letters patent,the 2d day of August, 1743. On the 31st of July, 1746, ourAuthor preached an Assize-Sermon at Lancaster, on St.John viii. 32. " Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall" make you free." This Sermon is inscribed to the HighSheriff and Grand Jury, being " published at their command."
In the year 1748, the Grammar-School of Brentwood, inthe parish of South Weald, in the county of Essex, being va­cant, was suffered by Lord and Lady Strange to lapse to theBishop of London, who, at their recommendation, appointedMr. Smith Schoolmaster there for life, by letters patent bear­ing date the 15th day of February, and by licence dated the17th of the same month. He held this school only one year,as he did in no wise relish the laborious life of a schoolmaster.On the 8th of June, 1753, he was licenced as one of the Min­isters of St. George's Church in Liverpool, on the nominationof the Corporation there,
In the year 1753, Mr Smith published, in two volumes,4to. dedicated to his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales,







OCR Output








ft. III. YEAR V. BEFORE CHRIST 427. 231


ambassadors then residing at Athens, and such of the Athe­nians, as inclining to mercy had a mind to save them, thanthey addressed themselves to the magistrates, begging thedecree might be again debated. Their request was the moreeasily granted, as the magistrates had discovered that thebulk of the city were desirous to have a second opportunityof declaring their sentiments. An assembly of the peopleis again convened, and various opinions were offered bydifferent persons, till Cleon the son of Cleanetus, who in theformer assembly had proposed and carried the murderingsentence, who in all other respects was the most violent ofall the citizens, and at this time had by far the greatest in­fluence over the people, stood forth again and spoke as fol­lows
" UPON many other occasions my own experience hath" convinced me, that a democracy is incapable of ruling" over others ; but I see it with the highest certainty now in" this your present repentance concerning the Mityleneans." In security so void of terror, in safety so exempt from" treachery, you pass your days within the walls of Athens," that you are grown quite safe and secure about your de-" pendents. Whenever, soothed by their specious intrea-" ties, you betray your judgment or relent in pity, not a soul" amongst you reflects that you are acting the dastardly" part, not in truth to confer obligations upon those depen-" dents, but to endanger your own welfare and safety. It" is then quite remote from your thoughts, that your rule" over them is in fact a tyranny, that they are ever intent
" on prospects to shake off your yoke that yoke, to
" which they ever reluctantly submitted. It is not forgive-" ness on your part, after injuries received, that can keep" them fast in their obedience, since this must be ever the" consequence of your own superior power and not of grati-" tude in them.
" Above all, I dread that extremity of danger to which" we are exposed, if not one of your decrees must ever be







OCR Output








B. I. INTRODUCTION.


cyra, put to death all the prisoners they had taken, exceptthe Corinthians, whom they kept in chains. And after this,as the Corinthians and allies having been vanquished in fightwere forced to retire within their own harbours, they werequite masters of all the adjacent sea; and, sailing first toLeucas a colony of the Corinthians, they laid its territorywaste; and then burnt Cyllene a dock of the Eleans, be­cause they had supplied the Corinthians with ships and mo­ney. In this manner they continued masters of the sea along time after their naval victory, and in their cruises verymuch annoyed the allies of the Corinthians. It was nottill the beginning of the summer, that a check was giventhem by a fleet and land army, who were commissioned, inorder to relieve their harrassed allies, to station themselvesat Actium and round the Chimerium of Thesprotis. Therethey lay, to cover Leucas and other places which were infriendship with them from the ravage of the enemy. TheCorcyreans, upon this, with a naval and land-force sta­tioned themselves over-against them at Leucimna. But,neither party venturing out to attack the other, they layquiet in their opposite stations the whole summer; and onthe approach of winter, both sides withdrew to their respec­tive homes.
During the remainder of the year, after the engagementat sea, and all the following, the Corinthians, whose indig­nation was raised in this their war against the Corcyreans,were building new ships, and sparing neither labour nor costto get a strong armament ready for sea, and sent through­out Peloponnesus and the other parts of Greece to hire ma­riners into their service. The Corcyreans, hearing of thesegreat preparations, were terribly alarmed, and with reason:For at that time they were in no alliance with any of theGrecians, nor comprehended either in the Athenian or La­cedaemonian league. And hence they thought it quite ex­pedient to go and sue for the alliance of the Athenians, and-endeavour to obtain some succour from them. The Corin­thians gaining intelligence of their design, dispatched ah







OCR Output








152 THE PEL0PONNESIAN WAR.


" honoured. Their children from this day till they arrive at" manhood shall be educated at the public expence of the" State*, which hath appointed so beneficial a need for" these and all future relicts of the public contests. For" wherever the greatest rewards are proposed fo^ virtue," there the best of patriots are ever to be found.—j—Now," let every one respectively indulge the decent grief for hisM departed friends, and then retire."
Such was the manner of the public funeral solemnizedthis winter, and with the end of which, the first year of thiswar was also ended. <
YEAR II. JIN the very beginning of summer, the Pelopoinesiansand allies, with two-thirds of their forces, made an incursionas before into Attica, under the command of Arciidamusson of Zeuxidamus, king of the Lacedaemonians, anl having
formed their camp, ravaged the country.
They had not been many days in Attica, before af sick-
• The law was, that they should be instructed at the public ejoence, andwhen come to age presented with a compleat suit of armour, aid honour­ed with the first seats in all public ptaces.
t The historian in the funeral oration hath given us a very exaled idea ofthe Athenian state, and the distinguishing excellencies of that himune andpolite people. The plague, which now broke out enables him O contrasthis pieces, and give his history a most agreeable variety. It is iow goingto be exceeding solemn, serious, and pathetic. It is as a historian and notas a phytician that he gives us the relation of it: A relation, whiih in gene­ral hath been esteemed an elaborate and complete performance He pro-fesseth to give an accurate detail of it. The accuracy hath gentrally beenallowed, but it hath been blamed as too minute. Lucretius hovever hathtransferred all the circumstances mentioned by Thucydides into his ownpoem, 1.6. enlarging still more minutely upon them ; and yet, this is tbegreatest ornament, and certainly the least exceptionable part of sis poen-Lucretius, an excellent poet, affected to write with the precisionof a pli-losopher ; and Thucydides, the historian, always composed with the spirtof a poet. Hippocrates hath left some cases of the plague, which he hatirecited as a physician ; but not one of them is dated at Athens. Thuc;-dides hath mentioned nothing of his practising there, much less of hspractising with success, He says on the contrary that "all human atwas totally unavailing ;" and bis follower, Lucretius, that " Mussabat taci.







OCR Output








B. I. INTRODUCTION. 105


of nature was most vigorously shewn ; and by it, he was sohighly distinguished above the bulk of mankind, as to deservethe greatest admiration. By the mere force of his naturalgenius, without any improvement from study, either in hisyouth or more advanced age, he could give the best adviceupon sudden emergencies with the least hesitation, and washappy in his conjectures about the events of the future.Whatever he undertook he was able to accomplish ; andwherein he was quite inexperienced, he had so prompt a dis­cernment that he never was mistaken. In a matter of ambi­guity, he foresaw with extraordinary acuteness the better andthe worse side of the question. Upon the whole, by the forceof natural genius, he was most quick at all expedients, and atthe same time excellent, beyond competition, at declaring in­stantly the most advisable measures of acting upon every oc­currence. But, being seized with a fit of sickness, his life isat an end. Some indeed report, that he put an end to hisown life by taking poison, when he judged it impossible toperform what he had promised the king. His monument how­ever is at Magnesia in Asia, in the forum. Of this provincehe was governor through the bounty of the king, who assignedhim Magnesia (which yielded him fifty talents* yearly,) forhis bread, Lampsacus for his wine, (which place was in thegreatest repute for wine,) and Myus for his meat. His bonesare said to have been conveyed home by his relations, in pur­suance of his own desire, and to have been interred in Atticawithout the privity of the Athenians. For it was against lawto bury him there, as he had been outlawed for treason}.
• 9,687/. 10*. Sterling
t Some authors have related, that his countrymen afterwards honouredhim with a cenotaph in the Piraeus. Plutarch however disbelieves thefact, and thinks it merely a presumption formed on the following verses ofPlato, the comic poet.
To thee, Themistocles, a tomb is due,Plac'd in the most conspicuous point of view ;Merchants from every port with just acclaimShould shout thy honour, and confess thy fame ;







OCR Output








'264 THE 1>ELOP0NNES1AN WAR.


strong in the senate, gets a fresh order to have it levied inall the rigour of the law. Thus debarred of any legal re­dress, and conscious further that Pythias, so long as he con­tinued in the senate, would prevail upon the people to declarethose their friends and those their foes who were so toAthens,—they rise up from the sanctuary, and seizing dag­gers rush suddenly into the senate-house, where they stabPythias and others, both senators and private persons, to thenumber of sixty. Some few indeed who were the adherentsof Pythias, saved themselves on board the Athenian vessel,which yet lay in the harbour.
After this bold assassination, they summoned the Corcy-reans to assemble immediately, where they justified theirproceedings " as most highly for the public good, and the" only expedient of preventing Athenian slavery ;"—advis­ing them " for the future to receive neither of the rival parties," unless they came peacefully in a single vessel ; if in more" to declare them enemies ;" and in conclusion, they forcedthe ratification of whatever they had proposed. They alsoinstantly dispatch ambassadors to Athens, representing thenecessity they lay under to act as they had done ; and to per­suade those who had fled for refuge thither, not to rush intosuch measures as might hurt the welfare of their country,from a dread of the miseries which might thence ensue.
When these ambassadors were arrived at Athens, theAthenians laid them and all their adherents under anarrest as enemies to the State, and sent them prisoners tovEgina.
In the mean time, those of the Corcyreans who had thusseized the government, animated by the arrival of a Corin­thian trireme and a Lacedaemonian embassy, attack thepeople and overpower them in battle. The people, by fa­vour of the night which approached, fly to the citadel andmore elevated parts of the city, where they drew up toge­ther and secured their posts ; they also got possession ofthe Hyllaic harbour. But their opponents seized the forum,







OCR Output








PREFACE.


the speeches, than could have been done by way of set andformal arguments.
I think the English reader can want nothing more, to en­able him to read Thucydides with pleasure and profit ; es­pecially if he be at all acquainted with the Grecian history,of which few that ever read can now be ignorant, since Mr-Stanyan's History of Greece and the Universal History arein so many hands. I dismiss the work with some hope, butmore terror about its success. That hope is encouraged andsupported by the list of my Subscribers. There are Namesthat do me honour indeed; and which, whether the workmay suit the generality or not, will preserve me from everrepenting that I have bestowed so much time on translatingTHUCYDIDES.







OCR Output








126 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


day; that further, the Lacedaemonians should retire withintheir own frontier; and then, if they had any thing to transactwith them, should send their ambassadors for the purpose."They even commission some persons to guard Melesippusback, that he might have no conference with any personwhatever. When he was brought to the borders and receivedhis dismission, he parted from them with these words—" This day is the beginning of great woes to the Grecians."Upon his return to the camp, Archidamus was convinced thatthe Athenians were inflexible as ever, so that he immediatelydislodged and advanced withhis army into their territories.—The Boeotians sent their quota of foot and their horse to jointhe Peloponnesians in this expedition, but with the rest oftheir forces they marched towards Plataea, and laid the coun­try waste.
Whilst the Peloponnesians were yet assembling at theIsthmus, or yet on the march, before they had entered Atti­ca, Pericles the son of Xantippus, who with nine others hadbeen appointed to command the Athenian forces, when hesaw an irruption from the Peloponnesians unavoidable, hadconceived a suspicion that Archidamus, whom the hospi­table* intercourse had made his friend, from a principleof good-nature willing to oblige him, would leave his landsuntouched, or, might be ordered to do so by the policy ofthe Lacedaemonians, as they had already demanded an ex­communication on his account; by which means he must


' The tie of hospitality was sacred and inviolable amongst the ancients.It was a necessary exertion of humanity at first from the want of inns andlodging-houses, and was frequently improved into friendship and endear­ment. This between Pericles and Archidamus was merely of a privatenature, between the royal family of Sparta and a principal one in the re­public of Athens. The family of Alcibiades was the public host of theSpartan state, and entertained their ambassadors and public ministers.The state of Athens had likewise in all places a public host who lodgedtheir ministers. Yet amongst private persons it was a frank disinterestedtie ; when once they had eat salt together, or sat at the same table, theyregarded themselves as under mutual obligations, which small pointsought not to abolish. They who swerved from this laudable custom throughcaprice or ingratitude were looked upon as infamous execrable persons.







OCR Output








B. I. BTTRODUCTIOW. • 57


" feriors should be controled by their superiors. To be the" latter we thought ourselves deserving: You thought so too" till now, when private interests engaging your attention," you begin to cry out for justice, which no people ever yet" so studiously practised, as, when able to carry a point by" strength, to check their inclination and let it drop. And" worthy, farther, are they of applause, who, pursuing the" dictates of human nature, in gaining rule over others," observe justice more steadily than their scope of power" requireth from them. And so far we have reason to con-" elude, that were our power lodged in other hands, plain" evidence would soon decide with what peculiar modera-" tion we use it: Though, so hard indeed is our lot, that" calumny and not applause hath been the consequence of" such our lenity. In suits of contract against our depend-" ents we are often worsted; and, though ever submitting" to fair and impartial trials in our own courts, we are" charged with litigiousness. Not one of them reflecteth," that those who are absolute in other places, and treat not" their dependents with that moderation which we observe," are for that very reason exempted from reproach: For," where lawl«ss violence is practised there can be no room4* for appeals to justice. But our dependents, accustomed" to contest with us upon equal footing, if they suffer never" so little damage where they fancy equity to be along with" them, either by a judicial sentence or the decision of" reigning power, express no gratitude for the greater share" of property they yet enjoy, but resent with higher chagrin44 the loss of such a pittance, than if at first we had set law" aside, and seized their all with open violence: Even, in" this case, they could not presume to deny, that inferiors" ought to submit to their superiors. But mankind, it" seemeth, resent the acts of injustice more deeply than the" acts of violence: Those, coming from an equal, are look-" ed upon as rapines: these, coming from a superior, aren complied with as necessities. The far more grievous op­


 







OCR Output








discourse ii. xlvii


which have poetry rather than history for their object; andcensures him for not delighting, when his profession wasonly to instruct. Mr. Hobbes hath gallantly defended hisauthor, and shewn all the arguments of Dionysius to beimpertinent, and to proceed from partiality and envy. Ishall not repeat, it will suffice to refer the curious reader towhat Mr. Hobbes hath written upon this topic. Homer hadcelebrated the Trojan war, and intermingled in his poems allthe historic strokes of that and of preceding ages, enliven­ing and exalting every thing he touched. That splendidpart of the Grecian history, in which his countrymen resist­ed and triumphed over the very formidable arms of the Per­sian monarch, had already been recorded by Herodotus.Should Thucydides plunge back into dark and fabulous ages,and turn a mere legendary and romantic writer ? He had,he could have no subject equal to his ambition and hisabilities, but the war, which broke out in his own days, whichhe foresaw would prove extensive and important, when theefforts of her enemies would be vigorously exerted to pulldown the power of Athens, to demolish that naval strengthwhich gave her the sovereignty of the sea, and made her thedread and envy of her neighbours. Coolly therefore withmy reason as an examiner of things, and warmly with mypassion as an Englishman, I cannot but applaud his choice,who hath projected the soundest and best system of Englishpolitics, so long before the constitution had existence; andhath left us fine lessons, such as his factious countrymenwould not observe, how to support that dominion of the sea,on which our glory is built, and on which our welfare in-tirely depends. In this light it is a most instructive and in­teresting history, and we may felicitate ourselves on thechoice of Thucydides. I must not anticipate : Thucydideswould have his readers pick out their own instructions. I canonly add, that Thucydides is a favourite historian with thestatesmen, and patriots of Great-Britain: This fits him alsoto be a Historian for the people. Other nations have ad­







OCR Output








xlii On his Qualifications as a Historian.


friend doth he commend? or, what enemy doth he re­proach ?—Brasidas was the immediate occasion of his dis­grace and exile. Yet, how doth he describe him ? Hemakes the most candid acknowledgments of his personalmerit, and doth justice to all his shining and superior abili­ties. Cleon is generally supposed to have irritated the peo­ple against him, and to have got him most severely punished,when he merited much better returns from his country.Doth he shew the least grudge or resentment against thisCleon ? He represents him indeed in his real character ofa factious demagogue, an incendiary, a bully, and of coursean arrant coward. And how do all other writers ? how dothAristophanes paint this worthless man, this false bellowingpatriot ? I would never call Aristophanes for an evidenceto character, but in cases where every other writer accordedfully with him, on the same foundation of truth, though notwith the same superstructure of bitterness and abuse. Heshould not be a voucher in regard to Socrates, or Pericles;but certainly may be heard about a Hyperbolus or a Cleon.Thucydides never mentions himself as opposed to any manbut Brasidas; and never so much as drops an insinuationthat he was hurt by Cleon. And thus, by general consent,he had gained immortal honour by giving fair and true re­presentations of men, whom he never felt to be such, butwhom succeeding writers have assured us to have actuallybeen his enemies.—As to things; though in the first sevenyears of the war he must in some measure have had employ­ment, yet he was soon disentangled from all business what­ever, in a manner which bore hard upon his reputation. Hehath stated the fact ; and then with the greatest calmness andunconcern, he hath left the decision to posterity.
He was henceforth of no country at all. Cut off from therepublic of Athens, he never sought after or desired a natu­ralization in any other State of Greece. He was now onlyto choose out and fix a proper spot of observation, fromwhence, like a person securely posted on a promontory, he







OCR Output








220 THE PELOPONN'ESIAN WAR.


in the blockade, " first of all to march out of the town in com­pany, and to compass their escape, if possible, over the worksof the enemy." The authors of this project were Thaeanetus,the son of Timedes, a soothsayer, and F.umolpidas, the son ofDaimachus, who was one of their commanders. But after­wards, half of the number, affrighted by the greatness of thedanger, refused to have a share in the attempt. Yet the re­mainder, to the number of about two hundred and twenty,resolutely adhered to attempt an escape in the following man­ner
They made ladders equal in height to the enemy's wall.The measure of this they learned from the rows of brick,where the side of the wall facing them was not covered overwith plaster. Several persons were appointed to count therows at the same time; some of them might probably bewrong, but the greater part would agree in the just compu­tation ; especially, as they counted them several times over,and were besides at no great distance, since the part markedout for the design was plainly within their view. In this me­thod, having guessed the measure of a brick from its thick­ness, they found out what must be the total height for theladders.
The work of the Peloponnesians was of the followingstructure.—It was composed of two circular walls ; one to­wards Plateea, and the other outward, to prevent any attackfrom Athens. These walls were at the distance of sixteenfeet one from the other ; and this intermediate space of six­teen feet was built into distinct lodgments for the guards.These however, standing thick together, gave to the wholework the appearance of one thick entire wall, with battle­ments on both sides. At every ten battlements were loftyturrets of the same breadth with the whole work, reachingfrom the face of the inward wall to that of the outward; sothat there was no passage by the sides of a turret, but thecommunication lay open through the middle of them all.By night, when the weather was rainy, they quitted the







OCR Output








44 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


arrival of that body under Aristeus, they send away twothousand of their heavy-armed and forty ships, under thecommand of Callias the son of Calliades and four colleagues*,to reduce the revolted. These, arriving first of all in Ma­cedonia, find the former thousand employed in besiegingPydne, having a little before got possession of Therme.They sat down with them for a time to carry on the siege ofPydne ; but afterwards, making with Perdiccas a composi­tion and alliance the best the.y could in their present exi-.gency, since Potidoea and the arrival of Aristeus were veryurgent points, they evacuate Macedonia. They marchednext to Beraea; and turning from thence, after having firstmade an unsuccessful attempt upon the place, they marchedby land towards Potidaea. Their army consisted of three,thousand heavy-armed of their own, without including alarge body of auxiliaries, and six hundred Macedonian horsewho had served with Philip and Pausanias : Seventy ships atthe same time sailed along the coast. And thus, by moderateinarches, they came up in three days to Gigonus, and thereencamped.
The Potideans with the body of Pcloponnesians com­manded by Aristeus, expecting the Athenians, had formed acamp near Olynthus within the isthmus, and had a marketkept for them without the city. The command of the in­fantry had been given to Aristeus by the voice of the con­federates, and that of the cavalry to Perdiccas: For nowagain he had abruptly broke with the Athenians and joinedthe Potidaeans, deputing Iolaus to command in his absence.It was the design of Aristeus, by encamping the body underhis own command within the isthmus, to observe the mo­tions of the Athenians if they advanced, whilst without theisthmus the Chalcideans and allies and two hundred horsebelonging to Perdiccas should continue at Olynthus, whovwhen the Athenians came forwards against them, were tothrow themselves in their rear, and thus shut up the enemybetween the two bodies. But Callias, the general of the







OCR Output








I On his Qualifications as a Historian.


" Thucydides. He hath indeed been praised by all; I own" it; but, as a man, who was an explainer of facts with" prudence, severity, and gravity: Not as a speaker at the" bar, but a historical relater of wars. And therefore he was" never numbered amongst the orators." Cicero learnednothing from him: He could not, neither, in his own words," would he if he could." His talents were different; hewas quite in all respects accomplished; he was eloquenceitself. But Demosthenes—and can there be higher praise ?—Demosthenes certainly loved, and studied Thucydides;for whose perfection I am not arguing; I would only esta­blish his character of loftiness and sublimity. Longinus*proposeth him as the model of true grandeur and exaltationin writing history.
And now I have mentioned this princely and most ju­dicious critic, let us call Thucydides to take a trial at hisbar, and see whether he hath all the genuine constituents ofthe true sublime.—For elevation of thought, for his powerin alarming and interesting the passions, for his bold and fre­quent use of figures, his character will soon be established.Even Dionysius of Halicarnassus bears testimony here, wholoved him not, and would have been glad to degrade him.Plutarch calls him the most pathetic, and a writer of thegreatest energy and variety that ever was. The scenes inhis history are strong, most expressive paintings. He makesthe past to be present; he makes hearing sight. In thevery words of Plutarchf—" His readers are thrown into" the same astonishment and hurry of passion, as the eye-" witnesses to every scene must have felt. Demosthenes" drawing up his men on the craggy shore of Pylus—Bra-" sidas calling out on his pilot to run the vessel ashore, get-" ting himself on the stairs, then wounded, fainting, falling" down on the gunnel; here, the Spartans fighting a land-" battle from the water, the Athenians a naval-battle from
the shore ;—and again, in the Sicilian war, the land-• On the Sublime. Stfctiun 14. t De Gloria Atheniensium.







OCR Output








PREFAGE.


himself for an explanation of his own meaning, must exceed­ingly often get quite wide of the sense. The writers ofScholia and the notes of verbal critics put us frequently on awrong scent, and more frequently leave us utterly in the dark.But, if we will be patient at a dead lift, something will soonoccur in the author himself to help us out, the obscurity willvanish, and light beam in upon us. Though sometimes wemay be forced to divine his meaning, since in many cases itis vain to apply to the aids of Grammar to develope the con­struction, yet the context at length will shew whether we havesucceeded, or help us to ascertain the sense. This howeverdemands repeated and attentive revisals. The present trans­lator hath not been frugal of his time or labour in these points.And wliether he hath generally succeeded in ascertaining thethought and properly expressing it in another language, mustbe left to the decision, not of men of no learning nor of merelearning, but to that class of judges, who are well acquaintedwith the state of Athens at the time of the history, and arereally Attic both in taste and judgment. This class, it may­be thought, will be but small: It is larger however, andhigher seated in this our community, than the generality haveeither opportunity enough to discover or good nature enoughto own.
The complaints so often made by the most able translatorsare indeed alarming. Their performances (they say) mayvery much disgrace, but can never commend them. Thepraise of all that is clear, and bright, and pleasing, and innstructive, is reflected back upon the original author; butevery appearance of a different nature is laid with severity ofcensure at the door of the translator. If it be so, we knowthe terms beforehand on which, either able or unable, we en­gage, and must patiently acquiesce in the issue. But candoris always expected, nay ever will be had from persons ofgood sense and sound judgment. Few but such may bepleased with Thucydides either in his old native Greek, orin a modern English garb ; and, if such confer the honour of







OCR Output








372 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR. '


both citizens and foreigners. The crowd of these, so sooqas ever the route was pointed homewards, were, exceptinga few, gone speedily off. But, when they were drawn up inthe order of battle, and were every moment expecting thecharge, Hippocrates the general shewing himself in thefront of the Athenians, animated them with the followingharangue :
" THE admonition, Athenians, I intend to give you will" be very concise, but such a one is sufficient to the brave :" I pretend not to encourage Athenians, but merely to re-" mind them of their duty. Let the thought be a stranger to" every heart amongst you, that we are going to plunge into" needless hazards in the territory of a foe. Be it the terri-" tory of a foe, yet in it you must fight for the security of" your own. And, if we conquer now, the Peloponnesians," will never again presume, without the aid of the Boeotian" horse, to repeat their inroads into Attica. By one battle" therefore you acquire this, and secure your own land from" future annoyance. Charge therefore your enemies, as you" ought, with a spirit worthy of the State of Athens, that" State which every soul amongst you boasts to be the first" of Greece ; and worthy of your great forefathers, who" formerly at Oenophyta, under the conduct of Myronides," defeated these people in the field, and possessed for a time" all Bocotia as their prize."
Hippocrates had not gone along half the line encouragingthem in this manner, when he was compelled to desist andleave the greater part of his army unaddressed. For theBoeotians, to whom Pagondas also had given but a short ex­hortation and had this moment finished the paean of attack,were coining down from the eminence. The Athenians ad­vanced to meet them, and both sides came running to thecharge. The skirts of both armies could not come to an en­gagement, as some rivulets that lay between stopped themequally on both sides. The rest closed firm in a stubbornfight, and with mutual thrusts of their shields. The left







OCR Output








212 THE PELOPO&fcESIAN WAR.


" ance with the Athenians—not to enslave the rest of Greece" to Athenians, but to deliver Greece from the Barbarian" yoke. And whilst they led us on in just equality, so long" with alacrity we followed their guidance. But when once"we perceived that they relaxed in their zeal against the" Mede, and were in earnest in rivetting slavery upon allies," we then began to be alarmed. It was impossible, where" so many parties were to be consulted, to unite together" in one body of defence, and thus all the allies fell into" slavery, except ourselves and the Chians. We indeed," left in the enjoyment of our own laws, and of nominal" freedom, continued still to follow them to war: But, from" the specimens we had hitherto seen of their behaviour," we could no longer regard these Athenians as trusty and" faithful leaders. For it was not in the least probable, that" after enslaving those who were comprehended in the same" treaty with ourselves, they would refrain from treating" such as yet were free in the same tyrannic manner, when-" ever opportunity served. Had we all indeed been left in" the free exercise of our own laws, we should then have" had the strongest proof that the Athenians acted upon ho-" nest uninnovating principles. But now, when they have" laid their yoke upon the greater number, though they" still continue to treat us as their equals, yet undoubtedly" it highly grates them; and they cannot long endure," when such numbers couch beneath their power, that our" State alone should stand up and claim equality. No; it" cannot be! For the more their power hath swelled in" bulk and strength, by so much are we become more deso-" late. The only secure pledge of a lasting alliance is that" mutual awe which keeps the contracting parties in proper" balance. For then, if any be disposed to make incroach-" ments, he finds he cannot act upon advantage, and is ef-" feetuallv deterred. Our preservation hitherto hath not"been owing to their honesty but their cunning. Their" scheme hath been gradually to advance their empire by







OCR Output








xcviii A Survey of the History.


" it. Athenians invade them ? The Athenians esteem them*" selves happy they are not invaded by the Syracusans. Yet," supposing them so mad, nothing but their own disgrace" and ruin can be the consequence. But it is all a fiction ; a" scheme to dishearten the friends of the people, and seize the" government of the State. Some men have ever been, and" ever will be dabbling in such vile machinations. But let" them not hope to escape detection. The intention is plain" already, and ought to be punished like open treason. He" then exhorts the people or the many to support their friends," and intirely to disarm the malice of their domestic foes ;" and inveighs severely against the few, or the party" whom he supposeth to be bent on the overthrow of the de-" mocracy at Syracuse."
The speech of Athenagoras was so full of ill-timedcholer and party-animosity, that had the debate proceeded,dissensions might have run very high at a season when un­animity was so needful in all the members of that commu­nity. A General of great eminence and weight thinks ithigh time to interpose ; who, in a short speech, reprimandsAthenagoras, recals the general attention to their own pre­servation from the imminent danger, and adjourns the as­sembly.
The grand fleet of Athens is now putting to sea fromCorcyra. The Historian takes a review of the whole, andgives a short account of its numbers and strength. Theyarrive on the coast of Italy, where they are refused a recep­tion. Every thing yields them a discouraging and gloomyaspect. They soon find, they had been grossly deluded bytheir Sicilian friends, who instigated them chiefly to the ex­pedition. The trick, which the Egesteans had put on theirembassadors, is particularly recited. The commanders, at acouncil of war, differ highly in opinion, and at last come tono sound resolution. They hover about the coast of Sicily,and parade in sight of Syracuse. Alcibiades endeavours topersuade the Catanians to join with and receive them, but a







OCR Output








t»«vi A Survey of the History.


ment. The project is described, and the probability of suc­cess established. But the very grandeur of the attempt de­ters the undertakers. Athens indeed is alarmed, and throwninto a great consternation; but, the project totally miscarries,and the Piraeus is better secured for the future.
All Thrace is now arming under Sitalces against Perdic-cas king of Macedonia. A vast army of Barbarians is as­sembled, marches over a great length of country, strikes ageneral panic, effectuates no real service, and soon dispersesor moulders away. Such bulky unwieldy armies make anawkward figure, compared with the regularity, exact disci­pline, and personal bravery of the diminutive armies ofGreece.
Thucydides gives us once more a sight of Phormio andhis gallant squadron; and then closeth the book, and thehistory of the third year of the war. " Never history (says" Rapin) comprised so much matter in so little room, nor"so much action in so few words. If any thing can be"found fault with, it is that the exploits are too closely" crowded with one another, so that the coherence seems" somewhat intricate and confused, and the multiplying of" objects tends only to dissipate the attention of the reader."An historian however is to take his incidents in their natu­ral order, as they subsist in fact. He is not so much todispose, as to describe them. If he does the latter perti­nently, accurately, and with a due attention to their im­portance, he hath acquitted himself of his duty. The poetor writer of fiction must pick out and heighten his incidents,with a view to fill up properly, and give to every distinctobject its needful splendor: He is to exert his choice, andby exerting it judiciously to gain applause. The historian isnot to pick but to make the best use of his materials. Hemay give them indeed all possible lustre; but, if they crowdtoo thick upon one another, the reader may be embarrassedwith the number, yet nobody can be justly blamed.
Book III. The Third Book is no less full of matter than







OCR Output








118 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


they offered, made no resistance ; especially as they foundthat violence was offered to no man. Yet, by means of theparley, they had discovered that the Thebans were few innumber ; and judged, should they venture an attack, theymight easily overpower them :—for the bulk of the Plateanshad not the least inclination to revolt from the Athenians.It was at length concluded, that this point should be at­tempted, after having conferred together, by digging throughthe partition-walls of one another's houses, to avoid the sus­picion which going through the streets might have occa­sioned. Then along the streets they ranged carriages with­out the oxen, to serve them instead of a rampart, and madea proper disposition for every thing necessary for immediateexecution. When they had got every thing ready in thebest manner they were able, watching till night began tovanish and the first dawn appear, they marched from theirhouses towards the Thebans, that they might fall uponihem before the full light should embolden their resistance,and give them equal advantages in the fight, and that theymight be more intimidated by being charged in the dark,and sensible of disadvantage from their ignorance of thecity. The attack was immediately begun, and both sidessoon came to action. The Thebans, when they foundthemselves thus circumvented, threw themselves into anoval, and wherever assaulted, prevented impression. Twiceor thrice they beat them back with success ; but when theassaults were again with a loud noise repeated, when thevery women and menial servants were shouting and scream­ing from the houses all around, and throwing stones andtiles amongst them, incommoded further by the rain whichhad fallen plentifully that night, they were seized with fear,and abandoning their defence fled in confusion about thecity. The greatest part of them running in the dark andthe dirt, knew not any of the passages by which they couldget out (for this affair happened upon the change of themoon); and were pursued by men who knowing them all


 







OCR Output








B. I. 115- INTRODUCTION.


"be found neither in the fields, nor the markets, nor by sea, nor by land.4' Upon this, being- just ready to starve, away they go to Lacedaemon, to" get the decree reversed which had been made on account of three
" whores. It would not do, embassy after embassy had no avail, and then" immediately rose all this clattering of shields."
Calumny hath a dart always left in her quiver, and in another comedy ofAristophanes we find another let fly at Pericles. This was, his being anaccomplice with Phidias in secreting some of the gold issued from the pub-lit- treasury for the statue of Minerva in the citadel, the workmanship of
that celebrated artist. In his comedy called The Peace, Mercury says
" Ye wise husbandmen, attend to my words, if you have a mind to know"how things came into this sad confusion. Phidias was the first cause of"it by cheating the public. Then Pericles helped it forwards, for fear he"should share the fate of Phidias. He stood in awe of your tempers : he" was afraid of falling under your censure ; so, to prevent his own personal" danger, he set the whole continuity in a flame, by lighting up first that" little spark of the decree against Megara. He then blew up that spark" into this mighty war, the smoke of which hath fetched tears from all the" eyes of Greece, from Grecians on both sides."
Pericles had employed Phidias in adorning Athens. The fine taste ofthe patron and fine execution of the artist have been universally acknow­ledged. An accusation however was preferred against Phidias by one ofhis workmen, that he had secreted some gold. By the advice of Pericleshe had laid it on so artfully, that it might be taken off without prejudicingthe statue. The trial accordingly was made, and the gold found to answerweight. It seems, however, that Phidias was banished; because as theenemies of Pericles attacked him at the same time, for impiety in the per­sons of his beloved Aspasia and his preceptor in philosophy Anaxagoras,and for a cheat in that of his favourite artist, he had only influence enoughto save the former, by pleading earnestly for her, and softening his pleawith abundant tears.
Both Plutarch and Cornelius Ncpos have recorded a third story of Peri­cles in relation to this war. It is this—Alcibiades, then a youth, saw himin a very pensive and melancholy mood, and demanded the reason of it.Pericles told him " great sums of public money had passed through his" hands, and he knew not how to make up his accounts." " Contrive" then," replied Alcibiades, " to give no account at all." And in pursuanceof this advice he is said to have involved the state in the Pelopomesianwar. But is not Thucydides more to be depended upon than a whole hostof writers of scandal, memoirs, private history, and satire .' If we listen tothe latter, there never was and never will he any truth in history ; therenever was, nor is there this moment any true worth or merit in the world.A buffoon can degrade a hero, a spiteful satirist cloud every good qualityin others, and the ears and hearts of men will he filled with nothing butdetraction and slander.


 







OCR Output








bcxviii A Survey of the History.


" revolted sooner, would the Lacedaemonians have counte-" nanced the measure: They had declared it on the first" invitation of the Boeotians. It was a noble revolt; it had" disengaged them from a combination to inslave the rest" of Greece ; it had associated them in the cause of honour" and liberty. It had been made indeed with too much" precipitation ; but this should make others more zealous" and active in their protection, who would reap a great" accession of strength by it; an accession of maritime" strength ; whilst the Athenians would be weakened in" point of shipping, and in point of revenue. It would be" a signal of revolt to others, and assurance to them that" they might do it safely. It would reflect abundant ho-" nour on the Lacedaemonians to succour the distressed, to" save men whose preservation would give them glory and" strength, and prove them those hearty friends to liberty," which all Greece with united praises acknowledged them" to be."
Interest without rhetoric was strong enough to insure theirsuccess. But the latter helped to gain them a prompt recep­tion from the Lacedaemonians, who resolve on sending thema succour, and making diversions on the Athenians, in orderto oblige them to raise the siege of Mitylene.
The blockade of Plataea by the Peloponnesians still con­tinuing, our author relates the bold project, and bold exe­cution of the project, of a party of Plataeans, in makingtheir escape over all the works of the besiegers. It is amost circumstantial, and a most clear and intelligible rela­tion.
Mitylene is now forced to surrender at discretion. Theprincipal agents in the late revolt are sent prisoners to Athens,where the people vote that " not they only but all the Mity-" leneans in general be put to death ;" and an order is immedi­ately dispatched to their commander at Mitylene to executehis part of the sentence. This bloody decree was carried byCleon, a furious demagogue. It was he, who worked up the







OCR Output








142 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


These were the transactions of the Summer, after the
departure of the Peloponnesians out of Attica.
The Winter following, Evarchus the Acarnanian, whohad a great desire to recover Astacus, prevailed with the Co­rinthians to carry him thither, with a fleet of forty ships,and a force of fifteen hundred heavy-armed, and endeavourto re-establish him. He himself also hired some auxiliariesfor the same purpose. This armament was commanded byEuphymadas son of Aristonymus, Timoxenus son of Timo-crates, and Eumachus son of Chrysis ; who sailing thitherexecuted their business. They had a mind to endeavour thereduction of some others of the maritime towns of Acarna-nia, but miscarrying in every attempt they made, they re­turned home. But in their passage touching at Cephallene,and debarking upon the lands of the Cranians, they weretreacherously inveigled into a conference, where the Cra­nians falling suddenly upon them, kill some of their men.It was not without difficulty, that they drew the others safelyoff, and gained their own ports.
But the same Winter, the Athenians, in conformity tothe established custom of their country, solemnized a publicfuneral for those who had been first killed in this war, in the
manner as follows;
The bones of the slain are brought to a tabernacle erectedfor the purpose three days before, and all are at liberty todeck out the remains of their friends at their own discretion.But when the grand procession is made, the cypress-coffinsare drawn on carriages, one for every tribe, in each of whichare separately contained the bones of all who belonged tothat tribe. One sumptuous bier is carried along empty forthose that are lost, whose bodies could not be found amongstthe slain. All who are willing, both citizens and strangers,attend the solemnity ; and the women who were related tothe deceased, stand near the sepulchre groaning and la­menting. They deposit the remains in the public sepulchre.







OCR Output








Ixxxvi A Survey of the History.


" and reap all the honour and advantage of it, since all the" credit of it will be their own. Lacedamonians may be" obliged, but will not be compelled. At length, they propose" their expedient, not explicitly, but with a shrewd insinuation," that would the Athenians strike up a bargain with them," they might jointly lord it over Greece for the future," beyond controul."
Had Pericles been now alive, we may easily guess, howreadily he would have laid hold on this opportunity to enda burthensome and distressful war, which on the side ofAthens had at first been necessitated and merely defensive.But success had elevated Athens quite too high ; and no realfriend to the State had at present so much influence as Cleon,that loud and boisterous demagogue. Hence it comes, thatsuch terms are insisted upon as the Lacedaemonians cannotin honour accept. The truce expires ; and all the attentionof Greece is fixed on the important scene of contention atPylus.
The author here interposeth an account of what was nowdoing in Sicily, and then returns to Pylus. The Spartans inthe isle seem as far off a surrender as ever. The people ofAthens murmur at the slowness of their troops, and begin tothink that after all they shall not carry the point. Cleonamuses them with lies, and exasperates them by slanders :In short, though quite undesigning it, he bullies himself intothe command; and, at the head of a reinforcement, joinsDemosthenes at Pylus. The author describes the event withso much state and dignity, that he raises it into anotherThermopylae. There three hundred Spartans stopped for along time the whole numerous army of Xerxes, and perishedin the sen-ice. About the same number of them strugglehere as long as they can against the troops of Athens ; but,to the disappointment of all Greece, they at last surrenderprisoners of war, and are carried, nay are carried by Cleon,in triumph to Athens.
The territories of Corinth are invaded soon after by the







OCR Output








IOME ACCOUNT 01 DR. SMITH.


•4 The History of the Peloponnesi an War, translated from" the Greek of Thucydides." The Translator has addedthree preliminary Discourses; on the Life of Thucydides;on his Qualifications as a Historian; and a Survey of hisHistory. In these Discourses, as well as in the Life of Lon-ginus, he has abundantly proved his own excellence in origi­nal composition. This work has been several times reprintedin 8vo. and was highly recommended by the Reviewers andothers on its first publication, and since that period.
In January, 1758, the Deanry of Chester became vacantby the decease of the Rev. Thomas Brooke, LL. D. Therewere many candidates for this dignity: but Mr. Smith was sowell supported by several of his illustrious friends, especiallyby his noble patron the carl of Derby, whose interest waspowerful at Court, and who prevailed on the Right Hon. EarlGranville, then Lord President of the Council, and on hisGrace the Duke of Newcastle, to unite with him in recom­mending Mr. Smith; that his Majesty King George the Secondpresented him to the Deanry. He now took the Degree ofDoctor in Divinity. On the 28th of July, Doctor Smith re­ceived institution, and was installed the same day by thatlearned and accomplished preacher, the Rev. Mr. Mapletoft,Vicedean. On the 30th day of April, 1766, the Dean wasinstituted to the Rectory of Handley near Chester, on thepresentation of the Dean and Chapter.
Doctor Smith had, since he left the University, if we exceptshort excursions, chiefly resided first with my Lord of Derby,afterwards at the Rectory of Trinity in Chester, then one yearin Essex, and of late at St. George's in Liverpool, from whencehe went occasionally to Chester Cathedral. But about thebeginning of the year 1767, he resolved to resign St. George'sChurch, and wrote a letter to that effect to the body corporate :which letter produced the following resolution.
" At a Council held this fourth day of February, 1767.
" On Mr. Dean Smith's Letter this day to the Council, inti-" matinghis desire of resigning his Chaplainship of St. George'6







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAR VII. BEFORE CHRIST 425. 333


of the Athenians. They were apprehensive the enemy wouldendeavour to force their way to the village of Solygia. Fora considerable space the battle was obstinate, neither sidegiving way ; but at length, through the advantage on theAthenian side of being assisted by a party of horse, whereastheir opposites had none, the Corinthians were broke anddriven up the ascent, where grounding their arms, they camedown no more to the charge, but remained in a quiet posture.In this route of the right wing, numbers of the Corinthiansperished, and Lycophron their general. But the rest of thebody had the good fortune to make a safe retreat, and so tosecure themselves upon the eminence, as they could not bebriskly pursued, and were not compelled to move off with pre­cipitation. When the Athenians perceived that the enemywould no more return to the pharge, they rifled the bodiesof the foes whom they had slain, and carried off their owndead, and then without loss of time erected their trophy.
That division of the Corinthians which had been postedat Cenchrea to prevent any attempt upon Crommyon, hadthe view of the battle intercepted from them by the moun­tain Oneius. But when they saw the cloud of dust, andthence knew what was doing, they marched full speed to­wards the spot. The aged inhabitants also, when they areinformed of the battle, rushed out of Corinth to succourtheir own people. The Athenians perceiving the approachof such numerous bodies, and judging them to be succourssent up by the neighbouring Peloponnesians, threw them­selves immediately on board their ships, with what spoil theyhad taken, and the bodies of their own dead excepting two,which not finding in this hurry they left behind. They wereno sooner re-embarked than they crossed over to the adjacentislands, from whence they dispatched a herald to demandleave, which was granted, to fetch off the dead bodies theyhad left behind*.
• This incident is related by Plutarch (in Me Life jfNicias) as a proof ofthe great piety and humanity of Nicias. His asking leave to fetch off these
Vol. I. 3 K







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAR VIII. BEFORE CHRIST 424. 341


They excessively dreaded the weight of such another calami­ty, as they had been sensible of in the blow at Sphacteria.Intimidated thus, they durst no longer think of fighting ; nay,whatever measures they concerted, they at once despondedof success, as their minds, accustomed till of late to an unin­terrupted career of good fortune, were now forebodingnothing but disappointments. Thus, for the most part,whilst the Athenians were extending their devastations allalong their coasts, they remained inactive. Each party onguard, though the enemy made a descent in the face of theirpost, knowing themselves inferior in number and sadly dis­pirited, made no offer to check them. One party indeed,which was posted near Cortyta and Aphrodisia, perceivingthe light-armed of the enemy to be straggling, ran speedily tocharge them ; but when the heavy-armed advanced to theirsupport, they retreated with so much precipitation, that some(though few) of them were killed, and their arms rifled.The Athenians, after erecting a trophy, re-embarked and re­passed to Cythera.
From thence they sailed again along the coast to the Li-merian Epidaurus ; and, after ravaging part of that district,they arrived at Thyrea, which, though it lies in the districtcalled Cynuria, is the frontier-town which parts Argia andLaconia. This place belonged to the Lacedaemonians, whohad assigned it for the residence of the exiled iEginetae, inrequital of the services they had done them at the time of theearthquake and the insurrection of the Helots, and furtherbecause, though subject to the Athenians, they hadjever firmlyabided in the Lacedaemonian interest. The iEginetae, thusagain invaded by the Athenians, abandoned the fortificationupon the sea-side, which they were busy in throwing up, andretreated into the city, which was the place of their residence,seated higher up at the distance of about ten stadia* fromthe shore. A party of Lacedaemonians had been posted


Vol. I.


• About a mile.3L







OCR Output













OCR Output








96 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAJl.


ance there, he took Byzantium, which was possessed by theMedes, and in it some favourites and relations of the kingwere made his prisoners, he releaseth them all, to ingratiatehimself with the king, without the privity of the other con­federates, giving it out in public that they had made theirescape. He transacted this affair by means of Gongylus theEretrian, to whose keeping he had intrusted Byzantium andthe prisoners. He also dispatched Gongylus to him with aletter, the contents of which, as was afterwards discovered,were these:
" PAUSANIAS, general of Sparta, desirous to oblige" you, sends away these his prisoners of war. And by it" I express my inclination, if you approve, to take your" daughter in marriage, and to put Sparta and the rest of" Greece into your subjection. I think I have power suffi-" cient to effectuate these points, could my scheme be com-" municated with you. If therefore any of these proposals" receive your approbation, send down to the coast some" trusty person, through whom for the future we may hold a" correspondence."
Thus much was contained in the letter; and, on the recep­tion of it, Xerxes was delighted, and sends away Artabazusthe son of Pharnacus down to the coast, with an order totake upon him the government of Dascylis, having first dis­missed Megabetes who was the governor. To him he in­trusted a letter for Pausanias at Byzantium, with an injunc­tion to forward it with all possible expedition, and to lethim see his signet; and that, if Pausanias should charge himwith any affairs, he should execute them with all possiblediligence and fidelity. Artabazus being arrived, obeyed allthe other injunctions with exactness, and forwarded the let­ter, which brought this answer
" THUS saith king Xerxes to Pausanias.—The kindness" done me in those persons, whom from Byzantium you de-" livered safe on the other side the sea, shall be placed to your" account in our family, eternally recorded: and with the







OCR Output








B. II. 203 YEAR III. BEFORE CHRIST 429.


against the Chalcideans and Bottiaeans ; where, by drivingthem into their fortresses, he ravaged the country. Duringhis stay in these parts, the southern Thessalians, Magnetians,and other people subject to the Thessalians, and the Greciansas far as Thermopylae, grew apprehensive that his army mightbe turned against them, and prepared for their defence. Un­der the same apprehensions were the northern Thracians be­yond the Strymon that inhabit the plains, the Panaeans, theOdomantians, the Droans, and the Dersaeans, who are all ofthem free and independent. He farther gave occasion for arumour that spread amongst the Grecians, enemies to Athens,that his army, brought into Greece by virtue of an alliancewith them, would invade them all in their turns. Yet, with­out advancing any further, he was at one and the same timecontinuing his ravage upon Chalcidica, and Bottitea, and Ma­cedonia. But unable to execute any of those points forwhich he formed this invasion, when his army began to wantprovisions, and to suffer by the rigor of the winter's cold, heis persuaded by Seuthes, the son of Sparadoxus, and his owncousin-german, who had a greater influence over him than anyother person, to march back again with the utmost expedition.This Seuthes had been secretly gained by Perdiccas, whopromised to give him his sister, and a large dower with her.Thus persuaded, after a stay upon the whole of but thirty days,and eight of these in Chalcidica, he retired precipitately intohis own dominions. Perdiccas, according to promise, soonafter gives his sister Stratonice in marriage to Seuthes. Andto this end came this grand expedition of Sitalces*.
The same winter, the Athenians at Naupactus, after the se-
• Sitalces, and his son Sadocus, who as Thucydides relates above, wasmade a citizen of Athens, have not escaped the buffoonery of Aristophanes,in his comedy of The Acharnians. Act. I. Sc. 4. " Crier. Embassador to" Sitalces, come into court. Embtut. Here. Diatopoli*. Oh ! here's ano-" tlier knave summoned to make his appearance. Emboss. We should not
"have stayed so long in Thrace Dicxopotis. I believe you, unless you
" had been well paid for it. Kmbass. Had not a great snow fallen and"covered all the country, and all the rivers at the same time been froze" over. When Theognis was contending here for glory, we were drinking







OCR Output








Ixxiv A Survey of the History.


phy can alleviate. The plague breaks out at Athens ; andthe reader must be ready to feel very sharp emotions in be­half of his fellow-creatures, and in behalf of morality andvirtue too. Amidst their accumulated distresses, Pericles isthe only support of the community; and, like the greatestbenefactors to ungrateful men, is cursed for being their sup­port, and reproached for being steadily wise and in theright. At last he convenes them, and addresses them withsuch an air of ingenuity, such spirit, and conscious dignity,and firm reliance on a good cause; as only two orators thatI know of have ever equalled on parallel occasions. Those;I mean are Demosthenes and St. Paul. All the world ofletters and good taste are well acquainted with the orationof the former against iEschines about the crown ; and everyclass of readers is surely well versed in the Second Epistle ofPaul to the Corinthians. I can but hint these resemblances,since now I must attend on Pericles, who sooths or thundershis countrymen out of all their discontent and malice, andsends them home convinced and ashamed. But domesticdistress soon efFaceth any other impressions; their passionsare again inflamed by inwardly corroding anguish, and Peri­cles after all must be fined, and turned out of his employ­ments. Yet people are not always mad; good sense andconviction return upon them ; and he is begged, becausemost worthy, again to accept the sole administration. Heenjoys it but a little time, before he is carried off by theplague. Athens then lost her ablest, honestest statesman.He was able to have sat at the helm of government, tohave steered the republic safe through every storm, and tohave insured her not bare security but open triumph. Hissuccessors were very alert at catching hold of that helm ;but, none of them could hold it long; and the vessel, throughtheir mutual quarrels, must needs run aground or founder atlast.
But the next remarkable passage in the history, is themarch of the Peloponnesians to invest Plataea, and the so­







OCR Output








£. I. Ill INTRODUCTION.


" fully exercised at starts ; or rather, there is nothing -which" so much requireth an uninterrupted application.
" If, farther, they should secrete the funds laid up at Olym-
" pia and Delphi, and endeavour, by an increase of pay to se-" duce from our service the foreigners, who are on board our" fleets ;—in case we were not their equals in strength, and" they themselves and such foreigners could entirely apply" themselves to the work:—This then might be terrible in-" deed. But nought would it avail them now, whilst—what" is our peculiar advantage—we have commanders Athenian-" born and seamen to man our fleets, in larger number and of" greater skill than all the rest of Greece together. Besides," in so dangerous a crisis, not one of these foreigners would" think of bartering an exile from his own settlement, and a" desertion to that side where the prospect of victory is not*4 near so inviting, for an enlargement of his pay of few days" continuance.
" The state of the Peloponnesians I judge to be such, or" very nearly such as I have described it; whereas our own" is exempt from those defects which I have pointed out in" them, and enjoys other great advantages far beyond their" competition. Grant, that they may invade our territories" by land: We too shall make descents upon theirs. And—" whether is the greatest damage, only some part of Pelopon-" nesus, or all Attica put to fire and sword—will admit of no" comparison. In the former case they will have no other" land to repair the damage, but what they must earn by dint" of arms: Whilst we have large tracts already in our power,
" both in the islands and on the main. Of vast conse-
" quence indeed is the dominion of the sea. But—consider" it with attention. For, were we seated upon an island,
" which of us would be subdued with greater difficulty ?
" And now, you ought to think, that our present situation is" as nearly as possible the same ; and so, to evacuate your" lands and houses here, to confine your defence to the" sea, and to Athens itself; and not exasperated against the" Peloponnesians for the sake of those, to hazard a battle


 







OCR Output








DISCOURSE II.


could look calmly on the storm that was raging, or the battlethat was fighting below, could note every incident, distinguishevery turn, and with a philosophical tranquillity enjoy it all.In short, he now was, and continued all the rest of the Pelo-ponnesian War, a citizen of the world at large, as much asany man ever actually was.
But, before this separation from the community, whilstyet he continued at Athens, where liberty opened the field*to all passionate chaces after power, where consequentlycompetitions were ever fermenting, and party was alwaysalive and active,—can we find him associated with any par­ticular set of men ? can we find him dabbling in political in­trigue ? a leader of, or led by any party ? or, can we as­suredly find out his principles ? or even guess at his realthoughts about the form of government under which he hadlived ? His biographers indeed, though ever parading hiscandour and impartiality, are often tracing out signs andmarks of party-zeal and personal prejudices from the verycharacters in his history. Marcellinus says, " he described" Cleon as a madman because he hated him ;" forgetful, whatCleon really was, and of the concurrent testimonies to thetruth of the character. The anonymous writer says, " he op-" posed Pericles at Athens, got the better of him, and be-" came the first man in the republic." A ridiculous story !void of all manner of support. According to this writer'sway of arguing in other places, who says, " he cajoled the" Lacedaemonians, and inveighed against the tyrannic all-" grasping temper of the Athenians, in his history, because" he had no opportunity to rail at them in any other shape,"—he should have left a far different. character of Periclesbehind him, than he hath actually left. But these are strangecompilers of patch-work, and deserve no regard. Fromwhat the former hath said about him, a reader might betempted to judge him of the oligarchical: from what the lat­ter hath said of him, of the democratical principle. Mr.Hobbes imagines he hath dived to the bottom of his real







OCR Output








146 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" seeing what is never concealed. We place not so great a" confidence in the preparatives and artifices of war, as in the" native warmth of our souls impelling us to action. In point"of education, the youth of some people are inured by a course" of laborious exercise, to support toil and exercise like men;" but we, notwithstanding our easy and elegant way of life," face all the dangers of war as intrepidly as they. This" may be proved by facts, since the Lacedaemonians never in-" vade our territories, barely with their own, but with the uni-" ted strength of all their confederates. But, when we in-" vade the dominions of our neighbours, for the most,part we" conquer without difficulty in an enemy's country those who" fight in defence of their own habitations. The strength of" our whole force no enemy yet hath ever experienced, be-" cause it is divided by our naval expeditions, or engaged in" the different quarters of our service by land. But if any" where they engage and defeat a small party of our forces," they boastjngly give it out a total defeat; and if they are" beat, they were certainly overpowered by our united strength." What though from a state of inactivity rather than laborious" exercise, or with a natural rather than an acquired valour," we learn to encounter danger ?—this good at least we re-" ceive from it, that we never droop under the apprehension" of possible misfortunes, and when we hazard the danger," are found no less courageous than those who are continu-" ally inured to it. In these respects our whole community" deserves justly to be admired, and in many we have yet to" mention.
" In our manner of living we shew an elegance tem-" pered with frugality, and we cultivate philosophy without" enervating the mind. We display our wealth in the sea-" son of beneficence, and not in the vanity of discourse. A" confession of poverty is disgrace to no man, no effort" to avoid it is disgrace indeed. There is visibly in the same" persons an attention to their own private concerns and" those of the public ; and in others engaged in the labours







OCR Output








338 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


dead (for about this time that monarch died), the ambassa­dors returned back to Athens.
The same winter also the Chians demolished their new for­tifications. The Athenians had expressly ordered it, suspect­ing that they were intent on some innovating schemes. Itavailed nothing, that they had lately given the Athenians allpossible securities, and the strongest assurances that theywould in no shape attempt or think of innovations. Andthus the winter ended; and with it the seventh year of thiswar, of which Thucydides hath compiled the history, wasbrought to a conclusion.
YEAR VIII.
EARLY in the following summer, at the time of the newmoon, the sun was partially eclipsed; and in the be­ginning of the same month the shock of an earthquake wasfelt.
The fugitives from Mitylene and Lesbos in general, whoto a great number had sheltered themselves on the conti­nent, assemble in a body, and, having hired some additionalsuccours in Peloponnesus, and drawn them over safely fromthence, surprise Rhaetium: but, in consideration of twothousand Phocean staters* paid immediately down, theyrestored it again undamaged. This being done, theymarched next against Antandrus, and got possession of itby the treachery of a party within the city, who betrayed itto them. It was farther their intention to set at liberty thosecities styled the Actean, which had formerly been possessedby the Mityleneans, but were now in the hands of the Athe­nians. But their principal view was the possession of An­tandrus, which once effectually secured (for it lay conve­nient for the building of ships, as it had plenty of timber,and mount Ida stood just above it) they would then be amply
•Above 1,8001. sterling.







OCR Output








8 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


strength at sea: But, from this armament we have good lightafforded to guess at the preceding. /
What though Mycenavwas a small city, or though anyplace at that time remarkable appear at present inconsidera­ble to us ; yet, no one ought on these motives prematurelyto imagine that armament to have been less considerablethan it is described by the poets and reported by tradition.Supposing the city of Lacedaemon to be now in a ruinatedcondition, nothing left but the temples and the pavements ofthe mass, I fancy, in process of time, posterity could noteasily be induced to believe that their power had ever beenproportioned to their glory. Of the five divisions* of Pelo­ponnesus they are actually possessed of two, have the com­mand of the whole, and of many confederate states without ;yet, as the city is neither closely built, as the temples andpublic edifices are by no means sumptuous, and the housesdetached from one another after the old mode of Greece,it would suffer disparagement from such a view. If we far­ther suppose the Athenians in the same reverse of fortune,from the view the city then would afford, it might be guess­ed that once it had double the strength which it really hath.We ought not therefore to be incredulous, nor so much toregard the appearance of cities as their power; and ofcourse, to conclude the armament against Troy to havebeen greater than ever was known before, but inferior tothose of our age. And whatever credit be given to the po­etry of Homer in this respect, who no doubt as a poet hathset it off with all possible enlargement, yet even accordingto his account it appeareth inferior. For he hath made itto consist of twelve hundred ships; those of the Boeotianscarrying each one hundred and twenty men, those of Phi-loctetes fifty; pointing out, as I imagine, the largest andthe smallest rates ; for of the rate of other ships he hath notmade the least mention in his catalogue, though he hath
• These were Laconia, Arcadia, Argolica, Messenia, and Elis. TheLacedemonians were possessed of I.aconia and Messenia. Scholiast.







OCR Output








B. II. 127 YEAR I. BEFORE CHRIST 431.


certainly incur the public jealousy. He declared thereforeto the Athenians, in a general assembly of the people—That" though Archidamus was his friend, he should not be so to" to the prejudice of the state, and that if the enemy spared" his lands and houses in the general ravage, he made a free" donation of them to the public ; so that for any accident of" that nature he ought not to fall under their censure." He then
exhorted all who were present, as he had done before " to
" prepare vigorously for war, and to withdraw all their ef-" fects from out of the country—by no means to march out" against the enemy, but keep within the walls, and mind only" the defence of the city ;—to fit out their navy, in which their" strength principally consisted, and keep a tight rein over all" their dependants. By the large tributes levied upon those," he said, their power was chiefly to be supported, since suc-" cess in war was a constant result from prudent measures" and plentiful supplies.—He exhorted them by no means to" let their spirits droop, since besides their certain revenue," six hundred talents were annually paid them by their tri-" butary states, and they had still in the citadel six thou-" sand talents of silver coined*." Their primary fund wasnine thousand seven hundred talents, out of which had beentaken what defrayed the expence of refitting the gates ofthe citadel, of other public works, and the exigencies ofPotidaea.—" That, besides this, they had gold and silver" uncoined, both in public and private repositories, many" valuable vases destined for religious uses and their public"solemnities, and the Persian spoils, the whole value of
• The account here given sheweth Athens at this time to be have been avery opulent state. Heduced to English money it stands thus The tri­bute paid them annually amounted to 116,250/. sterling. The fund yet re­maining in the citadel was 1,162,500/. sterling. Tbey had expended latelyon their public works 3.700 talents, which is equal to 716,875/. sterling.The weight of the gold on the statue of Minerva was 40 talents, which,computing the talent only at 65/. Troy, to avoid fractions, and the gold at4'. sterling an ounce, amounts in value to 124,800/. sterling.







OCR Output








134 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


be this. He presumed that the Athenians, who flourished
at that time in a numerous youth, and who never before hadbeen so well prepared for war, would probably march outagainst him, and would not sit quiet whilst their lands wereravaged before their eyes. But when he had advanced toEleusis and the plain of Thriasia without any resistance, hehad a mind to try whether laying siege to Acharnae wouldprovoke them to come out. This place seemed further tohim a convenient spot for a long encampment. Besides, hecould not persuade himself, that the Acharnians, so consi­derable a body amongst the citizens of Athens (for threethousand of them now wore the heavy armour), could seewith patience their own properties ruined by hostile devasta­tion, without inciting all their fellow-citizens to rush out tobattle. And if the Athenians would not come out againstthem this campaign, he might another campaign with greatersecurity extend his devastation even to the very walls ofAthens. He thought it not likely that the Acharnians, whenall their lands had been ruined in this manner, would chear-fully run into hazards to prevent the losses of others, andthat hence much dissention might be kindled up* amongst
• Aristophanes wrote his comedy of The Acharnians upon this plan, andabundantly ridiculed the public conduct as injurious to the citizens of Athens.Though it was not brought upon the stage till the sixth year of the war,it amply shews us, how the Acharnians resented their being thus exposedto the ravage of the enemy; and how the wits, that lived upon the publicpassions, helped still more to exasperate them, and misrepresented themeasures of the ablest politicians, and who perfectly well understood andaimed at the general welfare of the whole community, as weak, corrupt,and mischievous. No care to redress, and no commiseration for theAcharnians, as Dicmopolia hints, who was one of that borough " And4' what! it will be said, Can this possibly be helped > Be helped, do you"say? why not ! Tell me, if you can. Suppose only, that a Lacedxmo-"nian had stood across in his skiff to Seriphus, and after killing a favour
"ite lap-dog got off again safe : Would ye now in this case sit still!
" Quite the contrary. You would immediately be putting out to sea with" three hundred sail of ships: Athens would roar with the tumult of" soldiers ; the captains of vessels would be shouting, pay delivering, and"our gold Bying about- What a bustle would there be in the long portico !" what distributing of provisions, skins, thongs, casks full of olives, onions in







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAR VIII. BEFORE CHRIST 424. 381


ers without. And thus, in their present consternation, theproposal was generally received as mild and gentle. TheAthenians for their part, who thought themselves more ex­posed to danger than the rest, and had besides no hope ofspeedy relief, were delighted with the offer of quitting theplace. So also were all the rest, that they were not to losetheir rights and liberties as citizens, and should thus escapethe danger they had dreaded, even beyond their hopes.Upon this, the agents of Brasidas expatiated only on the mild­ness and generosity of the terms he had offered, because nowthey perceived that the multitude had altered their sentiments,and would no longer hearken to the Athenian commandant.In short, an accommodation was perfected, and they openedthe gates to Brasidas, upon the conditions he had proposedby his herald. And in this manner did the inhabitants de­liver up Amphipolis.
But in the evening of the same day, Thucydides andthe squadron came over to Eion. Brasidas was already inpossession of Amphipolis, and designed that very night toseize Eion also. And unless this squadron had come inthus critically to its defence, at break of day it had beenlost.
Thucydides instantly took care to put Eion in a pos­ture of defence, in case Brasidas should attack it; and toprovide farther for its future security, when he had openeda refuge there for such as were willing to remove thitherfrom Amphipolis, according to the articles of the late sur­render.
But Brasidas on a sudden fell down the river with alarge number of boats towards Eion, desig»iug if possibleto seize the point of land that juts out from the walls, whichwould have given him the command of the river's mouth.He endeavoured at the same time also to assault it byland, but was repulsed in both attempts. And now he ef­fectually employed his care in resettling and securing Am­phipolis.
Vol. I. 3 Q







OCR Output








B. I. INTRODUCTION. 75


the rebels in Ithome, and so raise them fresh embarrassments,give a dismission to them alone of their allies. They stroveindeed to conceal their suspicions, by alleging " they have nolonger any need of their assistance." The Athenians wereconvinced that their dismission was not owing to this moreplausible colour, but to some latent jealousy. They reckonedthemselves aggrieved: and thinking they had merited betterusage from the hands of the Lacedaemonians, were scarcelywithdrawn, than in open disregard to the league subsistingbetween them against the Mede ; they clapped up an alliancewith their old enemies the Argives: And in the same oathsand same alliance the Thessalians also were comprehendedwith them both.
The rebels in Ithome, in the tenth year of the siege, un­able to hold out any longer, surrendered to the Lacedemo­nians on the following conditions—that " a term of securitybe allowed them to quit Peloponnesus, into which they shallnever return again; that if any one of them be ever foundthere, he should be made the slave of whoever apprehendedhim." The Pythian oracle had already warned the Lacedae­monians " to let go the suppliants of Jupiter Ithometes."The men therefore, with their wives and children, went outof Ithome, and gained a reception from the Athenians, whoacted now in enmity to the Lacedaemonians, and assignedthem Naupactus for th«ir residence, which they had latelytaken from the Locrians of Ozoli.
The Megareans also deserted the Lacedaemonians, andwent over to the Athenian alliance, because the Corinthianshad warred upon them in pursuance of a dispute aboutsettling their frontier. Megara and Pegae were put into thehands of the Athenians, who built up for the Megareans thelong fva/lf that reach down, from Megara to Nisa;a, and tooktheir guard upon themselves. This was by no means theleast occasion of that violent enmity now beginning to arisebetween the Corinthians and Athenians.
Inarus, the son of Psammetichus, a Libyan, and king of







OCR Output








246 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


Athenians also took from them several towns upon the conti­nent which had belonged to the Mityleneans, and whichcontinued afterwards in subjection to the Athenians. Thusended the commotions of Lesbos.
The same summer, after the reduction of Lesbos—theAthenians, commanded by Nicias* the son of Niceratus,executed a design upon Minoa, the island which lies beforeMegara. The Megareans, having built a fort upon it,
• Nicias is now for the first time in the chief command, who is to actparts of very great importance in the sequel of the war. We should there­fore take some notice of him on his first appearance. Plutarch, who hathwrote his life, gives light into several circumstances, which fall not withinthe cognizance of a general historian. He was born of a noble family inAthens, and was one of the most wealthy citizens. Beside his estates, hehad a large annual income from the silver mines at Laurium. Not that thosemines belonged to him, as one would infer from Plutarch ; for they werethe patrimony of the State, annexed to it by Themistoclcs for the supportof the navy : But, as Xenophon relates, in his treatise of revenue, Nicias hada thousand slaves constantly employed in working these mines. He hiredthem out to Sosias the Thracian, who was undertaker of the work, on con-dition to receive a clear obole a day for every one of them ; and he alwayskept up the number. His income from hence was therefore near 2000/.sterling a year. He acted under Pericles so long as he lived; and, afterhis death, was set up by the more sober and sensible Athenians as a balanceto Cleon, who was the idol of the people. Nicias was a true lover of hiscountry, of unblemished integrity, and very gentle and complacent in hismanners. His good qualities were numerous and shining: His foibles werea great diffidence of himself, and a dread of the people, which made himcourt them by laying out his wealth in public games and shows for theirentertainment. He had an inward fund of real piety i but was supersti-tiously attached to the ceremonial of the religion of his country. His greatwealth drew a great number of followers and parasites about him ; and hisbenevolent disposition was always seeking occasions of doing good. Inshort, says Plutarch, " bad men had a sure fund in his pusillanimity, andgood men in his humanity." No body could either hate or fear him atAthens, and therefore his interest there was great. He was always cau­tious, and always diffident, and under such an awe of the people in the ge­neral assemblies, that they would shout out to him by way of encourage.inent, as his modesty was amiable and engaging when opposed to the im­pudence of Cleon.—^Thus much may suffice at present, since his militaryexpeditions and the whole of his political conduct will be related by Tintcydides.







OCR Output








xxxvi On the Life of Thuctdides.


by surprise of the important city of Amphipolis: He hadvery nearly succeeded. Eucles commanded there for theAthenians. Thucydides was at this time in the isle ofThasus, about half a day's sail from Amphipolis. A mes­senger was dispatched to him, to hasten him up for the de­fence of that city. He put to sea immediately with a smallsquadron of seven ships. Brasidas, knowing he was com­ing, opened a negotiation with the Amphipolitans, andgained admission for his troops. Thucydides stood up theStrymon in the evening, but too late, since Brasidas had gotfast possession of Amphipolis. The city of Eton is situatedalso upon the river Strymon lower down, and about two milesand a half from Amphipolis. Thucydides put in here, andsecured the place. " Brasidas (in his own words*) had de-" signed that very night to seize Eton also. And, unless" this squadron had come in thus critically to its defence, at" break of day it had been lost." Thucydides, without losinga moment, provided for its defence. Brasidas, with armedboats, fell down the river from Amphipolis, and made twoattempts upon it, but was repulsed in both: tJpon which, hegave up the scheme, and returned back.
One would imagine that Thucydides had done all thatcould be done on this occasion, and deserved to be thankedinstead of punished. The people of Athens made a differentdetermination. Cleon was now the demagogue of greatestinfluence there, and is generally supposed to have exasperatedthem against the man, who had not wrought impossibilitiesin saving their valuable town of Amphipolis. It is certaintheir fury rose so high against him, that they stripped Thucy­dides of his command, and passed the sentence of banish­ment upon him. It is himself who tells usf, " It was his lot" to suffer a twenty years exile from his country after the" affair of Amphipolis."
We have thus lost Thucydides the commander to securemore fast Thucydides the historian. Though sadly treated,• Book the fourth. f B°°k the fifth.







OCR Output








2 84 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


and pouring in whole showers of missive weapons, they turn­ed about and fled. Now tumbling into caverns from whencethey could not recover themselves, or bewildered in placesof which they had no knowledge, they were miserably de­stroyed. For Cromon, the Messenian, who laid out all theroutes, had been killed in the battle. The iEtolians pursuedwith their darts, and being not only swift of foot, but alsolightly armed, easily overtook many of them in their flight,and did great execution. A large party who had lost theirway, threw themselves into a wood which was quite impas­sable. The iEtolians set the wood on fire, in the flames ofwhich they were all consumed. Every affecting species offlight and destruction was now the fate of the Athenian army.Those who had the good fortune to escape, effected it byreaching the sea and Oeneon of Locris, from whence they firstbegan the expedition.
The number of the allies who thus perished, was large ;that of heavy-armed Athenians was about a hundred andtwenty ; so considerable was the loss, and all of them in thevery flower of their youth. In the whole course of this war,the State of Athens never lost at any one time so many ofher most gallant citizens as now. Procles also, the othercommander in this expedition, perished.
They afterwards fetched off their dead by a truce obtainedfrom the ./Etolians. This being done, they retired to Nau-pactus, and there shipped themselves for Athens. Demos­thenes however was left behind at Naupactus, and the partsadjacent. After such a miscarriage he durst not presume toface the people of Athens.
About the same time, the Athenians on the Sicilian station,having sailed towards Locris, landed upon that coast. Theydestroyed a party of Locrians who endeavoured to makehead against them ; and then take Peripolium, a town situ­ated on the river Hal ex.
The same summer the iEtolians, who had some time be­fore dispatched an embassy to Corinth and Lacedwmon,







OCR Output








B. II. 181 YEAR III. BEFORE CHRIST 429.


wind had happened to have blown along with it, as the ene­my hoped, they must all unavoidably have perished. It isnow reported, that a heavy rain falling on a sudden, attendedwith claps of thunder, extinguished the flames, and put anend to this imminent danger.
The Peloponnesians, upon the failure of this project,marched away part of their army ; but, continuing the re­mainder there, raised a wall of circumvallation quite roundthe city, the troops of every confederate state executing adeterminate part of the work. Both inside and outside ofthis wall was a ditch, and by first digging these they hadgot materials for brick. This work being compleated about •the rising of Arcturus*, they left some of their own men toguard half of the wall, the other half being left to the careof the Boeotians ; then marched away with the main army,and dismissed the auxiliary forces to their respective cities.
The Plataeans had already sent away to Athens their
wives, their children, their old people, and all the uselesscrowd of inhabitants. There were only left in the townduring this siege four hundred Plataeans, eighty Athenians,and one hundred and ten vomen to prepare their food.This was the whole number of them when the siege was firstformed ; nor was there any other person within the wall,either slave or free.—And in this manner was the city ofPlataea besieged in form.
The same summer, and about the time that the army ap­peared before Plataea, the Athenians, with a body of theirown people, consisting of two thousand heavy-armed, andtwo hundred horsemen, invaded the Chalcideans of Thraceand the Bottiaeans. The corn was in the ear, when thisarmy was led against them under the command of Xeno-phon the son of Euripides and two colleagues. Coming upto Spartolus, a town in Bottiaea, they destroyed the corn, andhoped to get possession of the place by the management of
• Beginning of September.Vol. I. 2 O







OCR Output








B. III. 277 YEAR VI.—BEFORE CHRIST 426.


At Peparethus also the surge of the sea rose very high, butdid not overflow. An earthquake however demolished partof the fortification*, the town-house, and some few dwel­ling houses. My solution of such effects is this : Where
the shock of the earthquake was most violent, it forciblydrove away the sea before it, which suddenly returning againoccasioned these more violent swells. And without an earth­quake I deem all such accidents impossible.
The same summer many of other nations, as they hap­pened to be drawn into the quarrel, were engaged in the warof Sicily as well as the Sicilians themselves who took uparms one against another, and the Athenians together withtheir allies. Yet, the most memorable actions alone, eitherof the allies thus aided by the Athenians, or of the commonenemy against the Athenians, shall I now relate.—Charoea-das the Athenian commander having lost his life in the Sy-racusan war, Laches, who had now the sole command of thefleet, injunction with the allies, appeared before Myla ofthe Messenians. The garrison of Mylae consisted of twocompanies of Messenians ; and these had formed an am­buscade to cut off the enemy when landed. But the Athe­nians and allies drive them from the place of ambush withgreat slaughter. Then they proceeded to assault the works,which necessitated the defendants to give up their citadelby capitulation, and even to attend them against Messene.But after this, the Athenians and allies were no sooner ap­proached, than the Messenians also compounded, givinghostages and all other securities required for their future be­haviour.
The same summer, the Athenians with thirty sail ofships commanded by Demosthenesf the son of Alcisthenes-
• Prytaneum.
t This Demosthenes will make a considerable figure in the course ofthis war. The most celebrated orator of the same name hath ranked himamongst the greatest of his countrymen, with Aristides, Pericles, and Ni-cias. He stiles him also an orator; and Thucydides will give us hereaf­ter a specimen of his manner of haranguing. His name-tah indeed hathVol. I. 3 C







OCR Output








fc, II. ' YEAR II. BEFORE DCHRIST 430. in


the island Zacynthus which lies over-against Elis. Theyare a colony of the Achaeans of Peloponnesus, and werethen in league with the Athenians. On board this fleetwere a thousand heavy-anryed Lacedaemonians; and Cne-mus the Spartan commanded in the expedition. Making adescent upon the island they ravaged great part of the coun­try,—but finding the entire reduction of it impracticable, theyre-embarked and returned home.
In the close of the same summer, Aristeus the Corinthian,Aneristus, Nicolaus, Protodemus, and Timagoras of Tegea,ambassadors from the Lacedaemonians, and Polis the Ar-give without any public character, travelling into Asia, toengage the Persian king to supply them with men andmoney for carrying on the war, on their journey stop firstin Thrace, and address themselves to Sitalces the son ofTeres. They had a mind to try if they could prevail uponhim to quit the Athenian alliance, to march to the relief ofPotidaea, now besieged by the Athenians, to desist for thefuture from giving the latter any assistance, and to obtainfrom him a safe conduct through his territory for the con­tinuance of their journey beyond the Hellespont to Phar-naces son of Pharnabazus, who would afterwards conductthem in safety to the royal court. Learchus the son ofCallimachus, and Ameiniadas the son of Philemon, happen­ing at that time to be with Sitalces, on an embassy fromAthens, persuade the son of Sitalces, who had been made acitizen of Athens, to seize and deliver them up to them,that they might not go fonvard to the king, to the prejudiceof that community of which he was a member. He hearken­ing to their advice arrests them just as they were going onshipboard to cross the Hellespont, after they had travelledthrough Thrace to the spot marked for their embarkation.He executed this by means of some trusty persons dispatchedpurposely after them along with Learchus and Ameiniades,and expressly ordered to deliver them up to the latter:They, so soon as they had got them in their power, carriedthem to Athens. Upon their arrival there, the Athenians







OCR Output








A Survey of the History.


" ment of death hath never effectually awed the tempers of" mankind. To make men desperate is very impolitic ; to44 extirpate their dependents is lopping off their own limbs," and ruining their own revenue. Men should be retainedM in their duty by mild discretionary precautions ; severe" and sanguinary proceedings never answer the purpose." And, what cruelty to doom a whole people to destruc-" tion! to involve the innocent with the guilty! to murder" even such as had been their friends and benefactors ! He" advises them not to give too large a scope to mercy, but" to punish the guilty, and the guilty alone. This will suf-" ficiently intimidate others ; will secure their interest in" Lesbos better for the future; and convince the world" how soundly Athenians can deliberate upon all their con-«* eerns."
Diodotus carries his point. The Athenians, cruel only inthe fit of choler, but habitually humane, repeal the bloody sen­tence ; and dispatch a vessel with all haste to stop execution,which arrives at Mitylene but just time enough to preventthe massacre.
The next event of importance contrasts the Lacedaemo­nian character with that of the Athenians. The author takesno pains to point it out; but it lies too ready and obviousto pass unobserved.—Platcea, after a tedious blockade, isobliged by famine to surrender. They surrender howeverto the Lacedaemonians, on condition of being brought to ajudicial trial, and only, if found guilty of unjust behaviourto be put to death. Some delegates arrive from Sparta topreside in this court of mere inquisition, since the wholeprocess is confined to a single question—" Whether they" had done any positive service to the Lacedaemonians and" allies"—that is, to their declared and determined enemies—" in the present war ?" The question plainly manifested adeliberate resolution to put them all to death. And all thefavour they obtain is, to be suffered to make a kind of dyingspeech before men, who were styled indeed judges, but in







OCR Output








144 THE PEL0PONNESIAN WAU.


" what they cannot equal, and immediately pronounce it" false. Yet, as this solemnity hath received its sanction" from the authority of our ancestors, it is my duty also to" obey the law, and to endeavour to procure, as far as I am" able, the good-will and approbation of all my audience.
" I shall therefore begin first with our forefathers, since" both justice and decency require we should on this occasion" bestow on them an honourable remembrance. In this our" country they kept themselves always firmly settled, and" through their valour handed it down free to every since" succeeding generation. Worthy indeed of praise are they," and yet more worthy are our immediate fathers ; since en-" larging their own inheritance into the extensive empire" which we now possess, they bequeathed that their work of" toil to us their sons. Yet even these successes, we ourselves" here present, we who are yet in the strength and vigour of" our days have nobly improved, and have made such pro-" visions for this our Athens, that now it is all-sufficient in" itself to answer every exigence of war and of peace. I" mean not here to recite those martial exploits by which" these ends were accomplished, or the resolute defences we" ourselves and our fathers have made against the formidable" invasions of Barbarians and Greeks—your own knowledge" of these will excuse the long detail. But—by what methods" we have rose to this height of glory and power ; by what" polity and by what conduct we are thus aggrandized, I" shall first endeavour to shew; and then proceed to the" praise of the deceased. These, in my opinion, can be no" impertinent topics on this occasion ; the discussion of them:4 must be beneficial to this numerous company of Athenians" and of strangers.
" We are happy in a form of government which cannot" envy the laws of our neighbours :—for it hath served as a" model to others, but is original at Athens. And this our" form, as committed not to the few, but to the whole body" of the people, is. called a democracy. How different soever







OCR Output








DISCOURSE III.


bay of Crissa. Their squadrons cruized round and quiteawed the coasts of Peloponnesus. Their interest at Ce-phallene, and the new alliance which gained them the acces­sion of the naval strength of Corcyra, rendered them mastersof the Ionian, and they had colonies to extend their traffic andinfluence both in Italy and Sicily.
These points are opened step by step in this digression byThucydides, till jealousy in the Lacedaemonians and malicein the Corinthians irritated all the Peloponnesian States andtheir allies against them, and ended in the determination forwar. The Corinthians had now carried their point, and soonhoped to gratify all their resentments. Accordingly, at thesecond grand congress at Sparta, when all the rest of theStates had declared their minds, they warmly encourage themto enter at once upon an offensive war, in a very studied andelaborate speech.
" They set out with handsome compliments to the Lace-" daemonians. They animate the landed States of Pelopon-" nesus to join effectually with those on the coasts. A firm" and lasting peace can only be obtained by a vigorous war;" and the power of Athens must needs be reduced.—They" open a plan—for establishing funds—for weakening the" marine of Athens, and consequently for improving and" strengthening the marine of her enemies—for effectuating" the revolts of her dependents—and raising fortifications" in Attica itself. Independence can never be earned at" too great a price; it costs as much to be voluntary and" obedient slaves. A single State should never be suffered" to play the tyrant in Greece. Their own reputation, their" dignity, their liberty, their welfare, a most righteous cause," nay the very Gods themselves summon them to action." They close with a very warm and pathetic recapitulation," sounding as it were the alarm for the destruction of" Athens."
Now war is a second time resolved upon by ballot.All are ordered to get ready, with the utmost dispatch, to be­







OCR Output








lii On his Qualifications as a Historian.


warm pathetic in the midst of some grand circumstance.The figures in which he most delights, are the Interroga­tion s the Change of number and time; the Hyperbaton, ortransposing and inverting the order of things which seem na­turally united and inseparable ; and above all, the Antithesis.This last he hath fondly used, almost to satiety. Term isnot only opposed to term, but thought to thought, sentence tosentence, and sometimes whole orations to one another, evenwhere the latter speaker cannot possibly be supposed to haveheard the former. A constant adherence to this method car­ries with it the danger of glutting the reader. I am sensiblethere should have been more variety to make the whole quitebeautiful and graceful.
As to the fourth constituent of sublimity, which, accord­ing to Longinus, is noble and graceful expression, our au­thor's claim cannot be so well established. Noble undoubt­edly he is, but as for the graceful—the reader may wish hehad been more careful in this particular, and I am sure histranslator wishes it from his heart. For fear of being vul­gar he is too set and solemn; and from the passion to bealways great, he hath lost the air of ease and genteelness.Dionysius of Halicarnassus says he studiously affected hardand obsolete words. But yet the same writer sets him up asthe standard of Attic purity ; nay, hath frequently strength­ened his own style by using the hard and obsolete words ofThucydides. However this be, it is certain Thucydideshath in this respect fallen half-way short: And more so, inthe fifth constituent of sublimity, composition or structureof his periods. He hath no harmony, hath given little orno proof of having a good ear. He is rough, austere ; hisperiods are sometimes a mile long, in which he labourshimself both out of tune and time. I acknowledge his im­perfections, and beg the reader would weigh them and setthem in the balance with his excellencies: He may thenjudge if the latter do not greatly preponderate. He thinksnobly; affects surprisingly ; his expression is noble, but not







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAR IX. BEFORE CHRIST 423.


a second time into Lyncus against Arribaeus. They com­manded their separate bodies; one, the forces of the Mace­donians subject to himself, and the heavy-armed Grecianswho dwelled amongst them: the other, the remainder of hisown Peloponnesians reinforced by Chalcideans and Acanthi-ans, and quotas from other cities such as they were able tofurnish. The number of heavy-armed Grecians computedtogether amounted to about three thousand: The cavalry thatattended, both of Macedonians and Chalcideans, was uponthe whole little less than a thousand: And the remainingcrowd of Barbarians was great.
Breaking thus into the territory of Arribaeus, and find­ing the Lyncestians already in the field to oppose them,they also sat down and faced them. The infantry on eachside were posted on an eminence, and a plain lay betweenthem. This yielding room for the excursions of the horse,the cavalry of both began a skirmish first. But then Bra-sidas and Perdiccas, so soon as the Lyncestian heavy-armedwere moving first from the eminence to the aid of their ca­valry and were ready to engage, marched also down intothe plain to oppose them, where they charged and routedthe Lyncestians. A large number of the latter M ere slain,the rest fled for preservation to the eminences, and therestood quiet.
The victors after this, having erected a trophy, continuedfor two or three days in the same post, waiting for the Illy-rians who were coming up to join Perdiccas for a stipulatedpay. And then Perdiccas intended to advance fartheragainst the villages of Arribaeus, and sit no longer inactive.Mende however was still uppermost in the care of Bra-sidas:—That place must be lost, should the Athenians ar­rive before it in the interval:—The Illyrians besides were notyet come up. He relished not the project, and was moreinclined to go back. This engendered some disputes be­tween them, in the midst of which the news was broughtthat the Illyrians had deserted Perdiccas, and joined them­







OCR Output








btxii A survey of the History.


Wed, and ready to march into Attica, under the commandof Archidamus. Like an able and cautious general he ha­rangues his troops, " encourages them with a sight of their" own numbers, but guards them from catching at that sight" a contempt of their foes. The strict observation of dis-" cipline is always necessary to armies, be they never so" large. No enemy ought ever to be despised, much less" Athenians. 1'hough an enemy, he speaks in high com-" mendation of the latter, and establishes the dignity of their" characters. He ends with an exhortation to his troops," to observe rules, conform to discipline, and bravely to" execute orders; and Spartan-like, concludes with an en-" comium on the beauty and strength of strict military obe-" dience."
He then sends a messenger to Athens, to try if a warwere yet to be avoided. The Athenians are as determinedas ever to make no submissions. The messenger is con­ducted out of their territories, and parts from his escort witha pathetic prediction of the miseries in which all Greece isgoing to be involved. Attica soon after is invaded. Themischief done by the invaders is described'; and the senseat Athens of their sufferings and distresses represented atlarge. The reader, on this occasion, will be let into theform and constitution of the Athenian polity. He will see,how they began to be moulded into one community by theprudence of Theseus one of their earliest kings. Other his­torians expatiate on the method, by which from being undera regal they had varied gradually into a purely republicanform. I shall only mention an observation*, that, contraryto most other nations, tluy had abolished the regal govern­ment, not from distate but reverence to kings. Codrus,the last of their kings, had devoted himself for his country,and was so worthy a man, that they resolved no mortalshould afterwards wear that title amongst them. They de­clared Jupiter king of Athens, about the same time that• TourreU's Preface Historique.







OCR Output








Iviii A Survey of the History.


exact calculation, and astronomy be made the faithful guideof chronology.
Book I. The First Book of Thucydides is introductoryto the rest. It is a comprehensive elaborate work of itself.It clears away rubbish, opens a view from the earliest ages,strikes out light from obscurity, and truth from fable, thatthe reader may enter upon the Peloponnesian war with aperfect insight into the state of Greece, and the schemes,interest, and strength of the contending parties. The au<-thor unfolds his design in writing, magnifies his subject,complains of the ignorance and credulity of mankind, rec­tifies their mistakes, removes all prejudice, and furnishes uswith the knowledge of every thing proper to be known, t»enable us to look at the contention with judgment and dis­cernment, when the point contended for is no less than thesovereignty of the sea, which that of the land must necessari-.ly follow.
He begins at the source, and traces the original of theGreek communities from certain and indisputable facts; andthe growth of Attica in particular, from the natural barren*ness of the soil, which tempted no invasions ; and from theshelter its inhabitants gave to all, who would settle amongstthem, and share their polity .—He shews the invention ofshipping to have been exceedingly mischievous at first. Itfilled the sea with pirates, to whom it gave a ready convey­ance from coast to coast, enabling them suddenly to seize,and at leisure to carry off and secure their booty. No con­siderable commerce, or rather none at all, could be carriedon, till the shore was cleared of such annoyance. Andwhen few durst venture to settle on the coasts, no martscould be opened for traffic, and no ports were yet secure.A ship was merely the instrument of ready conveyance fromplace to place: It was not yet become an engine of attackand defence on the water. Minos king of Crete made thefirst attempt with success to obtain a naval strength*, by
• Years before Christ 1006.







OCR Output








260 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" termined right: And for these, for all offences, you shall" have your reward.
" We have thus distinctly run over this affair, for your" sakes, O ye Lacedaemonians, as well for our own ; that you" may be convinced with how much equity you are going to" condemn them, and that we have pursued the offenders" upon yet stronger obligations of justice. Let not the reci-" tal of their former virtues, if virtues truly they ever had," mollify your hearts. Virtue should be pleaded by men" who have suffered; but, on those who have committed base-" ness, it should redouble their punishment, because they sin" in foul contrariety to their former selves. Let them not" save themselves by lamentations and pathetic complaints," though they cried out so movingly upon the sepulchres of" your fathers, and their own destitute forlorn condition. For" to stop their cries we have proved against them, that our" youths, when butchered by them, met with a more cruel" and unjust fate: those youths, some of whose fathers, re-" conciling Boeotia with you, died in the field of Coronea; the" rest, now advanced in years, bereft of their children, their" houses desolate, prefer a supplication far more just to you,'" to avenge them upon these Plataeans. Those are most de-" serving of pity, who have suffered some great indignity;" but when vengeance is duly inflicted on such men as these" Plataeans, the world hath cause to triumph. Their present" destitute forlorn condition is the work of themselves. They" wilfully rejected a better alliance ; and, though uninjured," broke every law against us; executioners of hatred more" than justice, though now about to suffer less than the prece-" dent they set requireth. For they shall be executed by" lawful sentence ; not like men who with stretched-out hands" obtained fair quarter, as they describe themselves, but who" surrendered on this condition—to submit to justice.
" Avenge, therefore, O Lacedaemonians, the law of" Greece so grossly violated by them. Retaliate all the in­







OCR Output








3. I. INTR0DUCTI0H. 85


and collected a body of seven hundred auxiliaries, passed overby night into Samos. They first exerted their efforts againstthe popular party, and got a majority of them into their pow­er : In the next place, they conveyed away the hostages fromLemnos by stealth ; they openly declared a revolt ; and deli­vered up the Athenian garrison, with their officers whom theyhad seized, to Pissuthnes; and then immediately preparedto renew their war against Miletus. The Byzantines fartherjoined with them in the revolt.
No sooner were the Athenians informed of this, than theyput out against Samos with sixty sail, though sixteen of themwere detached for other services. Some of the latter werestationed upon the coast of Caria to observe the motions ofa Phoenician fleet, and the rest were ordered to Chios and »Lesbos to give there a summons of aid. The remainingforty-four, commanded by Pericles* and nine colleagues, en­gaged near the isle of Tragia with the Samian fleet, consist­ing of seventy sail, twenty of which had land-soldiers onboard, and the whole was now on the return from Miletus ;and here the Athenians gained a signal victory. Afterwardsforty sail arrived from Athens to reinforce them, and twenty-five from the Chians and the Lesbians. With this accession
• The Athenians in the assembly of the people chose ten generals everyyear, according to the number of their tribes. They were sometimes, asin the present instance, all sent out in the same employ. They rolled, andeach in his turn was gentral of the day. Thucydides seldom gives morethan the name of one, whom we may conclude to have been the person ofthe greatest weight and influence amongst them, in fact a general in chief.Philip of Macedon was used to joke upon this multiplicity of generals." For my part (said he) I have never had the good fortune to find morethan one general in my life ; and yet the Athenians find ten fresh onesevery year." Not but that these generals were often re-elected and con-tinned years in commission. Pericles, it is plain, did so : and in lattertimes Phocion is said to have been elected five and forty times. Theirpower was great not only in the field but at Athens Every point that badrelation to war came under their department. Pericles in a foreign em­ploy was always first of the generals, and within the walls of Athens wasthe first or rather absolute minister of state.
Vol. I. 2 B


 







OCR Output








48 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


reans preferred the largest accusations, in particular that44they had been prohibited the use of all the harbours in the" Athenian dominions and the market of Athens, contrary" to the treaty." The Corinthians were the last who stoodforth. Having first allowed sufficient time to others to exas­perate the Lacedaemonians, they preferred their own charge,as followeth
" THAT faith, ye Lacedaemonians, which ever both in4•4 public conduct and in private life you so punctually observe," renderetl* what others, what we ourselves may have to say," more difficult to be believed. By it you have gained in-A deed the reputation of probity, but contract a prejudicial ig-" norance in regard to remote occurrences. For, though we" have frequently suggested to you, what wrongs we were" apprehensive of receiving from the Athenians, yet have you" not deigned to make enquiry into the grounds of those sug-" gestions, but rather have suspected our ingenuity as speak-" ing from selfish views and private resentments. And it is" not to prevent our sufferings, but now, when we already" feel their weight, that you convene these confederates to-M gether: Before whom, we ought to be indulged in a larger" share of discourse, as we have by much the largest share of" complaints to utter: wronged as we have been by the Athe-" nians, and by you neglected.
" If indeed by treachery lurking and Unobserved they44 had violated the peace of Greece, those who had not dis-" cerned it might justly have demanded explicit proofs. But" now, what need can there be of multiplying words, when" some you already sec enslaved ; against others, and those" not the meanest of your allies, the same fate intended ; and" the aggressors fully prepared to receive you, if at Length" a war should be declared ? With other views, they had not41 clandestinely laid hands on Corcyra, and forcibly detained" it from us, nor had they dared to block up Potidiea: of" which places this latter lieth the most convenient for ex--k tending our power in Thrace, the forfner could supply Per







OCR Output








X. II. YEAR III. BEFORE CHRIST 429. 175


YEAR III.
EARLY the next summer, the Peloponnesians and theirallies, omitting the incursion as before into Attica, marchedtheir forces against Plateea. Archidamus son of Zeuxida-mus, king of the Lacedaemonians, commanded ; who, havingencamped his army, was preparing to ravage the adjacentcountry. He was interrupted by an embassy from the Pla-taeans, who addressed themselves to him in the followingmanner.
" The war, O Archidamus and Lacedaemonians, you are" now levying on Plataea, is a flagrant breach of common"justice, a blemish on your honour and that of your fathers." Pausanias, the Lacedaemonian, son of Cleombrotus, when" —aided by those Grecians, who cheerfully exposed them-" selves with him to the dangers of that battle which was" fought on our land—he had delivered Greece from Per-" sian slavery, at a public sacrifice to Jupiter the deliverer," solemnized by him on that occasion in the public forum" of Plataea, called all the confederates together, and there" conferred these privileges on the Plataeans—" That theyM should have free possession of the city and territory be-" longing to it, to be governed at their own discretion;—" that no one should ever unjustly make war upon them, or" endeavour to enslave them; and in case of such attempts," all the confederates then present should avenge it to the
" utmost of their power." Such grateful returns did your
" fathers make us in recompence of our valour, and the zeal" we excited in the common dangers. Yet their generosity" you are now reversing—you, with the Thebans, our inve-" terate foes, are come hither to enslave us. But, by the" Gods, who were then witnesses to the oath they swore, by" all the tutelary Deities both of your own and of our com-" munity, we adjure you to do no damage to Plataean" ground, nor to violate your oaths, but to retire and leave







OCR Output








370 THE PEJLOPONNESIAN WAR.


"the masters of it all, beyond controul. So much more" have we to fear from these neighbours of ours, than any" other people.
" Those again, who in all the daring insolence of su-" perior strength are wont to invade their neighbours, as*4 these Athenians now do us, march with extraordinary de-" grees of confidence against such as are inactive, and de-" fend themselves only on their own soil. His schemes are" more painfully compleated, when men sally boldly beyond" their borders to meet the invader, and if opportunity" serveth attack him first. Of this truth our own experi-" ence will amply convince us. For ever since the defeat" we gave these very men at Coronea, when taking the ad-" vantage of our seditions they had possessed themselves of" our lands, we have kept Boeotia quiet from every alarm" till the present. This we ought now to remember, that" the seniors among us may proceed as they then begun ;" that the juniors, the sons of those sires who.then displayed" such uncommon bravery, may exert themselves to preserve" unblemished their hereditary virtues. We ought all to" be confident, that the God will fight on our side, whose" temple they pollute by raising ramparts, and dwelling" within its verge. And, as the victims we have offered are" fair and auspicious, we ought at once to advance to the" charge of these our foes, and make them know, that their" lust and rapine they only then can gratify, when they in-" vade such cowards as abandon their own defence : but" from men, who were born to vindicate their own country" for ever by the dint of arms, and never unjustly to inslave" another;—that from such men they shall not get awav" without that struggle which honour injoins."
In this manner Pagondas exhorted the Boeotians, andpersuaded them to march against the Athenians. He putthem instantly in motion, and led them towards the enemy :For it wa£ now late in the day. When he had approachedthe spot on which they were posted, he halted in a plact­







OCR Output








THE PELOPOSNESIA* WAR.


the keenest spirit. They most daringly projected, and thenregularly executed the most dreadful machinations. Theirrevenge was not limited by justice or the public welfare ; itaimed at more ample satisfaction. Either side constantlymeasured it by such retaliation as was judged the sweetest,either by a capital condemnation through an iniquitous sen­tence, or by earning the victory with their own hands, inwhich they were always ready to glut the present rancour oftheir hearts. And hence it was, that the pious and uprightconduct was on both sides disregarded. And, when anypoint of great importance was before them, to carry it byspecious collusive oratory was the greatest enhancement oftheir credit. Yet all this while, the moderate members ofsuch communities either hated because they would notmeddle, or, envied for such obnoxious conduct, fell victimsto both.
Seditions in this manner introduced every species of out­rageous wickedness into the Grecian manners. Sincerity,which is most frequently to be found in generous tempers,was laughed out of countenance and for ever vanished. Itwas become the universal practice, to keep up a constantenmity of intention against one another, and never to be­lieve. No promise was strong enough, no oath sufficientlysolemn, to banish such mutual diffidence. Those who ex­celled in shrewd consideration resigned all hope of any last­ing security, and stood ever on their guard against whom itwas impossible for them to trust. But persons of meanerunderstandings took more effectual means for their preser­vation. Living in constant apprehensions, from their owninferiority and the craft of their opponents, lest by wordsthey should be over-reached, or that such subtle headsmight execute their treacheries upon them unawares, theyboldly seized the present moment, and at once dispatchedthe men they dreaded ; who, presuming too much on theirown penetration, and that it was superfluous to aim a blowat those whom they could at any time supplant by cunning.







OCR Output








342 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


there, to assist those who were employed in the new fortifica­tion ; and yet, though earnestly pressed by the iEginetae,they refused to accompany them within their walls, beingaverse to run the risk of a new blockade. They chose ratherto retreat towards the eminences, as they judged themselvesdisabled by the inferiority of their number from facing theenemy, and remained there in a state of inaction.
By this time the Athenians, having compleated their land­ing and advanced with their whole force, take Thyrea by-storm. They set the city in flames and destroyed whateverwas within it. Such of the iEginetae as survived the instantcarnage, they carried prisoners to Athens ; and with themTantalus son of Patrocles, who commanded there as generalfor the Lacedaemonians. He had been wounded, and sotaken prisoner. They also carried thither some few personswhom they had taken in Cythera, such as for its security itwas expedient to remove. These the Athenians after a con­sultation decreed " to be disposed of in the islands, but" the rest of the Cythereans still to occupy their own lands" subjected to the yearly tribute of four talents*; but the" iEginetae, as many as had been taken prisoners, to be all in-" stantly put to death," (to gratify that eternal rancour theybore them) " and Tantalus to be kept in prison along with his" countrymen taken in Sphacteria."
The same summer, a suspension of arms was agreed onin Sicily; first, between the Camarineans and Geloans:and then, the other Sicilians, holding a general congress atGela, whither the ambassadors from the several States re­sorted, entered into conferences about the terms of a gene­ral reconciliation. Many different expedients were proposedon all sides and many disputes arose, each insisting on a re­paration suitable to their own private sense of grievance.But Hermocratesf the son of Hermon a Syracusan, who


• Seven hundred and seventy-five pounds sterling.
t This great and accomplished Syracusan seems to be ushered intothis history with peculiar dignity, as the very month of Sicily, exhorting;







OCR Output








PREFACE.


Mr. Hobbes declares in his Preface, that " the virtues of" this author so took his affection, that they begot in him aM desire to communicate him further." He considered also,that " he was exceedingly esteemed of the Italian and French" in their own tongues, notwithstanding that he be not very" much beholding for it to his interpreters." He says after­wards, that, by the first translation of Nicholls from theFrench of Seyssel, "he became at length traduced rather" than translated into our language ;" alluding perhaps to theItalian sarcasm on translators, Traduttore traditore. He thenresolved himself " to take him immediately from the Greek" —knowing, that when with diligence and leisure I should" have done it, though some errors might remain, yet they" would be errors but of one descent; of which nevertheless" (says he) I can discover none, and hope they be not" many.
Mr. Hobbes, however sorry and mischievous a philoso­pher, was undoubtedly a very learned man. He hath shewnit beyond dispute in his translation of Thucydides. He isan excellent help, for any one who consults him, to find outthe meaning and adjust the sense. But, though his transla­tion hath now passed through three editions, and hath pro­fitably been read by many, yet (I speak not from my ownprivate judgment) he cannot now be read with any compe­tent degree of pleasure. He is faithful, but most servilelyso, to the letter of his author. Even in the orations, he mere­ly acts the interpreter, and hath quite forgot the orator. Hetranslates literally throughout, and numbers rather thanweighs the words of Thucydides. By this means the con­struction is very often intricate and confused, the thoughtspregnant with sense are not sufficiently opened, nor the glow­ing ideas of the author or his orators transfused with properdegrees of warmth and light. Too scrupulous an attachmentto the letter of die original hath made the copy quite flat andheavy, the spirit is evaporated, the lofty and majestic air hathintirely disappeared. Too many low and vulgar expressions.







OCR Output








B. I. INTRODUCTION. 11


were built. It is a known fact, that Aminocles, a s.hip-car-penter from Corinth, built four ships for the Samians: Now,from the arrival of Aminocles at Samos to the conclusion ofthe -war which is now my subject, there passed at most butthree hundred years. The oldest sea-fight we know anything of, was that of the Corinthians against the Corcyreans:But the distance between that and the same period is notmore than two hundred and sixty. For the city of the Co­rinthians, being seated on the Isthmus, hath ever been a placeof trade, as formerly the Grecians both within and withoutPeloponnesus, more accustomed to land than sea, could haveno traffic with one another without passing through theirterritory. They were also remarkable for wealth, as clearlyappeareth from the ancient poets, who have given that citythe epithet of rich. And, when once navigation was prac­tised in Greece, they lost no time in their own equipments ;they cleared the sea of pirates ; and, opening their town as apublic mart, both by land and sea, made Corinth powerfulby the increase of its revenue. The Ionians had no navalforce till a long time after this, in the reign of Cyrus, firstking of the Persians, and his son Cambyses: And, wagingwar with Cyrus, they were for a time masters of the seawhich lieth upon their own coasts. Polycrates also, whowas tyrant of Samos, in the reign of Cambyses, having apowerful navy, subdued many of the islands, and amongthe rest Rhenea, which as soon as conquered he consecratedto Delian Apollo. The Phoceans also, when planting theircolony at Marseilles, had a successful engagement at seaagainst the Carthaginians.
These were the most remarkable equipments of a navalforce; and these, though beyond contest many generationslater than the war of Troy, had a very small number of tri-
were also masted and carried sails ; but they generally lowered the sailswhen they came to action, and relied chiefly on their oars, that they mightbe more able to tack about, or to run down upon the enemy with moreforce aijd steadiness. See Potter's \rtfi:w>logia, voL ii. c. 14.







OCR Output








390 THE PELOPOKNESIAN WAR.


" That by virtue of this truce, safe-conduct be granted" both of passage and repassage, either by land or sea, either" to Peloponnesus or to Athens, to all heralds and ambassa-M dors, and their whole retinue how numerous soever, com-" missioned to negociate the determination of the war, or to" get controverted points adjudged.
" That so long as this truce be in force, no deserters be" entertained, neither by you, nor by us, whether they be free-" men or slaves.
" You shall do justice in our causes, and we shall do the" same for you, according to the laws of our respective con-" stitutions, to the end that all controversies may be judicially" settled without a war.
" These articles have the approbation of the Lacedaemo-" nians and their allies. But, if any thing more honourable" or more just occurs to you, you are to repair to Lacedae-" mon, and propose it there. For whatever points you may" demonstrate to be just, will in no degree whatever be re-" jected, neither by the Lacedaemonians nor by their allies :" Provided the persons charged with these new commissions" be sent with full powers to put to them the finishing hand," in the same manner as you require the same conditions" from us.
" This truce shall be in force for a year."Ratified by the People.
The Acamantine Tribe presided. Phanippus was theNotary public. Niciades was in the chair. Laches pro­nounced—" Be it for the welfare and prosperity of the Athe-" nians, that a suspension of arms is granted upon the terms" offered by the Lacedaemonians and allies."
Agreed in the public assembly of the people,
" That this suspension shall continue for a year.
" That it shall take place this very day, being the four-" teenth day of the month Elaphebolion.
" That during this interval, ambassadors and heralds shall







OCR Output








B. I. 103 -Introduction.


rise together with the child whom he held as he sat down:For this was the most pathetic form of supplication. Andwhen, not long after, the Lacedaemonians and Atheniansarrived, and pressed him earnestly to do it, he refuseth togive him up, and sends him under a guard, as he had de­clared his intention to go to the king, to the other sea by ajourney over land, as far as Pydne, a town belonging toAlexander. He here met with a trading vessel bound to Io­nia ; and going on board, is driven by a storm into the Athe­nian fleet, which then lay before Naxos. Alarmed at hisdanger, he discovereth himself to the master (for not oneperson on board suspected who he was), and telleth him theoccasion of his flight; and, unless he will undertake his pre­servation, threatens " to inform against him, as one who had" been bribed to further his escape;—preserved he still might" be, provided no person was suffered, during the voyage, to" stir out of the vessel:—If he would comply, the favour" should be acknowledged with effectual gratitude."—Themaster of the vessel promiseth his service, and keeping out atsea a day and a night to windward of the fleet, he afterwadslandeth him at Ephesus. Themistocles, to recompence hiscare, made him a handsome present in money (for there hereceived those sums which he had ordered secretly to be con­veyed thither from his friends at Athens, and from Argos);and, travelling upwards from thence, in company with a Per­sian of the maritime provinces, he gets a letter to be deliveredto king Artaxerxes the son of Xerxes, who had lately mount­ed the throne, the purport of which was this;
"1 THEMISTOCLES am coming to you, who of all" the Grecians have done the greatest mischiefs to your fa-" mily, so long as I was obliged by necessity to resist the" invasion of your father. Yet the good services I did him" were much more numerous, when my own preservation" was secured, and his retreat became full of hazards. My" former generosity calls for a requital;" (here he insertedthe message he had sent to Xerxes about the retreat from







OCR Output








B. II. 137 YEAR I. BEFORE CHRIST 431.


manders in the expedition were Carcinus son of Xenotimus,Proteas son of Epicles, and Socrates son of Antigenes. Un­der their orders, the fleet so furnished out weighed anchorand sailed away.
The Peloponnesians, continuing in Attica till provisionsbegan to fail them, retired not by the same route they camtin, but marched away through Boeotia. And passing byOropus, they wasted the tract of ground called Piraice, whichwas occupied by the Oropians, who were subject to Athens.On their return into Peloponnesus, the army was dispersedinto their several cities.
After their departure, the Athenians settled the properstations for their guards both by land and sea, in the samedisposition as they were to continue to the end of the war.They also made a decree, that " a thousand talents should betaken from the fund of treasure in the citadel, and laid upby itself; that this sum should not be touched, but the ex­pense of the war be defrayed from the remainder—and, thatif any one moved or voted for converting this money to anyother use, than the necessary defence of the city, in case theenemy attacked it by sea, he should suffer the penalty ofdeath." Beside this, they selected constantly every year ahundred of their best triremes, with the due number of ablecommanders. These also they made it capital to use uponany other occasion, than that extremity for which the reserveof money was destined.
The Athenians on board the fleet of one hundred sail onthe coasts of Peloponnesus, being joined by the Corcyreansin fifty ships and by some other of their confederates inthose parts, hovered for a time and infested the coast, andat length made a descent and assaulted Methone a town ofLaconia, whose walls were but weak and poorly manned.It happened that Brasidas* the son of Tellis a Spartan had
• Here the name of BrcuiJas first occurs, and I must beg tlic reader tonote him as one who is to make no ordinary figure in the sequel. Trainedup through the regular and severe discipline ot Sparta, he was brave, vigi.lant, and active, lie was second to none of his countrymen, in those ga.A







OCR Output








198 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


again over-land to Corinth. The Athenians, finding theywere gone from Salamis, sailed home again. But ever afterthis they guarded the Piraeus in a stricter manner, barringup the mouth of the haven, and omitting no method of se­curing it effectually for the future.
About the same time, in the beginning of this winter,Shakes the Odrysian, son of Teres, a Thracian king,marched an army against Perdiccas, the son of Alexander,king of Macedonia, and the Chalcideans bordering onThrace, to enforce the execution of two engagements, onemade to and the other by himself. For Perdiccas, who hadentered into some engagement to him, for reconciling himto the Athenians when he was formerly pressed hard withwar, and for not restoring his brother Philip, then at enmitywith him, to his throne, had not yet performed that en­gagement. And he himself was under an engagement tothe Athenians, since the late alliance offensive and defen­sive made between them, that he would finish the war forthem against the Chalcideans of Thrace. On both theseaccounts, he undertook the present expedition, carryingalong with him Amyntas the son of Philip, to restore to himthe kingdom of Macedonia, with the Athenian ambassadorscommissioned to attend him on this occasion, and Agnonan Athenian general: Though the Athenians had obligedthemselves by treaty to accompany the expedition with afleet by sea and a numerous land-army.
Beginning the march himself from Odrysae, he sum­mons to attend him first all his Thracian subjects that livewithin the mountains Haemus and Rhodope, quite down tothe Hellespont and Euxine sea; next, the Getae beyondmount Haemus, and as many other nations as lay betweenthe river Ister and along quite down to the Euxine. TheGetae, and the nations so situated, border upon the Scy­thians, wearing the same habiliments of war, and all likethem drawing the bow on horseback. He procured also tojoin him many of the free Thracians that live upon the







OCR Output








216 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" will reflect security and advantage upon all; and who, if" you now continue to be deaf to their intreaties, must drop" into such a ruin as will at length involve you all. At this" crisis shew yourselves to be the men, which the voice of" Greece united in your praise and our dreadful situation re-" quire you to be."
In this manner the Mityleneans urged their plea ; and theLacedaemonians and confederates, having listened with atten­tion, and owned themselves convinced, admitted the Lesbiansinto their alliance, and decreed an incursion into Attica. To_put this in execution, orders were issued to the confederatesthen present expeditiously to march with two-thirds of theirforces to the Isthmus. The Lacedaemonians themselves ar­rived there first, and got machines ready at the Isthmus toconvey their ships over-land from Corinth to the sea ofAthens, that they might invade them at the same time both byland and sea. They indeed were eager and intent on the en-terprize: Bnt the other confederates were very slow in as­sembling together, as they were busy in getting in their har­vest, and began to be sadly tired of the war.
When the Athenians found that such preparationswere made against them, as an avowed insult on their ima­gined weakness, they had a mind to convince their foes thatsuch imaginations were erroneous, and that they were wellable, without countermanding their fleet from before Lesbos,to make head against any force that could come from Pe­loponnesus. Accordingly, they manned out a hundred ships,obliging all, as well sojourners as citizens (those excepted of thefirst and second class*), to go on board. Shewing themselves
• The original is, " except those who were worth five hundred medimns,and the Horaetnen or Knights." The Athenians were ranged into classesby Solon. Plutarch hath described the manner in the life of Solon, as thustranslated in Potter's Antiquities of Greece, v. i. p. 14.
" Solon finding the peoplep-ariousl^affected, some inclined to a monarchy,others to an oligarchy, others to a democracy, the rich men powerful andhaughty, the poor men groaning under the burden of their oppression, en­deavoured as far as was possible to compose all their differences, to easetheir grievances, andjgive*all reasonable persons.satbfaction. In the prose-







OCR Output








B. II. YEAR II. BEFORE CHRIST 430. 157


and compassionate. Such persons were ashamed, out of aselfish concern for themselves, entirely to abandon theirfriends, when their menial servants, no longer able to en­dure the groans and lamentations of the dying, had beencompelled to fly from such a weight of calamity. But thoseespecially, who had safely gone through it, took pity on thedying and the sick, because they knew by experience whatit really was, and were now secure in themselves; for itnever seized any one a second time so as to be mortal. Suchwere looked upon as quite happy by others, and were them­selves at first overjoyed in their late escape, and the ground­less hope that hereafter no distemper would prove fatal tothem. Beside this reigning calamity, the general removalfrom the country into the city was a heavy grievance, moreparticularly to those who had been necessitated to come thi­ther. For as they had no houses, but dwelled all the sum­mer season in booths, where there was scarce room tobreathe, the pestilence destroyed with the utmost disorder,so that they lay together in heaps, the dying upon the dead,and the dead upon the dying. Some were tumbling oneover another in the public streets, or lay expiring roundabout every fountain, whither they had crept to assuagetheir immoderate thirst. The temples, in which they haderected tents for their reception, were full of the bodies ofthose who had expired there. For in a calamity so outra­geously violent, and universal despair, things sacred andholy had quite lost their distinction. Nay, all regulationsobserved before in matters of sepulture were quite con­founded, since every one buried wherever he could find aplace. Some, whose sepulchres were already filled by thenumbers which had perished in their own families, wereshamefully compelled to seize those of others. They sur­prised on a sudden the piles which others had built for theirown friends, and burned their dead upon them ; and some,whilst one body was burning on a pile, tossed another bodvthey had dragged thither upon it, and went their way.Vol. I. 2 L







OCR Output








B. tit. YEAR IV. BEFORE CHRIST 428. 21.3


" all the specious colourings of justice, by the road of po-" licy rather than of strength. And thus, we have been re-" served to justify their violence, and to be quoted as a" proof, that unless those whom they have enslaved had de-" served their fate, a State upon an equal footing with them-" selves would never have marched in conjunction with them" to execute their vengeance. By the same strain of policy," their first step was to lead out those that were strongest" against the weaker parties, designing to finish with them," when left destitute of any outward resource, by the prior" reduction of the rest. Whereas, if they had begun with" us, the confederate body remaining yet possessed of its" strength and able to make a stand, their enslaving project" could not have equally succeeded. They were besides" under some apprehension of our naval force, lest, uniting" with yours, or any other State, such an accession might" have endangered the whole of their plan. Some respite" also was gained, from the respect we have ever shewn to" their whole community, and to the series of magistrates" who have presided amongst them. We knew, however," that we could not long hold out, had not this war come" timely to our relief. We saw our own fate in the examples" which had been made of others.
" What friendship therefore, what assurance of liberty" could subsist, when receiving each other with the open" countenance, suspicion lay lurking within ;—when, in war," apprehensive of our power, to us they paid their court; and" we, from the same principle, paid our court to them in the" season of tranquillity ? The bond of union, which mutual*4 good-will cements in others, was in us kept fast by fear." For through the prevalence of fear, and not of friendship" we have thus long persisted in alliance. And whichever" side security had first emboldened, that side would fkst" have began encroachments upon the other. WhoAver," therefore, chargeth us with injustice for revolting, whilst" they were only meditating our ruin, and before we actually
Vol. I. 2 S







OCR Output








xxxiv On the Life of Thucydides.


war, lay all the adjacent country waste. He must haveInarched under Pericles to retaliate on the territories of Me-gara, since the whole force of the State was obliged to takethe field on this occasion. He must have assisted at thepublic funeral solemnized in the winter for the first victimsof this war, and heard Pericles speak in honour of the deadand the living, and make his countrymen enamoured of theirOwn laws and constitution. The plague broke out immedi­ately after this; we are absolutely certain he was then inAthens. He himself assures us of it. He was an eye­witness to all that horrid scene. He had the plague himself;and hath given a circumstantial detail of it.
The war proceeds with vigor, and through a great varietyof events. Thucydides must have borne his share in theservice ; the particulars he haih not recorded. No man wasever less guilty of eg otism; he never mentions himself butwhen it is absolutely necessary. His next six years were cer­tainly employed in fighting and in writing; the latter washis passion, and the former his duty. In the forty-seventhyear of his age, he was joined in the command of an Athe­nian squadron and land-force on the coasts of Thrace. Hemight be assigned to this particular station, on account ofhis possessions and interest in this part of the world. It wasjudged at Athens, that he was best qualified to senx hiscountry in this department. The Lacedaemonian com­mander in Thrace dreaded his opposition. Let us wait alittle for the event: It is the most important passage in theLife of Thucydides.
It was intirely on the authority of Plutarch, that Thucy­dides was asserted above to be a descendant from Miltiades,and in the mode of consanguinity to have inherited his fineestate in this part of the world. Marcellinus, who is forever jumbling and confounding facts, hath also made himmarry a Thracian lady, who brought him his gold-mines forher fortune. Mr. Hobbes is willing to reconcile the facts,and solves all the difficulty in a very plausible manner.







OCR Output








236 THE PELOP0NNESIAN WAR.


" made the decree ; and now I earnestly conjure you, not to" repent of your own determinations, not to plunge yourselves" in inextricable difficulties, through pity, through delight of" hearing, and soft forbearance, the three most prejudicial ob-" stacles of power. It is just to shew pity to those who" are its proper objects, and not to men who would never" have felt compassion for us, nor to foes who must of neces-" sity be implacable. The orators, those delights of your" ears, will have room in debates of lesser moment to catch" at your applause, but should be silenced here, where they" only can give the public a short-lived pleasure, whilst they" embroil it with perplexities, not easy to be surmounted, and" themselves alone in requital of speaking well will be well re-" warded for it. Forbearance, further, may be shewn to" those who are willing to be, and will for the future prove" themselves our friends ; but not to such inveterate souls as" these, who, if suffered to live, will live only to wreak their" malice against you.
" I shall wave enlargements, and give you only one" short assurance, that if you hearken to my admonitions," you will at the same time do justice to the Mityleneans" and service to yourselves ; but if you resolve in any other" manner, you will receive no thanks from them, and will"establish the clearest evidence for your own condemnation." For, if these men had reason to revolt, it follows that you" have tyrannically ruled them. Grant the injustice of such" a rule, but yet that you have presumed to be guilty of" it;—why then, upon the mere motive of interest, you" ought now to chastise them beyond what is right, or im-" mediately to forego your power, and dropping yourselves" down into impotent security, to set about the practice of" humanity and virtue. But, adieu to this vain expedient!" and at once resolve to make them feel that weight of" misery they designed for us. Convince them that those" who have escaped it can feel as strong resentments as" those who projected the fatal blow. Determine now, by







OCR Output








DISCOURSE III. Ixxxix


disconcerts the main project of the Athenians.—The latteralso had another great scheme in agitation for a total revo­lution in Boeotia. Arms and intrigues were at once to act,both without and within. The whole force of Athens takesthe field on this occasion, under the command of Hippo­crates. The famous battle of Delium ensues, before whichthe generals harangue their troops. Pagondas the Thebanis an excellent speaker on this occasion. The Boeotians arenot represented in this history, as that gross and stupid peo­ple, which was their character from the succeeding wits ofAthens. The Athenian general begins also to harangue histroops, but is cut short by the attack of the enemy. Thebattle is finely described, and the dispute afterwards aboutthe dead. The Athenians have received a dreadful blow,which will soon make them begin to accuse their own judg­ments^ in refusing the accommodation lately offered fromSparta.
In other quarters also, the balance of war begins to in­cline in favour of the enemy. Brasidas, that active and ac­complished Spartan, had now compleated a march, at thehead of a small army, through Thessaly and Macedonia intoChalcidic Thrace. His bravery prevails much, but his con­duct more. He disjoins Perdiccas king of Macedonia fromthe Athenian league. Whenever he fights, he conquers;and whenever he harangues, he effectually persuades. Hisspeech to the Acanthians is strong, pertinent, laconic. Hesays all that can be said in favour of his countrymen, inrecommendation of the cause of liberty. There is that airof sincerity and good-faith in it, which were constantly ap­proved and verified by his personal deportment. The townsrevolt to him as fast he hath opportunities to address them.The reader will follow him with pleasure through his manyand great exploits, and acknowledge he wears his laurelsdeservedly, and with peculiar grace.
Book V. In Book the Fifth, Cleon appears again uponthe stage, to stop the rapid conquests of Brasidas. The for-
Vol. I. M







OCR Output








THREE PRELIMINARY DISCOURSES.


I. On the Life of Thuctdides.II. On his Qualifications as a Historian.III. A Survey of his History.


Vol. I.


B







OCR Output








26 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" ours will turn out highly to your honour upon several" accounts.
" In the firstplace, you will favour those with your assist-" ance who have felt but never committed injustice. In the" next place, by protecting those whose lives and liberties are" at stake, you will confer so vast an obligation that the memo-" ry of it can never be abolished. We are now masters of" the greatest naval force except your own. Consider there-" fore how fair an occasion, very seldom to be met with, of" the greatest advantage to yourselves, of the greatest vexation" to your enemies, now lieth before you ; when that very" power, the accession of which you would readily have pur-" chased with ample sums of money and a weight of obliga-" tion, cometh here to invite your acceptance and make a ten-" der of itself without any danger or expence to you ; nay,*4 what is more, enabling you to gain the praise of the world," the grateful acknowledgments of those you defend, and an" increase of power to yourselves. Few people, in pre-" ceding ages, have ever had at any one time so many fine op-" portunities within their reach. And few there are, who," suing for alliance, do it not rather from a view of receiving" than conferring security and reputation by their suit.
" If there be any one amongst you, who imagineth that war" will never happen in which we may do you service, in such" imagination he is quite mistaken. He doth not penetrate" the designs of the Lacedaemonians, who, alarmed at your" power, are intent on war ;1 nor those of the Corinthians," who, powerful of themselves, and your enemies, have begun" with us to open the way for attacking you ; that, united by" common resentments, we might not stand up in our mutual" defence against their violence: nor they be disappointed at" least in one of their views, either effectually to humble us," or securely to establish their own power. It is your in-" terest to prevent them, by accepting that alliance which we" offer, and rather to anticipate their designs than countef-" plot them when ripening into act.







OCR Output








DISCOURSE II.


For modes of government let fools contest,That which is best administered is best.
That studied obscurity, in which he hath veiled himself,will not let us discover, whether on instant and critical oc­casions he ever suffered himself to be actuated by any of thedarker passions, or too fondly indulged those of a brightercast. But it cannot be found from what he writes, that hehath praised any man from fondness, or even from gratitude,degraded any one through envy, or reproached any one withmalice and ill-nature. The same will hold in regard toStates or whole communities. Doth he ever censure theAthenians in the wrong place ? or commend the Lacedaemo­nians but in the right ? Were his name expunged from thebeginning of the whole work, and the conclusions of theyears, could any one guess to what State he had ever be­longed, whether he was a Lacedaemonian, a Corinthian, anAthenian, or a Sicilian, except from the purity of the Atticdialect in which he writes ? In that dialect he was cradled;he could not possibly swerve from it; without it he couldneither write nor speak. Could he have thought, that thismight yield suspicion of an impassioned or prejudiced spirit,he might perhaps have endeavoured to write in the Doric orIonic idiom.
Independent, further, he certainly must have been, sincehe had no great man to cajole, and no prince to dread orflatter. The powers of Greece or the monarch of Persiacould affect him no more, than the Germanic body or thegrand monarch of France the quiet and contented refugee,who lives on the sunny side of a hill in Switzerland. Thecircumjacent powers had no more, perhaps not so much, in­fluence at Scaptesyle, than the neighbouring kingdoms canhave at Lausanne. The States of Greece had garrisons onthe coasts, but were not masters of Thrace. Thrace was fullof little communities and petty principalities. Thucydideshad credit enough amongst them to insure his personal safe­ty and guard his retirement. He could disoblige those about







OCR Output








THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


In the first place, under the command of Cimon* son of*Miltiades, they laid siege to Eion, a town upon the Strymoiipossessed by the Medes, which they carried, and sold allfound within it for slaves. They afterwards did the same byScyros, an island in the iEgean sea, inhabited by the Dolopes,and placed in it a colony of their own people. They had, far­ther, a war with the Carysthians singly, in which the rest ofthe Euboeans were unconcerned, who at length submitted tothem upon terms.—After this they made war upon the Nax-ians, who had revolted, and reduced them by a siege. Thiswas the first confederate-state which was enslaved to gratifytheir aspiring ambition ; though afterwards all the rest, as op­portunity occurred, had the same fate.
The occasions of such revolts were various ; though theprincipal were deficiencies in their quotas of tribute andshipping, and refusals of common service. For the Athe­nians exerted their authority with exactness and rigour, andlaid heavy loads upon men, who had neither been accus­tomed nor were willing to bear oppression. Their me­thod of command was soon perverted; they no longercared to make it agreeable, and in general service disal­lowed an equality, as it was now more than ever in theirpower to force revolters to submission. But these points theconfederates had highly facilitated by their own proceed­ings. For, through a reluctancy of mingling in frequentexpeditions, a majority of them, to redeem their personalattendance, were rated at certain sums of money, equivalentto the expence of the ships they ought to have furnished.
• Cimon was a great general) a worthy patriot, brave, open, and ingeni­ous, upright in his political conduct like Aristides, and though an able po­litician, yet not so mischievously refined as to discard honesty and sincerityfrom public measures. His father Miltiades, after performing most signalservices to his country, was heavily fined, thrown into prison, because una­ble to pay, and there ended his days. Cimon afterwards paid the fine, is nowgoing also to perform great services to the state, is afterwards banished, butrecalled, and again employed in foreign commands, dying at last in theservice of his country, highly regretted, not only at Athens, but throughoutGreece.







OCR Output








B. III. YEAR IV. BEFORE CHRIST 428. 215


" so that, either they must be unable thus divided to make" head against you, if you singly attack them, or the union" of us both they will not be able to face.
" Let no one amongst you imagine, that this will be en-" dangering your own domestic welfare for the sake of fo-" reigners with whom you have no connexion. For though" Lesbos lies apparently at a great distance from you, yet the" conveniences of it will lie near at hand for your service." For the war will not be made in Attica, as such a one" supposeth, but in those parts whence Attica deriveth its sup-" port. Their revenue ariseth from the tribute paid by their" dependents. And that revenue will be increased if they" can compass the reduction of us. For then not a soul will" dare to revolt, and their own will be enlarged by the addi-" tion of our strength, and more grievous burdens will be" laid upon us, as being the last who have put on their yoke." On the other hand, if with proper alacrity you undertake" our support, you will gain over a State possessed of a con-" siderable navy, that acquisition you so greatly want; and" you will more easily be enabled to demolish the Athenians," by withdrawing their dependents from them: For then," every one of that number will with assurance and confi-" dence revolt—and you yourselves be cleared of the bad im-" putation you at present lie under, of rejecting those who" fly to you for protection. If, added to this, you manifest" your views to re-establish the general freedom, you will so" considerably strengthen the sinews of war, that all resist-" ance will be unavailing.
" Reverencing therefore as you ought, these hopes which" Greece hath conceived of you ;—Reverencing further Olym-" pian Jove, in whose temple we now stand, like supplicants
" distressed and suing for redress Grant to the Mitylene-
" ans the honour of your alliance, and undertake their pro-" tection. Reject not the intreaties of men, who have now" indeed their lives and properties exposed to dangers merely" their own, but whose deliverance from their present plunge







OCR Output








B. III. TEAR VI.—BEFORE CHRIST 426.


" Then they cannot belong to those of our party." The otherreplied, " They must, if you fought yesterday at Idomene."" We fought no where yesterday; we suffered the day before" in our retreat from Olpae." " But we fought yesterday" against those Ambraciots, who were advancing from the" city to relieve you." When the herald heard this, andfound that the army of relief from the city was thus destroy­ed, he burst into a groan ; and, quite overpowered with theweight of the present calamities, he went off abruptly, andwithout renewing his demand about the dead.
During the whole course of this war, no other Grecian citysuffered so great a loss in so short a time. I have not pre­sumed to mention the number of the slain, because it is saidto have been incredibly great, when compared with the sizeof their city. But I am well convinced, that, if in compliancewith the advice of the Athenians and Demosthenes, the Acar-nanians and Amphilochians would have proceeded to theexcision of Ambracia, they might have done it with a bareshout of their voice. But they dreaded its falling into thehands of the Athenians, who might prove worse neighboursto them than the old.
But to return. A third part of the spoils was bestowedupon the Athenians, the rest was divided amongst the confe­derate cities. Those allotted the Athenians were lost at sea.For the three hundred suits of armour which are reposited inthe Temples of Athens, were selected for Demosthenes, whonow returned thither, and brought^them with him. Thedread he had been under ever since his miscarriage in iEto-lia was quite dispelled by the good service he had now per­formed.
The Athenians, with their squadron of twenty sail, werenow returned to Naupactus ; and, since the departure of theAthenians and Demosthenes, the Acarnanians and Amphilo­chians had granted by treaty to those Ambraciots and Pelo-ponnesians, who had refuged with Salynthius and the Agrae-ans, a safe retreat from amongst the Oeniadae, who had also







OCR Output








B. III. TEAR V. BEFORE CHRIST 427. 243


" ought not therefore with the rigour of judges to inflict the" exactest punishments upon these offenders. We ought" rather to provide for futurity, and by moderate correction" still to preserve those cities in a full capacity of paying us" the needful tribute. To keep men firm in their duty, we44 should scorn the expedient of severe and sanguinary laws," since mild discretionary caution would better answer the" purpose. This prudent conduct we are now reversing, if," when re-possessed of a city stripped of its former liberty" and ruled with violence, sufficient motives of revolt, that it" may again become independent; if now we judge, that" this ought to be avenged with a weight of severity. Men" who have known what liberty is, ought not to be too se-" verely chastised, if they have dared to revolt; but we" ought to observe them with timely vigilance before they" revolt, to prevent their taking the least step towards it, or" even once entertaining a thought about it; at least, when" we have quelled the insurrection, the guilt should be fas-" tened upon as few as possible.
" Consider, I beseech you, with yourselves, how greatly" you will err in this, and in another respect, if Cleon's ad-" vice be approved. For now, the populace of all the cities" are generally well-affected towards us. They either refuse" to concur with the few in their revolts; or, if their con­currence be forced, they instantly turn enemies to those" who forced them ;—and you proceed to determine the" contest, assured that the populace of the adverse city will" be active in your favour. But if you doom to general" excision the people of Mitylene, those who had no share" in the revolt; who, when once they had got arms into
" their hands, spontaneously delivered up the place ;
" you will be guilty, first of base ingratitude, for murdering" your own benefactors,—and you will, next, establish such" a precedent, as the factious great above all things wish to" see. For then, whenever the latter effect the revolt of" cities, they will instantly have the people attached to their







OCR Output








B. III. YEAR V. BEFORE CHRIST 427. 265


where most of their own houses were situated, and the har­bour which points towards the forum and the continent.
The day following they skirmished a little with their mis­sive weapons, and both parties sent out detachments into thefields, to invite the concurrence of the slaves, upon a promiseof their freedom. A majority of slaves came in to the assist­ance of the people, and the other party got eight hundredauxiliaries from the continent.
After one day's respite they come again to blows. Thepeople get the better now, by the advantage of their strongposts and their numbers. The women with notable bold­ness assisted in the combat, by throwing tiles from the tops•f the houses, and sustaining the tumult beyond their sex.About the close of the evening, the few were forced to fly,and then apprehensive, lest the people should rush down up­on and so at a shout seize the dock and put them to thesword, in order to stop their passage, they set fire to thehouses all round the forum and to such as were adjacent,sparing neither their own nor those of their enemies. Thelarge effects of the merchants were consumed in the flames,and the whole city was in danger of being reduced to ashes,had a gale of wind arose to drive the flame that way.—-This put a stop to the contest, and brought on a cessation,when both sides applied themselves to strict guard forthe night. The Corinthian vessel, after this victory on theside of the people, stole privately away; and many of theauxiliaries, who crept off unperceived, repassed to the oppo­site shore.
The day following, Nicostratus, the son of Diotrephes,who commanded the Athenian squadron, comes up to theirassistance with his twelve sail from Naupactus and five hun­dred heavy-armed Messenians. He forthwith negotiated anaccommodation, and persuades them to make up the affairwith one another, by instantly condemning the ten princi­pal authors of the sedition (who immediately fled), and per­mitting all others to continue in the city, upon articles







OCR Output








202 THE PELOPONN£SIAN WAR.


The Macedonians, unable to make head against the nu­merous army by which they were invaded, retired within thewalled and fortified places of the country, which at this timewere not many. But Archelaus son of Perdiccas, succeed­ing his father in the kingdom, built those fortresses whichare now there, opened the roads, and made many other regu­lations, both in the military way about horses and arms, andin other public matters, more than all the eight precedingkings put together. The Thracian army from Doberuabroke first into that part of the country, which was formerlyin the possession of Philip. They took Eidomene by storm;and got Gortynia, Atalante, and some other places by com­position, which were readily brought to capitulate, out oftheir regard for Amyntas, whose son Philip now appearedamongst them. They also laid siege to Europus, but werenot able to reduce it. They afterwards advanced into theother Macedonia, lying to the left of Pella and Cyrrhus.Within these, they did not advance into Bottiaea and Pieria;but ravaged Mygdonia, Grestonia, and Anthemus. TheMacedonians never once thought of being able to makehead against them with their foot; but, sending for horsefrom their allies in the upper Macedonia, wherever by theadvantage of ground a few could encounter with many, theymade frequent attacks upon the Thracian army. Theymade so strong an impression, that nothing could resist suchexcellent horsemen and so completely armed. For thisreason, the enemy enclosed them about with their numerousforces, and thus made it exceeding hazardous for them tofight against such manifold odds of numbers ; so that at lastthey were forced to give over these skirmishes, judging itimprudent to run any hazards against so large an inequalityof strength.
Sitalces, at a parley held with Perdiccas, imparted tohim the motives of the war. And, as the Athenians were notyet come up with their fleet, because diffident of his punc­tuality to the engagement between them, and had only senthim presents and embassadors, he detached part of his army







OCR Output








Discourse hi. lvii


give, perhaps applaud him, for his great care to preventconfusion, and to give a neat and precise conception of allthat passeth. He constantly gives notice, when he is ne­cessitated, by the method he laid down for himself, to makesuch transitions: And, when we have been amused withwhat looks like a ramble from an engaging part of history,but is really a coincidence of events not to pass unheeded jwhen we have been so long at it, that we are convinced itlies in the road, and is no excursion at all; yet we are gladto see him re-connect, and land us on a spot, where we arealready well acquainted. He shews a steady and inviolableattachment to chronology, a necessary attendant upon his­tory. But the chronology of Thucydides is like a herald,that exactly marshals a long stately procession, adjusts therank, clears the way, and preserves every step distinct andunincumbered.
No writer had done this before him. No settled JErawas yet in use, not even the famous one of the Olympiad.The several States of Greece computed time by a methodof their own. It was not easy to make those methods coin­cide with one another. The Athenians reckoned by theirannual archons; the Lacedaemonians by their ephori; theArgives by the years of the priestess of Juno. The seasonsof the year, when the two former entered on their offices,were fixed, but did not suit together in point of time ; thebeginning of the years of the latter was variable, since itdepended on the death or removal of a predecessor. Thu­cydides, to avoid confusion, left all these artificial jarringrules, and adhered to the course of nature. He divided thenatural year into two halves, into a summer and winter. Hissummer includes the spring, and reacheth from the vernalto the autumnal equinox; the other half-year is compre­hended in his winter. He always records eclipses, as strangeevents, and proper concomitants for the horrors of this war.I must not be so sanguine as to imagine, that he supposedsuch appearances might some time or other be reduced to
Vol. I. H







OCR Output








\% THE PEL0PONNESIAN WAR.


remes, but consisted chiefly of vessels of fifty oars and bargesof the more ancient model. And it was but a little while be­fore the Median war and the death of Darius who succeededCambyses in the kingdom of Persia, that the tyrants of Sicilyand the Corcyreans became masters of any considerable num­ber of triremes. For these last were the only instances of anaval strength in Greece, before the invasion of it by Xerxes,that deserve particular mention. The vessels of the iEgine-tae, of the Athenians, and some others, were few in number,and most of them but of fifty oars. It was not till later times,when the Athenians had war with the iEginetae and also ex­pected the approach of Xerxes, that at the persuasion of The-mistocles they built those ships with which they fought suc­cessfully against the Barbarians; and even these were notyet compleatly decked over.
Such therefore were the navies of Greece, both of an earlierand later date. And the states to which they belonged gain­ed by them considerable strength, through an increase oftheir revenue and the enlargement of their dominions. Em­barkations grown more frequent, especially to those who werepent up in a narrow soil, occasioned the reduction of the isles:but for a land war, and in consequence of that, an accessionof power, none such was at that time known. All conflicts ofthat sort, which ever happened, were-disputes of boundariesbetween contiguous states. The Grecians had not yet launch­ed forth into distant expeditions, nor aimed ambitiously atforeign conquests. There were no dependent cities, whichfurnished quotas at the will of others who gave them law; nordid those who were upon equality concur in any joint under­taking ; each petty state took up arms occasionally in its owndefence against the incroachments of its neighbours. At most,the greatest division of Greece that ever happened was in theold rupture between the Clulcideans and Erctrians, whenleagues were formed in favour of both.
By these means was the growth of many states prevented,and that of the Ionians by a different cause—the great and







OCR Output













OCR Output








136 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


Pericles seeing their minds thus chagrined by the presentstate of their affairs, and in consequence of this intent uponunadviseable measures, but assured within himself of theprudence of his own conduct in thus restraining them fromaction, called no general assembly of the people, nor heldany public consultation, lest passion, which was more alivethan judgment, should throw them into indiscretions. Hekept strict guard in the city, and endeavoured as much aspossible to preserve the public quiet. Yet he was alwayssending out small parties of horse, to prevent any damagethat might be done near the city, by adventurous stragglersfrom the army. By this means, there happened once atPhrygii a skirmish between one troop of the Athenian horseaccompanied by some Thessalians, and the horsemen of Boe-otia, in which the Athenians and Thessalians maintainedtheir ground, till some heavy armed foot reinforced the Ba-otian horse. Then they were forced to turn about, and somefew, both Thessalians and Athenians, were slain. Howeverthey fetched off their bodies the same day without the enemy'sLeave, and the next day the Peloponnesians erected a trophy.The aid sent now by the Thessalians was in consequence ofan ancient alliance between them and the Athenians. Theseauxiliaries consisted of Larisseans, Pharsalians, Parasians,Cranonians, Peirasians, Gyrtonians, Pheraeans. Those fromLarissa were commanded by Polymedes and Aristonus, eachheading those of his own faction; those from Pharsalus, byMenon ; and those from the rest of the cities had their res­pective commanders.
The Peloponnesians, when the Athenians made no shew ofcoming out against them, broke up from Acharnae, and laidwaste some other of the Athenian boroughs, which lay betweenthe mountains Parnethus and Brilissus.
During the time of these incursions, the Athenians sentout the hundred ships they had already equipped, and whichhad on board a thousand heavy-armed soldiers and four hun­dred archers, to infest the coast of Peloponnesus. The com­







OCR Output








S. III. 'VJBAR V.—BEFORE CHRIST 427. 235


" with peculiar regard; and then, they never would have" been that insolent people we have found them now. For" so remarkably perverse is the temper of man, as ever to" contemn whoever courts him, and admire whoever will not
* bend before him.
" Let condign punishment therefore be awarded to their" demerits. Let not the guilty be avenged upon the heads"of the _/«*>, and the bulk of offenders escape unpunished." The whole people to a man have rebelled against us, when" it was in their power to have been sheltered here, and now
* again to be reinstated in their former seats. But they"judged the danger would be lessened by the general concur-" rence with the few, and so all revolted in concert.
" Extend further your regards to the whole body of your" dependents ; for if you inflict the same punishments on" those who revolt by compulsion of enemies, and who revolta on pure deliberate malice, which of them, do you think," will not seize the least pretext to throw off your yoke ;" when, if he succeeds, his liberty is recovered, and, though" he fails, the hurt is so easy to be cured ? Besides this, our" lives and fortunes will be endangered upon every single at-" tempt which shall be made. Suppose we succeed, we only" recover an exhausted ruinated city, but shall for the future" be deprived of the revenue arising from it, the essence of" our strength : But, if we cannot prevail, we shall enlarge" the number of enemies we already have: And at a time" when we ought to be employed in resisting our present ad-" versaries, we shall be intangled in wars against our own de-" pendents. We ought not therefore to encourage the hope," whether raised by the force of intreaty, or purchased by the" force of corruption, that their errors are but the errors of" men, and shall therefore be forgiven. The damage they" have done was not involuntary, but they have been delibe-" rate determined villains: Forgiveness is only for those who" erred not by design.
" Moved by the ardency and zeal of my former plea, you







OCR Output








fell I. INTRODUCTION, 109


" bodily labour, without wealth either in the purses of indivi-" duals, or in any public fund. Again, in wars of long con-" tinuance, or wars by sea, they are quite unpractised; since" the hostilities in which they have been embroiled with one" another have been short and transient, in consequence of" their poverty. Such people can neither compleatly man" out a fleet, nor frequently march land-armies abroad," abandoning the care of their domestic concerns, even" whilst from these they must answer a large expence, and," more than this, are excluded the benefit of the sea. Funds" of money are a much surer support of war, than contribu-" tions exacted by force. And men, who subsist by the la-" bour of their hands, are more ready to advance a service" with their bodies than with their money; since the former," though exposed, they strongly presume will survive the dan-" ger, but the latter, they apprehend, must be too speedily ex-" hausted, especially if the war run out into a greater length" than they expect, which will probably be the case. In a" single battle, it is true, the Peloponnesians and their con-" federates are able to make head against united Greece ;" but they are not able to support a war of continuance" against an enemy in all respects provided better than" themselves; since, by one general council they are not"guided, but execute their momentary schemes in sudden" and hasty efforts: since, farther, having all of them an" equality of suffrage, and being of different descents, each" of them is intent on the advancement of a separate inter-" est. In such circumstances no grand design can ever" be accomplished. Some of them are eager to obtain a" speedy vengeance on a foe; others are chiefly intent on" preserving their substance from unnecessary waste. It is" long before they can meet together to consult: and then," with great precipitancy they form their public determina-" tions, as the largest part of their time is devoted to domes-" tic concerns. Each thinks it impossible, that the public" welfare can be prejudiced by his own particular negligence,Vol. I. 2 E







OCR Output








B. II. YEAR II. BEFORE CHRIST 430.


" thinks aright, and yet cannot communicate his own thoughts," is just as insignificant as if he could not think at all. He" that enjoys both these faculties in perfection, and yet is an" enemy to his country, will in like manner, never say any" thing for his country's good : Or, though he love his coun-" try, and be not proof against corruption, he may prostitute"every thing to his own avarice. If therefore you judged" my qualifications in all these respects to be in some mode-" rate degree superior to those of other men, and were thus" drawn into a war by my advice, there can certainly be no" reason why I should be acccused of having done you wrong." Those indeed who are already in the fast possession of all" the ends attainable by war must make a foolish choice if" they run to arms : But, if once under a necessity, either" through tame submission to be enslaved by a neighbour-" power, or by a brave resistance to get the mastery over" them—he who flies danger in such a case, is much more" worthy of reproach than he who meets it with bold defiance.
" I indeed am the man I was, and of the mind I was." It is you whose resolutions have wavered ;—you who," whilst unhurt, through my persuasion resolved on war, and" repent so soon as you feel its strokes—who measure the" soundness of my advice by the weakness of your own judg-" ments, and therefore condemn it, because the present disasters" have so entirely engaged the whole of your attention, that" you have none left to perceive the high importance of it to" the public. Cruel indeed is that reverse of fortune which" hath so suddenly afflicted you, dejecting your minds and" dispiriting your former resolutions ! Accidents sudden and" unforeseen and so opposite to that event you might reasona-" bly have expected, enslave the mind;—which hath been your" case in all the late contingencies, and more particularly so" in this grievous pestilence. Yet men who are the constitu- '" ents of such a mighty State, and whose manners have been" by education formed for its support, ought never to want" that inward fortitude which can stem the greatest of afflic-







OCR Output








t A survey of the History.


and ardor of Homer. The Athenians had the better ; yet notso decisively, as to think proper to continue in their post, sincethey re-embark, and sail back to Catana.
The winter, it is true, was approaching, which both sidesspend in negociations for the acquisition of allies. That atCamarina, where ambassadors from both the warring partiesare at the same time admitted to an audience, is particularlyrecited. Hermocrates, in behalf of Syracuse, makes the firstaddress. " It is masterly, like all that Hermocrates per-" forms. It is designed to convince the Camarineans, how" insidious and how vile the schemes of the Athenians had" ever been, and still continue to be. He arraigns all their" politics and all their conduct since the Persian invasion ;" and gives that artful turn to his remarks, which might" well deter others from entering into any connexion or alli-" ance with them. His strokes are severe and cutting. He" makes use of the figures, which give force and energy to" discourse. No person better understood the common wel-" fare of Sicily ; and no person could better explain it. He" unfolds the political scheme at present in agitation ; de-" clares the consequence in case the Athenians prevail, to" alarm the concern of the Camarineans for their country," and further to alarm their fears for themselves. He even" threatens them with a severe revenge, in case the Syracu-" sans, without their aid, get the better of the invaders." Inshort, if the Camarineans had been good Sicilians, his argu­ments must have prevailed.
Euphemes, who is the mouth of the Athenian embassy»n this occasion, makes a bold and spirited defence for hiscountry. " He at once briskly attacks Hermocrates for the" bitter imputations he had cast upon Athens. He asserts"her fair reputation, and justifies her series of politics ever" since the invasion of Xerxes. Liberty had been the ob­ject of all her care and all her conduct. The Athenians" had guarded, had established it in Greece ; and were" come to support and secure it in Sicily. He throws back







OCR Output








DISCOURSE I.


I can only say that he was undoubtedly a serious man, andof a large fund of solid sense, which deriving originally fromthe bounty of nature, he had most certainly improved by aregular and sound education.
For a reason of much less weight, Antipho is assignedfor his master in rhetoric—because he speaks handsomely ofhim in the eighth book. He there indeed pays due acknow­ledgment to the merit of Antipho as a speaker; but it can­not be inferred from hence, that he had ever any connexionwith him. Others have made Antipho a scholar of Thucy-dides*, with full as little reason. Thucydides certainly wasnever a teacher by profession. It is pity to waste so muchtime on uncertainties. It is certain Thucydides had a libe­ral education, though the particular progress of it cannotnow be traced.
But, to shew the peculiar bent of his genius, and a re­markable prognostic what sort of person he would prove, thefollowing story is recorded by several authors, and dated byMr. Dodwell in the fifteenth year of his age.—His fathercarried him to the Olympic games. He there heard Hero­dotus read his history to the great crowd of Grecians assem­bled at that solemnity. He heard him with fixed attention;and, at length, burst out into tears. " Tears childish in­deed !" it hath been remarked: But however such as fewchildren would have shed, and highly expressive of his in­ward spirit. The active aspiring mind of Themistocles wasnot stronger shewn, when the trophy of Miltiades wouldnot let him be at rest; nor the genius of the lad at West­minster-school, when he could not sleep for the colours inWesminster-hall. Herodotus is said to have observed it,and to have complimented Olorus on his having a son, thathad so violent a bent to letters. A similar passage in anyperson's life would always be called to mind, when he wasthe subject of conversation.
In about two years more, Thucydides was obliged bj
• Plutarch's Livef of the ten Orators-







OCR Output








258 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


" py in the uninterrupted possession of your own rights, and" not compelled to receive law from others, as was our fate." Nay, to the very last moment, before this blockade was" formed against you, when we calmly invited vou to be quiet" and neutral, you insolently refused. Which therefore is" the people, on whom all Greece may fasten her hatred more" deservedly than on you, who have made it a point to exert" your bravery in ruining your country ? Those former good" dispositions you have so largely boasted, you have now" shewn plainly to be repugnant to your genius. What" your natural turn hath ever been, the event hath with" truth ascertained. The Athenians took the road of vio-" lence, and you attended them through all the journey.—" And thus, ample proof hath been exhibited by us, that" against our wills we served the Persian, and that you with" most chearful disposition have promoted the Athenian" tyranny.
" But in regard to your finishing charge against us as
" guilty of excessive outrage and injustice: that, con-
" trary to every law, in the midst of peace, on a day of" sacred solemnity, we seized upon your city.—This great" offence, in our opinion, is less to be imputed to us than to" yourselves. Had we marched indeed against your city in" a hostile manner, had we scaled your walls and put your" property to fire and sword, the charge had then been just." But if men, of the first rank amongst you both for wealth" and birth, desirous to put a stop to your foreign combina-" tions, and recal you to the common institutions of all" Boeotians ; if such at their own free motion invited our" presence, wherein are we unjust ? For the leaders, in all" cases, are greater transgressors than the followers. Though," in the present, neither are they in our judgments, nor are
" we transgressors. They were citizens as well as you;
" they had larger concerns at stake ; and therefore opening" their gate and receiving us within their walls as friends







OCR Output








322 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


to some notice received that he was bent on landing upon theisland ; as the soldiers, terribly incommoded by the straitnessof their stations, and resembling besieged more than besiegers,were eager for this bold adventure. Demosthenes was ani­mated more to the attempt because the island had lately beenset on fire. Before this accident, as it had been quite coveredover with wood, and was pathless, because ever uninhabited,he durst not think of such a step, and judged all these cir­cumstances to be for the enemy's advantage. For, though amore numerous army should have landed against them, theywere enabled terribly to annoy them from posts undescried.What errors might be committed, or how large their strength,might be more easily concealed on that side by the covert ofthe woods ; whereas all the errors of his own army would lieclear and open to observation, when the enemy might sudden­ly attack, and in what quarter they pleased, since battle mustbe entirely in their own option. On the other side, shouldhe force them to a close engagement on rough and woodyground, the smaller number, by being skilled in the passes,he imagined, must prove too hard for a superior numberwithout such experience ; that by this means his own force,merely on account of its numbers, might be imperceptiblydestroyed, as it could not be discerned which part of it washardest pressed, and stood most in need of support.
These inward suggestions were more prevalent in themind of Demosthenes from the remembrance of his iEtoliandefeat, which was partly owing to the woods amongst whichhe engaged. But as the narrowness of their station hadnecessitated his soldiers to land sometimes upon the skirts ofthe island, and under the cover of an advanced guard, todress their repast, a soldier, though entirely without design,set t!i5"wood on fire, which spread but slowly, till a briskgale happening to arise, the greatest part of it was unex­pectedly destroyed by the flames. Demosthenes, havinggained by this means a clearer view of the Lacedaemonians,found them more numerous than from the quantity of vie­







OCR Output








174 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


having been forced to feed upon one another; they held aparley about their surrender with the Athenian officers, whocommanded in the siege*, Xenophon, the son of Euripides,Hestiodorus, the son of Aristoclides, and Phanomachus, theson of Callimachus. They, sensible of the hardships theirtroops suffered by long lying abroad in the winter season, andthat the carrying on of the siege had already cost Athens twothousand talentsf, granted them a composition. The terms
agreed on were these " That they should quit the place
" with their wives, their children, and auxiliaries, every man" with one suit of .clothing, but the women with two ; and with" a certain sum of money to defray the expence of their de-
" parture." By virtue of this composition they went away
to Chalcis, where every one shifted for himself. But the Athe­nians called their^r/wc/s to account for their conduct, becausethey had signed this composition without their privity (forthey thought it in their power to have made them surrender atdiscretion), and afterwards sent to Potidaea some of their peo­ple whom they settled in a colony there.—These things weredone this' winter, and so ended the second year of this war,the history of which hath been compiled by Thucydides.
• In this siege of Potidaca, two persons served amongst the heavy-armedas private soldiers, one of whom was the glory of human nature ; and theother the glory and bane of his country: I mean the divine Socrates, andat this time young Alcibiades. Plutarch (in the life of Alcibiades) says,they lay in the same tent, and fought always side by side- Once, in a sharpskirmish, both of them distinguished themselves above all their fellow-sol-diers. Alcibiades at length was wounded and dropped; Socrates stoodover and defended him, and saved both him and his arms from the enemy.Socrates therefore had the justest right to the public reward, as the personwho had behaved best in this action. But when the gtneralt, on accountof Alcibiades's quality, shewed a great desire to confer honour upon him.Socrates, willing also to increase his ardour for gallant actions, turned wit­ness in his favour, and procured bim the wreath and the public present ofacompleat suit of armour. Socrates coveted no recompence for brave ex­ploits but the consciousness of having performed them, and young Alcibi­ades was to be nursed up to virtue. He was capable of every degree eitherof virtue or vice : And Socrates always endeavoured to encourage him inthe former, and give his eager and enterprising soul the just direction.
+ 387.500.'. sterling.







OCR Output








B. III. 245 YEAR V. BEFORE CHRIST 427.


had got the start of a day and a night. The Mitylene an am­bassadors amply furnished them with wine and barley-cakes,and promised them great rewards if they arrived in time.By this means they were so eager to accelerate the passage,that even whilst plying the oar they eat their cakes dipped inwine and oil; and whilst one half of the number refreshedthemselves with sleep, the other kept rowing amain. So for­tunate were they that not one adverse blast retarded theircourse. The former vessel, as sent on a monstrous errand,had not hastened its passage in the least; and the latter wasmost intently bent on expedition. That indeed got before toMitylene, but only long enough for Paches to read over thedecree, and give orders for its immediate execution. At thatcrisis the latter arriveth, and prevented the massacre. Tosuch an extremity of danger was Mitylene reduced.
The other Mityleneans, whom Paches* had sent to Athensas deepest concerned in the revolt, were there put to death,according to the advice of Cleon. And the number of theseamounted to somewhat above a thousand.
The Athenians, further, demolished the walls of Mityleneand took away their shipping. They did not for the futureenjoin an annual tribute upon the Lesbians, but dividing thewhole island into shares (except what belonged to Methymne),three thousand in the whole, they set apart three hundred ofthese as sacred to the Gods, and sent some of their own peo­ple, who were appointed by lot, to take possession of the rest,as full proprietors. The Lesbians, as tenants of these, wereobliged to pay them two Mynve] yearly for every share, inconsideration of which they had still the use of the soil.—The
• We hear no more in this history of Paches, who certainly, in the re­duction of Lesbos, had done a great service to his country, and had behavedthrough the whole affair with great discretion and humanity And jetPlutarch tells us in two passages (in the live) of Aristides and Nicias) thatat his return he was called to account for his conduct during his command,and fmding he was going to be condemned, his resentment and indignationrose so high, that he instantly slew himself in court.
t 6/. 9s. 2f/. sterling.Vol. I. 2 Y







OCR Output








Discourse hi. xcvii


" ought to believe it, and to prepare for their defence. Fear" will unite all Sicily against the invaders. Athens will onlyu reap disgrace, but Syracuse abundant glory on this occasion." Large armaments are seldom successful; they moulder" away for want of supplies, or are ruined for want of con-" duct. They should therefore prepare for gallant resistance," by getting every thing in readiness at home, and strength-" ening themselves by foreign alliances. They should do" more ; they should at once put out to sea, and dispute their" very passage with the enemy. A defeat, or even delay" thus given them, might oblige them to give up the pro-"ject. He supports his advice by many strong and judici-" ous arguments ; and ends with warm exhortations to his" countrymen to be lively and active, by no means to de-" spise the enemy except in action, but vigorously and with" all their foresight to prepare for resistance, since their ene-" mies are undoubtedly at sea, and only not arrrived on their" coasts."
Such advice was now given to the people of Syracuse byHermocrates. , That community, it is evident, was full ofcabal and faction, since this worthy patriot was regarded asa party-tool and a public incendiary. Athenagoras, the blus­tering demagogue who replies, treats him in this light. Hisvirulence shews, that he regarded Hermocrates, as one whowanted by any means whatever to force himself into employ­ment. He seems more alarmed for the lucrative posts of theState than for the welfare of his country. He throws out adeal of good-sense, but in a very impertinent and scurrilousmanner. Such are the persons, who study popularity morethan duty, and sacrifice all their talents to ambition or privatelucre.
He affirms, that " none but cowards and traitors wish" the Athenians might not invade them, and so infallibly" meet their destruction : But the whole account is a glaring" falsehood, the forgery of a factious cabal. He appeals to" his audience whether it carries the least probability with
Vol. I. N







OCR Output








DISCOURSE I.
ON THE
LIFE OF THUCYDIDES.
IT is a natural piece of curiosity, either when we haveread a book we like, or hear one commended, to enquire afterthe author. We acquiesce not in his bare name ; we imme­diately seek farther informations. The stranger shews aninclination to form some acquaintance with him; the readerto improve what he already hath. We at length grow in­quisitive about all that concerns him, and are eager to be letinto the particulars.
Some claim of this kind will no doubt be made in regardto Thucydides. He who endeavours to introduce him togeneral notice, ought at least to have something to say abouthim, and something rather tending perhaps to give favoura­ble impressions. All his editors and translators have reckon­ed this a point of duty incumbent upon them: But, it hathbeen generally performed in a very imperfect and slovenlymanner. His life wrote by Marcellinus, a crude incoherentmorsel, hath been prefixed to all the Greek editions. Thatby Suidas is an unsatisfactory mere dictionary-account. Athird in Greek by an anonymous author is also but a veryslight and shapeless sketch, and seems the work of a gramma­rian, who hath read indeed but very superficially read hishistory. Some incidental escapes from his own pen are themarks, which should be always kept in view by him, whowould give any tolerable account of Thucydides. Writersof a better age and class will contribute now and then a little







OCR Output








XXU SOME ACCOUNT O* DR. SMITH.


" Church into the hands of the Common Council; therefore it" is ordered, that this Council do immediately after such his re-" signation make him a compliment of one hundred and fifty" guineas, for his eminent and good services in the said Church."
In July the same year, he came to the Deanry-house in Ches­ter, with intent to pass the rest of his days there. The fa­vourable reception of his Thucydides induced the Dean, inthis healthy and pleasant retreat, to finish his Translation of" Xenophon's History of the Affairs of Greece:"which he published in one volume 4to. in the year 1770: thisTranslation appeared without any dedication. To form a judg­ment of its merit we may only quote the words of the title page,that it is " by the Translator of Thucydides."
When the Dean retired within the precincts of his Cathe­dral, he had resigned St. George's and held with the Deanrythe parish churches of Handley and Trinity only: till theRectory of West Kirkby,inthe hundred of Wirrall in Cheshire,became vacant by the decease of that excellent magistrate andpersuasive preacher, the Rev. Mr. Mainwaring, Prebendaryof Chester. The Dean was instituted to this Rectory on the4th of October, 1780. This is a valuable living in the pa­tronage of the Dean and Chapter. At this time the Deanresigned the Rectory of Trinity.
Doctor Smith was now Dean of Chester, Rector of Handley,and West Kirkby; but his best parochial preferment happenedlate in life ; he was advanced into his seventieth year, and be­gan to feel the infirmities ever attendant on age and a delicateconstitution. He had hitherto been a constant and powerfulpreacher: he began now to preach less frequently, as every ex­ertion fatigued him exceedingly. But when he could no longerpreach from the pulpit, he preached from the press, by publish­ing in 8vo. " Nine Discourses on the Beatitudes," inthe year 1782*.
• The good and learned Doctor Lowth, late Bishop of London, hiphlycommends these sermons in a letter to the Dean, dated at Fulham, July8th, 1782. Bishop Lowth and Dean Smith were contemporaries at Oxford:where an intimate friendship commenced between them, which continuedtill that year in which these two luminaries of the Church of Christ were" snatched—so Heaven decreed!—away."







OCR Output








btiv A Survey of the History.


" experienced youth alone is liable to such weakness. The44 war now under consideration is a most important point.M It may run out into a great length of time. It is against" Athenians—a remote people—a naval power—abounding" in wealth—excellently provided in all respects. He de-" mands, in every single article, whether they can presume" to become a match for such antagonists ? They should re-" remember the high spirit, the habits of activity and perse-" verance so natural to these Athenians, who are not to be" dejected at the first loss, nor frightened at big words or" haughty threats. Insults indeed must not be brooked;" but, adequate preparations should be made to avenge" them, and time be gained to make such preparations." It would be most prudent to begin a negociation, to spin it" out into length. If affairs can be amicably adjusted, it" would deserve their choice ;—If not, when they are com-" petently enabled, it will be soon enough to act offensively." He dreads not war himself, yet, war cannot be carried on" without money. Ample funds must be provided, a work" of time and deliberation. Circumspection is no real re-" proach; precipitation draws positive mischiefs after it." Lacedaemonians are used to be calm and considerate;" they should not now be cajoled or exasperated out of their"judgment. The Athenians are a wise and dextrous people." The Lacedaemonians should keep that in remembrance," and support their own characters of calmness of spirit and" true manly resolution: They should begin with caution," proceed with temper, end all things amicably if they can ;" if not, when duly prepared and adequately provided, they" might trust the decision to arms."
The Kings of Sparta were ever justled on their thronesby the haughty overbearing Ephori. Sthenelai'das, one ofthat college, answers Archidamus in a short, blunt, properlylaconic speech. " He is severe upon the Athenians, sneers" Archidamus, and avers that Lacedaemonians should not." deliberate upon, but instantly take the field and avenge







OCR Output








A Survey of the History.


menceth in form. It is clearly represented in the whole ofits progress, in all its forms. Every skirmish is a distinctand lively picture. In one of them old Lamachus is killed,and Nicias of course left singly in the whole command.He carries on the siege with vigor and success for a shortspace of time ; but Gylippus from Sparta, and the Pelopon-nesian aids are now only not arrived.
Book VII. " If you would read truly great things,"said a Spartan to Augustus Caesar, " read the Seventh Book" of Thucydides." Thither we have now brought this cur­sory survey. The reader of it will undoubtedly own, thatno Historian ever executed so closely, so strongly, so clearly,and so pathetically as Thucydides. "No fleet but that of" the Athenians," it is the observation of Cicero*, " was" ever able to enter the harbour of Syracuse. The fleet" was only able to atchieve it by the mighty force and" number of three hundred ships. But here first was the" power of Athens defeated, lessened, depressed^ In this" harbour the fame, the empire, the glory of Athens are" judged to have suffered a total wreck." Schemes projectedand actions conducted by Hermocrates and Gylippus theSpartan prove too hard for Nicias, whose phlegm and naturaldiffidence are no match against such vigilance and activity.The besieging party soon becomes as it were the besieged.The Letter of Nicias to the people of Athens represents allthe difficulties to which he finds himself reduced. No manever wrote so precisely and perspicuously about military af­fairs. The reader of it wants no light, no dictionary of arts,or an adept in war to explain the terms ; and can judge, ascould the meanest citizen of Athens to whom it was read,what was proper to be done. Secure in the consciousnessof his own integrity, he neatly reprimands his countrymenfor the great foible in their behaviour, justifies his own con­duct, and begs to be recalled. In short, Nicias is finelyjcharacterized bv his own pen in this epistle.
• Orat. quinla in Vcrrcm.







OCR Output








3S0 THE PELOP0NNE8IAX WAR.


The Athenians therefore, when all was fixed and deter­mined on both sides, crossed over by night to Minoa theisland of the Megareans with six hundred heavy-armed,commanded by Hippocrates, and sat themselves down in ahollow whence the bricks for the walls had been taken,and which lay near enough for their purpose : whilst anotherbody, under Demosthenes the other commander, consistingof light-armed Plateeans, and the Athenian patroles, con­cealed themselves near the temple of Mars, which lies stillnearer. Not a soul within the city knew any thing of thesemotions, excepting those whose vigilance it concerned thisnight to observe them. When the morning was ready tobreak, the plotters of Megara proceeded thus—
Through a series of time they had established a customto have the gates of the long walls opened to them in thenight, by carrying out a wherry upon a carriage, which theypersuaded the officers posted there, they conveyed nightlydown the ditch into the sea, and so went upon a cruize.And before it was light, bringing it back again to the wallsupon the carriage, they conveyed it through the gates, thatit might escape the notice of the Athenian watch on Minoa,who by this means might be eluded, as they never woulddescry any boat in the harbour. The carriage was now atthe gates, which were opened as usual for the reception ofthe wherry. This the Athenians observing (for this was thesignal agreed on), came running from their place of ambushto take possession of the gates before they could be shutagain. The very moment the carriage was between, andobstructed the closing thenl together, both they and theMegarean coadjutors, put the watch which was posted atthe gates to the sword. The Plataans and patroling partiesunder Demosthenes rushed in first to that spot where thetrophy now stands, and having thus gained an entrance (forthe Peloponnesians who were nearest had taken the alarm)the Plataeans made good their ground against those who at­tacked them, and secured the gates till the heavy-armed.Athenians, who were coming up with all speed, had entered.







OCR Output








INTRODUCTION. 13


surprising growth of the Persian power. For Cyrus, after hehad compleated the conquest of Croesus and all the countrywhich lieth between the fiver Halys and the sea, invadedthem and inslaved their towns upon the continent: And Da­rius afterwards, victorious by the strength of a Phoenicianfleet, did the same by the islands.
As for those tyrants, who had any where usurped the go­vernment of Grecian cities,—their whole application beingconfined to their own private concerns, to the guard of theirpersons or aggrandizement of their families—they resided intheir own cities so far as was consistent with their own secu­rity. Nothing worthy of remembrance was atchieved bythem, unless we take into account the frequent broils be­tween them and their neighbours : Not but that the tyrantsof Sicily had advanced their power to a great height. ButGreece in general was thus withheld for a long course oftime from performing any remarkable exploit, by thestrength of her united or the adventurous efforts of her sepa­rate states.
But after that the tyrants of Athens, and all the tyrantsof other parts of Greece, generally and of old subject tothese violent incroachments, notwithstanding their numberand the fresh vigour of the last, were all (except those ofSicily) demolished by the Lacedaemonians:—For Lacedae-mon, ever since it came into the hands of the Dorians, inwhose possession it still continueth though harassed with se­ditions the longest of any place we know, yet hath ever beenhappy in a well-regulated government, and hath always beenexempt from tyrants: For, reckoning to the conclusion ofthis present war, it is somewhat more than four hundredyears that the Lacedaemonians have enjoyed the same polity:On this basis was their power at home founded, and this en­abled them to exert it in regulating other states.—But, afterthat the tyrants were by them extirpated from Greece, notmany years intervened before the battle of Marathon wasfought by the Medes against the Athenians: And in the
Vol. I. Q







OCR Output








B. II. 193 YEAR III. BEFORE CHRIST 429.


" all things, when we come to action, observe the rules of dis-" cipline without hurry and noise: For these are matters of" great importance in every scene of war, and of not the least" in a naval engagement;—and charge your enemies with a" spirit worthy of your former achievements. Great indeed" are the points you are now to decide, the hopes of the Pelo-" ponnesians of making a figure at sea are now either to be" totally demolished, or the power of the sea must become" precarious to the Athenians, even near their own homes." Once more I call to your remembrance, that great part of" these enemies you have already conquered—and the courage" of enemies once conquered is seldom equal to what it was," when unconscious of defeat."
In this manner Phormio encouraged his men.—But thePeloponnesians, when they found that the Athenians wouldnot sail into the gulf and straits, had a mind to compel themto it against their inclinations. At break of day they beganto move, their ships being ranged in lines consisting of four,and stood along their own coasts within the gulf, the rightwing leading the course in the same order as they had lainat anchor. In this wing they had ranged twenty of their bestsailers, with a view that if Phormio should imagine they hada design upon Naupactus, and he himself should hasten to itssuccour, the Athenians might not be able to outsail them andescape their outermost squadron, which composed the rightwing, but be surrounded on all sides. He, just as they ex­pected, being alarmed for that place, which he knew was de­fenceless, no sooner saw them under sail, than against hiswill and in no little hurry he got on board, and sailed alonghis own coast—the land forces of the Messenians marchingalong the adjacent shore to be ready with their assistance.The Peloponnesians seeing them move along in a line shipafter ship, and that they were now within the gulf and nearthe shore, which was what they chiefly wanted—on a signalgiven at once altered their course, pouring down directly up­on the Athenians, all as fast as their ships could advance, in







OCR Output








90 THE PElOPONNESIAtt WAR.


" up those upon interest for immediate service, we are able by" enlarging their pay, to draw away all the foreigners who man" their fleets. The Athenian power is not supported by a natu-" ral but a purchased strength. And our own is less liable to" be injured by the same method, as we are strong in our per-" sons more than in our wealth. Should we gain the victory" but in one single engagement at sea, in all probability we have" done their business ; or, in case they continue the struggle," we shall then have a longer space to improve our naval" practice: And when once we have gained an equality ofu skill, our natural courage will soon secure us the triumph." For that valiant spirit which we enjoy by nature it is im-" possible for them to acquire by rules : But that superiority," with which at present their skill invests them, we may" easily learn to overmatch by practice.
" Those sums of money by which these points are chiefly" to be compassed, we will respectively contribute. For" would it not in reality be a grievous case, when their de-" pendents are never backward to send in those sums which" rivet slavery on themselves, if we, who want to be revenged" on our foes, and, at the same time, to secure ourownpre-" servation—if we should refuse to submit to expences, and" should store up our wealth to be plundered by them, to" purchase oppressions and miseries for ourselves ?
" We have other expedients within our reach to support
" this war, a revolt of their dependents: and, in conse-
" quence of that, a diminution of their revenue, the essence of" their strength; erectingforts within their territory; and many" others not yet to be foreseen. For war by no means yields to" the direction of a pre-determined plan; but of itself, in" every present exigence, confines and methodizeth its own" course. In war, who moves along with a temper in proper" command, hath got the firmest support: But he who hath" lost his temper, is, for that reason, more liable to miscarry.
The wealth reposited in these places must have been very large, consider­ing the great veneration universally paid these deities, and the numerousami valuable offerings sent annually to these famous temples.







OCR Output








DISCOURSE III.


people of Athens to such a pitch of inhumanity; which, how­ever, instantly subsided. They are struck with horror attheir own resolution, and will have it again debated. Weshall hear the two speakers on each side of the question, Cleonand Diodotus.
" Cleon sets out with all the fury and fire of a man, who" hath a bad heart. He hath abjured humanity to shew" himself a most zealous patriot. Eloquent he is acknow-" ledged to have been, and so appears in his invectives" against his own masters and his own tools, the people, for" their foolish commiseration, for their being the eternal" dupes of orators, of subtle and venal speakers. For his" own part, he loves his country and hates her enemies.M Guilt shall never find an advocate in him ; he calls out for" vengeance on the Mityleneans; none but their pensioners," none but men who are bribed and corrupted can offer a" plea in their behalf. He bids his audience throw away all" foolish pity, all womanish forbearance, to fix their atten-" tion on the crimes of the guilty, and not on the horrorsa of their punishment; and give this proof to their depend-" ents, that death shall inevitably be the portion of all re-" volters, that their arms may be henceforth employed in op-" posing their public enemies, and not in chastising their own" subjects."
Diodotus replies in a speech that shews him a real patriot,and a man who thought good-manners, a calm consideratetemper, and a regard to humanity to be very consistentwith the true patriot-spirit. " He therefore defends the re-" committing of their former resolution, since repeated con-" sulfations cannot be prejudicial to the public welfare. It" is a base and odious method to lavish the charge of ig-" norance and venality on men who differ in sentiment; it" robs the public of its ablest counsellors and sincerest" friends. Strict justice, in the present instance, may be" with Cleon; but the future and lasting welfare of their" country is the object now to be kept in view. The punish­







OCR Output








THE
PELOPONNESIAN WAR.
BOOK III
YEAR IV—BEFORE CHRIST 428.
IN the succeeding Summer, the Peloponnesians and allies,when the corn was full-grown, made incursion into Attica,under the command of Archidamus son of Zeuxidamus kingof the Lacedaemonians, and having fixed their camp ravagedthe country. The Athenian cavalry at all convenient placesskirmished with them as usual, and checked the greater num­ber of the light-armed from advancing before the heavy-arm­ed, and infesting the parts adjacent to the city. Having con­tinued here till provisions began to fail, they retired and weredisbanded to their respective cities.
Upon this irruption of the Peloponnesians, Lesbos im­mediately revolted from the Athenians, excepting Methimne.They were well inclined to such a step before the war brokeout, but were discountenanced by the Lacedaemonians, andnow were necessitated to make their revolt sooner than theyintended. They would have been glad to have deferred it,till they had compleated the works they were about for secur­ing their harbour, perfecting their walls and the ships thenupon the stocks—till they had received what they wantedfrom Pontus, both archers .and corn, and whatever they hadalready sent for thither.
The reason was the people of Tenedos then at enmity
with them, those of Methymne, and even some persons ofMitylene underhand, who in a civil broil had received the







OCR Output








he A Surtey of the History.


Our grave Historian is now retired, to make way for states­men and orators to mount the stage, who are very well worthhearing.
The Corcyr6ans, who take the lead, recognize " the ne-" cessity of alliances, which, though sometimes intangle-w ments, are generally security and defence. Wronged as" they now are, they sue for alliance as the means of redress." In granting it to them, the Athenians would shew honour" and virtue, and at the same time promote their own private" interest. The accession of the naval strength of Corcyra" to their own was very well worth the gaining ; in the end," it might preserve their State.—They open the nature of" colonies, shew the original contract between them and the" mother-country; obedience and protection are reciprocal," and imply one another.—They prove that Athens may" grant them alliance, in consistence with all other engage-" ments ; by doing it, may secure herself in time against the" envy and attack of the Peloponnesians; since the naval"strength of Corinth, joined to all the efforts of the latter in" a future war, will be weak and ineffectual against the com-" bined fleets of Corcyra and Athens."
The Corinthians, in their answer, inveigh highly againstthe Corcyreans. " They describe them as a very designing," iniquitous set of men, and a colony in the highest degree" undutiful to its mother-state. " They endeavour to prove" it unjust, and ungrateful too, in the Athenians, to take them" into alliance, and abet their criminal behaviour. They" maintain, that true honour points out another conduct;" and schemes of interest should never supersede the laws" of equity and good-faith. What may happen should be" less regarded, than what on present occasions is strictly" right. They intreat at last, though with a menacing air ;44 and close, with warmly adjuring the Athenians, to stand" neutral in the quarrel."
The Athenians however resolve to enter into a defen­







OCR Output








B. IV. YEAR VII.-—BETORE CHRIST 425. 299


About the same season of the spring, before the cornwas fully grown, the Peloponnesians and allies made theirinroad into Attica. Agis, the son of Archidamus, king ofthe Lacedaemonians, commanded. They fixed their camp,and ravaged the country.
The Athenians now sent out to sea the forty ships alreadyprepared for the Sicilian voyage, under the command ofEurymedon and Sophocles, who stayed behind to bring upthis reinforcement, since Pythodorus the third in the com­mission was already in his post at Sicily. They had ordersalso in the course of the voyage to touch at Corcyra, andprovide effectually for the preservation of those in the city,who were sadly infested by the outlaws posted on the moun­tain. Sixty sail of the Peloponnesians were now upon thatcoast, to act in support of those on the mountain, who, asthe city was sorely oppressed with famine, presumed theyshould with ease carry all before them. Demosthenes fur­ther, who had been in no public employ since his returnfrom Acarnania, procured leave to go on board this fleet withauthority to employ it on the coast of Peloponnesus, if hejudged it for the service.
When they were got to the height of Laconia, intelli­gence is brought them, that " the Peloponnesian fleet is now" in Corcyra." Eurymedon and Sophocles were for makingthe best of their way thither. But it was the advice of De­mosthenes to go first to Pylus, and after they had securedthat place, to proceed in their voyage. This was positivelyrefused; but it so happened, that a storm arose which drovethe whole fleet to Pylus. Demosthenes insisted that theyshould immediately fortify the place, since this was themotive of his attendance in the fleet. He shewed them,that " there was at hand plenty of timber and stone for the" work ; that, beside the strength of its natural situation, the" place itself was barren, as was also the greatest part of the" adjacent country." For Pylus lies at the distance of aboutfour hundred stadia* from Sparta, in the district which was• About forty English miles.







OCR Output








84 THK PKLOPONNESIAN WAR.


the Samians and Milesians about Priene. The Milesians,having the worst in the dispute, had recourse to the Athenians,to whom they bitterly exclaimed against the Samians. Nay,even some private citizens of Samos joined with them in thisoutery, whose scheme it was to work a change in the govern­ment. The Athenians therefore, putting to sea with a fleet offorty sail, landed upon Samos, where they set up a democracy;and exacted from them fifty boys and as many grown men forhostages, whom theydeposited at Lemnos. Theyhad farther,at their departure, left a garrison behind to secure that island.But a body of Samians, who would not submit to the newform of government, and therefore had refuged themselvesupon the continent, having gained the correspondence of themost powerful persons abiding in Samos, and the' alliance ofPissuthncs son of Hystaspes, at that time governor at Sardis,


the scheme nowcarrying on by Pericle9, to extend the sovereignty or Athensby sea. Yet the comic poets and writers of memoirs and private history,give another account of the affair, which it is surprising to find the authorsof the Universal History inclined to think as welt founded as what is givenby Thucydides, that " Pericles engaged the republic in this war, merelyto gratify the resentment of Aspasia, who was a native of Miletus, againstthe Samians." As this Aspasia had all the honour of Pericles's merit im­puted to herself, and he hath suffered a weight of reproach in her behalf,the reader will accept a short account of this famous lady. She is allowedon all hands to have been a woman of the greatest beauty and the first ge­nius ; but averred by some to have been a libertine, a prostitute, a bawd,nay every thing scandalous and vile. Pericles was doatingly fond of her,and got divorced from a wife whom he did not love, to marry her. Shetaught him, it is said, his refined maxims of policy, his lofty imperial elo­quence ; nay, even composed the speeches on which so great a share of hisreputation was founded. The best men in Athens frequented her house,and brought their wives to receive lessons from her of economy and right.deportment. Socrates himself was her pupil in eloquence, and gives herthe honour of that funeral oration which he delivers in the Menexenus ofPlato. There must have been some ground even for complimenting her inthis extraordinary manner. And after every abatement, what must wethink of a lady who was in such high esteem with the greatest men thatever lived at Athens, who taught force to orators, grace to philosophers,and conduct to ministers of state ; in a word, who had Pericles for herlover, and Socrates for her encomiast ? See Bayle's Dictionary, under Peri­cles, and Universal History, vol. vi. p. 415, note. £







OCR Output








$&5-S-,3&5


 


»^/


:7a


n


tdsJ-3-







OCR Output








B. III. 257 YEAR V. BEFORE CHRIST 427'.


" sions, it was always in your power to have recourse to that" Lacedaemonian league, in which you concurred against the" Mede, and about which you make at present the greatest" parade. That would have been amply sufficient to turn" aside our enmity from you ; and, what is above all, had se-" curely enabled you to rectify your measures. But it was" not against your will, neither was it upon compulsion, that" you have solely adhered to the Athenians.
" But, then you rejoin—" It was base to betray your bene-" factors."—Yet it was much more base and more enormous" to betray at once the whole body of Grecians, with whom" you had sworn a mutual defence, than the single Atheni-" ans ; the Athenians truly have inslaved your country ; and" the others would regain its freedom. You have not made" your benefactors the requital which gratitude injoined, or" which is exempted from reproach.—" Injured and oppres-" sed you applied, it is pretended, to them for redress —and" then you co-operated with them in oppressing others. But it" is not more dishonourable to be wanting in any act of grati-" tude, how justly soever it may be due, than to make the re-" turn in a manner in itself unjust. You yourselves by act-" ing thus have afforded undeniable proofs, that you alone" did not join the Mede, from a zeal for the Grecians, but" merely because the Athenians did not join him. You were" desirous to act in concert with the latter, but in opposition" to the former ; and now modestly claim to be recompensed" by your country, for all the iniquitous services you have" done to a party. But, justice will never suffer this. To" Athenians you gave the preference, strive therefore from" them to obtain redress. Cease vainly to allege the mutual" oaths you once exchanged, as if they were obliged at pre­sent to preserve you:—You renounced, you violated first" those oaths, who rather concurred to inslave the iERinet*" and some other people of the same association, than endea-" voured to prevent it; and all without compulsion ; still hap­







OCR Output








INTRODUCTION.


were present, in regular order, both to the greater ahd lesser
states: and the greatest part of them ballotted for war. But,though thus decreed, it was impossible for them, as they werequite unprepared, immediately to undertake it. It was agreedtherefore, that "every state should get in readiness their" several contingents, and no time to be lost." However, inless than a year, every thing needful was amply provided ;and, before its expiration, an irruption was made into Attica,and the war openly on foot. But even this interval was em­ployed in sending embassies to Athens, charged with accusa­tions, that reasons strong as possible for making war mightappear on their side, if those should meet with disregard.
BY the first ambassadors therefore whom the Lacedaemo­nians sent, they required the Athenians " To drive away
the pollution of the Goddess." And the pollution was this—
There was one Cylon, an Athenian, who had been victorat the Olympic games, a person of noble descent, and ofgreat consequence in his own person. He married a daugh­ter of Theagenes, a Megarean, who in those days was tyrantof Megara. This Cylon, asking advice at Delphi about ascheme he had projected, was directed by the God—" To" seize the citadel of Athens upon the greatest festival of" Jupiter." In pursuance of this, being supplied with a partyof men by Thiagenes, and having obtained the concurrenceof his own friends, upon the day of the Peloponnesian Olym­pics, he seized the citadel as instrumental to his tyranny.He imagined that to be the greatest festival of Jupiter, andto bear a particular relation to himself, who had been anOlympic victor. But whether the greatest festival meantwas to be held in Attica, or any other place, he had neverconsidered, nor had the oracle declared. There is a festivalof Jove observed by the Athenians, which is called the great­est festival of Jupiter the propitious. This is celebrated with­out the city, jin full concourse of the people, where manysacrifices are offered, not of real victims, but of artificialimages of creatures peculiar to the country. Concluding
Vol. I. 2 C


 







OCR Output








lxii A Survey of the History.


of this all-grasping rival, but were unable to effect it by*their own strength. They solicit all the confederates to re­pair to Lacedaemon, all full of complaint and remonstranceagainst the Athenians. The Corinthians reserve themselvesfor the finishing charge ; and our author repeats (or makesfor them) their most inveigling and alarming speech on thisoccasion.
" They address the Lacedaemonians with an artful mix-" ture of commendation and reproach, of commendation," for their strict adherence to good faith; of reproach, for" their indolence and sloth. They had suffered the State of" Athens to grow too mighty for their neighbours. Though" the acknowledged deliverers of Greece, they had now for" a length of time taken no notice of the incroachments of" the Athenians ; but, through wilful ignorance and habitual" supineness, had let them grow too big, and able now to en-" slave them all.—They do all they can to irritate and pro-" voke them. They draw an admirable parallel between them" and the Athenians ; invidious and reproachful, but directly" tending to exasperate those whom they want to exasperate." —Then, they warmly renew their applications to the pride" of the Lacedaemonians ; they alarm their fears ; they flatter" and reproach their foibles. They even threaten to abandon4* their league, unless they exert themselves in defence of their" friends; they endeavour to prove the necessity of active" and vigorous measures ; and end with a very artful stroke" of insinuating and persuasive address."
An Athenian embassy, now residing at Lacedaemon, beinginformed of these loud and bitter outcries against their mas­ters, beg an immediate audience. Accordingly, they areadmitted ; not indeed to plead before Lacedaemonians, as theirjudges or superiors—Athenians scorn such self-debasement;but, to vindicate their State from misrepresentations, to clearher reputation, and justify her power.
" With this view, they run over the great services they" had done to Greece, in the time of the Persian invasions:







OCR Output








B. I. INTRODUCTION. 21


Eleans, empty ships and money. And the number of shipsfitted out by themselves amounted to thirty and three thou­sand heavy armed.
When the Corcyreans were informed of these prepara­tions, they went to Corinth, purposely accompanied by am­bassadors from Lacedaemon and Sicyon. There they chargedthe Corinthians " to fetch away their garrison and new set­tlement from Epidamnus, as having no manner of preten­sions there: That, if they had any thing to allege to the con­trary, they were willing to submit to a fair trial in Pelopon­nesus before such states as both sides should approve; andto whichever party the colony should be adjudged, by themit should be held." They also intimated " their readiness torefer the point in dispute to the oracle at Delphos ;—war, intheir own inclinations, they were quite against: But if itmust be so, on their sides-, (they said) mere necessity wouldprescribe the measure ; and if thus compelled to do it, theyshould for assistance have recourse to friends, not eligibleindeed, but better able to serve them than such as they alreadyhad." The Corinthians answered, that " if they would with­draw their fleet and their Barbarians from before Epidamnus,they would then treat of an accommodation; but, till this wasdone, their honour would not suffer them to submit to a re­ference, whilst their friends were undergoing the miseries ofa siege." The Corcyreans replied, that " if they would recalltheir people from Epidamnus, themselves also would do thelike ; but were ready further to agree, that both parties shouldremain in their present situation, under a suspension of arms,till the affair could be judicially determined."
The Corinthians were not only deaf to every proposal, butso soon as ever they had manned their ships and their allieswere come up, dispatching a herald before-hand to declarewar against the Corcyreans, and then weighing anchor witha force of seventy-five ships and two thousand heavy-armed,they stretched away for Epidamnus to make head againstthe Corcyreans. The commanders of this fleet were Aris-
Vol. I. R







OCR Output













OCR Output








138 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


then the command of a garrison somewhere near Methone.He was sensible of the danger it was in, and set forwards withone hundred heavy-armed to its relief. The Athenian armywas then scattered about the country, and their attention di­rected only to the walls ; by which means, making a quickmarch through the midst of their quarters, he threw himselfinto Methone, and, with the loss of but a few who were inter­cepted in the passage, effectually secured the town. For thisbold exploit, he was the first man of all who signalized them­selves in this war, that received the public commendation atSparta. Upon this the Athenians re-embarked and sailedaway, and coming up to Pheia, a town of Elis, they ravagedthe country for two days together. A body of picked men ofthe lower Elis, with some other Eleans, that were got togetherfrom the adjacent country, endeavoured to stop their devas­tations, but coming to a skirmish, were defeated by them.But a storm arising, and their ships being exposed to dangeron the open coast, they went immediately on board, and sail­ing round the cape of Icthys, got into the harbour of Pheia.The Messenians in the mean time, and'some others who hadnot been able to gain their ships, had marched over-land andgot possession of the place. Soon after, the ships, being nowcome about, stood into the harbour, took them on board, andquitting the place put out again to sea. By this time a greatarmy of Eleans was drawn together to succour it, but theAthenians were sailed away to other parts of the coast, wherethey carried on their depredations.
About the same time, the Athenians had sent a fleet ofthirty sail to infes}; the coast about Locris, and at the sametime to guard Euboea. This fleet was commanded by Cleo-
qualities which did honour to the Spartans ; and was free from all theblemishes, which their peculiarity of education was apt to throw upon them,such as haughtiness of carriage, ferocity of temper, and an arrogance whichstudied no deference or condescension to others. He serves his countrymuch by his valour and military conduct, and more by his gentle, humane,and engaging behaviour. In a word, the distinguishing excellencies both ofthe Spartan and Athenian characters seem to have been united in thisBrasidas.







OCR Output








B. IV. TEAR VII.—BEFORE CHRIST 425. 301


The news of this arrived at Sparta during the celebrationof some public festival. They set light by it; assured, that,so soon as they appeared in sight, the enemy would eitherabandon it, or the place be recovered by an easy effort. Andthey were something more dilatory because their army wasyet in Attica.
The Athenians, having completed their works on the sidetowards the land and on the other necessary spots in the spaceof six days, leave Demosthenes with five ships to guard it,and with the larger number resumed their voyage for Cotcyraand Sicily.
But the Peloponnesians in Attica were no sooner adver­tised of this seizure of Pylus, than they marched back withall expedition. The Lacedaemonians, and Agis their king,regarded this affair of Pylus as their own domestic concern.And besides, as they had made the inroad early in the year,and whilst the corn was yet green, many of them laboured un­der a scarcity of provisions. The weather also, which provedtempestuous beyond what was usual in that season, had verymuch incommoded the army. In this manner, many acci­dents concurred to accelerate their retreat, and to render thisthe shortest of all their invasions. For the whole of their stayin Attica was but fifteen days.
About the same time, Simonides, an Athenian command­er, having gathered together a small party of Athenians fromthe neighbouring garrisons and a body of the circumjacentdependents, took possession of Ei'on in Thrace, a colony ofthe Mendeans. It had declared against the Athenians, butwas now put into their hands by treachery. Yet, the Chal-i cideans and Bottiaeans coming immediately to its relief, hewas beat out of it again, and lost a great number of his men.
After the retreat of the Peloponnesians out of Attica, theSpartans*, in conjunction with those of their allies, marched
• The reader will be pleased to take notice, that the word Spartam ishere emphatical. It means those of the first class, the noblest persons idthe community, as is plain from the sequel.
Vol. I. 3 F







OCR Output








B. III. YEAR V. BEFORE CHRIST 427. 241


" his advice. Strict justice, I grant, may be with him ; and," enraged as you are against the Mityleneans, may have a" sudden influence upon you. But we meet not here in judg-" ment upon them, and justly to decide is not now our em-" ployment; we are only to consult how to dispose of them" best for our own advantage.
" In the public communities of men, death is the pe-" nalty awarded to several crimes, to such as are not enor-" mous like this, but of a less guilty nature. Yet, puffed up" with hope, men run all hazards, and no one ever yet hath" boldly incurred the danger, if self-convinced beforehand," that he could not survive the attempt. Where was the" city so bent on revolt, that when its own domestic" strength, or the aid of others, were judged unequal to the" work, durst ever attempt it ? The whole of mankind," whether individuals or communities, are by nature liable" to sin : and a law of infallible prevention will never be" enacted. Men by repeated trials have inforced all kinds" of punishment, attentive, if possible, to restrain the out-" rages of the wicked. And in the early age it is probable," that milder penalties were assigned for the most enormous" wrongs ; but, being found by experience ineffectual, they" were afterwards extended generally to loss of life: This" however is not yet effective. Some terror therefore must" be invented, even more alarming than this, or this will" never sufficiently restrain. But then there is a poverty" which renders necessity daring; there is a power which" renders pride and insolence rapacious. There are other" contingencies, which in the fervour of passions, as every" human mind is possessed by some too stubborn to admit"a cure, drive them on boldly to confront extremities." But the greatest incentives of all are hope and love : This" points out a path, and that moves along according to" direction: This thoughtlessly proposeth the scheme, and" that immediately suggesteth a certainty of success. Thesr







OCR Output








B. II. YEAR III. BEFORE CHRIST 429. 185


of the Barbarians, when they saw them give way, durst notkeep their ground, but fled immediately. Neither of theGrecian bodies knew anything of this engagement, so hastilyhad those advanced, and were supposed to have done it onlyto encamp with greater expedition. But when the Barbari­ans came running back to them in disorderly rout, they re­ceived them into shelter, and all closing firm together stoodquiet the rest of the day. The Stratians durst not directly-assault them, because the other Acarnanians were not yetcome up to their assistance, but were continually slinging atthem from a distance, thus harassing them abundantly, butunable, without better weapons, to make them dislodge : TheAcarnanians only could have attacked them with effectualvigour.
By the favour of a dark night, Cnemus withdrew his armyby a quick march to the river Anapus, which is eighty stadia*distant from Stratus. The next day he obtains a truce tofetch off the dead. And the Oeniadae coming up in a friend­ly manner to his relief, he went to take refuge amongst them,before the Acarnanians could draw their succours together,and from thence the forces which composed his army march­ed to their own homes. But the Stratians erected a trophyon account of their victory over the Barbarians.
The fleet of Corinth and the other confederate states, thatwas to sail from the gulf of Crissa, to attend the orders ofCnemus, and prevent the Acarnanians on the coast from suc­couring those within the land, never arrives : For about thetime of the action at Stratus, they had been compelled tofight the Athenian squadron of twenty ships, stationed atNaupactus under the command of Phormio. Phormio hadwatched their coming out of the gulf, intending to attack sosoon as ever they got out to sea. The Corinthians and theirallies sailed out indeed, yet not so well prepared to fight by sea,as to forward the land expedition on Acaniania. They never
• About eight miles.







OCR Output








43 THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR.


and friend. His enmity was occasioned by an alliance theAthenians had formed with his brother Philip and Derdas,who were jointly in opposition against him. Alarmed atthis, he sent proper persons to Lacedaemon to stir up againstthem a Peloponnesian war, and to draw over the Corin­thians into his interest, in order to bring about the revolt ofPotidxa. He had also been tampering with the Chalci-deans of Thrace and the Bottiaeans to persuade them to re­volt at the same time ; concluding, that if he could bringabout a junction of the adjacent people, he might venture awar against them with greater probability of success. TheAthenians perceived, his scheme, and were desirous to pre­vent the revolt of the cities. They had begun an expedi­tion against his territories with a fleet of thirty ships and athousand heavy-armed, under the command of Achestratusthe son of Lycomedes associated with ten others in this ser­vice. They gave particular orders to the commanders totake hostages from the Potidaeans and to demolish theirwalls, and to keep a watchful eye over the neighbouringcities that they might not revolt. The Potidaeans had al­ready sent ambassadors to the Athenians, to dissuade themif possible from the execution of any new designs againstthem: And had at the same time dispatched an embassyto Lacedaemon along with the Corinthians, instructed toprocure a promise of redress if there should be occasion.But, when their long negotiation at Athens proved quite in­effectual, and the fleet was gone out to sea both against Ma­cedonia and themselves; when, farther, the regency at La-ceda:mon had given a promise to make an irruption intoAttica, if the Athenians should attempt any thing againstPotidaea; upon this encouragement, without loss of time,they revolt in conjunction with the Chalcideans and Bot-tiaeans, all combined by an oath of mutual defence and sup­port. Perdiccas, farther, prevaileth with the Chalcideans toabandon and demolish all their towns upon the sea-coast,and then to remove to Olynthus and fortify that town by a







OCR Output








DISCOURSE III.


the Jews rebelled against theocracy, and would have a manto reign over them, Archons for life succeeded, whoseterm was afterwards abridged to ten years ; then, to a singleyear. All general histories point out the variations, till theycame to the popular form which now prevailed.
The enemy, after heavy depredations, at length evacuatedAttica; and the Athenians take the field to retaliate uponthem. Their squadron had been all the time at sea, cruizingupon and infesting the coasts of Peloponnesus. But, in thewinter, we are called to Athens to see the public funeral ofthose, who were killed in the first campaign. Here, the firsttime it occurs, our author describes this solemnity, and Peri­cles makes the Funeral-oration.
I shall make no reflections on this celebrated performance.Should the reader not think it deserving of its high reputa­tion, I fear the translator will be sadly to blame. It is hardto give such noble ideas their proper energy, and such re­fined ones their due exactness. The great orators of Athenswere always glad to display their abilities on the same oc­casion. Plato hath entered the lists with a high spirit ofemulation, and with a high degree of success: And a greatmaster* this way hath lately made him English. If Thu-eydides suffers by a comparison, which now the unlearnedbut judicious reader is impowered to make, the latter mustbe intreated to observe, that the eloquence of Plato was be­yond dispute more smooth and fluent, more accomplished inall that is beautiful and sweet than the eloquence of Thucy-dides, but an adjudged inferiority in any other respect mustbe laid at the door of his translator.
After such an exhilarating and enlivening piece, for such itmust have been to all who heard it, and must have deter­mined every Athenian to suffer any thing with intrepidityand patience in the cause of his country, a very mournfulscene immediately succeeds, which lays them under such aload of affliction and distress, as no arguments, no philoso-
• Mr. West.Vol. I. K







OCR Output








34 THE PELOPONNESIAK WAR.


there was validity in the arguments of the Corinthians ; but,at the second, they came to a different resolution—not indeedto form such an alliance with the Corcyreans as to have thesame enemies and the same friends (for then, if the Corcyreansshould summon them to join in an expedition against Corinth,their treaty with the Peloponnesians would be broke); but analliance merely defensivej for the reciprocal succour of one an­other, if either Corcyra or Athens or any of their respectiveallies should be assaulted. A war with the Peloponnesiansseemed to them unavoidable ; and they had no mind to leaveCorcyra, which had so great a naval force, for a prey to theCorinthians ; but, to break them to the utmost of their poweragainst one another, that upon occasion they might be the bet­ter able to war with the Corinthians, thus weakened to theirhands, though joined by other states of Greece which had pow­er at sea. At the same time that island appeared to them mostconveniently situated in the passage to Italy and Sicily. Uponthese motives the Athenians received the Corcyreans into theiralliance: And, not long after the departure of the Corinthians,sent ten ships to their aid under the command of Lacedaemonius
When it appeared that the point proposed would not pass unanimously,the crier, at the command of the president in the chair, proclaimed aloud,*' What citizen above fifty years of age hath a mind to speak i" When suchhad been heard, the crier made a second proclamation, that " any Athenian" whatever had liberty to speak." The debate being ended, the presidentin the chair bade the crier put the question. It was decided by holding upof hands. The chairman distinguished the numbers in the affirmative andnegative, and declared the majority. Then the resolution or decree wasdrawn up in form : and the Archon's name who gave title to the year, theday of the month, and the name of the presiding tribe were prefixed.
The public decorum of the Athenians is worthy observation. The sen­timents of age and experience were first to be heard, and then the spiritand resolution of the younger were called in to assist at the public consul­tation. Nay, they carried it farther; no person convicted of profaneness,debauchery, cowardice, or public misdemeanor, was suffered to speak inthis assembly. From them they expected no sound instruction, no disin.terested advice. If any such offered to speak, the president.-! of the assemblyimmediately enjoined them silence ; or, if they were refractory, ordered1their officers to pull them down and turn them out of the assembly.







OCR Output








B. II. 135 YEAR I. BEFORE CHRIST 431.


them. Of these imaginary schemes was Archidamus full,whilst he lay before Acharnae.
The Athenians, so long as the enemy remained about Eleu-sis and the plain of Thriasia, conceived some hopes that theywould advance no farther. They put one another in mind,that Pleistoanax, son of Pausanias king of the Lacedaemonians,when, fourteen years before this war, he invaded Attica withan army of Peloponnesians, came only as far as to Eleusis andThrias, and then retreated without penetrating any farther-that, upon this account he had been banished Sparta, becauseit looked as if he had been bribed to such an unseasonable re­treat. But when they saw the enemy advanced to Acharnae,which was distant but sixty stadia* from Athens, they thoughttheir incursions were no longer to be endured. It appeared, asit reasonably might, a heavy grievance, to have all their inlandsthus ravaged within their sight; a scene like this the young­er sort never had beheld, nor the elder but once—in the Persianwar. The bulk of the people, but especially the younger part,were for sallying out and fighting, and not to stand tamelylooking upon the insult. Numbers of them assembled toge­ther in a tumultuous manner, which was the rise of great con­fusion, some loudly demanding to march out against the ene­my, and others restraining them from it. The soothsayersgave out all manner of predictions, which every hearer inter­preted by the key of his own passions. The Acharnians, re­garding themselves as no contemptible part of the Athenianbody, because their lands had been wasted, in a most earnestmanner insisted upon a sally. The whole city was in a fer­ment, and all their resentment centered on Pericles. Theyquite forgot the prudent conduct he had formerly planned outfor them.—They reproached him as a general that durst nothead them against their enemies, and regarded him as authorof all the miseries which their city endured.
" nets, ifc. t3V. Isfc. all the decks would be crowded with seamen. What"a dashing of oars, music sounding, boatswains bawling; nothing but" hurry and confusion! Such. I am well assured, would then be the case."• About six English miles.







OCR Output








DISCOURSE III. lxi


sive alliance with Corcyra. The war is renewed; and theAthenians send the Corcyreans a petty aid, which theyafterwards reinforce. Corcyra is secured, and all theprojects of the Corinthians are baffled, who are highly ex­asperated against the Athenians, and never will forgivethem.
Another affair soon happens, to embroil them more, andto make the second pretext for a general war. Potidaea, atown in the Isthmus of the Pallene, was a Corinthian colony,but at this time tributary to the Athenians. Its situationbetween two bays, and amongst the Athenian colonies on thecoast of Thrace and Macedonia, would enable it to gall theAthenians sorely in case of a rupture. They order it there­fore to be dismantled. The Potidaeans refuse obedience, andrevolt. A war ensues. The Athenians attempt to reducePotidaea; and the Corinthians to support the revolt. It is atlength besieged by the former. The siege runs out into agreat length of time, and at last becomes one of the conside­rable events of the Peloponnesian war.
The Corinthians, after this repeated provocation, are fullof resentments, and leave no stone unturned to stir up a ge­neral war in Greece. They were parties themselves in thePeloponnesian league, of which the Lacedaemonians werethe head. The Corinthians never set up for a leading State.They were ever content with the secondary rank, thoughthe first in that rank. Their turn was always more to com­merce than war. Commerce had long since made themrich ; riches had made them luxurious; and, though theyoften produced great and excellent soldiers, yet they neverpiqued themselves on being a martial or formidable people.Athens indeed they hated: Athens had rivalled them intrade, and very much abridged the extent of their commerce.One of the gulfs on which Corinth is seated, that of Sarone,was now intirely in the jurisdiction of the Athenians, whohad also begun to curb and straiten them much in the gulfof Crissa. They were consequently bent on the demolition







OCR Output








On the Life of Thucydides.


the laws to take his exercise in the study of arms, and tobegin to share in the defence of his country. Every citizenof Athens was also a soldier. They served at first within thewalls, or on great emergencies marched, though to no greatdistance from home. As years and skill advanced, theywere called upon to join in more distant and foreign expe­ditions. We are quite in the dark about the particular ser­vices, in which he might thus be employed. We are sureat least he much improved in the theory of arms. He qua­lified himself for the great trust of heading the forces of theState i and, in the sequel, we shall Bee him invested with acommand.
The anonymous author of his life relates, that Thucydideswas one of the number, whom the Athenians sent to founda colony at Thuria in Italy. Lampo and Xenocritus werethe leaders of this colony, and Herodotus is said to havebeen associated in it. If Thucydides went the voyage, (andthe strange inconsistencies of him who relates it render hiswhole account suspiciousj he must have been about twenty-seven years of age. One thing is pretty certain; his stayat Thuria could have been of no very long continuance.This is not to be inferred from the ostracism, which the samewriter says he soon after suffered ; a mistake incurred, it ishighly probable, by confounding him with Thucydides theson of Milesias, who was of the same family, and being aleader in the oligarchical-party at Athens, had the ostracismthrown upon him by the interest and popularity of Pericles.But, the quarrel between the Corcyreans and Corinthiansabout Epidamnus broke out soon after this. The enemiesof Athens were now scheming the demolition of its growingpower. Thucydides writes all the preparatory transactions,marks all the defensive measures of the Athenians, as a per­son who was privy to every one of them. And there shouldbe very strong and very positive proofs of the contrary, be­fore any reader of his history doubts of his having been allthe time at Athens.







OCR Output








xciv A Survey of the History.


Nicias declares himself " totally averse to the expedition," but doth it with that diffidence, which was a principal foi-" ble in his character. The honour conferred upon himself,*4 in his nomination to the command, shall not suppress his" real sentiments. He is neither fond, nor prodigal of his" life: But he loves his country, and would advise them to" give up the expedition.—He next runs over the political" topics, and shews it to be in every light an undesirable and" ill-judged project. And then, without naming him, strikes" at Alcibiades ; proves him not qualified in any respect foru so important a command ; he reflects with some severity on" his life and behaviour; and, though owning himself afraid" he shall be out-voted, yet would fain have the question put" again, whether the expedition shall proceed ?"
- Beside all the natural vivacity and fire of his temper, Al­cibiades was now provoked by the personalities that Niciashad thrown out against him. He had been a constant oppo-ser of the latter, who was beloved at Athens for his amiablequalities. For, though Nicias had not spirit enough to leadthe people, yet he had influence enough oftentimes to checkand restrain the aspiring busy Alcibiades. The reply hemakes on this occasion strongly marks the character and com­plexion of Alcibiades ; and delivered with that life and grace,and pretty lisp for which he was remarkable, must have en­gaged all the attention of his hearers, and drawn their appro­bation perhaps in spite of their judgment.
" Censured and provoked by Nicias, he begins with a vin-" dication of himself. He maintains his right to the com-" mand. He hints at the splendor of his birth, his public" spirit, the generosity of his heart. He recites with a haughty" and exulting air, his victories at the Olympic games, his" magnificence at home, and his capacity for political intrigue" already and successfully exerted. He then justifies the" wisdom of the decree for the Sicilian expedition. He shews" all the political topics in a different light from Nicias. He" insinuates the advice of the latter to proceed from indo­







OCR Output








Ixxxviii A Survey of the History.


" vantage; that, when the Sicilians have warred one an-" other down, they may seize the whole island for them-" selves. The great passion of these Athenians is conquest;" they regard no ties of consanguinity ; they aim at acquir-" ing vassals, no matter who. He blames them not; he" can never blame men, who are desirous of command ; but" he must blame such as are ready and willing to put on" their chains. The Athenians have no strength in Sicily," but in the division of its States. Let those States but once" re-unite, and Athenians must get them gone ; and may" depart with a face of success, as if they had united" whom they really wanted to disunite, and had effectuallyk4 re-settled peace, when their latent design was war."—Hetoucheth every topic in a succinct but masterly manner. Hehath recourse often to figures; renders his addresses em-phatical by making his own community speak from hismouth. He applies the first person and the singular numberwith great energy and weight. He useth those figures inin the same manner as Saint Paul does in the Epistle to theRomans. He presseth harmony and cordial re-union amongstthem in a manner best fitted to persuade. The wholespeech, in a word, is a very interesting and persuasive pieceof oratory.
The consequence is, a peace is settled in Sicily to generalsatisfaction ; and the Athenian commanders are obliged toreturn to Athens with their squadron, to be punished therefor what they could not possibly prevent.
The war continues hot through the remainder of thisbook. The Athenians take their turn in being checked andvanquished. Their attempt on Megara is related at large ;and this piece of narration, is by far the most intricate ofthe kind to be met with in Thucydides. The matter is quitetoo much crowded, when he endeavours to comprehend ina few terms the various incidents of this struggle for Megara,the fluctuation of events, the views and motives of the par­ties engaged. Brasidas at last secures the city, and quite







OCR Output








B. I. IlJTRODUCTION.


Themistocles, they easily acquiesced in such an answer. Butother persons afterwards arriving and making clear affirma­tion that " the wall is carrying on and already built up to aconsiderable height," they had it no longer in their power tobe incredulous. Themistocles, knowing this, exhorts them," not rashly to be biassed by rumours, but rather to sendaway some trusty persons of their own body, who from aview might report the truth." With this proposal they com­ply ; and Themistocles sendeth secret instructions to the Athe­nians how to behave towards these delegates ;—" to detainthem, though with as little appearance of design as possible,and by no means to dismiss them before they received againtheir own ambassadors:" For his colleagues were by this ar­rived, Abronychus the son of Lysicles, and Aristides the sonof Lysimachus, who brought him an assurance that the wallwas sufficiently compleated. His fear was, that the Lacedae­monians, when they had discovered the truth, would putthem under arrest. The Athenians therefore detained thedelegates according to instruction. And Themistocles, goingto an audience of the Lacedaemonians, there openly declared," that Athens was now so far walled, as to be strong enoughfor the defence of its inhabitants : For the future, when theLacedaemonians or confederates sent ambassadors thither,they must address themselves to them as to a people whoperfectly knew their own interest and the interest of Greece;since, when they judged it most advisable to abandon theircity and go on ship-board, they asserted their native couragewithout Lacedaemonian support; and, in all subsequent mea­sures taken in conjunction, had shewn themselves not at allinferior in the cabinet or the field: At present therefore theyjudge it most expedient to have Athens defended by a wall,and thus to render it a place of greater security for their ownmembers and for all their allies: It would not be possible,with strength inferior to that of a rival-power, equally to pre­serve and evenly to balance the public welfare of Greeoe."—From hence he inferred, that " either aH cities of the state*



