


OCR Output








SILVBR. 53


of lead) more especially for the purpose of cicatrizing wounds; itis used for tenesmus and dysentery, infused with the oil of myrtle,in glisters. It also enters into the composition of the medi­cines called cerates,5 which are applied to fungous ulcers, thathave been produced either by friction, or by open sores of thehead.
There is also produced from the same metal the substancewhich is called the foam of silver; * there are three species of it;the best, which is called Chrysitis; the second, which is calledArgyritis; and the third, Molybditis; J all these colours are gene­rally found in the same mass.6 The most valuable is the Athe­nian, the next the Spanish. Chrysitis is made from the entire oreitself; Argyritis from metallic silver; while Molybditis is pre­pared by fusing lead, as is done at Puteoli, whence it derives itsname.7 All the kinds are formed by fusing the material, and suf­fering it to flow from an upper vessel into one placed below, fromwhich it is taken up by iron rods,8 and moved about in the flameitself, in order that the substance may be rendered light. It is,as the name imports, the foam of the metal while effervescing, andit differs from dross in the same way that froth does from dregs.The first is what the substance throws off, while it is purifying


3 "Liparse." From Anrog, Adeps. Celsus describes them as being " leniaemplastra," and containing wax and lead; lib. v. cap. 19, 20, 25.
4 See note in last page.
5 XpvaiTig, auri colorem exhibens; Apyupiric, argenti colorem exhibens;Mo\v(3SiTis, plumbeus. These are compounds of lead and oxygen, varyingin the proportion of the constituents, and, in the last substance, also com­bined with a portion of metallic lead. We must suppose that the silver whichwas employed in the production of these oxides was alloyed with a quantityof lead.
6 " In iisdem tubulis;" in the notes we hare the following explanationgiven of those words; see Valpy, p. 471. "Fusores hodie panes vocant,seu massas offasque: tubulos antiqui. Vide formam tubulorum expressam inicone apud Agricolam de Re Metall. lib. x. p. 384." Upon referring to thisfigure (ed. Basil. 1561) the tubuli appear to be small hollow cylinders, closedat one end, which were taken up on iron rods, called veruculi, mentionedbelow; the tubulus was then dipped into the metal as it flowed from thefurnace, and a portion which adhered was thus exposed to the air andoxidized.
'Probabiy Puteolanum ; one of the purple colours was called Puteolanum,from its being procured near Puteoli; lib. xxxv. sec. 26.8 Veruculi.







OCR Output








CINNABAR. 57


39. MODE OF USING CINNABAR AND MINIUM IN PICTURES.
The ancients painted those pictures with cinnabar which arenow called monochromata1. They painted them also with theminium of Ephesus; but this custom was abandoned, in conse­quence of the great care which it required in its preparation. Be­sides these substances were both of them thought too corrosive;on this account they substituted for them Rubrica and Sinopis *,of which I shall speak in the proper place. Cinnabar is adul­terated with goat's blood, and with the triturated fruit of theservice tree. The price of it, when pure, is fifty sesterces thepound.
40. SPECIES OF MINIUM: MEDICINES FEOM IT.
We are informed by Juba, that minium is also procured inCarmania; and by Timagines, that it is also found in ^Ethiopia.But it is not brought to us from either of these places, nor indeedscarcely from any place except Spain. The most celebrated kindcomes from the district of the Sisapo, in Bretica; this mine ofminium is a source of considerable revenue to the Romans, and isguarded with very great care. The substance is not allowed to bepurified or roasted on the spot, but is brought to Rome sealed up,to the amount of 10,000 lbs. weight annually; it is then washedat Rome. The price of it is fixed by an express statute not toexceed seventy sesterces the pound; but it is adulterated in variousways, by which the company defraud the public. For there iaanother kind of minium that is found in all silver, and in manylead ores, which is formed by calcining the stone that is mixedwith the veins; not that out of which quicksilver exudes, (forthis is converted into quicksilver by being calcined), but fromother minerals which are found along with it. Those mineralswhich are barren in lead are recognized by their peculiar colour,not becoming red unless by calcination, after which they are


1 Painted in one colour only; they are treated of in lib. xxxv. sec. 5,& alibi.
* For a farther account of Sinopis, see lib. xxxv. sec. 13; it appearsto have been a species of brown or yellow ochre. See Theophrastus,De Lapid. sec. 2t; also Agricola, De Re Met. p. 462.







OCR Output








30 GOLD COIN.


copper, a quinarius at five, and a sesterce at two and a half. Thestandard pound of copper was diminished in the first Punic war,when the republic was not able to bear its expenses; it was thenordered that the As should consist of one-sixth of a pound only.By this measure there was a gain of five parts out of six, and thedebt was consequently expunged. The device on this coin wasa double Janus on the one side, and a prow of a ship on the other;there was a ship on the triens and the quadrans ; the quadrans hadbeen previously called teruncius, from its consisting of three ounces.At a later period, when Hannibal was pressing upon M. Minucius,in the dictatorship of Q. Fabius Maximus, the value of the As wasreduced to one ounce; it was also ordered that the denarius shouldpass for sixteen Ases, a quinarius for eight, and a sesterce for four;by this means the republic made a profit of fifty per cent. Inpaying the soldiers, however, the denarius was always consideredequivalent to ten Ases. The device on the silver coins was achariot with two and with four horses; they were hence calledbigati and quadrigati. At length, by the Papirian law, the Aswas reduced to half an ounce. When Liv. Drusus was tribuneof the people, one-eighth part of copper was mixed with the silver.9The coin which is now called victoriatus was struck in obedienceto the Clodian law. It was previously brought from Illyricum asan article of commerce; it obtained its name in consequence of itshaving the figure of victory on it. Gold was coined sixty-two yearslater than silver; a scripulum * of gold was valued at 20 sesterces;so that according to the ratio which at that time subsisted betweenthe sesterces and the pound, a pound of gold would contain 900sesterces. Afterwards it was thought proper to make 40 denariito the pound of gold,2 and by degrees their weight was still farther
t Dr. Thomson found that the denarius coined in the time of the republicwas composed of pure silver, but that a denarius of the emperor Domitiancontained 19.2 per cent of copper; Nich. Journ. xiv. 405, 6.
1 The scripulum was the l-288th part of the as or libra, correspondingexactly with the modern scruple; see Wurm, p. 9.
» It would appear that the Romans proceeded upon very arbitrary prin­ciples in their mode of estimating the value of their current coins, with re­spect to the comparative value of the metals, as well as of the same metalsat different periods; 900 sesterces are equal to 7l. 10s.; while 40 denarii areequal only to 1/. 5s. 10d.; see Adam, p. 492 et seq. Herodotus informsus, that in his time, the value of gold was thirteen times that of silver; iii. 95.In this country the value of gold is a little more than fifteen times that ofsilver. See Wurm, sec. 25, for the comparative value of gold and silveramong the Romans.







OCR Output








FINDING OF GOLD. 37


21. OF THE FINDING OF GOLD.
Gold is found in our part of the world, not to mention thatfrom India, which is dug up by ants, or that among the Scythiansby griffins.7 We procure it in three ways: first in the sand fromthe beds of rivers,8 as is the case with the Tagus in Spain, thePo in Italy, the Hebrus in Thrace, the Pactolus in Asia Minor, andthe Ganges in India.' Nor is there any gold more pure than this;its passage down the river, and the friction completely polishes it.Another source is the earth dug out of open pits,1 and lastly, thebreaking down1 of the mountains: I shall give an account of eachof these modes. In searching for gold, they first remove the Se-gullum,3 for so the substance is called which is regarded as an in­dication of its presence. A channel is formed, in which the sandis washed, and the quality of the sand is determined by ascertain­ing the nature of the sediment. Sometimes, by extraordinarygood fortune, a vein is found near the surface, as was lately thecase in Dalmatia, during the time of Nero, which yielded at therate of 50 lbs. weight per day. If the earth contains gold, a kindof gum called Talutatium" is found just below the sod. The dry


7 A farther detail of the circumstances here alluded to may be found inbook xi. sec. 36, and book vii. sec. 2. Pliny probably took his account fromHerodotus, book iii. sec. 102, and sec. 166. Agricola has attempted toexplain the origin of these stories; De Vet. et Nov. Met. lib. i. p. 393;also De Nat. Foss. lib. viii. p. 330. We have much curious informationrespecting gold mines and the mode of working them in this author, espe­cially in the 8th book of his treatise De Nat. Foss. and in the 2d book ofhis treatise De Vet. et Nov. Metallis.
8 "Ramentum."
9 We learn from Aristotle that gold was found in the soil of Pceonia andPieria, and in the river Ozus in Bactria; De Mirab. Aus. cap. 45... 8.Diodorus Siculus informs us that it was abundant in the rivers of Gaul;lib. iii. sec. 27.- --
1 "Puteorum-scrobes." r'
2 " Fragmenta."
3 We are informed in the French translation, that Segullo is an oldSpanish word, which is still in use among the Castillians; t. x. note in p.584, 5.
'4 In most of the technical mining terms that occur in this chapter, thereare considerable variations in the MSS.; in the present case we have insome copies "alutationem," in others "alutatium." The French trans­lator lenders the word " toute usuelle;" t. x. note in p. 588.







OCR Output








SILVER STATUES. 67


the case informer times, so to form some apology for our own age;C. Gracchus possessed Delphian vessels, which cost 5,000 sestercesthe pound; and Lucius Cassius had two cups, engraven by theartist Mentor, which cost 100,000 sesterces; but he confessed thathe was ashamed ever to use them. It is also well known that hehad vessels which cost 600,000 sesterces the pound. It was theconquest of Asia which introduced luxury into Italy; for we aretold, that Lucius Scipio brought over at his triumph 1,450 lbs.weight of chased silver, besides 1,500 lbs. weight of gold vessels;this was in the 565th year since the foundation of the city. Thissame Asia, when it was presented to us as a gift, inflicted stillgreater injury upon our morals, and the inheritance, of which wecame into possession at the death of king Attalus, was still of lessuse than that victory. For then all sense of shame was entirelydestroyed by the eagerness for purchasing the articles at the sale ofthe royal effects; this was in the 662d year of the city; so thatin the space of fifty-seven years, the people had learned not onlyto admire, but even to covet foreign wealth. And this feeling re­ceived a prodigious impulse by the conquest of Achaia, duringwhich interval, i. e. in the 608th year of the city, that nothingmight be wanting, there was a great influx of statues andpictures. Luxury was also much increased by the reduction ofCarthage; so that it seemed as if the fates conspired to give usboth the means and the will to pursue all kinds of vice. But in­deed some of our ancestors had endeavoured to gain credit by thiskind of conduct. C. Marius, after the victory over the Cimbri,is said to have drunk out of a great tankard, in order that hemight be like father Bacchus; and this is the man who was ori­ginally a ploughman at Arpinum, and was afterwards taken outof the ranks and made a general!
54. OF SILVER STATUES.
It is an erroneous opinion that silver was first used for statuesin the time of the late Emperor Augustus, by way of paying courtto him. For we find, that in the triumph of Pompey the Great,there was a silver statue of Pharnaces sent to Rome, the first ofthat name who reigned in Pontus, and of Mithridates, the son ofEupator; there were likewise chariots, both of gold and of silver.In some cases, silver has come after gold, as in the ankle-rings,worn by the women of the lower orders, which they preferred, being
f3







OCR Output








PREFACE.


The Natural History of Pliny has been alwaysregarded as one of the most precious remains of anti­quity. I conceive, therefore, that it will be unnecessaryfor me to make any observations, either on the value ofthe original, or on the addition that our literature wouldreceive from a correct translation of it. It may be suffi­cient to remark, that it will enable us to learn the stateboth of the sciences and of the arts among the Romans,and to ascertain the progress which they had made inthe knowledge of nature.
My object in the proposed work is to present theEnglish reader with a faithful translation, and to give it,as much as possible, in the style of the original. Thatthis is an undertaking of some difficulty every one willadmit, who is acquainted with the variety of topics onwhich the author treats, and with the mode in which heconveys his information. Partly owing to the imperfectstate of the manuscripts, and partly depending on thenature of the subject, we are frequently at a loss todevelope the meaning of the author, and where we havenot this obstacle to contend against, it is often difficult totransfer the meaning into our language, without destroy­ing the air of the original.
With respect to notes and illustrations, it is not easyfor a translator to prescribe to himself the correct methodwhich he ought to pursue. Without some assistance ofthis kind, the text would be often unintelligible; and yetto give all that might be appended in the way of com­mentary would lead to an endless accumulation of matter.
B 2







OCR Output








O DEDICATION.


has the power of making whomever he may select an absolutejudge in his own cause, and hence it is termed an appeal.11
I am well aware that, placed as you are in the very higheststation, and gifted with the most splendid eloquence and the mostaccomplished mind, even those who come to pay their respects toyou, do it with a kind of veneration: on this account I ought tobe careful that what is dedicated to you should be worthy of you.But the country people, and indeed some whole nations, offer milkto. the Gods,12 and those who cannot procure frankincense substi­tute in its place salted cakes; for the Gods are not dissatisfiedwhen they are worshipped by every one to the best of his ability.But my temerity will appear the greater by the consideration,that these little volumes, which I dedicate to you, are of suchinferior importance. For they do not allow of the display ofgenius, nor indeed is mine one of the highest order; they admitof no excursions, nor orations, nor discussions, nor of any wonder­ful adventures, nor any variety of transactions, nor, from thebarrenness of the matter, of any thing particularly pleasant in thenarration, or agreeable to the reader. The nature of things, andlife as it actually exists, are described in them; and often the lowestdepartment of it; so that, in very many cases, I am obliged touse rude and foreign, or even barbarous, terms, and these oftenrequire to be formally introduced by a kind of preface. Andbesides this, my road is not a beaten track, nor one which themind is much disposed to travel over. There is no one among uswho has ever attempted it, nor is there any one individual amongthe Greeks who has treated of all the topics. Most of us seek fornothing but amusement in our studies, while others are fond ofsubjects that are of excessive subtilty, and completely involved inobscurity. My object is to treat of all those things which theGreeks include in the Encyclopedia,'3 which however are either•jot generally known, or are rendered dubious from our ingeniouseonceits. And there are other matters, which many writers have
""Provocatio;" calling forth.
"See the authors referred to in the note in Valpy, p. 180; to which theollowing passages may be added from Tibullus:—
"Et placidum soleo spargere lacte Palem." Lib. i. El. 1. 36.
"Lacte madens illic suberat Pan ilicis umbra," ii. 5. 27.and an additional one from the Fasti of Ovid:—
"Lac dabat ilia Deo." v. 121.
""Orbem doctrince sic Graci vocant:" note in Valpy, p. 130.







OCR Output








ANTIMONY. 51


colour we discover whether the leaves have been applied single orare very thin; in order to prevent this, they fraudulently mix itwith the white of egg, and afterwards with hydrargyrum: of this Ishall give an account in its proper place.4 Quicksilver has notbeen procured in considerable quantity by any other means thanby the ore mentioned above.
33. OF STIMI, STIBIUM, ALABASTRUM, LARBAS0M, OKPLATYOPHTHALMUM.
In the same silver ores there is also found a mineral, which wemay properly call a white and shining, but not a transparent, foam;it is named by some Stimmi, by others Stibium, Alabastrum, orLarbason. There are two species of it, male and female. Thefemale is most approved; the male is coarse and rough, and lessheavy, less shining, and more sandy. The female, on the con­trary, is brilliant, friable, and breaks into long fissures ratherthan into rounded masses.'
34. THE MEDICINES FROM IT.
It possesses an astringent and refrigerant virtue; but its prin­cipal use is as an application for the eyes; on this account it isgenerally called platyophthalmum,6 since it dilates the eyes offemales when it enters into their eye-salves, i A powder composedof antimony and frankincense, mixed with gum, dries up thehumours, and heals the ulcers of the eyes; it also stops the flow­ing of blood from the brain. It is still more efficacious in recentwounds, and, when mixed with flour, in old wounds made by the
* Sec. 41. The author makes a distinction between argentum vivum andhydrargyrum, the first being native quicksilver, the latter quicksilver reducedfrom its ore.
5 See Dioscorides, lib. iii. cap. S3.
8 XlXarvoipOaXiiov, amplos oculos faciens.
7 " Calliblephari;" these were not properly medical preparations, but sub­stances which were supposed to increase the beauty of the eyes, as it wouldappear, by tinging the lids and lashes. We learn from Shaw, Travels, p.229, that the women of Barbary tinge their eye-lids with a black substancewhich he calls " the powder of lead ore." See also Russell's Aleppo, note22, v.i.p. 336; where we learn that the women use for this purpose a blackpowder which is called Kohol, and is said to be a kind of lead ore broughtfrom Persia. There are some remarks on this custom in Hacmer's Obser­vations, vol. ii. p. 405. obs. IS, chap. 10. It is also noticed as being nowpractised in Turkey, by Lady M. W. Montague; Works, vol. ii. p. 12?.
e2







OCR Output








GOLD RINGS. 19


long period, even a Roman senator did not wear a gold ring. Ifrings were given publicly to those only who were sent as ambassa­dors to foreign nations, it was done, I suppose, because it indi­cated to the foreigners that they were of the highest rank. Andit was not customary for any person to wear them, except those towhom they were publicly presented on this account; and it was inthis manner that they commonly rode in triumph. Even when theEtrurian crown, which was of gold, was carried over the head of thegeneral, still the ring on his finger was made of iron, so that hewho was borne in triumph, was upon a par with the slave that car­ried the crown. In this manner Caius Marius triumphed overJugurtha, and it is said that it was not until his third consulshipthat he wore a golden ring. And those, who in consequence ofhaving served the office of ambassador had received gold rings,only used them in public; in their own houses they still wore ironrings. It is in pursuance of the same custom, that even at thistime, an iron ring is sent as a present to a bride, and that withoutany gem attached to it.
I do not find that rings were in use in the time of the Trojan war.6Homer certainly never mentions them: when he speaks of lettersthat were written on tablets, and garments, and gold and silvervessels being laid up in chests, he always describes them as securedby knots, not marked by rings. And when he describes the heroescasting lots,7 in reply to the challenge, he does not mention thatthey did it by means of their rings. When also he enumeratesthe articles that were manufactured by Vulcan, he mentionsclasps, and other female ornaments, as ear-rings, but says nothingof rings for the fingers. And whoever it was that first adopted


marking wine-vessels, and to which rings were attached; but, in this case,the rings appear to have served merely as the handles.
6 It is supposed that the " signet" of Judah, to which allusion is made inGen. xxxviii. 18, was a ring: in this case it was employed to identify hisperson, equivalent to a sign manual. In the apologue of the Prodigal Son,the father commands his servants to put a ring on the son's ringer, as anornamental badge of distinction. The Egyptians used rings in very earlytimes: Fharoah put his ring on Joseph's finger, Gen. xli. 42; this, proba­bly, was a seal-ring. Moses directed that onyx stones should be engravedlike " the engraving of a signet," Exod. xxviii. 11. Seal-rings appear tohave been commonly used by the Greeks in Solon's time.
7 II. vii. 176, et seq. It is said that each of the candidates marked his"K\>ipog," and threw it into the helmet of Agamemnon. In Matt, xxviii. 35,the soldiers are represented as " BaXXovvrce icXijpov."
c 2







OCR Output








I


I







OCR Output








4 PREFACE.


Feeling these difficulties, and aware of the quantity oftime and labour that must necessarily be devoted to suchan undertaking, even in the most favourable circum­stances, I have resolved to lay before the public the fol­lowing specimen of the manner in which I propose toexecute the translation, in order that they may judge ofmy competency to the undertaking, and that I may beable to profit by any remarks that are made on thisportion of the work in the farther prosecution of it.
I have selected the 33d book, in addition to the 1st, asone with which I was previously familiar, and which, Ithink, may be considered as exhibiting a fair specimen ofthe merits of the original.1
Upper Bedford Place,Sept. 23, 1828.
1 The editions of Pliny which I have used are that of Dalecamp, fol.Franc. 1599; of De Laet, 12mo. Elz. L. B. 1635; the Var. of Gronovius,8vo. L. B. 1669; and that of Valpy, 8vo. Lond. 1826, which may beconsidered as combining the editions of Harduin and Brotier; I havegenerally followed the text of this edition. I have frequently foundadvantage in referring to the translation of Holland, a writer highlycommendable for his diligence, but whose style, which must have been,at all times, harsh and paraphrastical, is now completely antiquated.His translation was published in 1635; he appears to have followed thetext of Dalecamp. The French translation of Pinet, published in 1566,allowing for the period when it was written, is a work of much merit;but it has been superseded by the elaborate translation executed byPoinsinet de Sivri, in conjunction with other learned individuals, whichwas published between the years 1771 and 1782. The text of Harduinhas been employed in this work. The sense of the author is given withcorrectness and elegance, but I conceive that the translator has failed inconveying an idea of the style of the original. Something may pro­bably depend on the idiom of the French language, which does noteasily admit of the concise abruptness, which is so characteristic ofPliny. I conceive it to be the duty of a translator to transfuse into hisversion, as far as it can be accomplished, not merely the ideas of theauthor, but the language in which they are cloathed.







OCR Output








GOLD COIN. 31


diminished by the emperors: they were the smallest in the time ofNero, when there were 45 to the pound.
14. AN ACCOUNT OF THE EAGER DESIRE FOR GOLD.
Money was the origin of avarice, after usury had been dis­covered, and the mode of becoming rich without labour. By de­grees not merely avarice, but the thirst of gold itself was inflamedto such a degree, that Septimuleius, when he had cut off the headof his friend C. Gracchus, carried it to Opimius, and claimed hisreward of its weight in gold, after having poured lead into themouth; thus, in addition to his crime of parricide, being guiltyof defrauding the republic. But, not to speak of individuals, theRoman name generally became so infamous in this respect, thatking Mithridates poured gold into the mouth of the generalAquilius when he took him prisoner. These are the fruits of thelust of gain. It is disgusting to observe the number of new termsderived from the Greek language, which are applied to the differentkinds of silver vessels, some of them covered with gold on theoutside and gilt within, and to see for what whimsical purposesthey are used, both those that are gilt, and those that are of solidgold; and especially when we know that Spartacus forbid any one inhis camp to have either gold or silver in his possession. So muchmore good sense is there in our run-away slaves! Messala, theorator, informs us, that Anthony, the triumvir, employed gold forthe most mean uses; and what was still more disgusting, that thesame was done by Cleopatra. It was considered an instance ofvery great luxury among foreigners, that king Philip, when heslept, had always a golden cup under his pillow, and Agno, theTeian, the praefect of Alexander the Great, used golden claspsfor his slippers. But among ourselves, in spite of what seems theorder of nature, Anthony employed gold for the most degradingof purposes, an act which might be protested against even bySpartacus.
15. WHO POSSESSED THE GREATEST QUANTITY OF GOLD AND
SILVER.
I wonder indeed that the Romans, when they exacted tributefrom those whom they had conquered, always demanded silver andnot gold. Thus when Carthage was conquered, after the defeatof Hannibal, the people were sentenced to pay 12,000 lbs. of silver







OCR Output








THE EQUESTRIAN ORDER. 25


This distinction, however, took place at a late period. For wefind that the heralds (praecones)8 commonly used this particularkind of wide purple tunic, as was the case with the father of Lu-cilius .(Elius Stilo, who, on this account, was named Prasconicus.The rings, therefore, formed a third order, which was intermediatebetween the people and the partricians; the name, which was for­merly bestowed in consequence of the possession of a militaryhorse, being now given as an indication of wealth. But thischange did not take place until the time of the late Emperor Au­gustus,9 who, when he arranged the seats of the Judges, foundthat the greater part of them wore iron rings; and these were notcalled knights, but judges. The name of knight was still attachedto those who composed the troops of cavalry. At first there wereonly four orders of judges, and there was scarcely a thousand ineach order, the inhabitants of the provinces not being yet admittedinto the office; and it still remains a practice, that none of thenewly made citizens should be admitted among them.
The orders themselves were distinguished by different names,as the Tribunes of the Treasury, the Select, and the Judges, pro­perly so called. Besides these there were the Nine Hundred,chosen from all the orders, for the purpose of guarding the boxesthat contained the suffrages of the general assemblies; and thislast order was also divided, in consequence of the pride of indivi­duals in assuming particular names, one person styling himself amember of the Nine Hundred, another one of the Select, andanother one of the Tribunes.
8. OF THE EQUESTRIAN ORDER./
At length, in the 9th year of the Emperor Tiberius, the wholeof the equestrian order was reduced to an equality of rank: it wasdecided who were entitled to wear rings in the consulship of C.Asinius Publio and C. Antistius Vetus, in the year of the city575. We may well wonder at the very slight cause which pro­duced this change. C. Sulpitius Galba, wishing to acquire someyouthful fame in the eyes of the prince, formed a plan for inflic-ing penalties on the keepers of taverns, and complained in thesenate that the persons who were liable to this punishment defended
* For an account of the office of the Praeco, see Adam, p. 177, 8.» "Divus Augustus."







OCR Output








26 THE EftUESTRIAX ORDER.


themselves by the privilege of their rings. On this account itwas decreed, that no one should enjoy that right who was nothimself free-born, and whose father and paternal grandfather hadnot possessed a property which was rated at 400 sestertia,1 and who,according to the Julian law, were entitled to sit on one of the four­teen first benches at the theatre. But afterwards that badge be­gan to be wished for by every one indiscriminately; and, on accountof the disturbances that hence ensued, it was that the EmperorCaius formed a fifth order of judges. And so much emulation wasexcited from this cause, that the benches which could not be filledin the time of the late Emperor Augustus, cannot now contain allthe members, and that freedmen jump directly from the state ofslavery to the wearing of these ornaments, a thing that was neverdone before, since the wearing of the iron rings was understood tobe the privilege of the knights and judges. The use of ringsbecame so promiscuous, that in the censorship of Claudius Caesar,Flavius Proculus, one of the knights, indited 400 persons on thisvery account. So that while the order of knighthood was keptdistinct from the free-born citizens, it was thrown open to theslaves.
The Gracchi first formed a distinct order under the title ofjudges, from their factious desire of acquiring popularity, for thepurpose of bringing contempt upon the senate. This popularspirit being subdued, after various revolutions, the authority whichwas connected with the name at length devolved upon the farm­ers of the revenue,1 and these, for some time, were a kind of thirdestate. Cicero finally established the title of the equestrian orderin his consulship, during the affair of Cataline, giving out that heproceeded from it, and endeavoured to increase its power by hisindividual popularity. From this period it clearly became the thirdbody in the republic, and the equestrian order began to be addedto the senate and the Roman people. On this account it is evennow written after the people, as being the one which was addedthe last in point of time.
1 A sestertium is equal to 1000 sestertii; the sestertium denotes a sum,the sestertius a coin; the English word sesterce is applied to the coin; itsvalue was nearly two-pence of our money, or one penny three farthings, anda sestertium, 81. Is. 6 jrf. The sum mentioned in the text would be 3,229/.3s. 4,d. See Wurm, de Pond. Num. &c. Rom. et Grsec. p. 24.
2 Adam, p. 27, remarks on the different estimation in which the " Publi-cani" were held in the city and in the provinces.







OCR Output








32 SILVER PAGEANTS.


annually for fifty years, but no gold; yet we cannot suppose therewas any scarcity of it in the world. Midas and Croesus had,before this time, been in possession of immense quantities. AndCyrus, when he conquered Asia, found 34,000 lbs. weight of it,besides golden vessels and various articles of wrought gold; amongother things, a plane tree, and a vine made of gold.3 From thisvictory he obtained 500,000 talents of silver, and also the vase ofSemiramis, which was said to weigh fifteen talents. We are in­formed, by Varro, that the Egyptian talent is equal to 80 lbs. Itwas before this time, that Salauces reigned in Colchos, and alsoEsubopes, who is said to have got possession of a tract of virginsoil, in the country of the Suani, a country which had long beenfamous for its golden fleeces, from which he is reported to havedug up a very great quantity both of silver and gold. We aretold that the arched roof of his palace was made of gold, and thatthe beams, columns, and pilasters,4 were made of silver: this wasthe case after he had conquered Sesostris, the King of Egypt,who was so haughty, that he is said every year to have selected,by lot, certain kings, out of those whom he had subdued, and thathe was in the habit of yoking them to his chariot, and in thismanner rode in triumph.
16. WHEN THE FIRST PAGEANT OF SILVER WAS BROUGHT ONTHE STAGE, AND WHEN ON THE ARENA.
Even we ourselves have done things which will be scarcelycredited by posterity. Caesar, he who was afterwards dictator,during his aedileship, when he exhibited funeral games in honourof his father, was the first who had all the apparatus of theamphitheatre made of silver, those who were condemned to thecombat using then, for the first time, silver spears, a practice


3 This probably refers to the golden plane tree and vine, which Pythiusof Lydia is said to have presented to Darius. See Herodotus, book vii.sec. 27; also, sec. 47, of this book.
* "Parastaticse." It may be doubted whether the ancients had any thingwhich exactly corresponds to our pilaster; the word occurs in Vitruvius,ix. 9, "in columna aut parastatice;" the term "parastate," which is foundin some of the MS., would appear to refer to another part of the building.Parastatae is met with, v. 1; and is supposed by Rode to be synonymouswith pilastre; see lexicon in loco; Newton retains the Latin term in histranslation, p. 74.







OCR Output








40 WOUKING OF GOLD MINES.


called Corrugi,5 as I suppose from the word corrivatio, i. e. drawingthe river into one channel. This is indeed a most laborious un­dertaking. It is necessary that the level should be so adjusted asto produce a sufficient current for the stream, and for this purposethe water is brought from the highest point that is practicable.If it has to pass across a valley, it is necessary to build a canalover it. In some places the passage is obstructed by rocks, whichthey cut through; and a space is thus formed through whichwooden troughs are carried. The man who cuts through the rockis suspended by ropes, so that those who see him at a distancemight suppose him to be some species, not indeed of wild beast,but of bird. While they are hanging in this manner they takethe level of the ground, and mark out the line in which the water­course is to be carried; for there is no space left on which theycan rest their feet. They remove all the rubbish with their hands,and carry it away in baskets. This kind of earth they call Urium;6they therefore avoid the urium, and, as far as is practicable, con­duct the water-course through the hard rock or solid stone. Whenthey have brought the water to the brow of the hill, they dig largeponds, 200 feet in length and breadth, and ten in depth; in thesethey generally leave five sluices, three feet square; when the pondis filled, they open the gates, and the torrent rushes down with somuch violence, as to drive before it all the masses of stone thatstand in its way.
And there is another laborious process to be gone through inthe lower ground. Trenches are dug, through which the watermay flow: they are called Agangae,7 and furze is laid at intervalsabove their sides. This is a shrub somewhat like rosemary,which, from its roughness, serves to detain the gold. The sidesof these trenches are enclosed with planks, and where the groundis uneven, they are raised upon arches, so that the stream is madeto flow from the land to the sea. These works have contributedto advance the prosperity of Spain.8 The ore which is procured
5 The French translator informs us, that corrugo is derived from an oldCastilian word which signifies a furrow; t. x. p. 590.
? The French translator states that urium is derived from the Celticword Our,water, because this kind of earth absorbs water; t. x. note in p. 592.
7 Or "Agandas," derived from the Castilian words aqua and andar, signify­ing water-courses; see French translation, t. x. note in p. 592.
*■ "His de causis jam promovit Hispania." This is explained by theeditor of the Regent's edition, "Propius mari admovit puteos suos, fossas,







OCR Output








58 CINNABAR.


ground to powder.3 This is the second rate kind of minium,which indeed is known to very few, and which is much less valu­able than the native species. And this is the substance which isemployed by our public companies to adulterate genuine minium.In this way they make Syricum, by a process which I shalldescribe it in its proper place.* It is evident, by reckoning thecost of the article, that in painting with minium the ground isoften laid with syricum. Another dishonest custom which painterspractise is to wash the brushes when they are loaded with paint;this settles to the bottom of the water, and is pilfered by the work­men. Pure minium ought to have the rich colour of crimson.When the inferior kind is laid upon walls, in consequence of theirmoisture, the colour becomes very much less brilliant; yet this issupposed to be a species of metallic rust. In the Sisaponensianminium mines the ore is calcined without silver, like gold. It istested by heated gold; the factitious kind is rendered black, whilethe colour of the genuine kind is not affected. I find that it isalso adulterated by lime. If there be no gold at hand, a plate ofheated iron may be substituted for the gold. Exposure to thelight, either of the sun or of the moon, is injurious to the colour;the remedy is to cover the wall, when it is become dry, with amixture of Punic wax and oil, which is to be laid on while hotwith hair brushes.
It is to be heated again by burning gall nuts,5 until the surfacemelts; it is then smoothed down with tapers,6 and afterwards rubbedwith clean linen cloths, as marbles are cleaned and polished.7 Theworkmen who prepare minium in the manufactories, bind bladdersloosely over the face, to prevent them from taking the poison-
3 Theophrastus speaks of a native and an artificial minium; the latterwould appear to be merely a pulverized red earth; Op. p. 399; De Lapid.sec. 103.
4 Lib. xxxv. sec 24. The only account we have of it is, that it is formedby a mixture of " Sinopis" and " Sandyx," which appear to be species ofochres.
5 "Admotis gallse carbonibus;" the galls would act in no other way thanas a convenient mode of applying heat.
6 "Candelis subigitur;" it seems difficult to determine what was the com­position of the candeta, and what was the object of this part of the process.
'This process is described by Vitruvius; the painted surface is coveredwith a mixture of wax and oil, this is melted by burning coals, and rubbedwith a roll of linen cloth, the application of the candela is omitted; lib. vii.cap. 9; Newton's Trans, p. 169.







OCR Output








OEPIMENT. 41


in the mode that was first mentioned, with such immense labour,is washed in this water, lest it should fill up the pits. The goldwhich is procured from the Arrugige is not smelted, being foundin the metallic state. Lumps of it are met with in this situation,and also in the trenches, of more than ten pounds each; theSpaniards call them Palacae, others call them Palacurnae; whenvery small they are called Balucae.9 The furze, after being dried,is burnt, and the ashes are washed; a sod being laid under it onwhich the gold may settle. Some writers have asserted, that inthis way 20,000 lbs. weight are procured every year from Asturia,Gallaecia, and Lusitania; Asturia, however, produces the greatestproportion of it; and it is said, that in no part of the world havethe mines been equally productive for so long a period. I havealready mentioned, that in consequence of an ancient prohibitionof the senate, mines have never been sunk in Italy, otherwise nocountry would have been richer in metals. A prohibitory law islikewise extant respecting the gold mine of the Ictimuli, in thecountry of the Vercellenses, which orders that those who farm thismine should be allowed to employ uo more than 5,000 men.
22. ORPIMENT. * -
Gold is also obtained from Orpiment, a substance which is gotin Syria for the use of painters: it lies near the surface of the


et canales." The French translation is as follows; "Les sedimens de ces."eaux ont deja recule sensiblement les limites du continent de l'Espagne."
9 For some remarks on these terms, see the note in Valpy, p. 4357, 8.Strabo has the following observation; "Ev Et roig iptiyfiaoi .... fwepagKaOapaiuiq StoptvaQ." "Csterum inter auri ramenta aiunt inventas aliquando"selibres glebas, quas ipsi palas (iroXac) nominant, exigua purgationc"indigentes." lib. iii. p. 216.
1 "Auripigmentum." This appears to be orpiment, the sulphuret ofarsenic; the word occurs in only one other passage of Pliny, lib. xxxv. sec.12, where he is enumerating the " colores austeri qui nascuntur." It is notmentioned in the section which treats on arsenic, our author perhaps notbeing aware of its connexion with the substance; see lib. xxxiv. sec. 56.The word auripigmentum is not, I believe, to be found in the text ofDioscorides, although Virgilius and his commentators generally have trans­lated the Greek word apatviKov by the Latin word auripigmentum, while itappears that the substance which is described by Dioscorides under thetitle of apaivnov is not the white oxide but the sulphuret of arsenic; seelib. v. cap. 75. p. 671, 5. Celsus, lib. v. cup. 5. sec. 1, speaks of auripig­







OCR Output








12 DEDICATION.


4
whose works, although they are so perfect that we are never satis­fied with admiring them, are inscribed with a temporary title,1*such as "Apelles, or Polycletus, was doing this;" implying, thatthe art was in its infancy, and still imperfect, and that the artistmight benefit by the criticisms that were made on his work, andalter any part that required it, if he had not been prevented bydeath. It is also a great mark of their modesty, that they inscribedall -their works as if they were the last which they had executed,and as still in hand at the time of their death. I think there arebut three works of art, which are inscribed positively with the words"such a one executed this;" of these I shall give an account inthe proper place. In these cases it appears that the artist felt themost perfect satisfaction with his work, and hence these pieceswere the most eagerly sought after.
I, indeed, freely admit that much may be added to my works;not only to this, but to all which I have published. By thisadmission I hope to escape from the carping critics,*6 and I havethe more reason to say this, because I hear that there are certainStoics and Dialecticians, and also Epicureans, (from the Gramma­rians I expected as much,) who are big with something againstthe little work I published on Grammar, and that they have beencarrying these abortions for ten years together—a longer preg­nancy this than the elephant's. But I well know that even awoman once wrote against Theophrastus, a man so eminent ineloquence that he obtained the title of the Divine, and that thenceoriginated the proverb of, choosing a tree to hang oneself.27
I cannot refrain from quoting the words of Cato the censor,which are so pertinent to this point. It appears from them, thateven Cato, who wrote commentaries on military discipline, andwho had learned the military art under Africanus, or rather underHannibal (for he could not endure Africanus, who, when he washis general, had borne away the triumph from him), that Cato, Isay, was open to the attacks of such as caught at reputation forthemselves by detracting from the merits of others. What then
"s "Pendenti titulo;" see note in Valpy, p. 187.
56 "Homeromastigse."
a7 "Suspendio jam quserere mortem oportere homines viteque renunciarecum tantum licentise, vel feminse, vel imperiti homines summit, ut in doc-tissimos scribant;" note in Valpy, p. 188. We learn from Cicero, De Nat.Deor. lib. i. sec. 33, that the name of this female was Leentium; ".... sedmeretricula etiam Leontium, contra Theophrastum scribere ausa sit?"







OCR Output








70 CffiEULEUM.


pictures; but for painting of pannels,' the gritty species alone isused, because the grit which is in it resists the acrid nature of thelime. It is dug out of the hills about twenty miles from the city.It is afterwards calcined, and is so adulterated that it is sold forthe pressed kind. But that it is counterfeit, and has been calcined,is evident from its acrid nature; for we find that it falls into pow­der. Polygnotus and Micon were the first painters who used Sil;they, however, used the Attic kind only. In the following agethis kind was used to produce the lights, the Syrican and theLydian being for the shades. The Lydian was procured at Sardis,but is no longer used.
57. OF CCBBULEUM.1
Coeruleum is a kind of sand. Formerly there were three kindsof it: the Egyptian, which is the most esteemed; the Scythian,which is easily mixed up, and when it is triturated produces fourshades of colour, some lighter and others darker; but the Cyprianis preferred to this. Besides these, there is that from Puteoli andfrom Spain, which is prepared there artificially from sand. Theyare all coloured by being boiled with a certain plant, the juice ofwhich they imbibe: the process is the same with that which isemployed for making chrysocolla. From Coeruleum is produced


9 " Abacus j" this term seems to be applied by Vitmvius to various partsof architecture; in lib. iii. cap. 3, and in iv. 1 and 7, it is supposed to desig­nate the flat stone that is placed over the capital of a column; while in vii. 3and 4, it means a pannel or entablature; see the lexicon to Rhode's Vitruvius,and the note in Newton's trans, p. 160 and 162; he remarks that the generalsignification of the term is a flat tabulated surface.
1 Dioscorides describes " nvavog," translated by Virgilius Coeruleum, asbeing found in the copper mines of Cyprus, and formed in caverns on thesea shore; lib. v. cap. 60. See also Vitruvius, vii. 9 and 11; Rhode in hisLexicon, and Newton, p. 172, note, suppose it to be smalt, or the oxide ofcobalt; but there is reason to suppose that the ancients were not acquaintedwith this substance. Theophrastus speaks of Kvavog, as a substance of asandy nature, and mentions both the native and the artificial species; Op.p. 399. It was probably a carbonate of copper, the azure or mountainblue of the moderns; see Kirwan's Min. i. 129.. 1; Jameson's Min. ii.218..6; Brochant, Min. ii. 190..6; and Aikins'Diet. i. 321. Theophras­tus also applies the word Kvavog to a kind of gem; Op. p. 395; perhapsLapis Lazuli. The word kvovoq appears likewise to have been occasionallyemployed to signify a species of metal; Homer speaks of ni\ag Kvavog as en­tering into the composition of the breast-plate of Agamemnon, II. xi. lin. 24;







OCR Output








THE
NATURAL HISTORY OF PLINY.


BOOK I.


DEDICATION.


C. PLINIUS SECUNDUS TO HIS FRIEND TIT0S VESPASIAN.
This treatise on Natural History, a novel work in Romanliterature, which I have just completed, I have determined todedicate, in a diffuse epistle, to you most pleasant1 emperor, (anappellation peculiarly suitable to you, while, on account of hisage, it is less appropriate to your illustrious father,)
"For still thou ne'er would'st quite despiseThe trifles that I write
if I may be allowed to quote the words of Catullus, my fellow-countryman, 3 a military term, which you well understand. Forhe, as you know, by altering the old words, * made himself some-
1 "Jucundissime;" it is not easy to find an epithet in our languagewhich will cerrectly express the meaning of the original, at the same timethat it is sufficiently dignified and respectful.
• Lamb's trans,; Carm. i. 1. 4. of the original.
3 "Conterraneus;" we have no word in English which expresses the ideaintended by the original, and which is, at the same time, a military term.There is indeed some reason to doubt whether the word now inserted inthe text was the one employed by the author: see note in Valpy, p. 174;also an observation in Cigalino's dissertation on the native country of Pliny;in Valpy, p. 8.
* "Permutatis prioribus seetabis ;" it appears that what were commonlycalled sudaria, napkins, Catullus calls sudaria Saetaba, Ssetabian napkins,Carm. xii. 14; xxv. 7, probably from their having been made at Saetabis;the individuals mentioned in the text, who, as Catullus informs us, gavehim the napkins, had visited Sfctabis in a military capacity: see Lamb'sCatullus, p. 135 and 149.







OCR Output








20 GOLD RINGS.


the custom, seems to have done it secretly, putting the ring on theleft hand, as it were concealing it; for if it had been clearlyregarded as an honour, it would have been more conspicuous onthe right hand. It may indeed be said, that they were worn onthe left hand, in order that the right might be left more at libertyfor the use of offensive weapons; yet we may remark, that the freeuse of the left hand, with which the shield is held, is as necessaryas the right. We learn also from Homer, that men wore orna­ments of gold in their hair: it does not appear whether this customoriginated with the women.
5. OF THE QUANTITY OF GOLD AMONG THE ANCIENTS.
For a long time the quantity of gold in Rome was but verysmall. It is certain, that when peace was purchased from theGauls, after they had captured the city, no more than 1,000 lbs.weight of gold could be raised. I am indeed not ignorant of thefact, that M. Crassus, in his and Pompey's second consulship, em­bezzled 2,000 lbs. weight of gold, which he took from the throneof Jupiter Capitolinus, where it had been deposited by Camillus,8and from this circumstance many persons have supposed, that2,000 lbs. weight had been collected by him at the time. But theadditional quantity was the booty of the Gauls, part of which theyhad taken from the temples of the captive city. What happenedto Torquatus proves that the Gauls made use of gold when theywent to battle. We may then conclude, that the ransom offeredto the Gauls, and what belonged to the temples, made up the sumin question, and no more. And this indeed appears to have beenthe meaning of the oracle, when it said, that Jupiter Capitolinushad rendered back double the sum that had been entrusted to him.I may also mention by the way, since I am to resume the subjectof. rings, that the keeper of this treasure being seized, broke thestone of his ring in his mouth, and immediately expired, so thatall farther discovery was rendered impossible. It appears, there­fore, that the quantity of gold in Rome was no more than 2,000lbs. weight, in the year of the city 364, and when, according tothe census, the number of the free-born citizens 9 was 152,573.
• See Livy, v. SO; where we are informed that the treasure was first de­posited in the cella, and was afterwards removed to the sella of Jupiter; seenote in Valpy's edit. p. 919. Pliny employs the term solium.
» "Capita libera;" the number in the text refers only to the free-bom







OCR Output








CffiRULEUM. 71


what we call Lomentum;1 it is made by washing or trituratingthe Coeruleum, and is somewhat lighter coloured: its price is tendenarii the pound; Cceruleum is eight. It is used for painting onchalk,3 but it will not bear quicklime. Another kind has beenlately introduced, which, from the name of the maker, is calledVestorianum; it is formed from the lighter part of the Egyptian,and costs eleven denarii the pound. It is applied to the same useas that from Puteoli, and likewise for windows; it is called Cyanon.We have lately begun to bring a species from India, which iseight denarii the pound; its principal use in painting is to markthe lines which separate the shadows from the lighter parts. Thereis a very inferior kind, which is called ground Lomentum, worthfive ases only. To try the purity of Cceruleum we throw it onburning coals, and observe whether it inflames; a counterfeit kindis made from a decoction of dried violets, adding the expressedjuice to Eretrian chalk.
58. MEDICINES FROM CffiRULEUM.
Its medical virtue is to cleanse ulcers; it is also an ingredientin plaisters and caustics. Sil is triturated with great difficulty;its effect is to produce a slight irritation and astringency, by meansof which it fills up ulcers; but in order that it may produce theseeffects, it is necessary for it to be calcined in earthen vessels.
I am aware that the prices which I have mentioned differ indifferent places, and that they vary almost every year, accordingto the state of commerce, and the circumstances of the merchants,or in consequence of the price being raised by the artifices of any-great monopolizer. I well recollect how, when Nero was Emperor,Demetrius was accused by all the druggists4 of Capua before theconsuls. It was, however, necessary that I should state what arethe ordinary prices at Rome, in order to establish a general rulerespecting them.
and Aristotle expressly designates it " to ptraWov," in his treatise "DeMirab. Aus." cap. 59; we appear to have no means of ascertaining whatmetal was referred to in these cases. See the note of Beckmann on thispassage, p. 123.
* Washed or purified; from Atuaiiai, see note (4) p. 44.
3 " Usus in creta;" or mixed with chalk, so as to make a body colour.
4 " A tota Seplasia." The French translator calls them "les parfumeursde Rome;" t. x. p. 667. See note in Valpy, p. 4406.







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








4tt SOLDERING.


to be pounded with a copper pestle and mortar; it is then calledSanterna.8 It is the gold which contains an alloy of silver that issoldered in this way. They judge of its nature by observingwhether it becomes bright when the Santerna is applied to it; ifit is alloyed with copper, it seems to shrink, it looks dull, and isnot easily soldered. In order to solder this kind of metal, a por­tion of gold, with one-seventh part of silver, is added to the com­pound mentioned above, and rubbed with it.
30. THE WONDERS OF NATURE IN SOLDERING AND COMPLETINGMETALLIC SUBSTANCES.
It may be proper to notice in this place the other kinds ofsolder, that we may become fully acquainted with the wonders ofnature. The solder for gold has been already described. Clay 9is the solder for iron; cadmia1 for masses of copper; and alum forcopper-plates; resin for lead and for marble; black lead is solderedby white lead, and pieces of white lead are united together by oil.Stannum 2 is soldered by copper filings, and silver by stannum.
* The pro.cess is described by Dioscorides as a method of preparing ver­digris, so as to produce a solder for gold; " Eotiv Si tic KoXKtotriv ■"
lib. v. cap. 47. "Est prseter hanc etiam serugo alia, quae ab inducentibus"aurum operibus suis in mortario pistilloque ex Cyprio sere et pueri urina"fit, qua aurum inducunt." The process is again mentioned by Pliny,lib. xxxiv. sec. 28, as a method of preparing a kind of verdigris that wasused for soldering gold. Agricola, in describing the factitious chrysocolla,chiefly follows Pliny and Dioscorides; De Nat. Foss. lib. iii. p. 222.
9 "Argilla," this term frequently occurs in Pliny, and appears to be equi­valent to the term clay, signifying the various species of plastic earths andmarls, essentially composed of alumine and silex, and generally containingoxide of iron.
1 Cadmia is described more fully in the next book, sec. 2, et alibi; it ap­pears to have been an ore of zinc, probably calamine; see also Diosco­rides, v. 42.
a "Plumbum album," and " plumbum nigrum," are described in the nextbook, sec. 47. By plumbum nigrum the author appears to mean metalliclead. There are various circumstances mentioned with respect to plum­bum album, which would lead to the opinion that he applied this term totin. He frequently uses the word Stannum, but never speaks of the twoas synonimous, of which an instance occurs in the very next sentence;see also lib. xxxiv. sec. 47, 48. Agricola distinctly applies the term plum­bum candidum to tin, and informs us that it was called by the GreeksKairirirfpos, DeNat. Foss. lib. viii. p. 339; see also the dialogue, De Re Met.







OCR Output








VALUE OF GOLD.


ously mistaken who suppose that the colour of gold pleases us, be­cause it is like that of the fixed stars, for we do not find this to bethe case with respect to gems, or other similar articles. Nor dowe prefer it to other metals in consequence of its weight, or theease with which it is worked, because, in both these points, ityields to lead, but because it is the only substance which is notdestroyed by fire, remaining uninjured even in conflagrations andin funeral piles. Indeed, the oftener it is exposed to fire the moreit is improved; and in order to try the purity of gold, we observewhether, after being exposed to the fire, it becomes red, and glowslike the fire itself; this process is called the test;1 and the greatproof of the goodness of gold is the difficulty with which it is con­sumed. It is very remarkable, that while it is not affected by themost violent charcoal fire, it is very readily fused by chaff ;* andthat in order to purify it, it is necessary to heat it with lead. Abetter reason for its high price is, that it is so little liable to beworn by use, while with silver, copper, and lead, lines may bedrawn, and the hands are soiled with the matter which is rubbedoff them. Nor is any substance capable of being beat out intofiner leaves, or divided into smaller parts, so that an ounce of it iscapable of being extended out into 750 leaves or more, each of themfour fingers wide in both directions. The thickest of these arecalled Praenestine, still retaining this name, from their having beenused to gild the statue of Fortune, which is at Praeneste. Theleaves, which are the next to these in thickness, are calledQuaestorian.
In Spain, the very small masses of gold are called Stigiles; thismetal, more frequently than all the others, being found either ina mass or in small fibres. And while the other metals require tobe reduced by fire, this is found in a perfect form, and possesses,


1 "Obrussa;" there is much uncertainty concerning both the orthographyand derivation of this word. It is used metaphorically by Cicero, "etadhibenda, tanquam obrussa, ratio ;" Brutus, sec. 74, p. 496; and by Seneca,"Sic verus ille animus, et in alienum non venturus arbitrium, probatur:hsec ejus obrussa est." Epist. xii. sub init. p. 407. Aericola informs usthat gold which had been purified by fusion was called " obryzum:" DeNat. Foss. lib. viii. p. 331.
J Diodorus Siculus, in giving an account of the mode in which the Egyptiangold ore is refined, says that it is put into an earthen crucible, togetherwith a quantity'of salt, lead, (poXt/Moc), tin, (icaooiTtpoQ), and the bran ofbarley (KpiQivov wnvpov); lib. iii. sec. 14.
d2







OCR Output








42 ELECTRUM.


ground, and is of the colour of gold, but it is brittle like LapisSpecularis.1 The emperor Caius, who was most greedy of gold,was anxious to make trial of it, and ordered a great quantity ofit to be smelted. And he certainly procured gold of excellentquality, but in so small a proportion, that he incurred a heavyloss from the undertaking, to which he was impelled by his avarice;although fourteen pounds weight of the Orpiment had been ac­tually converted into gold. The process has never been attemptedby any one since.
23. OF ELECTEUM.
In all gold there is a portion of silver; the quantity differs, insome cases amounting to one-ninth, in others to one-eighth of thewhole. There is an ore found in Gaul called Albucrarense, whichcontains only l-36th part, so much does it excel the others invalue. When one-fifth of the whole is silver it is called Electrum,3this kind of alloy is found in the ore called Canaliense.4 Electrumis also made artificially, by adding gold to silver, but if the pro­portion of silver be more than one-fifth, the compound will notbear the hammer. Homer gives his testimony to the value whichwas formerly set upon Electrum, when he informs us that thepalace of Menelaus was resplendent with gold, silver, electrum,and ivory.5 Lindos, a town of the island of Rhodes, has a temple


mentum as "quod apatviKov a Graecis nominatur." Nearly the same wordsare employed by Vitruvius, lib. vii. cap. 7, and by Agricola, De Nat.Foss. lib. iii. p. 225; but in this and other passages these authors appear torefer to the sulphuret of arsenic. In his Dialogue De Re Met. p. 456, hedistinctly mentions white arsenic, and designates auripigmentum as yellowarsenic.
* This is the Foliated Gypsum, or Selinhe, of the modern mineralogists;SeeKirwin'sMin. 123,4; Jameson,i.567 .. 0; Brochant, i. 606..9; Aikins'Diet. i. 546, 7. It is described by Agricola, De Re Met. p. 456, 7. Plinytreats of it farther in lib. xxxvi. sec. 45.
J Agricola says that the name of electrum was given to an alloy, "ubiquinta argenti portio inest in quatuor auri portionibus;" De Nat. Foss.lib. viii. p. 343. The term has been retained by the modern chemists andapplied to the argentiferous ore of gold; the proportion of its ingredientsis, however, very different from that stated by Pliny and Agricola;Klaproth found it to consist of 64 parts gold to 36 silver.
4 See p. 38.
s Odyssey, lib. iv. v. 73. Sophocles speaks of "aapittav ijXticrpoi/" inconnexion with the other precious metals; Antigone, 1037, 8.







OCR Output








50 QUICKSILVER.


remain, and retain the names given them by their discoverers.7One of these, now called Bebulo, yielded Hannibal 300 weightdaily; it runs into the mountain for 1500 paces; and through thisspace the Aquitani draw off the water night and day, measuringtheir time by the burning of their lamps, and discharge a streamas large as a river. When a vein of silver is found at the surface,it is called Crudaria.» The antients continued to dig down untilthey came to a stratum of Alumen;9 beyond this they made nofarther search. But a vein of white copper 1 having been latelyfound below the alumen, the miners are induced to go still lower.The vapour which arises from silver mines is injurious to all ani­mals, and especially to dogs. Both gold and silver are the morebeautiful the softer they are. It is generally thought to be re­markable that silver should leave a black streak behind it
32. OF QUICKSILVER.
There is in these veins a stone, which discharges a substancethat always remains fluid, called Quicksilver, but which is deathto every thing.* It corrodes and destroys the vessels in which itis Jcept, oozing through them with its baneful poison. All things,except 'gold, float in it; that substance alone is attracted to it.On this account it is very useful in refining gold, separating it fromall the impurities, by repeatedly shaking it in earthen vessels whichcontain pieces of leather. The quicksilver is then separated fromthe gold by pressing the prepared skins, through which it exudeslike perspiration, leaving the pure gold behind. For the samereason, in gilding bronzes,3 if quicksilver be rubbed over them,the gold leaves will adhere firmly to the bronze. But by the light
? Aristotle speaks of the great quantity of silver brought from Spain bythe Phoenicians; De Mirab. Aus. cap. 127. We have likewise an accountof the silver mines of Spain in Diodorus Siculus, lib. v. sec. 35, 6.
s The French translator informs us that cruda ria are two Castilianwords, signifying veine crue; t. x. note in p. 616.
9 Alumen is treated of in lib. xxxv. sec. 52; also by Dioscorides, lib. v.cap. 77. The word appears to have been applied both to the aluminousores and to the salt obtained from them; although it was probably in animpure state.
1 Probably arsenicated copper.
• Here is probably intended to be a kind of pun between the words " ar-gentum vivum" and " venenum.'
• " Mia."







OCR Output








WORKING OF GOLD MINES. 39


sometimes happens that the clefts suddenly slip down, and over­whelm the workmen: it may indeed be considered as a less dan­gerous employment to dive for pearls in the depths of the ocean;so much more hurtful to us have we made the land than the water.To prevent these accidents, there are a number of arches left inthe mountains. Masses of very hard stone4 are occasionally metwith in both kinds of mines; these they break down with fire andvinegar. But more frequently in the shafts, where the smokeand vapour would produce suffocation, they cleave the rock inlarge masses of 150 lbs. each, and these they convey on theirshoulders, and pass them on in regular order, from one to another,according as they are stationed; all this is done in the dark, thosealone who stand the last in the line seeing the light. If this hardrock is of very considerable length, the trench is carried by theside of it, and goes round it. The labour, however, is thought tobe less in cutting through flint rock than some other substances:there is an earth composed of a kind of clay mixed with gravel;it is called white earth, and it is almost impossible to quarry it;they attack it with iron wedges, and mallets of the same material.Nothing it is thought can be harder than this substance, unlessindeed the insatiable thirst of gold be esteemed the hardest of allthings. When they have completed their workings, they thenbreak down the supports, beginning at the last. A man, who isconstantly stationed on the top of the hill for this purpose, watchesthe first sign of the ground being about to give way; he imme­diately calls out to the men to leave the mine, and goes himselfaway as speedily as possible. The mountain breaks down, andfalls asunder with a crash which is inconceivable, and is accompa­nied by a prodigious rush of air. They survey the ruins of natureas if they had conquered her. But they have not yet procuredthe gold; when the ore is dug up, they do not know its nature.The hope only of obtaining what they so earnestly desire, is causeenough for them to undertake all this labour and expense.
Another operation still remains to be performed, which is equallylaborious, and even more expensive; this consists in conveyingwater along the ridges of the hills, perhaps for a hundred miles,in order to wash these ruins of the mountains. These streams arc


4 "Silices;" this term is not to be understood as restricted to flint, accord­ing to the modern use of the term, but to be applied to any rock which wasvery hard and difficult to work.







OCR Output








SILVER VESSELS. Go


the same Africanus, at his triumph, distributed to his soldiersseven denarii a-piece. Men worthy indeed of such a general, tobe satisfied with this! His brother, Allobrogicus, was the firstwho had as much as 1,000 lbs. weight; and Livius Drusus, whenhe was tribune of the people, 10,000 lbs. At this day it appearsincredible, that an individual, after having had the honour of atriumph, should have been reproved in his old age by the censors,because he possessed 5 lbs. weight of silver. And likewise thatCatus JSlius, when the ambassadors of the iEtolians came to him,and found him dining off earthen ware, would not receive the silvervessels that were presented to him, and never, to the last day of hislife, possessed any silver utensils, except two cups, which L. Pau-Ius, his father-in-law, gave him on account of his valour, when heconquered King Perseus. It was a saying of the Carthaginianambassadors, that no people are kinder to each other than theRomans; for they used the same service of plate at all the dif­ferent houses. And we know for a certainty, that Pompeius Pau-linus, the son of a Roman knight of Aries, and a person of a veryhonourable family,6 was banished to a barbarous country, becausehe had in his army 12 lbs. weight of silver.
51. WHEN SILVER WAS FIRST ADDED TO COUCHES.
The couches 7 of the women have been, for some time past, en­tirely covered with silver, and this is the case sometimes with thecouches which are used at meals.8 Cavilius Pollio is said to havebeen the first who introduced this custom, not entirely coveringthem, after the Delian mode, but according to the Carthaginian.He also employed gold for the same purpose; and it was not longafter this time that silver couches were used, like those from Delos.But all this was expiated by the civil war of Sylla.
6 " Paternaque gente pellitum;" whose family were privileged to wear aparticular dress. This expression has been supposed to be illustrated by aline in Claudian,
"Crinigeri sedere patres, pellita Getarum
"Curia." De Bell. Get. 481, 2.
»" Lecti."
s " Triclinia.'' This word is applied sometimes to the couches used atmeals, so named because they held three persons each, and sometimes tothe room in which the meals were taken. In Vitruvius, vi. 5 and 8, it re-it refers to the room, in vi. 6. it refers to the couches. Newton, Trans, note,p. 137, remarks, " the triclinium or triclinia (as in the eighth chapter fol­lowing) was the dining room; the word is sometimes used for the diningtable, and surrounding couches on which they lay to eat."
F







OCR Output








GOLD RINGS. 17


account of their very brittleness. For it was regarded as a proofof opulence, and as quite the glory of luxury, to possess what isliable, at any time, to be totally destroyed. Nor was even thisthought sufficient; we drink out of a cluster of gems, and we coverour cups with emeralds ;8 we are anxious to get possession of Indiain order to indulge our passion for drinking, and the gold is becomeonly a secondary consideration.
3. WHAT IS THE CHIEF RECOMMENDATION OF GOLD.
Oh! that the sacred thirst of gold, as some very famousauthors have termed it, could be entirely banished from theearth! It has always been loaded with reproaches by the bestmen, and was discovered for the destruction of life. How muchhappier a period was it when articles were bartered for each other,as was the case in the time of the Trojan war, if we are to creditHomer. For in this way, as I suppose, was the traffic carried on,by which they procured their subsistence. He mentions thatsome exchanged ox-hides, and others iron, or the booty whichthey had taken in battle; yet, it appears, that he himself esteemedgold very highly, as he informs us, that Glaucus exchanged hisarms, which were made of gold, and were considered worth onehundred oxen, for Diomed's, which were worth only nine. Pro­ceeding upon the same system of barter, it appears, that even atRome, in former times, the fines were levied in cattle.9
4. OF THE ORIGIN OF GOLD RINGS.
The man who first put gold upon his fingers committed thegreatest crime: we are not however informed who first did this.For what is said with respect to Prometheus, I regard as fabulous.The ancients indeed generally represent him with an iron ring;
but signified any translucent mineral, that exhibited a variety of colours.See Montfaucon's Antiq. vol. iii. part 1. book 4. chap. 9. Salmasius ridiculesthe idea of their being onyxes, and conceives that the vessels were made ofporcelain; Exer. Plin. p. 144.
• The "Smaragdus" is described in book xxxvii. sec. 13; probably theBeryl of the moderns.
» We may suppose that this was the reason why the figure of an ox, orother animal was stamped on the earliest Roman coins; see Montfaucon,vol. iii. part 1. book, 4. ch. 9. pi. 27. fig. 17, 18, 19; also Adam's RomanAntiquities, p. 491.
c







OCR Output








14 DEDICATION.


The 9th on Aquatic Animals.
The 10th on the different Kinds of Birds.
The 11th on Insects.
The 12th on Odoriferous Plants.
The 13th on Exotic Trees.
The 14th on Vines.
The 15th on Fruit Trees.
The 16th on Forest Trees.
The 17th on Plants raised in Gardens or Nurseries.
The 18th on the Nature of Fruits and the Cerealea, and thePursuits of the Husbandman.
The 19th treats of Flax, Broom,31 and Garden Plants.
The 20th is on the Parts of Cultivated Plants that are properfor Food and for Medicine.
The 21st on Flowers and Plants that are proper for Garlands.
The 22d on Garlands and Medicines made from Plants.
The 23d on Medicines made from Wine, and from cultivatedTrees.
The 24th on Medicines made from Forest Trees.
The 25th on Medicines made from Wild Plants.
The 26th on New Diseases, and Medicines for Diseases madefrom certain Plants.
The 27th on some other Plants and Medicines.
The 28th on Medicines procured from Man, and from largeAnimals.
The 29th on Medical Authors, and on Medicines from otherAnimals.
The 30th on Magic, and Medicines for certain Parts of theBody.
The 31st on Medicines from Aquatic Animals.
The 32d on other Substances procured from Aquatic Animals.
The 33d on Gold and Silver.
The 34th on Copper and Lead, and the Workers of Copper.The 35th on Pictures, Colours, and Painters.The 36th on Marbles and Stones.The 37th on Gems.


3° "Spartum;" ropes were made from this plant: it may be regarded asequivalent to our hemp.







OCR Output








ON THE NATURE OF METALS.


BOOK XXXIII.


INTRODUCTION.
1. OF METALS.
I must now speak of metals, and of actual wealth, and of theprices of things, what we diligently search after, in various ways,within the earth. In some cases we dig for the purpose of obtain­ing riches, searching, at the expense of our lives, for gold, silver,electrum,1 and copper.* In some cases, for the purposes ofluxury, we search for gems, and for pigments, to adorn our wallsand our fingers; while in others, we rashly search for iron, whichfor the purposes of war and slaughter is more acceptable eventhan gold. We trace out all the veins of the earth, and live upon.it, hollowed out, as it is, and then wonder that it should occa­sionally yawn and tremble; as if all this could be dug out of oursacred parent, without her expressing her anger. We descendinto her very bowels, and we search for treasures, even in the lower
1 Electrum is described, in sec. 23, as gold mixed with a certain propor­tion of silver. The word Electrum is likewise used to signify amber, as inbook iii. sec. 30.
* By Ms is here probably meant copper; it is more fully described in thenext book. We learn from the analysis of Klaproth, that the term Ms,when applied to works of art—as cutting instruments, statues, vases, &c.signified bronze, or a mixture of copper and tin, in which the proportion oftin varied from a little more than 2 to 14 per cent, according as the objectwas to procure a flexible or a hard substance: Nicholson's Journal, xxvi. 90,et seq. and Aikiu's Diet. "Copper," i. 348. Watson has rendered it pro­bable, that brass, the mixture of copper and zinc, was called by the ancientsOrichalcum: Manchester Trans, ii. 47, et seq. Agricola speaks of Ms assynonimous with Cuprum: De Vet. & Nov. Met. lib. i. p. 391. He alsoremarks, "Ms autem cadmia tingitur, et abit in aureum colorem, appella-turque a Grsecis optixaXicov." De Nat. Foss. lib. viii. p. 337.







OCR Output








SILVER STATUES.


of silver, from their having been so commonly made of gold. Andin our own time, we have the example of Arellius Fuse us, (hewho was degraded from the equestrian order in consequence of hisbeing followed by a number of young men) who had his ringsmade of silver. But to what purpose do I collect facts of this de­scription, when the hilts of the soldiers1 swords are carved in sil­ver, ivory being quite despised, and when their sheaths and beltsabsolutely rattle with silver chains and plates. Even the youngpages wear a ring of silver,3 and the women cannot wash their feetexcept in silver vessels; and the same material is used both tohold our food, and for the most degrading purposes. Could Fa-bricius see these things, the baths of the women paved with silver,so that there is not even a spot left to set the foot on, the womenalso bathing along with the men; could Fabricius, I say, whoforbad even the bravest generals to possess more than a plate anda salt-cellar of silver, see what ought to be kept as a reward forvalour, converted to such purposes! But, alas for our manners,we are now ashamed of Fabricius!
55. DISTINGUISHED WORKS, AND WORKMEN, IN SILVER. 4
It is remarkable that no one has distinguished himself in theengraving of gold, while so many have in silver. Mentor,4 whom Imentioned above, was the most celebrated. There were four pair ofvases entirely executed by him, but none of them are said nowto exist, in consequence of the Temple of Ephesus and the Ca­pitol having been burned down. Varro says that he had a bronzestatue made by this artist. Those who stand next to him areAcragus, Boethus, and Mys. There are works of all these nowat Rhodes; the Minerva of Boethus at Lindus, a statue by Acra­gus in the temple of father Bacchus, and in the city of Rhodesthe female Bacchante and the Centaur, carved on goblets; in thesame temple are the Silenus and the Cupids of Mys. The hunt,executed on a goblet by Acragus, is very celebrated. The nextafter them in reputation are Calamis and Antipater, and also Stra-tonicus, whose figure of a satyr, oppressed by sleep, is more pro­perly said to be laid upon the jar, than carved on it. After these
s " Ad transitum virilitatis custodiantur argento;" See Celsus, lib. vii.cap. '25, sec. 3.
4 Mentor and Praxitiles are among the artists mentioned by Martial inthe epigram referred to above, p. 64-.







OCR Output








 


C. Baldwin, Printer,New Bridge-street, London.







OCR Output








,72
I hail completed the above translation before I was aware of the existence»f the new edition of Pliny, recently published at Paris, with notes byCuvier. In the farther prosecution of this work, I shall not fail to availmyself of the invaluable assistance which must be afforded by the laboursof an individual so thoroughly conversant with the topics on which ourAuthor treats.


LIST OF AUTHORS REFERRED TO.


Adam's Roman Antiquities,
(6th ed.) Lond. 1807
Agricola, Opera Basil. 1546
Aikins' Dictionary of Chemis­try Lond. 1807
Aristotles, Opuscula Varia,
Franc. 1587
De Mirab. Auscult. a
Beckmann Gott. 1786
Brochant, Mineralogie de, (2e ed.)
Par. 1808
Catullus a Grevio Traj. 1680
, trans, by Lamb, Lond. 1821
Celsus, a Targa, cum Lex. Mat-
thite L.B. 1785
Cicero, a Gronovio L. B. 1692
Claudianus, Delph. ed. by Valpy,
Lond. 1820
Columella Par. 1542
Cuperi Harpocrates, a Le Moin,
Traj. 1694Diodorus Siculus, a Wesseling,
Anst. 1746Durand, Hist. Nat. de l'Or et de
l'Argent Lond. 1729
Harmer's Observations (2nd ed.)
Lond. 1776Herodotus, a Wesseling.. Anst. 1763
Homerus, a Clarke Lond. 1735
Horatius, a Baxter Lond. 1725
Jameson's Mineralogy .. Edin. 1804Juvenalis, aSchrevelio.. L. B. 1672Kirwan's Mineralogy (2nd edit.)
Lond. 1794Klaproth, in Nicholson's Journ. v. 26.Livius, a Ruddiman.... Edin. 1751Lucretius, a Creech .... Oxon. 1807


Lucretius, translated by Creech,
Lond. 1714Martialis, aSchrevelio .. L. B. 1663Montague's (Lady M. W.) Works,
(5th ed.) Lond. 1774
Montfaucon's Antiquities, by
Humphries Lond. 1721
Ovidius, a Cnippingio .. Amst. 1683Perseus, aSchrevelio .. ..L. B. 1672"
Plautus, a Gronovio Amst. 1684
Quintilianus, a Gibson.. Lond. 1716Russell's Aleppo (2d ed.) Lond. 1794Salmasii Exercitationes Plini-
aiiic in Solinum Traj. 1689
Scribonius Largus, a Rhodio,
Patav. 1655Shaw's Travels (2nded.) Lond. 1757
Solinus, a Camerte Par. 1733
Sophocles, a Brunck .. Argent. 1786
Strabo, a Casaubono Amst. 1707
Suetonius, Delph. ed. by Valpy,
Lond. 1826Theophrastus, a Heinsio, L. B. 1613 's History of Stones,
trans, by Hill (2nd ed.) Lond. 1774
Tibullus, a Heyne Lips. 1777
Varro de Ling. Lat. ab Augustino
Bipont, 1788Vitruvius,aDeLaet,Elz. Amst. 1649
, a Rhodio Ber. 1800
, trans, by Newton,
Lond. 1791Watson's in Manch. Memoirs, v. ii.Winckelmann, Descrip. des
Pierres de Stosch Flor. 1760
Wurm, de Pond., Num., &c.
Rom. &Grtec Stutg. 1821


C. Baldwin, Priliter.New Bridge-street. Lon Ion.


---







OCR Output








 


1







OCR Output








10 DEDICATION.


health, and contenting myself with this reward, that while we aremusing on these subjects (according to the remark of Varro), weare adding to the length of our lives; for life properly exists inbeing awake.
In consideration of these circumstances and these difficulties, Idare promise nothing; but you have done me the most essentialservice, in permitting me to inscribe my work to you. Nor doesthis merely give a sanction to it, but it determines its value; forthings are often conceived to be of great value, solely because theyare consecrated in temples.
I have given a full account of all your family—your father,yourself, and your brother, in a history of our own times, begin­ning where Aufidius Bassus concludes. You will ask, Where it is?It has been long completed, and its accuracy confirmed,1* other­wise I had determined to commit the charge of it to my heirs, lestI should have been suspected, during my life-time, of havingbeen unduly influenced by ambition. By this means I confer anobligation on those who occupy the same ground with myself; andalso on posterity, who, I am aware, will contend with me as I havedone with my predecessors.
You may judge of my disposition from my having inserted inmy book the names of the authors that I have consulted. For Iconceive it to be courteous, and to indicate an ingenuous modesty,to acknowledge the source whence we have derived assistance, andnot act as most of those have done whom I have examined. ForI must inform you, that in consulting various authors, I have dis­covered that some of the most grave, and of the latest writers,have transcribed word for word from former works, without makingany acknowledgment. Not avowedly rivalling them, in the mannerof Virgil, or with the candour of Cicero, who, in his treatise "DeRepublica," professes to be the companion of Plato, and in hisEssay on consolation for his Daughter, calls himself the followerof Crantor, and of Panaecius in his Offices,16 volumes, which youwell know, ought not merely to be always in our hands, but to belearned by heart. For it is indeed the mark of a perverted mind


1s " Jam pridem peracta sancitur."
16 The following is probably the passage in the Offices, to which Plinyrefers :—" Panaetius igitur, qui sine controversia de officiis accuratissirriedisputavit, quemque nos, correctione quadam adhibita, potissimum secutisumus,...." Lib. iii. sec. 2.







OCR Output








GOXD RINGS. 21


After an interval of 307 years, when the temple of the Capitoland all the other temples were destroyed by fire, C. Marius the,younger took to Praeneste 13,000 lbs. weight; the same sum wasbrought back to Rome by Sylla, at his triumph, together with6,000 lbs. weight of silver. The day before he had conveyed toRome 15,000 lbs. weight of gold, together with 115,000 lbs.weight of silver, being the produce of all his other victories.
6. OF THE EIGHTS ATTACHED TO GOLD EINGS.
It was not until the time of Cn. Flavius, the son of Annius,that rings became more generally used. For he, having publishedthe calendar, which the people had been perpetually requestinga few of the chief men to do,1 obtained so great a degree of favourwith the lower classes, that although he was no more than the sonof a freedman, and had himself been the secretary of AppiusCaecus (by whom he was encouraged to undertake the business,being guided by his sagacity, and to publish the result) he wascreated curule jEdile, together with L. Anicius of Praeneste, who,a few years before, had been in arms against Rome, passing byPcetilius and Domitius, whose fathers had been consuls. Andin addition to this, Flavius was also created a tribune of thepeople. At this, the senate were so indignant, that we are told, inthe old annals, that they cast off their rings. Many personssuppose, but erroneously, that the knights did the same thing;for what we are told is, that they also threw off their badges, fromwhich they receive the appellation of knights.2 It is, however,
adult males, and would therefore form only a small part of the whole popu­lation.
1 This was so much wished for by the people, because it contained an ac­count of the days on which the courts were open, and business of all kindswas transacted, as well as of the holidays and festivals. These seem tohave been previously regulated by the Pontifices, and, it may be presumed,not unfrequently in an arbitrary manner, so as to serve the purposes of thePatricians.
»".... phalera posita." This, we may presume, was some trapping be­longing to the horses, or at least, something significant of their possessinghorses. It appears, indeed, that the rank of knight entitled the individualto wear a gold ring, but that besides this, they possessed something speci­fically distinctive of their order. Livy, in his account of this transaction,says, "Plerique nobilium annulos aureos et phaleras deponerent," lib. ix.cap. 46; thus denoting the "phalerse'' as something different from rings.







OCR Output








56 CINNABAR.


38. OF CINNABAH.6
I am not surprised at the high estimation in which this colourhas been held. Even in the time of the Trojans, Rubrica1 wasmuch valued, according to the testimony of Homer, who praisesthe ships that were painted with it,8 although, on most occasions,he is very sparing of his remarks on paintings and pigments.Minium is called by the Greeks, Milton, and by some personsCinnabar. Hence arises the mistake respecting the substancewhich is called Cinnabar by the Indians; for they give this nameto the blood of the dragon, when it is crushed by the weight of theelephant dying on it, in the way which I have described above,9the blood of the two animals being mixed together. There is noother pigment which gives the proper blood-colour in painting.Cinnabar is of great use, both as an antidote and a medicine; but,by Jove! the physicians, instead of the proper Cinnabar, actuallyuse this which is made from Minium, and which is itself a poison,as I shall show hereafter.
0 Dioscorides gives an account of cinnabar, in lib. v. cap. 63. p. 668; hewas not aware of its relation to minium. Agricola was acquainted withthis relation, and with the true nature of cinnabar, as a compound of mer­cury and sulphur; De Re Met. p. 460,1; he calls it "Miniumfactitium;"De Nat. Foss. lib. ix. p. 358, 9. The ancients appear to have had no cor­rect idea of the relation of these substances to each other.
? For a farther account of Rubrica see lib. xxxv. sec. 14. It is describedby Dioscorides under the name of piXrov; v. 65, 6; where we have an ac­count of both the native and the artificial species; the latter is said to beproduced by calcining ochre. The same statement is made by Agricola,De Re Met. p. 461; he gives a full description of Rubrica in the treatiseDe Nat. Foss. lib. ii. p. 204; it appears to be a kind of red ochre. Vitru-vius classes Rubrica with Si], as species of ochres; vii. 7.
"In the line supposed to be referred to in this place, II. ii. 637, Homersimply mentions the fact, that the ships of Ulysses were "fuXroTrapijoi,"without any expression of praise or admiration. There is, however, reasonto suppose that by itiXrov the ancients meant a species of red ochre; The-ophrastus classes it with w^pa, as substances of an earthy nature; DeLap. sec. 71; Op. p. 396, 7.
9 Lib. viii. sec. 12. This tale is repeated by Solinus, as is ordinarily thecase with all the improbable stories that are referred to by Pliny. Speakingof the contest of the dragon and the elephant, Solinus says, "Itaque cum"ebiberunt (dracones) sanguinem, dum ruunt belluae, dracones obruuntur.Sic utrinque fusus cum terram imbuit, fitque pigmentum quiquid solitinxerit, quod cinnabari vocant." cap. 26. See also Salmasius, in Exerc.Plin. p. 140.







OCR Output








CINNABAR. 55


36. OF MINIUM ; S HOW SACRED IT WAS CONSIDERED AMONGTHE ANCIENTS.
Minium is also found in veins of silver ore; a substance, which,both in our own times is in high estimation as a pigment, and wasformerly considered by the Romans, not only as most highly va­luable, but even as sacred.
Verrius enumerates certain writers of unquestionable veracity,who inform us, that on festivals the face of the statue of Jupiterwas smeared with minium, as were all the bodies of those who rodein triumph; and this was the case with Camillus. In consequenceof this superstition it is that, at this day, minium is added to theunguents which are employed in the triumphal entertainments,and that the first duty of the censors is to have the minium ap­plied to the statue of Jupiter. I cannot but wonder what was theorigin of this custom. We learn, indeed, that at this day thesame substance is in request among the .Ethiopians, and that alltheir nobility, and the statues of their gods, are coloured with it.It therefore behoves us to make all possible inquiry respecting it.
37. OF ITS DISCOVERY AND ORIGIN.
Theophrastus informs us, that ninety years before Praxibuluswas chief magistrate of Athens (which answers to the 394th year ofour city,) minium was discovered by Callias, the Athenian, whilehe was endeavouring to procure gold, by calcining the red sandwhich is found in the silver ores; this is said to have been its ori­gin. It had been previously found in Spain, but in a hard andgritty state; also among the Colchians, in a certain inaccessiblerock, from which it was detached by darts. This, however, was abastard kind; the best was obtained above Ephesus, in the Cil-bianian country. The sand has a scarlet colour; it is rubbeddown, the powder is washed, and the part which subsides is washeda second time. The difference between the modes in which it isprepared is, that some persons procure the minium by one wash­ing only, while others use more water, and obtain the best kind bya subsequent washing.


5 By the term minium Pliny designated the sulphuret of mercury, cin­nabar, or native vermillion, not the red oxide of lead, according to themodern use of the word. Agricola employs it in the same way with Pliny;De Nat. Foss. lib. x. and De Re Met. p. *68 .. 0.







OCR Output








DEDICATION. 11


and an unhappy disposition, to prefer being caught in a theft toreturning what we have borrowed, especially when we have realizeda capital after paying ample interest for it.17
The Greeks were wonderfully happy in their titles. One workthey called Kvptov, which means the Honeycomb; another KijpajA/xaXfeaj, or Cornu copiae, so that you might expect to get evena draught of pigeon's milk from it.18 Then they have theirFlowers, their Muses, Magazines, Manuals, Gardens, Pictures,and Sketches," all of them titles for which a man might betempted even to forfeit his bail. But when you enter uponthe works, oh ye Gods and Goddesses! how full of emptiness!Our duller countrymen have simply their Antiquities, or theirExamples, or their Arts. I think one of the most humoroushas his Lamp Studies,20 a term employed by Bibaculus; aname, which he richly deserved.*1 Varro, indeed, is not muchbehind him, when he calls some of his satires A Trick anda Half, and Turning the Tables.** Diodorus was the firstamong the Greeks, who laid aside this trifling manner, and namedhis history The Library." Apion, the grammarian, indeed—he whom Tiberius Caesar called the trumpet of the world, butwho should rather seem to be the drum of common report **—sup­posed that every one to whom he inscribed any work would thenceacquire immortality. I do not regret not having given my worka more fanciful title.
That I may not, however, appear so completely to inveighagainst the Greeks, I should wish to be considered under thesame point of view with those inventors of the arts of painting andsculpture, of whom you will find an account in these volumes,
'" "Cum prasertim sors fiat ex usura."
18 " Lac gallinaceum;" "Proverbium de re singulari et admodum rara;"see note in Valpy, p. 184.
19 The titles in the original are given in Greek; I have inserted in thetext the words whicli the most nearly resemble them, and which have beenemployed by modern authors.
50 "Lucubratio."
al The pun in the original cannot be preserved in the translation; theEnglish reader may conceive the name Bibaculus to correspond to oursurname Jolly.
M "Sesculysses" and "Floxtabula;" literally Ulysses and a half andBend table.
*3 "Bij3\ioeijK»j."
54 " Cymbalum mundi" and "publica; famse tympanum."







OCR Output








DEDICATION. 2


given so much in detail, that we quite loathe them. It is, indeed,no easy task to give novelty to what is old, and authority to whatis new; brightness to what is become tarnished, and light to whatis obscure; to render what is slighted acceptable, and what isdoubtful worthy of our confidence; to give to all a naturalmanner, and to each its peculiar nature. It is sufficiently honour­able and glorious to have been willing even to make the attempt,although it should prove unavailing. And, indeed, I am of opinionthat the studies of those are more especially worthy of our regard,who, after having overcome all difficulties, prefer the useful officeof assisting others, to the mere gratification of giving pleasure;and this is what I have already done in some of my former works.I confess it surprises me, that T. Livius, so celebrated an authoras he is, in one of the books of his history of the city from itsorigin, should begin with this remark, " I have now obtained asufficient reputation, so that I might put an end to my work, didnot my restless mind require to be supported by employment."Certainly he ought to have composed this work, not for his ownglory, but for that of the Roman name, and of the people whowere the conquerors of all other nations. It would have beenmore meritorious to have persevered in his labours from his loveof the work, than from the gratification which it afforded himself,and to have accomplished it, not for his own sake, but for that ofthe Roman people.
I have included in thirty-six u books 20,000 topics, all worthyof attention, (for, as Domitius Piso says, we ought to make notmerely books, but valuable collections) gained by the perusal ofabout 2,000 volumes, few only of which are in the hands of thestudious, on account of the obscurity of the subjects, procured bythe careful examination of 100 select authors; and to these Ihave made considerable additions of things, which were either notknown to my predecessors, or which have been lately discovered.Nor can I doubt but that there still remain many things which I, have omitted. For I am a mere mortal, and one that has many oc­cupations. I have been therefore obliged to compose this work atinterrupted intervals, indeed during the night, so that you willfind I have not been idle even during this period. The day I de­vote to you, exactly portioning out my sleep to the necessity of my
14 "Quem primum historic PlinianiE librum vocamus, nunc ipse nonnumerat:" note in Valpy, p. 181.







OCR Output








DEDICATION. 7


"Emperor ! why do you read these things? They are written onlyfor the common people, for farmers or mechanics, or for those who?have nothing else to do; why do you trouble yourself with them?"Indeed, when I undertook this work, I did not expect that youwould sit in judgment on me;' I considered your situation muchtoo elevated for you to descend to such an office. Besides wepossess the right of openly rejecting the opinion of men of learn­ing. M. Tullius himself, whose genius is beyond all competition,uses this privilege, and, remarkable as it may appear, employs anadvocate in his own defence. "I do not write for very learnedpeople; I do not wish my works to be read by Manius Persius,but by Junius Congus."8 And if Lucilius, who first introducedthe satirical style,' applied such a remark to himself, and ifCicero thought proper to borrow it, and that more especially inhis treatise "De Republica;" how much more reason have I to doso, who have such a judge to defend myself against? And by thisvery dedication I have deprived myself of the benefit of chal­lenge ;IO for it is a very different thing whether a person has ajudge given him by lot, or whether he voluntarily selects one; andwe always make more preparation for an invited guest, than forone that comes in unexpectedly.
When the candidates for office, during the heat of the canvass,deposited the fine in the hands of Cato, that determined opposerof bribery, rejoicing as he did in his being rejected from what heconsidered to be foolish honours, they professed to do this out ofrespect to his integrity; the greatest glory which a man couldattain. It was on this occasion that M. Cicero uttered the nobleejaculation; "How happy are you, Marcus Porcius, of whom noone dares to ask what is dishonourable!" When L. Scipio Asiati-cus appealed to the tribunes, among whom was Gracchus, heexpressed full confidence that he should obtain an acquittal, evenfrom a judge who was his enemy. Thus it appears that every one
7 "Non eras in hoc albo;" see note inValpy, p. 177. A passage inQuintilian, lib. xii. cap. 4. p. 688, may serve to illustrate this use of the
term album;" quorum alii se ad album ac rubricas transtule-
runt...."
8 Cicero refers to this remark of Lucilius's in two of his other works,although with a variation in the expression and in the individuals specified;De Orat. lib. ii. sec. 6, and De Fin. lib. i. sec. 3.
9 "Qui primus condidit styli nasum."
1° " Sed haec ego mihi nunc patrocinia ademi nuncupatioue."







OCR Output













OCR Output













OCR Output








46 CHRYSOCOLLA.


alum schist,6 and the plant mentioned above. It must be dyedbefore it can dye.r It is of importance that it should be bibulous,and easy to work. If it has not quickly taken the the propercolour, they add schytanum and turbiston,8 names which theygave to two substances which cause it to imbibe the colour.
27. ITS USE IN PAINTING.
When it is dyed in this manner, the painters call it Orobitis; 9and there are two kinds of it,—the yellow, which is made into apowder," and the liquid, which is formed by dissolving the grainsin a fluid. Both these kinds are made in Cyprus. The mostapproved comes from Armenia, the next best from Macedonia,but it is the most plentiful in Spain. That is the most valuedwhich produces a colour as nearly as possible similar to the brightgreen of young corn. The arena of the circus was covered withchrysocolla, at the games which were exhibited by the EmperorNero, when he proposed himself to drive his chariot in a dress ofthe same colour. The workmen, who are not well acquaintedwith the substance, divide it into three species; the rough kind,which is valued at seven denarii the pound, the middle kind atfive, and the powder, which is also called the vegetable spe­cies, at three. Painters, before they use the pulverized chry­socolla, lay under it a ground-work of Atramentum2 and Paraeto-
6 "Alumen schistum;" this is described lib. xxxv. sec. 52.'** Pingiturque antequam pingat."
• It appears impossible to ascertain the orthography or the derivation ofthese words, nor can we form any conjecture what substances they wereintended to designate.
• From its being formed into masses or small grains like the seeds of theorobus or vetch.
'"Quae servatur in lomentum;" this phrase may perhaps mean, that thesubstance in question was mixed with some kind of powder, for the purposeof making what we call an opake or body colour. The term lomentum issupposed to be immediately derived from \tnopai, lavo; it occurs again insec. 57.
• "Atramentum" is generally translated ink, and it appears that the an­cients applied the term to the fluid which was used for writing. Theirwriting-ink was not, however, like that of the moderns, composed of thegallate of iron, but more like what we term Indian ink, consisting of acarbonaceous substance suspended in a viscid fluid. But we learn from ourauthor, that besides its more general acceptation, the word atramentumwas also applied to a certain pigment, and to something which was used







OCR Output








MIRRORS. 61


it acquires a false whiteness. There is another method of testingpolished silver by observing, when it is breathed upon, whetherthe moisture quickly evaporates.
45. OF MIRRORS.
It was generally supposed, that the finest kind of silver onlycould be spread out into leaves, or made into mirrors; but this artis also injured by fraud. The property of reflecting the image ofobjects is very wonderful, evidently depending on the air rever­berating and again entering the eye. It is owing to the samepower in the mirrors, that when their thickness is much worn awayby polishing, and the surface in some degree depressed, the sizeof the image is immensely dilated. So different is the effect ac­cording as the mirror throws back the image, or receives it intoits substance. Drinking vessels are likewise so formed, by having,as it were, a number of mirrors carved within them, that a singleindividual looking into them sees a multitude of persons. Thereare some mirrors so contrived as to distort the objects; as the con­secrated mirrors in the temple at Smyrna; it depends on the formwhich is given them. The most important point is whether theyare concave like a cup, or like a Thracian shield, whether themiddle is depressed or elevated, placed transversely or obliquely,directed upwards or straight forwards; the figure of the surfacethat reflects the the objects bending, as it were, the forms * thatproceed from them. For the image is nothing more than thebrightness of the matter which receives the forms regularly ar­ranged. And that I may state in this place all that is known re­specting mirrors, the best that our ancestors had were made atBrundisium, of a mixture of stannum5 and copper. The silver


4 " Umbrae." "Umbras vocant simulacra rerum ipsa a nostris corporibus-missa, et profusa in corpvis lseve, et splendidum et densum. Epicuri haecsententia est de ratione speculorum." Note in Valpy, p. 4383. It may beremarked, however, that the word umbra is never used in this sense byLucretius; he employs the term simulacrum; see his fourth book, 1. 34, 97,126, et alibi. The Epicurean doctrine of the simulacra,
"Quae quasi membranae summo de corpore rerum"Direptte volitant, ultro citroque per auras:"is very amply explained by Creech, in his notes. See also Enfield's Philo­sophy, i. 468, 9.
5 For stannum, see remarks in note 3, p. 48.


r







OCR Output








GOLDEN STATUES. 43


of Minerva, in which Helen consecrated a goblet made of thiskind of metal; the story says that it was the size of one of herbreasts. It is the nature of Electrum to be more brilliant than silverby lamp-light. The native Electrum has also the property of de­tecting poison; if a cup of this metal contains poison, a number ofcoloured circles, like the rainbow, make their appearance, and thereis, at the same time, a hissing noise; so that we are made sensibleof the presence of poison in two ways.
24. THE FIEST GOLDEN STATUES.
The first golden statue that was made without any cavity in theinside (and this was before any bronze statues were formed of thekind which they call Holosphyraton5) is said to have been placedin the temple of Anaitis, (I have mentioned above in what part ofthe world this name is used?) a deity considered peculiarly sacredby those nations. The statue was broken in pieces during theexpedition of Anthony against the Parthians. A speech is re­ported to have been made concerning it by one of the veterans ofBononia, at an entertainment which he gave to the late emperorAugustus. When he was asked, whether it was true, that he whoviolated this divinity expired, after having lost his sight and theuse of his limbs, he replied, that Augustus was then supping offher leg, for that he was the individual in question, and that it wasfrom this plunder that he derived his fortune. Gorgias, theLeontine, was the first person who had his own statue made ofsolid gold; he placed it in the temple of Delphi about the 70thOlympiad. So great was the emolument derived from teachingrhetoric!
25. THE EIGHT MEDICINES MADE OF GOLD.
Gold is in many ways useful as a medicine. It is applied towounds, and also to children, to protect them from any noxiouscharms to which they may have been exposed. It has, however,itself a noxious influence, when laid upon any thing, as uponchickens or young cattle. The remedy in this case is to wash the


6 OXooQvparog, solidus, malleo confectus, probably in opposition tothose that were cast in a mould.
7 The author here probably refers to the following passage in book v.sec. 20; " Fluit (Euphrates) Derxenem primum, mox Anaiticam, &c."







OCR Output








22 COLD RINGS.


stated in certain annals, that it was the noblility alone who threwoff their rings, and not the whole senate. This transaction tookplace in the consulship of P. Sempronius and P. Sulpitius. Fla-vius vowed that he would erect a temple to Concord if he couldreconcile the privileged orders to the people. And because thepublic money could not be decreed for this purpose, he employedthe fines which were levied on usurers, and with these he built asmall brazen temple in the Graecostasis,3 which was then abovethe court-house; and it was engraven on a bronze tablet, that thistemple was consecrated 204 years after the Capitol. It was,therefore, 449 years after the foundation of the city that thisevent occurred, and that we have the first trace of the use of rings.In the second Punic war, we have another notice of their verygeneral use; for, unless this had been the case, the three bushelscould not have been sent to Carthage by Hannibal. The quar­rel between Caepio and Drusus began in consequence of the pub­lic sale of a ring; whence sprung the social war, and the ruin ofthe commonwealth. Gold rings were not, however, worn at thattime by all the senators, for it is in the memory of our grand­fathers, that many, even of those who had filled the office ofpraetor, wore iron rings during all their lives, as was the case withCalpurnius and Manilius, which latter, according to the accountof Fenestella, was the lieutenant-general of C. Marius in theJugurthine war; and the same thing is said by many concerningL. Fusidius, he to whom Scaurus dedicated the account of hisown life. It was an established custom in the family of theQuintii that not even the women should wear gold; and thegreater part, both of nations and individuals, even of those wholive under our empire, have no rings at all. Neither the Orientalsnor the Egyptians employ seals, being satisfied with merely sign­ing their names.*


The French translator employs the term " collier," and Durand, in the trans­lation, or rather paraphrase, of this part of Pliny, which forms the com­mencement of his "Histoire Naturelle de l'Or et de 1'Argent," calls it"un ornement de cou;" but I am not aware of any foundation for this ap­plication of the word.
3 This, we are informed, was a public hotel, where formerly the GreekAmbassadors were received, and which was afterwards appropriated to thereception of ambassadors generally. See Varro de Ling. Lat. p. 43.
4 This remark, among many others, proves that the principal use of therings was as seals or signets.







OCR Output








18 SOLD RINGS.


yet this was probably intended to signify rather a chain than anornament. And as for the ring of Midas, by the turning of whichthe wearer was rendered invisible, who does not admit, that this isstill more fabulous? Gold obtained its very high estimation frombeing worn on the hand, and always on the sinister hand;1 nothowever by the Romans, who used a ring of iron, as an indicationof their warlike spirit.
I cannot exactly say what was the fact with respect to theltoman kings. There is nothing of the kind on the statue ofRomulus in the capitol, nor on any other, except those of Numaand Servius Tullius; not even on that of L. Brutus. I wondermuch that this should be the case with respect to the Tarquins,who came from Greece, from which country the use of these ringswas derived; although now indeed they use iron rings at Lace-daemon. It appears, however, that Tarquinius Priscus was thefirst who presented his son with a golden bulla,2 upon his killingan enemy in battle, while he still wore the praetexta;3 whencethis custom of wearing the bulla was continued, so that the chil­dren of those who had the rank of knight were allowed to havethat badge of distinction, while the others wore a leathern belt.*It therefore appears the more remarkable that the statue ofTarquin should be without a ring.
I find that there has been much uncertainty respecting the nameof this article; the Greeks derive it from the finger, (ActxrvXioi)our ancestors styled it Unguium, while latterly both the Greeksand ourselves have called it Symbolum.5 It is certain that, for a
1 "Sinistra ;•* the play upon this word, which the Author intended toconvey, cannot be fully transferred into tha English language.
a On the subject of Bullae, see Montfaucon, vol. iii. part 1. book 2. ch. 10.pi. 12. fig. 7...18, and pi. 13. fig. 5; also Adam, p. 414.
3 The toga praetexta was worn by the young men of Rome until theywere 17 years of age; Adam, ubi supra.
4 "Lorum" belt, signifying nodus, or signum de loro, according toJuvenal, v. 16S.
s Badge, signet; these were probably like what we now call seal-rings.We have a copious set of references in Adam, p. 428, 9: it does not, how­ever, I think, appear certain that in all these cases, for example, in Plautus,Bacch.2.3.29, the "symbolum" was attached to aring. See also Montfaucon,vol. iii. part 2. book 1. ch. 11, 12, pi. 13. He describes Annuli signatorii, asone species of rings. The ancient gems were some of them cut in relief, andothers engraven en creux; the former were used for the purpose of personalornament, or for being deposited in cabinets, while the latter were set inrings. Besides the seals attached to finger-rings, there were large seals, for







OCR Output








silver. 49


Copper and iron are fused the best by pine wood; in Egypt,papyrus is used; while gold is fused by chaff'3. Lime and theThracian stone4 are made hot by water, and quenched by oil.Fire generally is best extinguished by vinegar, birdlime, and egg.Earth is very slightly combustible; charcoal that has been extin­guished, and is again inflamed, burns with greater force.
31. OF SILVER.
We must now proceed to silver, the metal which, next to gold,has been the greatest cause of madness. It is never procured ex­cept from mines, and it is found in situations, where there was noindication of its presence, there being no sparkling fragments tobe seen, as is the case with gold. The earth is, in some cases, ofa red colour, in others of an ash grey. It cannot be refined, ex­cept by black lead or the ore of lead; that which is generallyfound near the vein of silver is called Galena.5 By the action offire, a portion of the ore falls to the bottom in the form of lead,while the pure silver floats upon the surface, like oil on water. Itis found in almost all the provinces, but the finest comes fromSpain. It occurs in barren land, generally in mountains, andwhere there is one vein, another is found at no great distance.This indeed is the case with all other bodies of this class, whencethe Greeks seem to have derived the term metal.6 It is remark­able that the mines which were opened in Spain by Hannibal still
p. 450; while stannum is described as a mixture of plumbum nigrum andsilver; ibid. lib. i. p. 187. He points out three species of lead; album orcandidum, nigrum, and cinereum, "quod bisemutum nominant nostri;"ibid. p. 186 and 339. We have an example of the application of the wordKaaairipos to tin by Herodotus, lib. iii. sec. 115.
3 See note 3 p. 35.
4 The Thracian stone is described by Dioscorides as possessing this pro­perty, and is also said to contain bitumen and sulphur; v. 100. The samecircumstance is referred to by Aristotle, in his treatise, De Mirab. Aus.cap. 41 et 125. Theophrastus does not mention the Thracian stone byname, but he speaks of a combustible stone from Bena, a town of Thrace;Op. p. 393, and De Lap. sec. 23. See the remarks of Salmasius, Exer.Plin. p. 179.
5 The author informs us, lib. xxxiv. that by galena he designates " venaargenti phumbique communis." This term is now applied to the compoundof lead and sulphur.
6 Mtra akkaiv or aWa.
V.







OCR Output








44 CHRYSOCOLLA.


gold with water, and then to sprinkle the water upon the thingsthat we wish to purify. If gold be roasted with twice its weightof salt, three of misy,8 and again with two of salt, and one of astone which they call Schiston, the noxious part of it will pass intothe substances that are calcined along with it in the earthen ves­sels, while the metal remains pure and entire. The ashes thatare left in the earthen pot, when made into a paste with water,are useful for removing eruptions from the face; it must bewashed off with bean-meal.9 It also relieves fistulae, and what arccalled haemorrhoids. When mixed with pounded pumice, it curesputrid and foetid ulcers; boiled with honey and melanthium,1 andrubbed on the navel, it opens the body gently. M. Varro as­serts that warts are removed by gold.
26. OF CHRYSOCOLLA.2
Chrysocolla is a liquid substance, found in the pits that havebeen described above, which flows through the veins of gold, andhardens by the cold of winter, until it acquires the solidity of
8 "Miseos;" Misy is described by our author in book xxxiv. § 31; alsoby Dioscorides, lib. v. cap. 71; it is frequently mentioned by Agricola;De Nat. Foss. lib. iii. p. 219, & alibi. It appears to have been an impurevitriol.
9 "Lomentum;" said to be meal made from the lotos.
1 Melanthion is described at large in book xx. sec 71, as " Gith ex Grsecis,alii Melanthium, &c." and is referred to in various other passages. Ithas been supposed to be coriander, but the following passage from Columella,x. 244, 5. seems to prove that this is not the case;
"famosaque tunc coriandra
Nascuntur, gracilique melantia grata cumino."Hermolaus, the commentator on Dioscorides, refers to it under the appel­lation of "Gith quasi Nigellam;" lib. i. sec. 47. Celsus enumerates Gitamong the medicines "quae calefaciunt;" lib. ii. cap. 33; and in lib. iv.cap. 20, classes it with castoreum and anethum. It is mentioned by Scrib.Largus, sec. 69, 0, & 131, 141; from the substances with which it is asso­ciated it may be concluded that it was some heating or stimulating seed,perhaps a species of pepper.
* Chrysocolla has been commonly translated Borax; but, as it appears,incorrectly. Our author speaks of the same substance in lib. xxxv. sec.12 & 18, as a species of pigment. See also the present book, sec. 57, andSalmasius, Exerc. Plin. p. 811. Aristotle says that the best Chrysocolla isfound near gold; De Mirab. Aus. cap. SO; Theophrastus describes it as of asandy nature, Op. p* 396. 7, and classes it with aptnviKOv, aavSapaKa,







OCR Output








52 SILVER.


bite of dogs. It is very useful in burns, mixed with fat, litharge,8white lead,' and wax. It is roasted in furnaces, surrounded withballs of ox dung; it is then quenched in woman's milk, and groundin mortars with rain water. It is then poured, while turbid, intoa copper vessel, and purified with natron. The dross consistsprincipally of lead, and every thing which subsides in the mortaris thrown away. The vessel into which the turbid fluid had beenpoured is left for the space of a night covered with a linen cloth;on the following day all the fluid part is poured off, and removedby a sponge. That which subsides from the fluid is named theflower; it is dried in the sun, covered by a linen cloth, carebeing taken that it should not be rendered hard. It is then againrubbed in the mortar, and is divided into pastils. It is above allthings necessary not to roast it too much, lest it be converted intolead: some persons do not use dung, but fat, in this process;others again, after it has been pounded, put it into sacks made ofthree folds of linen, and plunge them into water; they throw awaythe dregs, and pouring off what passes through the linen, theycollect the substance, which subsides from the water; this theymake up into plaisters and applications for the eyes.
35. OF THE SCORIA OF SILVER; MEDICINES FROM IT.
The Scoria of silver is called by the Greeks helcysma;1 it hasan astringent and refrigerant virtue. It is put into plaisters likeMolybdena,* (a substance which I shall speak of in the account
* "Spuma argenti." This substance is described by Dioscorides, lib; v.cap. 54, under the name of AtQapyvpog, i. e. the calx of silver. Agricolawas acquainted with its real nature, as produced from the lead which ismixed with the silver, when a mixture of the two metals is exposed to ahigh temperature; De Nat. Foss. lib. ix. p. 354.
9 " Cerussa." The nature and manufacture of this substance are describedin book xxxiv. sec. 54; it appears to have been similar to our ceruse, thecarbonate of lead of the modern chemists. This process is described more atlength by Dioscorides, lib. v. cap. 57.
1 Supposed to be derived from cXkuu, traho, perhaps signifying what isdrawn from off the melted metal. For the meaning of the word scoria, seesec. 21.
a Lib. xxxiv. sec. 53; the author employs this term as synonimous withGalena; see also Dioscorides, lib. v. cap. 54. The word appears to havebeen generally employed by the ancients to designate a sulphuret or oxide oflead. The modern chemists have applied the term moh/bdena to a distinctmetal. Agricola says, what the Latins call plumbago, the Greek call noXvfi-Saiva, lib. x. p. 335; it appears to be an oxide of lead.







OCR Output








16 INTRODUCTION.


regions, as if the part which we cultivate was not sufficiently boun­tiful and fertile. But all this time we take very little pains insearching for remedies; for how few persons there are who diginto the earth for the purpose of procuring medicines. She has,indeed, with her accustomed kindness and liberality, given us onthe surface whatever is necessary for this purpose. It is what shehas concealed from us, what is sunk below the surface, and is ofslow growth, that urges us downwards, and drives us to the lowerregions. When the mind ranges abroad, we are led to inquirewhat will be the end of this rage for exhausting the earth, andhow far avarice will finally penetrate. How innocent, how happy,how truly delightful would life be, if we were anxious to obtainnothing but what is to be procured above ground, and only pos­sessed what lies ready to our hands!
2. OF GOLD.
Gold is dug up from the earth, and near it is found chryso-colla,3 which, from its position, may seem more valuable than itactually is. It was not enough for us to have discovered oneplague for our lives, but that we must likewise set a price upon thedross of gold.4 While avarice was searching for silver, it wasthought a great advantage to have discovered minium,5 and tofind out a use for this red earth. What a spirit of prodigality!In how many ways have we increased the value of things! Weemploy the art of painting for this purpose, and we have ren­dered even gold and silver more costly by chasing it. Man haslearned how to rival nature. Art has been promoted even by theincitements to vice; our drinking vessels are so ornamented as toadminister to our lusts.6 These things were, however, aftersome time, thrown aside and despised; gold and silver becametoo common. From this same earth we also procure murr-hine 7 and crystalline vessels, and these are valued the more on
3 ChrysocoUa is more fully described in sec. 26.
4 "Auri sanies."
5 Minium is described in sec 36.
6 It would appear that the author here refers both to the art of chasing;i. e. forming figures in relief on the metal, and also to the custom of givingparticular forms to the vessels. This is evident from Juvenal; Sat. ii.1.95.
1 Murrhina are described in book xxxvii. sec. 8; they were probablyonyxes or opals; perhaps the term was not confined to these substances,







OCR Output








GOLD RINGS. 23


Luxury, in this, as in every other case, produced variouschanges, by adding gems of exquisite brilliancy, and by loadingthe fingers with quite a large fortune, as I shall mention in thebook on gems; afterwards by chasing various figures on the rings,so that they were sometimes valued for the material, and at othertimes for the workmanship. There were indeed some gems, whichit would have been thought absolute sacrilege to use as seals, andin order to shew that they were not intended to be employed inthis way, they were set plain. There are also some persons, whowill not have gold at the part which touches the finger, consider­ing gold of less value than many of the stones that are in use.
There are on the contrary, others who do not admit of the useof any gems, but seal with the gold itself; a custom first adoptedin the time of the emperor Claudius Cassar. In these days thereare slaves who have the iron ring surrounded with gold, whileothers have the ring entirely of gold. The name given to these ringsshows that this licence originated in Samothrace.
It was at first the custom to wear rings upon one finger only,that next to the little finger; as we see it in the statues of Numaand Servius Tullius. They were then put on the finger next tothe thumb, even in the statues of the gods, and afterwards it wasthought proper to give them also to the little finger. The Gaulsand the Britons are said to have used the middle finger. At presentthis finger alone is exempted, while all the rest are loaded, eveneach of the smaller joints having little rings put on them. Thereare some persons who heap three rings on the little finger alone,while there are others who put only one upon it, thus marking thisas the marking finger.5 The seal itself, however, being carefullypreserved, was brought out as if from a sacred place, like some­thing very rare, and not to be debased by common use, and thecircumstance of having a single ring only on the little finger, wasmade an ostentatious mark of the possession of a store of othervaluable articles. Some persons now make a boast of the weightof their rings; by others it is considered a kind of labour tocarry more rings than one. Others again, from their anxietyfor their gems, think it safer to have them set in some sub­stance lighter than gold, as less likely to be injured by a fall.Others inclose poison under the gems, as was the case with thatfirst of Grecian orators, Demosthenes; and thus employ their
5 "Quo signantem signant."







OCR Output








28 GOLD ORNAMENTS.


12. OF THE OTHER USES OF GOLD BY WOMEN.
Gold was never used in the sacred rites, except for gilding thehorns of the victims that were offered in sacrifice, and that onlyfor the larger ones. But among the soldiery, the luxury of em­ploying gold increased so much, that we have letters of Brutus,written during the campaign of Pharsalia, in which he complainsgrievously that the tribunes wore gold clasps for their cloaks.But, by Jove! what would you have said, Brutus, had you seenthe gold which the women wear on their feet? And I considerthat individual guilty of a great crime who first brought gold intorepute, by having it made into rings. This also led to the customof men wearing ornaments of gold about their arms, which, as itwas introduced by the Dardans, were called Dardanian; as, forthe same reason, bracelets* are named, one species Celticae, andanother Celtibericae. We may indeed allow women to wear goldon their arms, and on every one of their fingers, on their necks,in their ears, and their curls. Let them have chains crossed overtheir waists, and have ponderous jewels set in gold hanging fromtheir necks, so that they may be conscious of wearing them evenin their sleep; but should we, therefore, permit them to wear iton their feet, as if for the express purpose of creating a third orderamong females, which might correspond to that of knights amongmen, and which would be intermediate between women of rankand those of the lowest class. We should leave ornaments of thiskind for our pages, and employ them to set off the beauty of ourchildren. The men indeed now begin to wear on their fingersthe figure of Harpocrates,5 or of some of the Egyptian deities.There was another unusual restriction when Claudius was Emperor,
4 Viriole and viree;" said to be bracelets containing green stones.
5 Harpocrates is characterized as the god of silence, and represented withhis finger on his lip, according to the description of Ovid; "Quique premitvocem, digitoque silentia suadet;" Met. ix. 691. We have a full accountof him by Montfaucon, vol. ii. part 2. c. 12, 3, accompanied by a number ofengravings, pi. 40, 1. It is observed that many of the figures have a re­lation to the emblems of the sun; and a treatise was written by Cuper, theprincipal object of which is to prove that the figure of Harpocrates is tobe considered as "non silentium tantum digito suadens, verum, solis ima-ginem referens." See also the remark of Winckleman, Cat. des Pierresgravees du Baron Stosch, p. 20. It does not appear why Harpocrates wasselected as an ornament for rings; perhaps he was mentioned by Pliny asthe first name that occurred *o him.







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








CHRYSOCOLLA. 45


pumice. The best kind is found in the copper mines.s and thenext to it in those of silver; it is also found in lead mines, butthis is not so good as that from gold. It may be formed artifi­cially in all these situations, but this kind is inferior to what isproduced naturally. To form it artificially, water is let into themines during the winter, indeed, until the month of June; this isthen evaporated during June and July. Hence it appears evi­dent, that chrysocolla is nothing more than a mouldering vein.*The artificial chrysocolla differs much from the native in its hard­ness; in this state it is styled Lutea, but it receives its colourfrom the plant of the same name; 5 for it resembles flax or woolin the circumstance of readily receiving various dyes. In pre­paring it, it is first beaten in a mortar and then passed through afine sieve; it is afterwards ground, and is again passed througha still finer sieve; what will not pass through is pounded andground a second time. The powder is always digested in pots,and macerated with vinegar, until it is completely softened; it isonce more pounded, and is afterwards lixiviated in certain vesselscalled Conchs, and is finally dried. It is then dyed by means of


fiiXrog, taxpa, & Kvavog, as what is found in gold, silver, and copper mines,De Lapid. sec. 47 & 90. Dioscorides describes it in lib. v. cap. 50. Vitru-vius states that it is found in copper mines, vii. 9. Celsus enumerates itamong the substances " quae rodant," but without any description; lib. v.cap. 6. Agricola enumerates Chrysocolla among the " succi concreti"which are mixed with metals, classing it with aerugo, ferrugo, and cceru-leum; De Nat. Foss. lib. i. p. 185. It is more fully described in lib. iii.p. 221, and is said to be found in metallic veins "potissimum serariae;" inthe Dialogue De Re Met. p. 452, it is called a species of green earth. Uponthe whole there appears sufficient reason to suppose that the Chrysocollaof the ancients was essentially an oxide or carbonate of iron, mixed with acertain proportion of oxide or carbonate of copper; it may be supposed tohave been generally yellow, but to have had occasionally a blue or greentinge, according to the nature of its constituents. We have a long disser­tation by M. Guettard, in the notes to the French translation, t. x. p. 600 &seq.; he calls it verd de montagne, and considers it to be the same sub­stance which is now procured from the copper mines of Hungary.
3 "iErariis metallis;" the word metallum was employed, by the an­cients, sometimes to designate a metal, sometimes the ore of a metal, andsometimes, as in this case, the mine from which the ore is extracted.
4 "Vena putris."
5 Supposed to be Weld, the Reseda Luteola of Linnseus. The yellowcolour of the plant, combining with the blue of the chrysocolla, would pro­duce the green which was so much valued.







OCR Output








38 WORKING OF GOLD MINES.


and barren mountains of Spain, which produce nothing else, areforced to be fruitful in this good thing. The ore which is dug outof the open pits is called Canalicium by some, and by others Ca-naliense;5 it is imbedded in marble,6 but it does not sparkle, as isthe case in the Oriental sapphire7 and the Thebaic stone,8 and inmany other gems; it rather appears to surround the particles ofthe marble. The channels in which these veins are found, passin all directions along the sides of the trenches, whence their nameis derived; the earth is propped up by wooden pillars. What isdug up is pounded, washed, roasted, ground to powder, and beatenin mortars. The part that comes out of the furnace is called sil­ver; while the impure dross which is thrown out of the stove, fromwhatever metal it is derived, is called scoria." The scoria of goldis pounded, and is again subjected to the furnace. The smeltingpots are made of Tasconium;1 this is a white earth, considerablyresembling clay; no other substance will resist the blast, the heatof the furnace, and the burning fuel.
The third method of procuring gold almost surpasses the laboursof the giants. Shafts2 are driven of considerable length, and themountains are excavated by the light of lamps. The labourersare relieved at regular intervals; but for many months they neversee the light of day. Shafts of this kind are called Arrugiae.1 It


5 Channelled, from canalis.
6 " Marmoris glareae;" the word marmor must here be applied to quartzor some other primitive rock, which is the ordinary matrix of gold.
'In describing the sapphire, he says, "aurum punctis collucet coeruliis;"lib. xxxvii. sec. 39.
» The Thebaic stone is said to be " interstinctus aureis guttis;" lib. xxxvi.sec. 13.
9 As the term scoria is here used, it will include both the extraneoussubstances that are separated from the metal by smelting, and any part ofthe metal that becomes oxidized during the process.^ 1 The French translator informs us that Tascos is an old Castilian wordsignifying impurity; t. x. note in p. 587, 8.
* "Cuniculi." We hay e a very interesting account, by Diodorus Siculus,of the gold mines on the confines of Egypt, ^Ethiopia, and Arabia; Kb. iii.sec. 12.. 4,; the descriptions of Diodorus and of Pliny mutually illustrateeach other.
a We are told by Harduin, see note in Valpy, p. 4354, that the wordarrugiw occurs in the Aulularia of Plautus; but on referring to thecomedy it appears to be found only in the "supposita," added by theeditor; see p. 173. The French translator informs us that arrugia is stillapplied in Spain to a deep mine; t. x. p. 588.







OCR Output








SIT.. 69


comes Tauriscus of Cyzicum; Ariston and Eunicus of Mytilene,and Hecataeus, are also much admired; and about the age ofPompey the Great, we have Praxitiles, Posidonius the Ephesian,and Ledus Stratiates, who executed battles, and men in armour;and Zopyrus, who engraved the magistrates of the Areopagus andthe judgment of Orestes on two goblets, which were valued at12,000 sesterces. Then there is Pytheus, two ounces of whosework sold for 10,000 sesterces; the subject was Ulysses andDiomed carrying off the Palladium, intended to be attached to ajar.5 The same artist likewise made little figures, which he callsMagiriscia,6 and which were carved on small cups, and so deli­cately wrought that it was impossible to take models of them with­out injuring them. Teucer also, who made figures on medallions, 7gained considerable credit. But this art was so suddenly lost,that these works are now valued solely for their antiquity, thefigures having been so rubbed down, that they are scarcely visible.Silver is affected by mineral waters, and even by the saline vapoursthat arise from them, as is observed to be the case in the middleof Spain.
56. OF SIL ; 8 WHO FIItST FAINTED WITH SIL, AND IN WHATMANNER.
Certain pigments are also found connected with the gold andsilver ores, viz. Sil and Cceruleum. Sil is properly a kind of mud;the best kind is said to come from Attica; it costs two denarii thepound. The next in value is the gritty kind, which is half theprice of the first: the third is the dense kind, which some callSyricum, as coming from the isle of Syros. This kind had beenpreviously brought from Achaia, and is used for the shades ofpictures; its price is two sesterces the pound. The bright kind,which comes from Gaul, is sold at two ases less than the former.This kind, and that from Attica, are used for giving the lights to


» " In phialse emblemate;" the emblemala appear to have been ornamentedmetallic plates, which were occasionally attached to vessels or other articles,and removed at pleasure; see Adam, p. US, and the authorities there re­ferred to.
6 Said to be the diminutive from Mayetpoc, coquus.1 " Teucer crustarius."
s Sil appears to have been a kind of ochre; see lib. xxxv. sec. 17, 20. Secalso Vitruvius, vii. 7.







OCR Output








54 SILVEH.


itself; the second is the refuse, after it is purified. Some personsreckon two kinds of foam only, which they call lithus and peu-mene;9 the third kind, molybdena, will be mentioned when Itreat of lead. To render this foam fit for use, it is broken intopieces the size of a walnut,1 and is again roasted, the flame beingurged by bellows, in order to separate the charcoal and the ashes;it is then washed and at the same time quenched in vinegar or inwine.1 If it be the species called argyritis, in order to give it theproper whiteness, we are directed to break it into pieces the size ofa bean, and then to boil it in water in an earthen vessel, togetherwith a quantity of new wheat, or barley, tied up in linen until itis purified; it is then pounded in a mortar for six days, beingwashed three times each day with cold water, and lastly with hotwater, adding to each pound of the foam an obolus of rock salt.3During the last day they digest it in a leaden vessel. Some personsboil it with white beans and barley water, and dry it in the sun;others with white wool and beans, and continue the process untilthe wool is no longer blackened by it. Then they add the rocksalt, the water being changed from time to time, and they dry itfor forty days in the warmest summer weather. They also boil itin a pig's stomach4 with water, afterwards rub it with natron, andthen pound it in mortars with salt as directed above. Othersagain there are who do not boil it, but rub it with salt, and wash itwith water. It is used for eye-salves, and it is employed byfemales, in the form of ointment, to remove pimples and spots ofthe skin; and to wash the hair. Its virtues are to dry, to soften,to cool, to temper, to purge, to fill up ulcers, and to removetumours. When made into plaisters with rue, myrtle, and vine­gar, it relieves erysipelas; and, when mixed with myrtle and wax,it removes chilblains.


9 The MSS. differ in the spelling of the words; they are probably derivedfrom AiOoc and Uvtvpa, and refer to the mechanical texture of the substance.
1 This reading I conceive to be sanctioned by the passage from Diosco-rides quoted below.
1 This operation is described by Dioscorides, lib. v. cap. 56, p. 662;
"Kavaue airoriBtao. Coquendi argenti spuma hoc modo est: in
"frustra juglandis nucis magnitudine earn dividito, in carbonibus ponito,"follibusque usque dum ignita condeat, ventilato. Auferto deinde inhse-"rentes illi sordes omnes, purgatamque reponito."
3 "Sal fossile."
4 " In ventre suillo;" this may perhaps refer not to the actual stomachof an animal, but to some vessel of the form of a stomach.







OCR Output













OCR Output








60 TOUCHSTONES.


42. OF GILDING SILVER.
Silver is now almost the only metal which is gilt by means ofquicksilver, although it ought to be also employed in the gildingof copper. But the same kind of cunning, which is so very in­genious in every department of life, has discovered some cheapermaterial, as I have mentioned above.*
43. OF TOUCHSTONES FOR GOLD.
In speaking of gold and silver it is necessary to take notice ofwhat is styled the touchstone, formerly found only in the riverTmolus, according to the account of Theophrastus, but now foundin many situations; some call it the Heraclian stone, others theLydian.3 They are of moderate size, not exceeding four inchesin length, and two in breadth. The side which has been exposedto the sun is thought to be better than that which has lain upon theearth. Those who are practised in the use of these stones, whenthey have rasped off a fragment of ore from the vein for the pur­pose of experiment, can immediately say how much gold, or sil­ver, or copper it contains, being able from their wonderful skill toascertain the quantity with great minuteness.
44. SPECIES OF SILVER AND TESTS.
There are two different kinds of silver. A small portion of themetal in question being placed on heated iron bars, if it remainswhite it is considered pure; the next best kind becomes red;when it becomes black, it is very bad. But fraud is often prac­tised in this experiment. The bars are kept in the urine of men,and hence when the specimen is heated its colour is affected, and
• Sec. 32.
» The Basanitc of Kirwan, i. 307; the Lydian stone of Jameson, L 107;the Pierre de Lydie of Brochant, i. 286, the Lapis Lydius of Aikin, ii. 3,and Thomson, iii. 302. It is mentioned by Theophrastus, Opera, p. 397, 8;De Lap. sec. 78. Salmasius, in reference to the subject, accuses Pliny ofhaving fallen into a gross error in confounding the Heraclean with theLydian stone; Exer. Plin. p. 776.; it appears, however, that, in this in­stance, this learned critic has committed an oversight; for Theophrastusexpressly informs us, that the touchstone was called indifferently by eitherof these names; Op. p. 392; De Lap. sec. 10.







OCR Output








DEDICATION. 13


does he say in his book?" I know that when I shall publish whatI have written, there will be many who will do all they can todepreciate it, and especially such as are themselves void of allmerit; but I let their harangues glide by me." Nor was theremark of Plancus a bad one, when Asinius Pollio was said to bepreparing an oration against him, which was to be published eitherby himself or his children, after the death of Plancus, in orderthat he might not be able to answer it. "It is only ghosts thatfight with the dead." This remark gave such a blow to theoration, that in the opinion of the learned generally nothing wasever thought more scandalous. Feeling myself therefore secureagainst these slanderers vile,*8 a name elegantly composed byCato, to express their slanderous and vile disposition, (for whatother object have they, but to wrangle and breed quarrels ?) Iwill proceed y ith my projected work.
And because the public good requires that you should be sparedas much as possible from all trouble, I have subjoined to thisepistle the contents of each of the following books, >s and haveused my best endeavours to prevent your being obliged to readthem all through. And this, which was done for your benefit,will also serve the same purpose for others, so that any one maysearch for what he wishes, and may know where to find it. Thishas been done before among us by Valerius Soranus, in his bookwhich he entitled " On Mysteries."30
The 1st book is the Preface of the Work, dedicated to TitusVespasian Caesar.
The 2d is on the World, the Elements, and the HeavenlyBodies.
The 3d is on the 1st and 2d of the Great Bays of Europe.
The 4th is on the 3d Bay of Europe.
In the 5th Africa is described.
The 6th contains the Description of Asia.
The 7th is on Man, and the Inventions of Man.
The 8th on the different kinds of Land Animals.


»» "Vitiligatores."
a» The table of contents, which occupies no less than 130 pages in Valpy'sedition, is omitted, on the present occasion, in consequence of its length.In this specimen I have thought it sufficient to add the general subjectsof the books only.
3° " EltOltTlStOV."







OCR Output








36 GILDING.


from the first, the complete metallic state.3 This is found native,while the others, which I shall presently describe, are, as it were,compelled to become metals. It is more especially free from theliability to rust or corrode, or to any change, which may eitherinjure its purity or diminish its weight. It is proof both againstsalt and vinegar, bodies which act the most powerfully on varioussubstances; and what is a still more remarkable property, it maybe spun or woven like wool, without any wool being mixed with it.We are informed by Verrius, that Tarquinius Priscus rode in tri­umph in a tunic of gold; and we have seen Agrippina, the wife ofthe Emperor Claudius, when he exhibited the spectacle of a navalcombat, sitting by him covered with a robe, made entirely of wovengold, without any other material. In what are called the Attalicstuffs, the gold is woven with some other substance. This art wasthe invention of one of the kings of Asia.
20. THE METHOD OF GILDING.
Marble, and those substances which cannot be made red hot,4are gilt by first smearing them with the white of egg; on wood, akind of glue is applied, which is called Leucophoron: what thissubstance is, and in what manner it acts, I shall explain in theproper place.5 It used to be prescribed by law in gilding copper,to employ either native quicksilver, or that which is reduced fromthe ore; but respecting these, as I shall mention when I give anaccount of their nature, frauds have been devised. The copper isin the first place very much hammered, and is plunged, while hot,into a mixture of salt, vinegar, and alum. After it has beenscowered with sand, they judge, by its brightness, whether it hasbeen sufficiently acted on; when, if necessary, it is again subjectedto the furnace, and afterwards has thin leaves of gold attached toit, by means of a mixture of pumice, alum, and quicksilver. Alumhas the same effect as lead in purifying gold.6


3 It was probably this native gold which Aristotle calls " xpva0v awvpov,"as not requiring the aid of fire for its reduction; De Mirab. Aus. cap. 45.
4 "Candefieri;" literally made white; we may consider the term as im­plying a high temperature generally.
5 Lib. xxxv. sec. 17.
B For an ample account of the process of gilding see the art. "Gilding"in Aikins' Diet, which will materially illustrate the account in the .text.







OCR Output








GOLD CROWNS. 27


9. HOW FREQUENTLY THE APPELLATION OF THE KNIGHTSWAS CHANGED.
The appellation of the knights has been frequently changed,even with respect to those who have been admitted into the order.Under Romulus and the kings, they were called Celeres, thenFlexumines, and afterwards Trossuli, because, without any as­sistance from the infantry, they took a town of that name inTuscany, which was nine miles on this side of the Volcinii: thisname remained until after the time of C. Gracchus. Junius, in­deed, who, on account of his friendship with Gracchus, was calledGracchanus, has left these words in writing: " as for what belongsto the equestrian order, they were formerly named Trossuli, andare now called Equites, (knights) because they are not acquaintedwith the meaning of the name, and many of them are ashamedto be called Trussuli."3
10. OF MILITARY DONATIONS IN BOTH GOLD AND SILVER.
There are some other distinctions in the use of gold which mustnot be omitted. Allies and foreigners were presented with goldchains, while citizens had only silver ones; and besides, braceletswere given to citizens, which was not done to foreigners.
11. WHEN THE FIRST GOLD CROWN WAS PRESENTED.
Crowns of gold were likewise given to the citizens, a circum­stance which is more remarkable. I have not been able to learnwho it was that first received one of them. We are however toldby L. Piso, that it was first presented by A. Posthumius, thedictator, upon the capture of the camp of the Latins, at the LakeRegillus; he gave, out of the plunder, the crown in question toan individual who had particularly signalized himself on the occa­sion. The consul L. Lentulus likewise gave one of 5 lbs. weightto Serg. Corn. Merenda, on taking the town of the Samnites. Piso,surnamed the Thrifty, presented his son with a crown, out of hisown property, and he left it to him by an especial bequest.
'See the note in Valpy, p. 4324.







OCR Output








CHRYSOCOLLA.


nium.3 These substances combine readily with the Chrysocolla,and, at the same time, give a smoothness to its colour. The Pa-rastonium, which is of a fatty and very smooth consistence, issprinkled over the Atramentum, lest the whiteness of the Parae-tonium should injure the lustre of the chrysocolla. The speciescalled Lutea, is supposed to be named from the plant, which isitself sometimes rubbed with Cceruleum,4 and used instead of thechrysocolla, but the green thus produced is a very bad and a mostdeceitful colour.
28. THE SIX MEDICINES MADE FROM CHRYSOCOLLA.
Chrysocolla is used in medicine to cleanse wounds, mixed upwith oil and wax; being itself a dry substance, it causes them todry and contract. It is also given in sore throats, and in asthma,combined with honey. It acts as an emetic; it is used in eye-salves, to remove scars or specks from the cornea; also in greenplaisters, for the purpose of relieving pains or healing scars. Thekind of Chrysocolla which is not called Orobitis, the physiciansname Acesis.5
29. OF THE CHRYSOCOLLA OF THE GOLDSMITHS, OR SANTERNA.
Chrysocolla is also used by the goldsmiths for soldering theirgold; it is from this property that the name Chrysocolla6 isapplied to all the species. For this purpose it is digested withverdigris, and the urine of children, together with natron.? It is
for the purpose of a varnish; see lib. xxxv. sec. 12 & 36. Vitruvius givesan account of the mode of making writing ink, " atramentum librarium,"by mixing the soet of resin with gum; he informs us that atramentum wasalso used as a pigment for walls; vii. 10.
s "Parsetonium" is enumerated among the pigments, as one of the "colores"austeri," in lib. xxxv. sec. 12, and in sec. 18, is described as "spumam"... maris solidatam cum limo." We may suppose it to have been a mecha­nical mixture of various earthy and saline bodies, which possessed anabsorbent quality. It is mentioned by Vitruvius, vii. 7, among the earthypigments. It was probably procured from Paretonium in Marmorica.
4 Coeruleum is described in sec. 57.
5 Ab aKtofiai; equivalent to Cure-all.
6 XpvooKoWa, Auri glutinum.
7 "Nitrum," the word used in the text signified among the ancients thenative subcarbonate of soda, not the nitrate of potash, as among modernchemists; Pliny describes it in lib. xxxi. sec. 46.







OCR Output








QUICKSILVER. 59


ous vapour into the lungs, while, at the same time, they are ableto see through them. Minium is employed in books for writingthe more conspicuous letters; this is also done in inscriptions ormonuments, whether of gold or of marble.
41. OF HYDRARGYRUM.
There has been invented from the inferior kind of minium,8 anartificial quicksilver, to be used instead of the native kind. It ismade in two ways; either by triturating minium with vinegar in acopper mortar, or by placing it in an iron shell or earthern dishcovered with a head, over which a quantity of clay has beenspread.9 A fire is then kindled under the dish, and kept up bybellows; the moisture which exudes from the head is wiped off,and will be found to resemble silver in colour, and water in fluidity.It is easily divided into globules, which run together into a liquidwhich slips through the fingers.1 And because it is certain thatthis is poisonous, I conceive that all the accounts which we possessof the use of minium as a medicine are not to be trusted, exceptperhaps its application to the head or the abdomen for the purposeof stopping haemorrhages, provided it does not penetrate into thebowels or touch the wound: I, for my part, think it ought not tobe used on any other occasion.
s "Ex secondario." Our author must have been misinformed on thispoint, as the substance which he describes as the inferior minium is not anoxide of mercury. The editors and translators, presuming, as it would ap­pear, that Pliny was a complete chemist and mineralogist, have taken muchpains to amend or explain this passage; see note in the French trans, t. x.p. 636, 7; and in Valpy, p. 4380.
9 We have the same process described by Dioscorides, lib. v. cap. 64.
"XSpapyvpog St OKtvaStrai vipapyvpog ytvtrai." "Fit ex minio,
"quod falso cinnabaris dicitur, argentum vivum. Confectionis autem"modus hie est. In fictilem patinam ferream habentem concham minium"conjicitur. Calice dien luto circumlito, fictilis cooperitur patina ilia;*' accensisque sub eas carbonibus, qute calici fuligo inhiesit, derasa, refri-"gerataque, argentum vivum est."
1 The process for obtaining quicksilver from its oxide is detailed byVitruvius; he also states, at some length, the properties of the quicksilverso procured; among other particulars he remarks that four sextarii weighed100 lb.; vii. 8. This estimate is not very far from the truth; if we sup­pose the sextarius to have been equal to 1J pint, the above mentionedquantity of mercury will weigh about 589,000 grs. equal to a little more than103 lbs. See Wurm, sec. 66. p. 116 .. 0.







OCR Output








THE
FIRST AND THIRTY-THIRD BOOKS
OF
PLINY'SNATURAL HISTORY;
A SPECIMEN
OF
A PROPOSED TRANSLATION
OF
THE WHOLE WORK, WITH NOTES, &c.


By JOHN BOSTOCK, M.D.
F.R.S. L.S. 6.S. AND H.S. H.R.I.
MEMBER OF THE MEDICO-CHIRURQICAL, OF THE ASTRONOMICAL, AND OFTHE ZOOLOGICAL SOCIETIES, &C. &C.


LONDON:PRINTED FOR BALDWIN AND CRADOCK.
1828.


2a L







OCR Output








SILVER PAGEANTS. 33


which is now imitated even by the small towns. C. Antoniusexhibited games with a scene of silver.s L. Murana, and theEmperor Caius brought into the Circus a pageant, in which therewere 124,000 lbs. weight of silver. Claudius, his successor, whenhe triumphed over Britain, among the crowns which he exhibitedon that occasion, had one of 7>000 lbs. weight, which was pre­sented to him by the people of the Hither Spain, and another of900 lbs. by Gallia Comata, as appears by the inscription. Hissuccessor Nero, in order to shew his wealth to Tiridates, kingof Armenia, in one day covered the whole of Pompey's theatrewith gold. But what was this in comparison with his goldenhouse, which, as it were, surrounded the whole city!
17. AT WHAT PERIOD THERE WAS THE GREATEST QUANTITY OFGOLD AND SILVER IN THE TREASURY OF THE ROMAN PEOPLE.
In the consulship of Sex. Julius and L. Aurelius, seven yearsbefore the third Punic war, there was in the Roman treasury16,810 lbs.6 weight of gold, 22,070 of silver, and of coined money6,285,400 lbs. In the consulship of Sex. Julius, and L. Marcius,that is at the commencement of the Social war, there wasl,620,820 lbs.weight of gold. C. Cassar, at his entrance into the city in hisCivil war, took out of the treasury 25,000 ingots of gold, 35,000ingots of silver, and of coined money 430,000 sesterces; nor wasthere any period in which the republic was more wealthy. iEmiliusPaulus, after he had conquered King Perseus, out of the Mace­donian booty which he had obtained, brought into the treasury2,000,300 sesterces, and from this time the Romans ceased topay taxes.


5 " Scena argentea;" the scena in the Roman theatre appears not tohave been simply a painting, as in modern times, but, at least in many cases,a kind of model of the place or object intended to be represented. The termis frequently employed by Vitruvius, in his description of the Roman theatres,v. 6, 7, 8. In one passage it would appear to be used for the stage, or forthat part of it where the actors stood; "quod omnes artifices in scena" (oraccording to some MSS. scenam) "dant operam;" cap. vi. Newtontranslates it, " for all the performers act on the scene (or stage);" p. 105.
6 In all the large sums that are mentioned, there is so much variation inthe MSS., and so much apparent irregularity in the mode of notation, thatI confess, myself, unable to attain any certainty respecting them: I have,in almost all cases, followed the estimates of Harduin.
D







OCR Output








GOLD COIN. 29


that those alone to whom his freedmen had given access to hisapartments, were permitted to have the likeness of the Emperorengraven on their gold rings; a regulation which was the causeof many accusations. But the auspicious elevation of Vespasianput a stop to all these evils, by making the Emperor accessible toevery one. Enough, however, has now been said respecting goldrings, and the uses to which they have been applied.
13. OF GOLD MONEY. WHEN GOLD AND SILVER WERE FIRSTCOINED. WHAT WAS THE CUSTOM WITH RESPECT TO COPPERBEFORE THEY WERE COINED; AND WHAT WAS THE GREATESTaUANTITY OF MONEY AT THE FIRST CENSUS. HOW FREQUENTLY,AND AT WHAT PERIODS, AUTHORITY WAS GIVEN FOR COININGMONEY.
The next crime was committed by the person who first coinedgold into money; but who it was that did this is not known. TheRomans certainly did not use even silver in the form of coin, pre­vious to their victory over king Pyrrhus. The As was, in the firstinstance, valued at a pound weight of copper; and hence its presentappellation of a pound, (libella), and of two pounds, (dupondius),for two Ases. Hence also fines were reckoned at a certain weightof copper; and from the same origin the terms "expensa," "im-"pensa," and "dependere," are derived. Hence also the pay ofthe soldiers is called a stipend, implying that it was ascertained byweight; and for the same reason stewards and paymasters aretermed "dispensatores," and "libripendes ;"6 and it is upon thesame principle that the balance is introduced in all contracts forconveying property. Servius, the king, was the first person whocoined copper. Timaeus informs us, that before this time, theyused it at Rome uncoined. It had the figure of an ox, (pecus),stamped upon it; and hence it was denominated "pecunia."The largest income 7 in that reign was 110,000 Ases; and hencethis was fixed upon as the standard for the first class of citizens.
Silver was coined in the year of the city 485, in the consulshipof L. Agulnius and C. Fabius, which was five years before thefirst Punic war. A denarius8 was valued at ten pounds weights of
e All these words are derived from " pendo," to weigh. We have notunfrequent allusions to the practice of weighing sums of money in the OldTestament, as in Jerem. xxxii.
7 " Census;" income as ascertained by the census.
• A denarius was a silver coin of the value of 7%d. See Varro, De Ling.Lat. p. 47, 8.







OCR Output








24 THE JUDGES.


rings as instruments of death. And indeed the most criminalfrauds that are committed in our days are effected by rings.What a happy life did our ancestors lead, and what a state ofinnocence was theirs, in which nothing was ever sealed! But weare now obliged to seal even our meat and drink, to prevent itsbeing stolen.6 This we gain by the legion of slaves, and thecrowd of foreigners, we have about us; so that in consequence ofthe number of our servants, we are obliged to have a person totell us their names. Our ancestors had only one servant each,who took the name of his master, and was called Marcius's boy,or Lucius's boy, &c. and they ate the same food with their master,so there was no occasion to have any thing locked up. But nowwe procure dainties, as if for the very purpose of being pilfered,and, at the same time, persons who may pilfer them; and it is notenough to have our keys sealed, for the rings themselves are takenfrom the fingers of the owners when they are asleep, or lying ontheir death-beds. I do not know at what period it was that themost important transactions of life began to be carried on bymeans of this instrument. We have an example of the importancethat was attached to it by foreigners, in the case of Polycrates, thetyrant of Samos, whose favourite ring being thrown into the sea,was recovered from a fish that they caught; now he was put todeath about the 230th year of our city. But the use of ringsmust have become more generally known at the same time withusury; in proof of this we may cite the custom of the commonpeople, who, whenever they make a bargain, draw the ring fromthe finger, as being the most expeditious mode of making thecontract; so that we may positively affirm that money was firstin use among us, and afterwards rings. But I shall speak ofmoney presently.
7, OF THE OKDERS OF JUDGES.'
Rings, when once they became remarkable, served to distinguishthe equestrian order from the people at large, in the same way thatthe tunic distinguished the senate from those who wore rings.


0 This refers to the custom of putting seals upon the store-rooms, cellars,wine-vaults, &c.; they may be considered as equivalent to the locks ofmodern times.
7 " DecurisE;" see Adam, p. 259.







OCR Output








SILVER VESSELS.


52. WHEN DISHES WEKE MADE OF AN IMMODERATE SIZE; WHENTYMPANA WERE FIRST MADE.
It was a little before this time that dishes were made, each con­taining 100 lbs. weight of silver, of which it appears there were morethan five hundred in Rome, and it seems that many persons wereproscribed on this very account, by the knavery of people wholonged for them. What a scandal does it bring upon our annals toascribe the civil war to such vices! But in our times we are stillbolder. In the reign of Claudius, one of his servants, Drusillus,surnamed Rotundus, who was his treasurer in the province ofNorthern Spain, had a dish of 500 lbs. weight, so that it wasnecessary to have a manufactory erected for the express purposeof making it; and there were eight others belonging to the sameset, amounting in the whole to 850 lbs. weight. We may ask,how many of his fellow servants would it require to carry thesedishes, and how many guests would they entertain? Corn. Neposinforms us, that before the victory of Sylla, there were only two sil­ver supper couches in all Rome. Fenestrella, who died in the lastyear of the Emperor Tiberius, says, that it was within his memorythat silver was first employed to ornament the stands,9 and alsothat tortoise-shell1 came into use. A little before his time theywere made of common wood, round, and solid, and not muchlarger than tables; when he was a boy they were made squareand more compact, and began to be covered with maple or citronwood; after a while silver was put on the corners and lines ofthem, and also along the joints. When he was a young manwhat had formerly been called platters and trenchers began to becalled plates and dishes.1
53. IMMODERATE QUANTITIES OF SILVER.
And men were not only mad after the silver itself, but almoststill more so, after the manner of working it; and this indeed was
9 " Repositoria."
1 " Testudinea." In lib. ix. sec. 13, the author observes, "Testudinumputamina secare in laminas, lectosque et repositoria his vestire."
• Tympana, and magides; staterae and lances, are the terms employed bythe author. We have no corresponding terms in our language, and it isperhaps impossible to discover to what forms of dishes they were applied bythe Romans. We meet indeed with one of the names in Varro; "Ma-gidam aut Langulam, alteram a magnitudine, alteram ab latitudine finx-erunt." De Ling. Lat. t. i. p. 34.







OCR Output








62 EGYPTIAN SILVER.


mirrors are, however, now preferred. These were first made byPraxiteles, about the time of Pompey the Great. Of late years ithas been thought that they give a truer image of the object whengold is applied to the back of the mirror.
46. OF EGYPTIAN SILVER.
The Egyptians also colour their silver that they may beholdtheir god Anubis on their vessels; they do not engrave but painttheir silver. This practice was afterwards applied to triumphalstatues; and it is remarkable that their cost is increased bywhat diminishes their splendour. It is done in this manner.They mix with the silver one-third part of the thinnest Cypriancopper, which is called Coronarium, with a quantity of sulphurequal to the silver. These are fused together in an earthern pot,lined all round with clay; the process is continued until thecovering of the pot opens of itself.6 Silver is also blackened bybeing coated with coagulated egg, but this may be afterwardsrubbed off by vinegar and chalk.
Anthony, the triumvir, mixed iron with the denarii; the coin isnow debased by copper. Sometimes the coin is made short of itsproper weight; this ought to be such, that eighty-four denarii aremade out of one pound of metal. The plan of fixing a legalstandard for the coin which was formed by Marius Gratidianuswas so popular among the people, that statues of him were placedin every street. It is, however, remarkable, that this very planshould have become the means of practising fraud; for we findthat a specimen of a base denarius is highly valued, and thatthere are persons who will give several genuine denarii for acounterfeit one.
47, OF IMMODERATE SUMS OF MONEY; WHAT INDIVIDUALSWERE THE MOST WEALTHY.
There were no fortunes among the ancients larger than100,000 sesterces; but in our times this sum is so much multi­plied, that we hear of ten times 100,000,7 or even more. This
6 The effect of this process would be to form a sulphuret of silver.7 The sums mentioned in the text are 807/. 5*. Wd. and 10,350/. re­spectively.







OCR Output








6 DEDICATION.


what obscure, because he was anxious that his works shouldplease his friends, the Veranioli and the Fabulli. At the sametime this my importunity may effect, what you complained of mynot having done in another too forward epistle of mine; it willput upon record, and let all the world know, on what terms ofequality you live with us. You, who have had the honour of atriumph, and of the censorship, have been six times consul, andhave shared in the tribunate; and, what is still more honourable,whilst you held them in conjunction with your father, you havepresided over the equestrian order, and have been the prefect ofthe praetorians: 5 all this you have done for the service of therepublic, and at the same time, have regarded me as a fellow-soldier and a messmate.
Nor has the extent of your prosperity produced any change inyou, except that it has given you the power of doing good to theutmost of your wishes. And whilst all these circumstancesincrease the veneration which other persons feel for you, withrespect to myself, they have made me so bold as to wish tobecome more familiar. You must, therefore, place this to yourown account, and blame yourself for any fault of this kind that Imay commit. But although I have laid aside my blushes,6 Ihave not gained my object; for you still awe me, and keep me ata distance, by the majesty of your understanding. In no one doesthe force of eloquence and of tribunitian oratory blaze out morepowerfully! With what glowing language do you thunder forththe praises of your father! How dearly do you love your brother!How admirable is your talent for poetry! What a fertility ofgenius do you possess, so as to enable you to imitate your bro­ther! But who is there that is bold enough to form an estimate onthese points, if he is to be judged by you, and more especially, ifyou are challenged to do so? For the case of those who merelypublish their works is very different from that of those whoexpressly dedicate them to you. In the former case I might say,
5 The narrative of Suetonius may serve to illustrate the observation ofPliny; "Triumphavit (Titus) cum patre, censuramque gessit una. Eidemcollega et in tribunicia potestate, et in septem consularibus fuit. Recep-taque ad se prope omnium officiorum cura, cum patris nomine et epistolasipse dictaret, et edicta conscriberet, orationesque in Senatu recitaret etiamquaestoris vice, prefecturam quoque prtetorii suscepit, nunquam ad id tempus,nisi ab Equite Romano, administratum:" Valpy's ed. p. 946.
6 " Perfricui faciem;" see note in Valpy, p. 176.







OCR Output








64 SILVER VESSELS.


lot of slaves, or which even kings themselves have not been ableto attain!
48. WHEN THE ROMANS FIRST GAVE LARGESSES.
The Roman people began to give largesses in the consulship ofSp. Postumius and Q. Martius. Money was then so plentiful,that a sum was given to L. Scipio, with which he institutedpublic games. With respect to the copper sextans, which wascollected for the funeral of Agrippa Menenius, I do not regard itas a largess, but as done in honour of him, and what was renderednecessary by his poverty.
49. OF LUXURY IN SILVER VESSELS.
The wonderful fickleness of the human mind is perpetuallyvarying the forms of our silver vessels, never long together approv­ing of any one kind; now adopting the Firmian pattern, now theClodian, nowtheGratian; for we give the names of the silversmithsto our sideboards.' Next we search after chased vessels,4 with de­signs engraven on them. We likewise place our dishes upon stands,sand we cut away their sides in order that they may hold the pro­visions, and they are considered the more valuable the more theyaTe filed away. Calvus, the orator, complained that our cookingutensils were made of silver; but we have ornamented even ourchariots with chased silver; and, in our own times, Poppasa, thewife of the Emperor Nero, had the shoes of her favourite mulesmade of gold.
50. EXAMPLES OF ANCIENT FRUGALITY IN THE USE OF SILVER.
The second Africanus left his heir only 32 lbs. weight of silver.The same individual, when he triumphed over the Carthaginians,transmitted to the treasury 4,380 lbs. weight of silver. This wasthe total amount of silver possessed by Carthage, that rival of thewhole earth; but in these days how many services for the tablehave exceeded this sum! After the destruction of Numantium,


3 Martial gives us a curious list of the different kinds of silver vessels thatwere the most esteemed when he wrote; Epig. iv. 38.* " Anaglypta," avayXvirra, coelata.
5 " Repositoria;" "supports pour les plats;" French trans, t. x. p. 619.







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








PRIVATE WEALTH. 63


has been brought about by usury, and by coining; and hence isderived the term aes alienum,8 debt. Then certain persons assumedthe surname of Dives; but let it be known, that he who first tookthis name had compounded with his creditors. A member of thefamily, M. Crassus, said that he did not consider any one wealthywho could not pay the yearly expense of a legion. His estateswere worth 2,000,000 sesterces;9 next to Sylla he was consi­dered the most wealthy of the Romans. But this was not enoughfor him; he thirsted for the gold of the Parthians; and let itnever be forgotten, that he obtained what he so earnestly wished;for it is proper that we observe the consequence of this insatiabledesire of wealth. We have, however, in later times, known many,even among the freedmen, who have been richer. There werethree at one time, when Claudius was emperor; Pallas, Callistus,and Narcissus. But to omit these, as still in possession of theirwealth, in the consulship of C. Asinius Galbus, and C. MartiusCensorinus, C. Caecilius Claudius Isodorus declared by his will,dated 6th kal. of February, that notwithstanding he had lostmuch in the civil wars, he had still left 4,116 slaves, 3,600 yokeof oxen, 357,000 head of cattle of other kinds, and in money600,000 sesterces.1 He directed that 11,000 sesterces should bespent on his funeral. These men, no doubt, heaped together un­bounded wealth; yet what a small part was this of what Ptolemypossessed? Who, as Varro informs us, when Pompey was engagedin the Jewish war, supported by his own funds 8,000 horsemen,and entertained 1,000 guests, each of them being furnished withgold cups, and these being changed at each course of the enter­tainment. And what a small proportion would this bear to thewealth of Pythius, the Bithynian (not to speak of kings), whopresented Darius with the golden plane tree and the noble vine,and feasted all the army of Xerxes, amounting to 788,000 men;promising also that he would provide five months' pay and provi­sions for them, on condition that one of his five sons might bespared to him to comfort his old age.1 Yet even he would notappear rich when compared with king Croesus. But, good God!what madness it is to be anxious to acquire what either falls to the
8 Alienated copper; thus, as it were, estimating their property by copper.
9 If we estimate a sestertium, or 1000 sestertii, at 61. Is. 5%d., Crassus'sproperty mentioned in the text will be 1,614,583/. 6s. Sd. See Adam, p. 497.
1 Estimated at 484,375/.
1 See Herodotus, lib. vii. sec. 27.







OCR Output








34 VALUE OF GOLD.


18. WHEN THE CEILINGS 7 WEEF. FIRST GILT.8
The ceilings which now, even in private houses, are coveredwith gold, were first gilt in the Capitol, after the destruction ofCarthage, during the censorship of L. Mummius. The practicewas afterwards adopted with respect to the ceilings, and the wallsof houses, so that these latter were ornamented with gold like ves­sels; there were, however, various opinions entertained at thetime, respecting Catulus, the person who first gilt the brazen tilesof the Capitol.
19, FROM WHAT CAUSES OUR ESTIMATION OF GOLD IS PRINCIPALLY
DERIVED.
I have given an account of the first discovery of gold, as wellas of the other metals, in the 7th book.' I do not suppose thatthis metal became so much esteemed in consequence of its colour,for that of silver is more brilliant, and more like the light of day,and therefore more suitable for military ensigns, since its splendourwould cause it to be seen at a greater distance. They are obvi-
'"Laquearia" or "Lacunaria." The first of these words is used in thetitle of the section, the second in the text itself; hence, it appears, that theywere employed indiscriminately; see also the note in Valpy, p. 4612. Theymean the spaces left between the beams in the ceilings, technically calledcoffers; as well as in other parts of buildings; Vitruvius, iv. 8; vi. 6;vii. 2. Baldus, in his Lexicon Vitruvianum, under the word Lacunar, re­marks, "Lacunaria contignationes sunt." Newton, Trans, of Vitruvius,note in p. 73, describes the Lacunaria to be "coffers or pannels usuallyformed in the soffites of the corona or architrave, as well as in the ceilings,&c." It appears, however, to have been used to signify the ceiling gene­rally; as by Cicero, " .... fulgentem gladium e lacunari — demitti jussit."Tus. Quest, v. 21; and by Horace, "Non ebur neque aureum mea renidetin domo lacunar." Od. ii. 18. 1, 2, by Juvenal, "doctus spectare lacunar,"i. 56, and by Persius, "Et magis aureis pendens laquearibus ensis," iii. 40.It may, therefore, not improbably, be used in this general sense by ourauthor. Rhode supposes that it was employed in this sense by Vitruvius, in -the passage in vii. 2; see lexicon, in loco.
8 We learn from various passages in the Old Testament, that certain partsof Solomon's Temple were covered with gold; see 1 Kings, vi. 21, 2;1 Chron. xxix. 4; 2 Chron. iii. 7, 8, 9.
» Lib. 7. §. 57. p. 1424; "Auri metalla et conflaturam, Cadmus Phoenixad Pangseum montem (invenit) &c."



