


OCR Output








402 DECLINE AND FALL [eHAP. XLV.


heroic virtues, the valour, liberality, and fortune of theking of the Lombards.1" But his ambition was yet un­satisfied; and the conqueror of the Gepidaa turned hiseyes from the Danube to the richer banks of the Po andthe Tiber. Fifteen years had not elapsed since his sub­jects, the confederates of Narses, had visited the pleasantclimate of Italy: the mountains, the rivers, the high­ways, were familiar to their memory : the report of theirsuccess, perhaps the view of their spoils, had kindled inthe rising generation the flame of emulation and enter­prise. Their hopes were encouraged by the spirit andeloquence of Alboin; and it is affirmed, that he spoke totheir senses, by producing, at the royal feast, the fairestand most exquisite fruits that grew spontaneously in thegarden of the world. No sooner had he erected his stand­ard, than the native strength of the Lombards was mul­tiplied by the adventurous youth of Germany and Scy-thia. The robust peasantry of Noricum and Panoniahad resumed the manners of barbarians; and the namesof the Gepidae, Bulgarians, Sarmatians, and Bavarians,may be distinctly traced in the provinces of Italy." Ofthe Saxons, the old allies of the Lombards, twenty thou­sand warriors, with their wives and children, accepted theinvitation of Alboin. Their bravery contributed to hissuccess; but the accession or the absence of their num­bers was not sensibly felt in the magnitude of his host.Every mode of religion was freely practised by its respec­tive votaries. The king of the Lombards had been edu­cated in the Arian heresy; but the Catholics, in their pub­lic worship, were allowed to pray for hisconversion; while
m Ut hactenus etiam tam apnd Bajoariorum gentem, quam et Saxomim, sed etalios ejusdem linguae homines . . . . in eorum carminibus celebretar. Paul. lib. i.c. 27. He died A. D. 799, (Maratori, in Praefat. tom. 1. p. 397.) These Germansongs, some of which might be as old as Tacitus, (de Moribus Germ. c. 2.) werecompiled and transcribed by Charlemagne. Barhara et antiquissima carmina, quibusveterum regum actus et bella canehantur, scripsit, memoriaeque mandavit. (Eginard,in Vit. Carol. Magn. c. 29. p. 130,131.) The poems, which Goldast commends,(Animadvers. ad Eginard, p. 207.) appear to be reoent and contemptible romances.
* The other nations are rehearsed by Paul. (lib. 2. c. 6. 26.) Muratori (Auti-ohita Italians, tom. 1. dissert. 1. p. 4.) has discovered the village of the Bavarians,three miles from Modena.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


tesy, both Vitiges and his more noble consort: and asthe king of the Goths conformed to the Athanasianfaith, he obtained, with a rich inheritance of lands inAsia, the rank of senator and patrician.5 Every specta­tor admired, without peril, the strength and stature ofthe young barbarians: they adored the strength and ma­jesty of the throne, and promised to shed their blood inthe service of their benefactor. Justinian deposited in theByzantine palace the treasures of the Gothic monarchy.A flattering senate was sometimes admitted to gaze onthe magnificent spectacle; but it was enviously secludedfrom the public view; and the conqueror of Italy re­nounced, without a murmur, perhaps without a sigh, thewell-earned honours of a second triumph. His glorywas indeed exalted above all external pomp; and thefaint and hollow praises of the court were supplied, evenin a servile age, by the respect and admiration of hiscountry. Whenever he appeared in the streets andpublic places of Constantinople, Belisarius attracted andsatisfied the eyes of the people. His lofty stature andmajestic countenance fulfilled their expectations of ahero; the meanest of his fellow-citizens were embolden­ed by his gentle and gracious demeanour; and the mar­tial train, which attended his footsteps, left his personmore accessible than in a day of battle. Seven thousandhorsemen, matchless for beauty and valour, were main­tained in the service, and at the private expense of thegeneral.' Their prowess was always conspicuous in sin­gle combats, or in the foremost ranks; and both partiesconfessed, that in the siege of Rome, the guards of Be­lisarius had alone vanquished the barbarian host. Theirnumbers were continually augmented by the bravest and
^ Vitiges lived Iwo years at Constantinople, and imperatoris in affectu convictm(or conjunctas) rehas excessit homanis. His widow, Mathasuenta, the wife and mo­ther of the patricians, the elder and younger Germanns, united the streams of Anicianand Amali blood. (Jornandes, c. 60. p. 221, in Moratori,tom^l.)
1 Procopius, Goth. lib. 3. c. 1. Atmoin, a French monk of the eleventh century,who had obtained, and has disfigured, some authentic information of Belisarius, men­tions,in his name, twelve thousandpueri or slaves—quospropriis alimus stipendiis—besides eighteen thousand noldiers. (Historians of France, tom. 3. De Gcstis Fran«.lib. 2. c. 6. p. 48.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 73


the insects, and the manufactures of silk,1 in which bothChina and Constantinople have been surpassed by theindustry of modern Europe. I am not insensible of thebenefits of elegant luxury; yet I reflect with some pain,that if the importers of silk had introduced the art ofprinting, already practised by the Chinese, the comediesof Menander, and the entire decads of Livy, would havebeen perpetuated in the editions of the sixth century.A larger view of the globe might at least have promotedthe improvement of speculative science; but the Christiangeography was forcibly extracted from texts of Scripture,and the study of nature was the surest symptom of an un­believing mind. The orthodox faith confined the habi­table world to one temperate zone, and represented theearth as an oblong surface, four hundred days' journeyin length, two hundred in breadth, encompassed by theocean, and covered by the solid chrystal of the firma­ment.11
IV. The subjects of Justinian were dissatisfied with the state of thetimes, and with the government. Europe was overrunre?eime'by the barbarians, and Asia by the monks; the povertyof the west discouraged the trade and manufactures ofthe east; the produce of labour was consumed by theunprofitable servants of the church, the state, and thearmy, and a rapid decrease was felt in the fixed and cir­culating capitals which constitute the national wealth.The public distress had been alleviated by the economy
t Procopius, lib. 8. Gothic. 4. c. 17. Theophanes, Byzant. apnd Phot. Cod.84. p. 38. Zonaras, tom. S. lib. 14. p. 69. Pagi (tom. 2. p. 603.) assigns to theyear 552 this memorable importation. Menander (in Excerpt. Legat, p. 107.) men­tions the admiration of the Sogdoites; and Theopbylact Simocatta (lib. 7. c. 9.)darkly represents the two rival kingdoms in (China) the country of silk.
b Cosmas, sarnanied Indicopleastes, or the Indian navigator, performed his voyageabout the year 522, and composed, at Alexandria, between 535 and 547, Christian To­pograpby, (Montfauoon, Praefat. c. 1.) in which he refutes the impious opinion, that theearth is a globe; and Photios had read this work, (Cod. 36. p. 9,10.) which displaysthe prejudices of a monk, with the knowledge of a merchant: the most valuable parthas been given in French, and in Greek by Melchisedeo Thevenot, (Relations Curi-euses, part 1.) and the whole is since published in a splendid edition by the Pere
Montfaucon. (Nova Collectio Patrum, Paris, 1707, 2 vols, in fol. tom. 2. p. 113
346.) But the editor, a theologian, might blush at not discovering the Nestorianheresy of Cosmas, which has been detected by la Croze. (Christianisme des Indes,tom. i. p. 40—56.)
VOL. V. , G







OCR Output













OCR Output








CHAP. XL1V.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


the supreme tribunal of the people. But a wild demo­cracy, superior to the forms, too often disdains the es­sential principles, of justice: the pride of despotism wasenvenomed by plebeian envy, and the heroes of Athensmight sometimes applaud the happiness of the Persian,whose fate depended on the caprice of a single tyrant.Some salutary restraints, imposed by the people on theirown passions, were at once the cause and effect of thegravity and temperance of the Romans. The right ofaccusation was confined to the magistrates. A vote ofthe thirty-five tribes could inflict a fine: but the cogni­sance of all natural crimes was reserved by a fundamentallaw to the assembly of the centuries, in which the weightof influence and property was sure to preponderate. Re­peated proclamations and adjournments were interposed,to allow time for prejudice and resentment to subside;the whole proceeding might be annulled by a seasonableomen, or the opposition of a tribune; and such populartrials were commonly less formidable to innocence, thanthey were favourable to guilt. But this union of the judi­cial and legislative powers, left it doubtful whether the ac­cused party was pardoned or acquitted; and in the defenceof an illustrious client, the orators of Rome and Athensaddressed their arguments to the policy and benevolence,as well as to the justice, of their sovereign. 2. The taskof convening the citizens for the trial of each offenderbecame more difficult, as the citizens and the offenderscontinually multiplied; and the ready expedient wasadopted of delegating the jurisdiction of the people tothe ordinary magistrates, or to extraordinary inquisitors.In the first ages these questions were rare and occasional.In the beginning of the seventh century of Rome theywere made perpetual; for praetors were annually em­powered to sit in judgment on the state offences of trea­son, extortion, peculation, and bribery ; and Sylla addednew praetors and new questions for those crimes whichmore directly injure the safety of individuals. By these







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLiy.


wishes and motives to the assembly of thirty curiae or pa­rishes, and the general law of inheritance was suspendedby an occasional act of the legislature. After the permis­sion of the decemvirs, each private lawgiver promulgatedhis verbal or written testament in the presence of five citi­zens, who represented the five classes of the Roman peo­ple ; a sixth witness attested their concurrence; a seventhweighed the copper money, which was paid by an ima­ginary purchaser; and the estate was emancipated by afictitious sale and immediate release. This singular ce­remony,° which excited the wonder of the Greeks, wasstill practised in the age of Severus; but the praetors hadalready approved a more simple testament, for which theyrequired the seals and signatures of seven witnesses, freefrom all legal exception, and purposely summoned forthe execution of that important act. A domestic mo­narch, who reigned over the lives and fortunes of hischildren, might distribute their respective shares accord­ing to the degrees of their merit or his affection: his ar­bitrary displeasure chastised an unworthy son by the lossof his inheritance and the mortifying preference of astranger. But the experience of unnatural parents re­commended some limitations of their testamentary powrers. A son, or, by the laws of Justinian, even a daughter,could no longer be disinherited by their silence: theywere compelled to name the criminal, and to specify theoffence; and the justice of the emperor enumerated thesole causes that could justify such a violation of the firstprinciples of nature and society." Unless a legitimateportion, a fourth part, had been reserved for the children,they were entitled to institute an action or complaint of
ther'only could make a will. (Plutarch, in Solon, tom. 1. p. 164. See Isaeas andJones.)
° The testament of Augustus is Specified by Suetonius, (in Angnst. o. 101. in Ne-ron. c. 4.) who may be studied as a code of Roman Antiquities. Plutarch (Opuscal.tom. 2. p. 976.) is surprised a-rav 5s 5iaflnxa; ypajpxnv infws jwev a■jrotentou<rvt jeta-pmfxovs, ErSfoi 5e iriahova-i rei; oi/fl-iet?. The language of TJlpian (Fragment, tit. 20.p. 627. edit. Sohultiug) is almost too exclnsivc—solum in usu est.
I' Justinian (Novel. 115. no. 3, 4.) enumerates only the public and private crimes,for which a sun might likewise disinherit his father.







OCR Output








]80 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI,


The Goihs The whole nation of the Ostrogoths had been as^siege of sembled for the attack, and was almost entirely consumeda.°d?538 m the siege of Rome. If any credit be due to an in­ward, telligent spectator, one-third at least of their enormoushost was destroyed, in frequent and bloody combatsunder the walls of the city. The bad fame and per­nicious qualities of the summer air, might already beimputed to the decay of agriculture and population; andthe evils of famine and pestilence were agravated bytheir own licentiousness, and the unfriendly dispositionof the country. While Vitiges struggled with his for­tune; while he hesitated between shame and ruin, hisretreat was hastened by domestic alarms. . The king ofthe Goths was informed by trembling messengers, thatJohn the Sanguinary spread the devastations of war fromthe Appennine to the Hadriatic; that the rich spoils andinnumerable captives of Picenum were lodged in the,for­tifications of Rimini; and that this formidable chief haddefeated his uncle, insulted his capital, and seduced, bysecret correspondence, the fidelity of his wife, the im­perious daughter of Amalasontha. Yet, before he re­tired, Vitiges made a last effort either to storm or tosurprise the city. A secret passage was discovered inone of the aqueducts; two citizens of the Vatican weretempted by bribes to intoxicate the guards of the Aure-<lian gate; an attack was meditated on the walls beyondthe Tiber in a place which was not fortified with towers;and the barbarians advanced, with torches and scaling-ladders, to the assault of the Pincian gate. But everyattempt was defeated by the intrepid vigilance of Beli-sarius and, his band of veterans, who, in the most pe­rilous moments, did not regret the absence of their com­panions ; and the Goths, alike destitute of hope andsubsistence, clamorously urged their departure, before"the truce should expire, and the Roman cavalry shouldagain be united. One year and nine days after the com­mencement of the siege, an army so lately strong and







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI.


respect of Belisarius for the successor of St. Peter, andhis rigid discipline secured, in the midst of war, the bless­ings of tranquillity and justice. They applauded therapid success of his arms, which overran the adjacentcountry, as far as Narni, Perusia, and Spoleto: but theytrembled, the senate, the clergy, and the unwarlike peo­ple, as soon as they understood that he had resolved,and would speedily be reduced, to sustain a siege againstthe powers of the Gothic monarchy. The designs ofVitiges were executed during the winter-season, withdiligence and effect. From their rustic habitations, fromtheir distant garrisons, the Goths assembled at Ravennafor the defence of their country; and such were theirnumbers, that after an army had been detached for therelief of Dalmatia, one hundred and fifty thousand fight­ing men marched under the royal standard. Accordingto the degrees of rank or merit, the Gothic king distri­buted arms and horses, rich gifts, and liberal promises;he moved along the Flaminian way, declined the uselesssieges of Perusia and Spoleto, respected the impregnablerock of Narni, and arrived within two miles of Rome, atthe foot of the Milvian bridge. The narrow passagewas fortified with a tower, and Belisarius had computedthe value of the twenty days, which must be lost in theconstruction of another bridge. But the consternationof the soldiers of the tower, who either fled or deserted,disappointed his hopes, and betrayed his person into themost imminent danger. At the head of one thousandhorse, the Roman general sallied from the Flaminiang3te to mark the ground of an advantageous position,and to survey the camp of the barbarians; but while hestill believed them on the other side of the Tiber, hewas suddenly encompassed and assaulted by their innu­merable squadrons. The fate of Italy depended on hislife ; and the deserters pointed to the conspicuous horse,a bay,f with a white face, which he rode on that memo-
'An horse of a hay or red colour was styled <j>aXio; by the Greeks, halam by. ths







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 77


action, which exceeded, perhaps in a tenfold proportion,the ability of the farmer; and his distress was aggravatedby the partial injustice of weights and measures, and theexpense and labour of distant carriage. In a time ofscarcity, an extraordinary requisition was made to the ad­jacent provinces of Thrace, Bithynia, and Phrygia; butthe proprietors, after a wearisome journey and a perilousnavigation, received so inadequate a compensation, thatthey would have chosen the alternative of deliveringboth the corn and price at the doors of their granaries.These precautions might indicate a tender solicitude forthe welfare of the capital; yet Constantinople did notescape the rapacious despotism of Justinian. Till hisreign, the straits of the Bosphorus and Hellespont wereopen to the freedom of trade, and nothing was prohibitedexcept the exportation of arms for the service of thebarbarians. At each of these gates of the city, a praetorwas stationed, the minister of imperial avarice; heavycustoms were imposed on the vessels and their merchan­dise; the oppression was retaliated on the helpless con­sumer; the poor were afflicted by the artificial scarcity,and exorbitant price of the market; and a people,accustomed to depend on the liberality of their prince,might sometimes complain of the deficiency of waterand bread/ The aerial tribute, without a name, a law,or a definite object, was an annual gift of 120,000/.which the emperor accepted from his praetorian pre­fect; and the means of payment were abandoned tothe discretion of that powerful magistrate. IV. Even Monopo-such a tax was less intolerable than the privilege ofmonopolies, which checked the fair competition ofindustry, and, for the sake of a small and dishonestgain, imposed an arbitrary burden on the wants andluxury of the subject. "As soon (I transcribe the anec­dotes) as the exclusive sale of silk was usurped by the
'John Malala (tom. 2. p. 232.) mentions the want of bread, and !t,ooaras (lib. 14.f . 63.) the leaden niues, which Justinian, or his servants, stole from the aqueducts*







OCR Output













OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.] OF THE EOMAN EMPIRE.


eight thousandof a smaller size;" and the royal stables werefilled with six thousand mules and horses, among whomthe names of Shebdiz and Barid are renowned for theirSpeed or beauty. Six thousand guards successively mount­ed before the palace-gate; the service of the interiorapartments was performed by twelve thousand slaves,and in the number of three thousand virgins, the fairestof Asia, some happy concubine might console her mas­ter for the age or the indifference of Sira. The varioustreasures of gold, silver, gems, silk, and aromatics, weredeposited in a hundred subterraneous vaults; and thechamber Badaverd denoted the accidental gift of thewinds which had wafted the spoils of Heraclius into one ofthe Syrian harbours of his rival. The voice of flattery, andperhaps of fiction, is not ashamed to compute the thirtythousand rich hangings that adorned the walls, the fortythousand columns of silver, or more probably of marble,and plated wood, that supported the roof; and a thou­sand globes of gold suspended in the dome, to imitate themotions of the planets and the constellations of the zo­diac." While the Persian monarch contemplated thewonders of his art and power, he received an epistle froman obscure citizen of Mecca, inviting him to acknow­ledge Mahomet as the apostle of God. He rejected theinvitation, and tore the epistle. "It is thus (exclaimedthe Arabian prophet) that God will tear the kingdom,and reject the supplications, of Chosroes."y Placed on
• The difference between the two races consists in one or two humps; the drome­dary has only one; the size of the proper camel is larger; the oonntry he comesfrom, Turkestan or Bactriana; the dromedary is confined to Arahia and Africa.Buffon, Hist. Naturelle, tom. 11. p. 211, &c. Aristot. Hist. Animal, tom. 1. lib. 2.c. 1. tom. 2. p. 185.
x Theophanes, Chronograph, p. 268. D'Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientale, p.997. The Greeks describe the decay, the Persians the splendour, of Dastagerd ybut the former speak from the modest wituess of the eye, the latter from the vaguereport of the ear.
y The historians of Mahomet, Abulfeda, (in Vit. Mohammed, p. 92, 93.) and Gag-nier, (Vie de Mahomet, tom. 2. p. 247.) date this emhassy in the seventh year of theHegira, which commences A. D. 628, May 11. Their chronology is erroneous, sinoeChosroes died in the month of February of the same year. (Pagi, Critica, tom. 2.p.779.) The count de Boulaiuvilliers (Vie de Mahumed, p. 327, 328.) places thisemhassy about A. D. 615, soon after the conquest of Palestine. Yet Mahomet wouldscarcely hare ventured so soon on so bold a step.







OCR Output








378 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIV.


asses. But the same denomination of money was re­duced, in three centuries, from a pound to the weightof half an ounce; and the insolence of a wealthy Romanindulged himself in the cheap amusement of breakingand satisfying the law of the twelve tables. Veratius ranthrough the streets striking on the face the inoffensivepassengers, and his attendant purse-bearer immediatelysilenced their clamours by the legal tender of twenty-fivepieces of copper, about the value of one shilling..' Theequity of the praetors examined and estimated the distinctmerits of each particular complaint. In the adjudicationof civil damages, the magistrate assumed a right to con­sider the various circumstances of time and place, of ageand dignity, which may aggravate the shame and suffer­ings of the injured person; but if he admitted the ideaof a fine, a punishment, an example, he invaded the pro­vince, though, perhaps, he supplied the defects, of thecriminal law.'
The execution of the Alban dictator, who was dis­membered by eight horses, is represented by Livy as thefirst and the last instance of Roman cruelty in the pu­nishment of the most atrocious crimes." But this act ofjustice, or revenge, was inflicted on a foreign enemyin the heat of victory, and at the command of a singleSerena man. The twelve tables afforded a more decisive prooftweirs of the national spirit, since they were framed by thetM"*' wisest of the senate, and accepted by the free voices otthe people; yet these laws, like the statutes of Draco,1are written in characters of blood.™ They approve theinhuman and unequal principle of retaliation; and the
1 Auhis Gellius (Noct. Attic. 20. 1.) borrowed his story from the Commentaries ofQ. Labeo on the twelve tables.
* The narrative of Livy (1.28.) is weighty and solemn. At tu dictis Alhaoe ma-neres is a harsh reflection, unwortby of Virgil's humanity. (jEneid, 8. 643.) Heyne,with his usual good taste, observes that the subject was too horrid for the shield ofiEneas. (tom. 3. p. 229.)'
1 The age of Draco (Olympiad 39.1.) is fixed by Sir John Marsham (Canon Chro-nicus, p. 593—596.) and Corsini. (Fasti Attici. tom. 3. p: 62.) For his laws, seathe writers on the goverument of Athens, Sigonius, Meursias, Potter, &c.
m The eighth, de delictis, of the twelve tables is delineated by Gravina.p' 292,293. with a Commentary, p. 214—230.) Aulus Gellius (20.1.) and the"latio Leg um Mosaicarum et Romanarum aflbrd much original information.


Punishmeats.







OCR Output








334 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL1V.


that he who touches the ear, touches the whole body;and that he who steals from a heap of corn, or a hogs­head of wine, is guilty of the entire theft.1"Authority. Arms, eloquence, and the study of the civil law, pro­moted a citizen to the honours of the Roman state ; andthe three professions were.sometimes more conspicuousby their union in the same character. In the composi­tion of the edict, a learned prastor gave a sanction andpreference to his private sentiments: the opinion of acensor, or a consul, was entertained with respect: anda doubtful interpretation of the laws might be support­ed by the virtues or triumphs of the civilian. The pa­trician arts were long protected by the veil of mystery;and in more enlightened times, the freedom of inquiryestablished the general principles of jurisprudence. Sub­tle and intricate cases were elucidated by the disputes ofthe Forum: rules, axioms,and definitions," were admittedas the genuine dictates of reason ; and the consent of thelegal professors was interwoven into the practice of thetribunals. But these interpreters could neither enactnor execute the laws of the republic; and the judgesmight disregard the authority of Scaevolas themselves,which was often overthrown by the eloquence or so­phistry of an ingenious pleader.° Augustus and Tibe­rius were the first to adopt, as a useful engine, thescience of the civilians; and their servile labours ac­commodated the old system to the spirit and views ofdespotism. Under the fair pretence of securing thedignity of the art, the privilege of subscribing legal andvalid opinions was confined to the sages of senatorian orequestrian rank, who had -been previously approved bythe judgment of the prince; and this monopoly prevail­ed, till Hadrian restored the freedom of the profession to
m See Gravina, (p. 45—51.) and the ineffectual cavils of Mascou. Heineccins(Hist. J. R. no. 125.) quotes and approves a dissertation of Ever aid Otto, de StoicaJorisconsnltorom Philosophia.
° We have heard of the Catonian rule, the Aquilian stipulation, and the Manilianforms, of two hundred and eleven maxims, and of two hundred and forty-seven defi­nitions. (Pandect. Jib. 50. tit. 16,17.)
° Read Cicero, lib. 1. de. Oratore, Topica, pro Murena.







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


temple; almost every city of the empire obtained thesolid advantages of bridges, hospitals, and aqueducts;but the severe liberality of the monarch disdained to in­dulge his subjects in the popular luxury of baths andtheatres. While Justinian laboured for the public ser­vice, he was not unmindful of his own dignity and ease.The Byzantine palace, which had been damaged by theconflagration, was restored with new magnificence; andsome notions may be conceived of the whole edifice, bythe vestibule or hall, which, from the doors perhaps, orthe roof, was surnamed choice, or the brazen. Thedome of a spacious quadrangle was supported by massypillars; the pavement and walls were incrusted withmany coloured marbles—the emerald green of Laconia;the fiery red, and the white Phrygian stone intersectedwith veins of a sea-green hue: the mosaic paintings ofthe dome and sides represented the glories of the Africanand Italian triumphs. On the Asiatic shore of the Pro-pontis, at a small distance to the east of Chalcedon, thecostly palace and gardens of Heraeum'' were prepared forthe summer residence of Justinian; and more especiallyTheodora. The poets of the age have celebrated therare alliance of nature and art, the harmony of thenymphs of the groves, the fountains, and the waves;yet the crowd of attendants who followed the court com­plained of their inconvenient lodgings,' and the nymphswere too often alarmed by the famous Porphyrio, awhale of ten cubits in breadth, and thirty in length, whowas stranded at the mouth of the river Sangaris, after hehad infested more than half a century the seas of Con­stantinople.5
i For the Heraenm, the palace of Theodora, see Gyllius (da Bosphoro Thraciot,lib. 3. c. 11.) Aleman. (Not. ad Aneodot. p. 80, 81. who quotes sereral epigrams ofthe Anthology,( and Ducange (C P. Christ. lib. 4. o. 13. p. 175,176.)
_r Compare, in the Edifices, (lib. 1. c. 11.) aud in the Anecdotes, (c. 8—15.) thedifferent styles of adulation and malevolence: stripped of the paint, or cleansed fromthe dirt, the object appears to be the same.
* Preoopius, lib. 8.29. most prohably a stranger and wanderer, as the Mediterra­nean does not breed whales. Balaenae quoque in nostra maria penetrant. (Plin. Hist,JNatur. 9. 2.) Between the polar circle and the tropic, the cetaceous animals of tha


H 2







OCR Output








CHAP. XMV.J OF THE SOMAN IMtIRE,


steps, the rapid progress of the evil. The ancient war*ship of the Romans afforded a peculiar goddess to hearand reconcile the complaints of a married life; but herepithet of Firiplaca} the appeaser of husbands, too clear­ly indicates on which side submission and repentancewere always expeoted. Every act of a citizen was sub­ject to the judgment of the censors; the first who usedIhe privilege of divorce assigned, at their command, themotives of his conduct ;m and a senator was expelled fordismissing his virgin spouse without the knowledge oradvice of his friends. Whenever an action was institutedfor the recovery of a marriage portion, the praetor, as theguardian of equity, examined the cause and the charac­ters, and gently inclined the scale in favour of the guilt-Jess and injured party. Augustus, who united the pow­ers of both magistrates, adopted their different modes ofrepressing or chastising the license of divorce.* Thepresence of seven Roman witnesses was required for the•validity of this solemn and deliberate act: if any ade­quate provocation had been given by the husband, in­stead of the delay of two years, he was compelled to re­fund immediately, or in the space of six months; but ifhe could arraign the manners of his wife, her guilt orlevity was expiated by the loss of the sixth or eighth partof her marriage portion. The Christian princes were■the first who specified the just causes of a private di­vorce; their institutions, from Constantine to Justinian,appear to fluctuate between the custom of the empireand the wishes of the church,° and the author of the No-.yels too frequently reforms the jurisprudence of the Codeand Pandects. In the most rigorous laws, a wife was
1 Sacellum Viriplac:e(Valerias Maxitnns, lib. 2. c. 1.) in the Palatine region ap­pears in the time of Theodosias, in the description of Kome by Publius Victor.
m Valerian Maximas, lib. 2. c. 9. With some propriety be judges divorce morecriminal than oelihacy: illo namque conjngalia sacra spreta tantom, hoc etiam injn-riose traotata.
"See the laws of Augustus and his suooessors, in Heineccius, ad Legem PapiamPoppwam, c. 19. in Opp. tom. 6. P. 1. p. 323—333.
° Aliae sunt leges Cwsarum, aliae Christi ; alind Papinianus, aliud Paulus nos-,tor praeoir.it. (Jeroni. tom. 1. f. 198. Seldon, Uxor Ebraica, lib. 3, c. 31. p.
847—853.) x -"







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


Catholic bishops devoted to his interest, the clergy andthe monks were gained by his liberality, and the peoplewere taught to pray for theipfuture sovereign, the hopeand pillar of the true religion. The magnificence ofJustinian was displayed in the superior pomp of his publicspectacles, an object not less sacred and important in theeyes of the multitude, than the creed of Nice or Chal-cedon; the expense of his consulship was esteemed attwo hundred and eighty-eight thousand pieces of gold;twenty lions, and thirty leopards, were produced at thesame time in the amphitheatre, and a numerous train ofhorses, with their rich trappings, was bestowed as anextraordinary gift on the victorious charioteers of thecircus. While he indulged the people of Constanti­nople, and received the addresses of foreign kings, thenephew of Justin assiduously cultivated the friendship of.the senate. That venerable name seemed to qualify itsmembers to declare the sense of the nation, and to regu­late the succession of the imperial throne: the feebleAnastasius had permitted the vigour of government todegenerate into the form or substance of an aristocracy;and the military officers who had obtained the senatorialrank, were followed by their domestic guards, a band ofveterans, whose arms or acclamations might fix in a tu­multuous moment the diadem of the east. The trea­sures of the state were lavished to procure the voices ofthe senators; and their unanimous wish, that he wouldbe pleased to adopt Justinian, for his colleague, was com­municated to the emperor. But this request, which tooclearly admonished him of his approaching end, was un­welcome to the jealous temper of an aged monarch, de­sirous to retain the power which he was incapable ofexercising; and Justin, holding his purple with both hishands, advised them to prefer, since an election was soprofitable, some older candidate. Notwithstanding thisreproach, the senate proceeded to decorate Justinian withthe royal epithet of nobilissimus; and their decree was
E a







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.] OP THE ROMAN UMPIRE.


possessed, and bequeathed by the soldier alone; and thefair analogy was extended to the emoluments of any li­beral profession, the salary of public service, and the sa­cred liberality of the emperor or the empress. The lifeof a citizen was less exposed than his fortune to theabuse of paternal power. Yet his life might be adverseto the interest or passions of an unworthy father: thesame crimes that flowed from the corruption, were moresensibly felt by the humanity, of the Augustan age ; andthe cruel Erixo, who whipped his son till he expired, wassaved by the emperor from the just fury of the multi­tude/ The Roman father, from the license of serviledominion, was reduced to the gravity and moderation ofa judge. The presence and opinion of Augustus con­firmed the sentence of exile pronounced against an in­tentional parricide by the domestic tribunal of Arius.Hadrian transported to an island the jealous parent, who,like a robber, had seized the opportunity of hunting, toassassinate a youth, the incestuous lover of his step­mother.8 A private jurisdiction is repugnant to the spi­rit of monarchy; the parent was again reduced from ajudge to an accuser; and the magistrates were enjoinedby Severus Alexander to hear his complaints and executehis sentence. He could no longer take the life of a sonwithout incurring the guilt and punishment of murder;and the pains of parricide, from which he had been ex­empted by the Pompeian law, were finally inflicted bythe justice of Constantine.' The same protection wasdue to every period of existence: and reason must applaudthe humanity of Paulus, for imputing the crime of mur-
- r The examples of Krixo and Arias are related by Seneca, (de Clement!*, 1. 14,
15.) the former with horTor, the latter withapplfluse. • * •.
'■ Quod latronis magis quam patris jure eum interfeoit, nam patria poteslas in pie-late debet nou in alrocitate oonsiatere. (Marcian, Inatitut. lib. 14. in Pandect, lib.48. tit. 9. leg. 5.) < ■
1 The Pompeian and Cornelian laws de sicariis and parricidis, are repeated, or ra­ther abridged, with the last supplements of Alexander Severus, Constantine, and Va-lentinian, in the Pandects, (lib. 48. tit. 8, 9.) and Code. (lib. 9. tit. 16,17.) . Seelikewise the Theodosian Code, (lib. 9. tit. 14, 15.) with Godefroy's Comnienlarv,(torn. 3. p. 84—113.) who pours a flood of ancient and modern learning over thesepenal laws.







OCR Output








[CHAP. XLII. OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


less congenial than that of Europe, to military spirit:those populous countries were enervated by luxury, des­potism, and superstition; and the monks were moreexpensive and more numerous than the soldiers of theeast. The regular forpe of the empire had once amountedto six hundred and forty-five thousand men: it was re­duced, in the time of Justinian, to one hundred andfifty thousand; and this number, large as it may seem,was thinly scattered over the sea and land; in Spain andItaly, in Africa and Egypt, , on the banks of the Danube,the coast of the Euxine, and the frontiers of Persia.The citizen was exhausted, yet the soldier was unpaid;his poverty was mischievously soothed by the privilegeof rapine and indolence; and the tardy payments weredetained and intercepted by the fraud of those agentswho usurp, without courage or danger, the emolumentsof war. Public and private distress recruited the armiesof the state; but in the field, and still more in the pre­sence of the enemy, their numbers were always defective.The want of national spirit was supplied by the preca­rious faith and disorderly service of barbarian mercen­aries. Even military honour, which has often survivedthe loss of virtue and freedom, was almost totally extinct.The generals, who were multiplied beyond the, exampleof former times, laboured only to prevent the success,, orto sully the reputation, of their colleagues; and theyhad been taught by experience, that if merit sometimesprovoked the jealousy, error, or even guilt, would ob­tain the indulgence, of a gracious emperor.d In suchan age the triumphs of Belisarius, and afterward ofNarses, shine with incomparable lustre; but they areencompassed with the darkest shades of disgrace andcalamity. While the lieutenant of Justinian subdued
yaorat \somiurai;. This Inst epithet of Procopius is too nobly translated by pirates;naval thieves is the proper words: strippers of garments, eitlierfor injury or insult.(Demosthenes contra Conon. in Reiske Orator. Grace, torn. 2. p. 1264.) *
d See the third and fourth boots of the Gothic War: the writer of the Anecdotescaunot aggravate these abuses.' ''.
VOL. V. P







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIV.


conduct of each citizen was exposed to the eyes and earsof his friends and countrymen. The insolvent debtorconsulted the wishes of his creditor: the client wouldhave blushed to oppose the vieWs of his patron: the ge­neral was followed by his veterans, and the aspect of thegrave magistrate Was a living lesson to the multitude. Anew method of secret ballot abolished the influence offear and shame, of honour and interest, and the abuse offreedom accelerated the progress of anarchy and despo­tism.' The Romans had aspired to be equal; they werelevelled by the equality of servitude; and the dictates ofAugustus were patiently ratified by the formal consent-of the tribes or centuries. Once, and once only, he ex­perienced a sincere and strenuous opposition. His sub­jects had resigned all political liberty; they defended thefreedom of domestic life. A law which enforced theobligation, and strengthened the bonds of marriage, wasclamorously rejected; Propertius, in the arms of Delia,applauded the victory of licentious love; and the projectof reform Was suspended till a new and more tractable ge­neration had arisen in the world.8 Such an example wasnot necessary to instruct a prudent usurper, of the mis­chief of popular assemblies; and their abolition, whichAugustus had silently prepared, was accomplished with­out resistance, and almost Without notice, on the acces­sion of his successor.h Sixty thousand plebeian legisla­tors, whom numbers made formidable, and poverty se­cure, were supplanted by six hundred senators, who heldtheir honours, their fortunes, and their lives, by the cle-iheC«natef mency oftne emperor. The loss of executive power wasalleviated by the gift of legislative authority; and Ulplan might assert, after the practice of two hundred
'Cicero (de Legibus, 3.16—18.) dehates this constitutional question, anil as­signs to his brother Qirintus the most unpopular side.
s Prm tutnultu recusantlum perferre non potui. (Suctbn. in August, c. 34.) SeePropertius, lib % eleg. 6. Heinecciifs, in a separate history, has exhausted, thewhole subject of the Julian and Papian-Poppaean laws. (Opp. tout. 7. P. 1. p. 1—479.)
j> Tacit. Antml. 1. 15. Lipsius, Excursus E. in Tacitum. <•







OCR Output








368 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIY,


cwu de- branches. The degrees of kindred*1 are numbered by
grees of . »
kindred, the civilians, ascending from the last possessor to a com­mon parent, and descending from the common parentto the next heir: my father stands in the first degree,my brother in the second, his children in the third, andthe remainder of the series may be conceived by fancy,or pictured in a genealogical table. In Jthis computation,a distinction was made, essential to the laws and even theconstitution of Rome; the agnats, or persons connect­ed by a line of males, were called, as they stood in thenearest degree, to an equal partition; but a female wasincapable of transmitting any legal claims; and the cog­nate of every rank, without excepting the dear relation ofa mother and a son, were disinherited by the twelvetables, as strangers and aliens. Among the Romans, agens or lineage was united by a common name and do­mestic rites :. the various cognomens or surnames of Sci-pio or Marcellus, distinguished from each other the sub­ordinate branches or families of the Cornelian or Clau-dian ra.ce: the default of the agnats, of the same sur­name, was supplied by the larger denomination of Gen­tiles i and the vigilance of the laws maintained, in thesame name, the perpetual descent of religion and pra^-perty. A similar principle dictated the Voconian law,'wh?ch abolished the right of female inheritance. Aslong as virgins were given or sold in marriage, the adop­tion of the wife extinguished the hopes of the daughter.E;ut the equal succession pf independent matrons sup­ported their pride and luxury, and might transport intoa foreign house the riches of their fathers. Whilethe maxims of Catok were revered, they tended to per-
* Blackstnne's Tables (vol. 2. p. 202.) represent and compare the degrees of thecivil with those of the canon and common law. A separate tract of Julius Paulus, degradibus et afbnibus, is inserted or abridged in the Pandects, (lib. 38. tit. 10.) Inthe seventh degrees he computes (no. 18,) one thousand and twenty-four persons.
'1 The Voconian law was enacted in the year of Rome 584. 'The younger Scipio,who was then seventeen years of age, (Frenshemius, Supplement. Livian. 46. 40.)found an occasion of exercising his generosity to his mother, sisters, &c. (Polyhius,tom. t. lib. S\. p. 1453—1464.'edit. Gronov. .a domestic wituess.)
J1 Legem Voconiam ^Ernesti, Clavis Ciceroniana) magna voce bonis lateribus (at







OCR Output








150 DECLINE AND FALJ. [CHAP. XLI,


conquest, true knowledge of the state of the Vandals.8 The longman* in continuance of the Italian war delayed the punishmentajd.'550 of the Visigoths; and the eyes of Theudes were closed—620. before they tasted the fruits of his mistaken policy. Afterhis death, the sceptre of Spain was disputed by a civil war.The weaker candidate solicited the protection of Justi­nian; and ambitiously subscribed a treaty of allianpe,which deeply wounded the independence and happinessof his country. Several cities, bpth' on the ocean and.the Mediterranean, were ceded to the Roman troops,who afterward refused to evacuate those pledges, as itshould seem, either of safety or payment; and as theywere fortified by perpetual supplies from Africa, theymaintained their impregnable stations, for the mischiev­ous purpose of inflaming the civil and religious factionsof the barbarians. Seventy years elapsed before thispainful thorn could be extirpated from the bosom of themonarchy; and as long as the emperors retained anyshare of these remote and useless possessions, their va­nity might number Spain in the list of their provinces,and the successors of Alaric in the rank of their vas­sals.1' .Beiisariu* The error of the Goths who reigned in Italy was lessibTo.^ excusable than that of their Spanish brethren, and theirfta'i'y °f punishment was still more immediate and terrible. Froma.u. 534. a motive of private revenge, they enabled their most dan­gerous enemy to destroy their most valuable ally. Asister of the great Theodoric had been given in marriageto Thrasimond the African king:° on this occasion, thefortress of Lilybaeumd in Sicily was resigned to the Van­dals: and the princess Amalafrida was attended by a
a Procopius, Vandal, lib. 1. o. 24.
b See the original chronicle of Isidore, and the fifth and sixth books of the Historyof Spain by Mariana. The Romans were finally expelled by Suintila, the king of theVisigoths, (A. D. £21—626.) after their reunion to the Catholic church.
c See the marriage and fate of Amalafrida iu Procopins, (Vandal, lib. 1. e. 8, 9.')and in Cassiodorius, (Var. 9. 1.) the expostulation of her royal brother. CompareJikowUe the Chronicle of Victor Tunnunensis.
Lilybacum was built by the Carthaginians, Olymp. 95. 4. and in the first Funicwar, a strong situation, and excellent harbour, rendered that flace an important objecttu both nations.







OCR Output








146 DECLINE AND FALL JcHAP. XLI.


their blood; support, with some impatience, the Saxon,or Prussian yoke; and serve with secret and voluntaryallegiance, the descendant of their ancient kings, whoin his garb and present fortune is confounded with themeanest of his vassals.p The name and situation of thisunhappy people might indicate their descent from onecommon stock with the conquerors of Africa. But theuse of a Sclavonian dialect more clearly represents themas the last remnant of the new colonies, who succeededto the genuine Vandals, already scattered or destroyedin the age of Procopius.9«nd"defatt If Belisarius had been tempted to hesitate in his afle-Moots. giance, he might have urged, even against the empe-a.d.535. ror himself, the indispensable duty of saving Africafrom an enemy more barbarous than the Vandals. Theorigin of the Moors is involved in darkness; they wereignorant of the use of letters/ Their limits cannotbe precisely denned: a boundless continent was opento the Libyan shepherds; the change of seasons andpastures regulated their motions; and their rude hutsand slender furniture were transported with the sameease as their arms, their families, and their cattle, whichconsisted of sheep, oxen, and camels.5 During thevigour of the Roman power, they observed a respect­ful distance from Carthage and the sea-shore; underthe feeble reign of the Vandals, they invaded the citiesof Numidia, occupied the sea-coast from Tangier to
r From the month of the great elector (in 1687), Tollios describes tho secret roy­alty and rebellious spirit of the Vandals of Brandenburgh, who could .muster fire orsix thousand soldiers who had procured some cannon, &c. (Itinerar. Hungar. p. 42.apud Dubos, Hist, de la Monarchic Fraucoise, tom. 1. p. 182,183.) The veracity,not of the elector, but of Tollius himself/ may justly be suspected.
4 Proeopius (lib. 1. c. 22.) was in total darkness—mtt fsrpfsv tic cuSe aiofsa ec tfxsenterat. Under the reign of Dagobert, (A. D. 630.) the Sclavonian tribes of theSorhi and Venedi already bordered on Thuringia. (Mascou, Hist, of the Germans, 15.3—5.)
* Sallust represents the Moors as a remnant of the army of Heracles (de Bell, Ju-gurth, c. 21.) and Proeopins, (Vandal, lib. 2. c. 10.) as the posterity of the Cananaeanswho fled from the robber Joshua (*hjt>i;). He quotes two columns, with a Phoeni­cian-inscription. I believe in the columns—I doubt the inscription—and I reject thepedigree.
• Virgil (Georgic. 3. 339.) and Pomponius Mela, (1. 8.) describe the wanderingrife of the African shepherds, similar to that of the Arabs and Tartars; and Shaw(p. 222.) is the best commentator on the poet and the geographer.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 189


deplorable state. They compared the fame and fortuneof Belisarius with the weakness of their ill-fated king;and the comparison suggested an extraordinary project,to which Vitiges, with apparent resignation, was com­pelled to acquiesce. Partition would ruin the strength,exile would disgrace the honour, of the nation ; but theyoffered their arms, their treasures, and the fortificationsof Ravenna, if Belisarius would disclaim the authority ofa master, accept the choice of the Goths, and assume,as he had deserved, the kingdom of Italy. If the falselustre of a diadem could have tempted the loyalty of afaithful subject, his prudence must have foreseen the in^constancy of the barbarians, and his rational ambitionwould prefer the safe and honourable station of a Romangeneral. Even the patience and seeming satisfactionwith which he entertained a proposal of treason, mightbe susceptible of a malignant interpretation. But thelieutenant of Justinian was conscious of his own recti­tude: he entered into a dark and crooked path, as itmight lead to the voluntary submission of the Goths;and his dexterous policy persuaded them that he was dis­posed to comply with their wishes, without engaging anoath or a promise for the performance of a treaty whichhe secretly abhorred. The day of the surrender of Ra­venna was stipulated by the Gothic ambassadors: a fleet,laden with provisions, sailed as a welcome guest into thedeepest recess of the harbour r the gates were opened to Subduesthe fancied king of Italy ; and Belisarius, without meet- kingdom"ing an enemy, triumphantly marched through the streets a/d^oof an impregnable city.q The Romans were astonished December,by their success; the multitude of tall and robust barba­rians were confounded by the image of their own pa­tience; and the masculine females, spitting in the facesof their sons and husbands, most bitterly reproached
1 Ravenna was taken, not in the 540, but in the latter end of 539; and Pagi (torn.2. p. 569.) is rectified by Muratori,(Annali d'ltalia, torn. 5. p. 62.) who proves, froman original act on papyrus, (Antiquit. Italia Medii jEvi, torn. 2. dissert. 32. p. 999—1007. Mafiei, Istoria Diplomat, p. 155—160.) that before the 3d of January, 540,peace and free correspondence were restored between Ravenna and Fnenza. _ .







OCR Output








CMAP. XLVI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 44Q


weakness; and even the modest language of his replystill left room for treaty and reconciliation. Chosroes ledinto the field the slaves of the palace and the populace ofthe capital: they beheld with terror the banners of a ve­teran army; they were encompassed and surprised by theevolutions of the general; and the satraps who had de­posed Hormouz, received the punishment of their revolt,or expiated their first treason by a second and more cri­minal act of disloyalty. The life and liberty of Chos­roes were saved, but he was reduced to the necessity ofimploring aid or refuge in some foreign land; and theimplacable Bindoes, anxious to secure an unquestionabletitle, hastily returned to the palace, and ended, with a D<*n» ofbow-string, the wretched existence of the son of Nushir- a. d. 590.van.p
While Chosroes despatched the preparations of his re- cbosroe.treat, he deliberated with his remaining friends,q whether Rom.,he should lurk in the valleys of mount Caucasus, or flyto the tents of the Turks, or solicit the protection of theemperor. The long emulation of the successors of Ar-taxerxes and Constantine increased his reluctance to ap­pear as a suppliant in a rival court; but he weighed theforces of the Romans, and prudently considered, that theneighbourhood of Syria would render his escape moreeasy, and their succours more effectual. Attended onlyby his concubines, and a troop of thirty guards, he se­cretly departed from the capital, followed the banks ofthe Euphrates, traversed the desert, and halted at thedistance of ten miles from Circesium. About the third\vatch of the night, the Roman prefect was informed ofhis approach, and he introduced the royal stranger to the
P Theophylact (lib. 4. c. 7.) imputes the death of Hormonz to his son, by whosecommand he was beaten to death with clubs. I bare followed Hie milder account ofKhondemir and Eutychius, and shall ajways be content with the slightest evidenceto extenuate the crime of parricide.
i After the battle of Pharsalia, the Pompey of Luean (lib.. 8. 256—455.) holds asimilar debate. He was himself desirous of seeking the Parthians ; bat his compa­nions abhorred the unnatural alliance; and the adverse prejudices might operate asforcibly on Chosroes and his companions, who could describe, with the same vehe­mence, the contrast of laws, religion, and manners, between the cast aud nest.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 405


Whatever might be the grounds of his security, Al- Conquestboin neither expected nor encountered a Roman army part ofin the field. He ascended the Julian Alps, and lookedfheLom-down with contempt and desire on the fruitful plains to AarDs'568which his victory communicated the perpetual appella- 570.tion of Lombardy. A faithful chieftain, and a selectband, were stationed at Forum Julii, the modern Friuli,to guard the passes of the mountains. The Lombardsrespected the strength of Pavia, and listened to theprayers of the Trevisans: their slow and heavy multi­tudes proceeded to occupy the palace and city of Verona;and Milan, now rising from her ashes, was invested bythe powers of Alboin five months after his departurefrom Pannonia. Terror preceded his march; he foundevery where, or he left, a dreary solitude; and the pu­sillanimous Italians presumed, without a trial, that thestranger was invincible. Escaping to lakes, or rocks, ormorasses, the affrighted crowds concealed some frag­ments of their wealth, and delayed the moment of theirservitude. Paulinus, the patriarch of Aquileia, removedhis treasures, sacred and profane, to the isle of Grado,3and his successors were adopted by the infant republic ofVenice, which was continually enriched by the publiccalamities. Honoratus, who filled the chair of St. Am­brose, had credulously accepted the faithless offers of acapitulation; and the archbishop, with the clergy andnobles of Milan, were driven by the perfidy of Alboin toseek a refuge in the less accessible ramparts of Genoa.Along the maritime coast, the courage of the inhabitantswas supported by the facility of supply, the hopes of re­lief, and the power of escape; but from the Trentine hills
in the last chapter of the first book, and the seven first chapters of the second book,of Paul the deacon.
* Which from this translation was called New Aquileia, (Chron. Venet. p. 3.)
•The patriarch of Grado soon became the first citizen of the republic, (p. 9. &c.) buthis seat was not removed to Venice till the jear 1450. He is now decorated withtitles and honours; but the genius of the churoh has bowed to that of the state, andthe government of a Catholic city is strictly presby terian. Thomassin, Discipline de
TEglise, tom. 1. p. 156, 157. 161—165. Amelot de la Houssaye, Goayernementde Venise, tom. 1. p. 256—261.







OCR Output








l66 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIII.


under the same appellation of Goths, vtes insensiblyformed in the camp of Totila. He sincerely accomplishedthe articles of capitulation, without seeking or acceptingany sinister advantage from ambiguous expressions orunforeseen events: the garrison of Naples had stipulated,that they should be transported by sea; the obstinacy ofthe winds prevented their voyage, but they were gener­ously supplied with horses, provisions, and a safe con­duct to the gates of Rome. The wives of the senators,who had been surprised in the villas of Campania, wererestored, without a ransom, to their husbands; the vio­lation of female chastity was inexorably chastised withdeath; and, in the salutary regulation of the diet of thefamished Neapolitans, the conqueror assumed the officeof a humane and attentive physician. The virtues ofTotila are equally laudable, whether they proceeded fromtrue policy, religious principle, or the instinct of huma­nity: he often harangued his troops; and it was hisconstant theme, that national vice and ruin are insepara­bly connected: that victory is the fruit of moral as wellas military virtue; and that the prince, and even thepeople, are responsible for the crimes which they neglectto punish.
Second The return of Belisarius, to save the country which heof Beiisa- had subdued, was pressed with equal vehemence by hisitaiy!" friends and enemies; and the Gothic war was imposeda. D.544 a3 a trust or an exile on the veteran commander. A
—548.
hero on the banks of the Euphrates, a slave in the pa­lace of Constantinople, he accepted, with reluctance, thepainful task of supporting his own reputation, and re­trieving the faults of his successors. The sea was opento the Romans.; the ships and soldiers were assembledat Salona, near the palace of Diocletian: he refreshedand reviewed his troops at Pola in Istria, coasted roundthe head of the Hadriatic, entered the port of Ravenna,and dispatched orders rather than supplies to the subor­dinate cities. His first public oration was addressed to'







OCR Output








<l6 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLy.


quaint expression of" Evagrius) a perfect aristocracy ofreason and virtue. Some suspicion will degrade the tes­timony of a subject, though he protests that his secretpraise should never reach the ears of his sovereign,'1 andsome failings seem to place the character of Maurice be­low the purer merit of his predecessor. His cold andreserved demeanor might be imputed to arrogance; hisjustice was not always exempt from cruelty, nor his cle­mency from weakness; and his rigid economy too oftenexposed him to the reproach of avarice. But the rationalwishes of an absolute monarch must tend to the happi­ness of his people; Maurice was endowed with senseand courage to promote that happiness, and his adminis­tration was directed by the principles and example ofTiberius. The pusillanimity ofthe Greeks had introduc­ed so complete a separation between the offices of kingand of general, that a private soldier who had deservedand obtained the purple, seldom or never appeared at thehead of his armies. Yet the emperor Maurice enjoyedthe glory of restoring the Persian monarch to his throne:his lieutenants waged a doubtful war against the Avars ofthe Danube, and he cast an eye of pity, of ineffectualpity, on the abject and distressful state of his Italian pro­vinces.
Distress of From Italy the emperors were incessantly tormented3tal>- by tales of misery and demands of succour, which extort­ed the humiliating confession of their own weakness.The expiring dignity of Rome was only marked by thefreedom and energy of her complaints. "If you are in­capable (she said) of delivering us from the swords of theLombards, save us at least from the calamity of famine."Tiberius forgave the reproach, and relieved the distress:a supply of corn was transported from Egypt to the Ti­ber; and the Roman people, invoking the name, not of
h Aurcjtgar&jg ovrftiC yEvo^Evo? r«v [J.ZV oyKm^tnuav rouv waBm Ex r*J; aXEiet; E^EinXarW-i■^i>Xnc afiff-roxgetrEtav $6 ev to*; Eetyrou Xcyia-fAQi; naraa-rwapm;, Kvagrius composedhi* history In the twelfth year of Maurice; and be had been so wisely indiscreet, thatttie emperor knew and rewarded his favourable.opinion. (lib. 6. c. 24.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLII.] 6F trffe ttOMAN EMPIRE.


the table of Justinian, by the side of his master; aridone thousand pounds of gold might be assigned for theexpense of his journey and entertainment. Yet the1re­peated labours of Isdigune could procure only a partialand imperfect truce, which was always purchased withthe treasures, and renewed at the solicitation, of the By­zantine court. Many years of fruitless desolation elap­sed before Justinian and Chosroes were compelled, bymutual lassitude, to consult the repose of their decliningage. At a conference held on the frontier, each party,without expecting to gain eredit, displayed the power,the justice, and the pacific intentions of their respectivesovereigns; but necessity and interest dictated the trea­ty of peace, which was concluded for a term of fifty years,diligently composed in the Greek and Persian languages,and attested by the seals of twelve interpreters. Theliberty of commerce and religion was fixed and defined;the allies of the emperor and the great king were includ­ed in the same benefits and obligations; and the mostscrupulous precautions were provided to prevent or de­termine the accidental disputes that might arise on theconfines of two hostile nations. After twenty years ofdestructive though feeble war, the limits still remainedwithout alteration; and Chosroes was persuaded to re­nounce his dangerous claim to the possession or sove­reignty of Colchos and its dependent states. Rich inthe accumulated treasures of the east, he extorted fromthe Romans an annual payment of thirty thousand piecesof gold; and the smallness of the sum revealed the dis­grace of a tribute in its naked deformity. In a previousdebate, the chariot of Sesostris, and the wheel of fortune,were applied by one of the ministers of Justinian, whoobserved, that the reduction of Antioch, and some Syriancities, had elevated beyond measure the vain and ambi­tious spirit of the barbarian. "You are mistaken, (re­plied the modest Persian): the king of kings, the lord ofmankind, looks down with contempt on such petty ac-


s 2







OCR Output








CHAP. XLYI-] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


rice.' The iron of Tuscany or Pontus still received the'keenest temper from the skill of the Byzantine workmen.The magazines were plentifully stored with every speciesof offensive and defensive arms. In the construction anduse of ships, engines, and fortifications, the barbariansadmired the superior ingenuity of a people whom theyso often vanquished in the field. The science of tactics,the order, evolutions, arid stratagems, of antiquity, wastranscribed and studied in the books of the Greeks andRomans. But the solitude or degeneracy of the pro­vinces could no longer supply a race of men to handlethose weapons, to guard those walls, to navigate thoseships, and to reduce the theory of war into bold and suc­cessful practice. The genius of Belisarius and Narses hadbeen formed without a master, and expired without a dis­ciple. Neither honour, nor patriotism, nor generous su­perstition, could animate the lifeless bodies of slaves andstrangers, who had succeeded to the honours of the le­gions: it was in the camp alone that the emperor shouldhave exercised a despotic command; it was only in thecamps that his authority was disobeyed and insulted: heappeased and inflamed with gold the licentiousness of thetroops; but their vices were inherent, their victories wereaccidental, and their costly maintenance exhausted thesubstance of a state which they were unable to defend.After a long and pernicious indulgence, the cure of thisinveterate evil was undertaken by Maurice; but the rashattempt, which drew destruction on his own head, tend­ed only to aggravate the disease. A reformer should beexempt from the suspicion of interest, and he mustpossess the confidence and esteem of those whom he pro­poses to reclaim. The troops of Maurice might listento the voice,of a victorious leader; they disdained theadmonitions of statesmen and sophists, and when they
'Maurice himself oomposed twelve books on the militaryart, which are still ex­tant, and have been published (Upsal, 1664.) by John Scheffer at the end of the Tacticsof Arrian, (F;ibricius, Bibllot. Gracca, lib. 4. c. 8. tom. 3. p. 278.) who promises tospeak more fully of his work in its proper place. ,







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL III.


but the favourite eunuch still enjoyed the confidence ofJustinian, or the leader of a victorious army awed andrepressed the ingratitude of a timid court. Yet it wasnot by weak and mischievous indulgence that Narsessecured the attachment of his troops. Forgetful of thepast, and regardless of the future, they abused the pre­sent hour of prosperity and peace. The cities of Italyresounded with the noise of drinking and dancing: thespoils of victory were wasted in sensual pleasures; andnothing (says Agathias) remained, unless to exchangetheir shields and helmets for the soft lute and the capa­cious hogshead.'1 In a manly oration, not unworthy ofa Roman censor, the eunuch reproved these disorderlyvices, which sullied their fame and endangered theirsafety. The soldiers blushed and obeyed: discipline wasconfirmed, the fortifications were restored; a duke wasstationed for the defence and military command of eachof the principal citiesand the eye of Narses pervadedthe ample prospect from Calabria to the Alps. The re­mains of the Gothic nation evacuated the country, ormingled with the people: the Franks, instead of re­venging the death of Buccelin, abandoned, without astruggle, their Italian conquests: and the rebelliousSindbal, chief of the Heruli, was subdued, taken, andhung on a lofty gallows by the inflexible justice of theexarch.k The civil state of Italy, after the agitation ofa long tempest, was fixed by a pragmatic faction, whichthe emperor promulgated at the request of the pope.Justinian introduced his own jurisprudence into theschools and tribunals of the west: he ratified the acts of
EXiwsto yap ot.uat, auroi* Lira aCeXTEfia; rac aa-mXtt; tu%ov km to- xpavn ajw<f)ogEa)<oivsv kcu Cag€cTW aTrcSw&at. (Agathias, lib. 2. p. 48.) In the first scene of RichardIII. our English poet has beautifully enlarged on this idea, for which, however, hewas not indebted to the Byzantine historian. ... J
'Maffei has proved (Verona Illustrata, p. 1. lib. 10. p. 257—289.) against thecommon opinion, that the dukes of Italy were instituted before iht conquest of theLombards by Narses himself. In the Piaginatic Sanction (no. 23.) Justinian re­strains the judices militare*.
k See Paulus Diaconus, lib. 3. c2. p. 776. Mennnder (in Excerpt. Lcgat. p. 135.)mentious some risings in Italy by the Franks, and Theophanes (p. 201) hints at someGothic rebellions. ■' , . , . . .a







OCR Output








CHAP. XL!.] QF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 181


triumphant, burnt their tents, and tumultuously repassed•the Milvian bridge. They repassed not with impunity:their thronging multitudes, oppressed in a narrow pas­sage, were driven headlong into the Tiber by their ownfears and the pursuit of the enemy; and the Roman"general, sallying from the Pincian gate, inflicted a se­vere and disgraceful wound on their retreat. The slowlength of a sickly and desponding host was heavilydragged along the Flaminian way; from whence thebarbarians were sometimes compelled to deviate, Jestthey should encounter the hostile garrisons that guardedthe high road to Rimini and Ravenna. Yet so power­ful was this flying army, that Vitiges spared ten thou­sand men for the defence of the cities which he was mostsolicitous to preserve, and detached his nephew Uraias,with an adequate force, for the chastisement of rebelliousMilan. At the head of his principal army, he besieged.Rimini, only thirty-three miles distant from the Gothiccapital. A feeble rampart, and a shallow ditch, weremaintained by the skill and valour of John the Sanguina­ry, who shared the danger and fatigue of the meanestsoldier, and emulated, on a theatre less illustrious, themilitary virtues of his great commander. ' The towers L?s?Ri-and battering engines of the barbarians were rendereduseless; their attacks were repulsed; and the tediousblockade, which reduced the garrison to the last ex­tremity of hunger, afforded time for the union and marchof the Roman forces. A fleet which had surprised An-cona, sailed along the coast of the Hadriatic, to the re­lief of the besieged city. The eunuch Narses landed inPicenum with two thousand Heruli and five thousand ofthe bravest troops of the east. The rock of the Ap-pennine was forced; ten thousand veterans moved roundthe foot of the mountains, under the command of Beli-sarius himself; and a new army, whose encampmentblazed with innumerable lights, appeared to advancealong the Flaminian way. Overwhelmed with astonish- - ■







OCR Output








C HAP. XLVI.] Op THE ROMAN EMPIRE,


of the naked and hungry inhabitants. Singidunum, atthe distance of fifty miles, experienced a more cruel fate:the buildings were rased, and the vanquished peoplewere condemned to servitude and exile. Yet the ruins ofSirmium are no longer visible; the advantageous situa­tion of Singidunum soon attracted a new colony of Scla-vonians, and the conflux of the Save and Danube is stillguarded by the fortifications of Belgrade, or the WhiteCity, so often and so obstinately disputed by the Chris­tian and Turkish arms." From Belgrade to the walls ofConstantinople, a line may be measured of six hundredmiles: that line was marked with flames and with blood;the horses of the Avars were alternately bathed in theEuxine and the Adriatic; and the Roman pontiff alarm­ed by the approach of a more savage enemy/was reducedto cherish the Lombards as the protectors of Italy. Thedespair of a captive, whom his country refused to ran­som, disclosed to the Avars the intention and practice ofmilitary engines;° but in the first attempts, they wererudely framed and awkwardly managed; and the resist­ance of Diocletianopolis and Beraea, of Philippopolis andAdrianople, soon exhausted the skill and patience of thebesiegers. The warfare of Baian was that of a Tartar,yet his mind was susceptible of a humane and generoussentiment: he spared Anchialus, whose salutary watershad restored the health of the best beloved of his wives;and the Romans confess, that their starving army wasfed and dismissed by the liberality of a foe. His empireextended over Hungary, Poland, and Prussia, from themouth of the Danube to that of the Oder ;b and his new
e See d'Anville, in the Memoires tie. l'Acad. des Inscriptions, tom. 28. p. 412-—443. The Sclavonic name of Belgrade is mentioned in the tenth century by Constan-tine Porpbyrogenitus ; the Latin appellation of Alha Graeca is used by the Pranks tifethe beginning of the ninth, (p. 414.)
f Baron. Annal. Eccles. A. D. 600. no. 1. Paul Warnefrid (lib. 4. c. 38.) relates'their irrnption into Frinli.and (c. 39.) the captivity of his ancestors, alxiut A. 1). 6:i^.. The Sclavi traversed the Hadriatic, cum multitudine navium, and made a descent inthe territory of Siiiontmn. (c. 47.)
S Even the helepolis, or moveable turret. Theophylaot, lib. 2. 16, 17.
b The arms and alliances of tho clmgan reached to the neighbourhood of a westernsea, fifteen months'journey from Constantinopte. The emperor Maurice conversed
VOL. V. 1 H







OCR Output








74 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL.


of Anastasius, and that prudent emperor accumulated animmense treasure, while he delivered his people from themost odious or oppressive taxes. Their gratitude uni­versally applauded the abolition of the gold of affliction,a personal tribute on the industry of the poorbut moretolerable, as it should seem, in the form than in the sub­stance, since the flourishing city of Edessa paid only onehundred and forty pounds of gold, which was collectedin four years from ten thousand artificers.11 Yet suchwas the parsimony, which supported this liberal disposi­tion, that, in a reign of twenty-seven years, Anastasiussaved, from his annual revenue, the enormous sum ofthirteen millions sterling, or three hundred and twentythousand pounds of gold.1 His example was neglected,and his treasure was abused, by the nephew of Justin.The riches of Justinian were speedily exhausted by almsand buildings, by ambitious wars, and ignominious trea­ties. His revenues were found inadequate to his expenses.Av«ioe Every art was tried to extort from the people the goldfasianof and silver which he scattered with a lavish hand fromJustmian. persia to France;™ his reign was marked by the vicissi­tudes, or rather by the combat, of rapaciousness and ava­rice, of splendour and poverty; he lived with the repu­tation of hidden treasures," and bequeathed to his suc­cessor the payment of his debts." Such a character has
1 Evagrius (lib. 3. e. S9, 40.) is minute and grateful, but angry with Zosimus forcalumniating tlie great Constantine. In collecting all the bonds and records of thetax, Che humanity of Anastasius was diligent and artfal; fathers were sometimes com­pelled to prostitute their daughters. (Zosim. Hist. lib. 2. c. 38. p. 165,166. Lipsiae,1784.) Timotheus of Gaza chose such an event for the subject of a tragedy, (Snidas,tom. S. p. 475.) which contributed to the abolition of the tax: (Cedrenus, p. 35.) ahappy instance (if it be true) of the use of the theatre.
k See Josua Stylites, in the Bibliotheca Orientalis of Asseman. (tom. 1. p. 268.)This capitation-tax is slightly mentioned in the Chronicle of Edessa.
1 Procopius (Anecdot. c. 19.) fixes this sum from the report of the treasurer*themselves. Tiberius had Dices ter mi I lies; but far different was his empire fromthat of Anastasius.
m Evagrius, (lib. 4. c. SO.) in the next generation, was moderate and well-informed;and Zonaras, (lib. 14. c. 61.) in the twelfth century, had read with care, and thoughtwithout prejudice: yet their colours are almost as black as those of the Anecdotes.
° Proeopius (Anecdot. c. 30.) relates the idle conjectures of the times. Thedeath of Justinian, says the secret historian, will expose his wealth or poverty."SeeCorjppus de Laudibus Justini Aug. lib. 2. 260. &c. 384, &c."Plurima sunt vivo mmium neglecta parenti,Uude totexhaustus contraxit dehita fiscas."







OCR Output








320 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLII.


rable cavalry. I am not ignorant of the road whichthey have followed to invade your empire; nor can I bedeceived by the vain pretence, that mount Caucasus isthe impregnable barrier of the Romans. I know thecourse of the Niester, the Danube, and the Hebrus; themost warlike nations have yielded to the arms of theTurks; and from the rising to the setting sun the earthis my inheritance." Notwithstanding this menace, asense of mutual advantage soon renewed the alliance ofthe Turks and Romans: but the pride of the great khansurvived his resentment: and when he announced animportant conquest to his friend the emperor Maurice,he styled himself the master of the seven races, and thelord of the seven climates of the world."state of Disputes having often arisen between the sovereignsa!d!*500- of Asia, for the title of king of the world; while the530- contest has proved that it could not belong to either ofthe competitors. The kingdom of the Turks wasbounded by the Oxus or Gihon; and Touran was sepa­rated by that great river from the rival monarch of Iran,or Persia,.which, in a smaller compass, contained perhapsa larger measure of power and population. The Per^sians, who alternately invaded and repulsed the Turks andthe Romans, were still ruled by the house of Sassan,which ascended the throne three hundred years beforethe accession of Justinian. His contemporary, Cabades,or Kobad, had been successful in war against the empe­ror Anastasius; but the reign of that prince was distractedby civil and religious troubles. A prisoner in the handsof his subjects; an exile among the enemies of Persia;he recovered his liberty by prostituting the honour ofhis wife, and regained his kingdom with the dangerousand mercenary aid of the barbarians, who had slain hisfather. His nobles were suspicious that Kobad neverforgave the authors of his expulsion, or even those of
• All the details of these Turkish and Roman embassies, so ourions in the historyof human manners, are drawn from the Extracts of Menaniler, (p. 106—110. 151—154.161—164.) in which we often regret the want of order and connexion. <







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLVI.


and moderation in a contest with their Roman brethren.The rigid and parsimonious virtues of Maurice had longsince alienated the hearts of his subjects; as he walkedbarefoot in a religious procession, he was rudely assaultedwith stones, and his guards were compelled to presenttheir iron-maces in the defence of his person. A, fa­natic monk ran through the streets with a drawn sword,denouncing against him the wrath and the sentence ofGod; and a vile plebeian, who represented his counte­nance and apparel, was .seated on an ass, and pursued bythe imprecations of the multitude.11 The emperor sus­pected the popularity of Germanus with the soldiers andcitizens; he feared, he threatened, but he delayed tostrike; the patrician fled to the sanctuary of the church;the people rose in his defence, the walls were desertedby the guards, and the lawless city was abandoned tothe flames and rapine of a nocturnal tumult. In a smallbark, the unfortunate Maurice, with his wife and ninechildren, escaped to the Asiatic shore; but the violenceof the wind compelled him to land at the church of St.Autonomus," near Chalcedon, from whence he dis­patched Theodosius, his eldest son, to implore the grati­tude and friendship of the Persian monarch. For him-• self, he refused to fly; his body was tortured with sciaticpains/ his mind was enfeebled by superstition; he pa­tiently awaited the event of the revolution, and addresseda fervent and public prayer to the Almighty, that thepunishment of his sins might be inflicted in this world
"In their clamours against Maurice, the people of Constantinople branded himwith the name of Marcionite or Marcionist: a heresy, (says Theopbylact, lib. 8. c. 9.)fAsra two? jwauja; EvXafftias, Eu>!0nc te xai xaray&a.a-ros. Did the^ only cast oat avague reproach, or had the emperor really listened to some obscure teacher of thoseancient Gnostics?
* The church of St. Antonomus (whom I have not the honour to know) was onehundred aud fifty Stadia from Constantinople. (Theopbylact, lib. 8. c. 9.) The portof Entropies, where Maurice and his children were murdered, is described by Gyllius(de Bosphoio Thracio, lib. 3. c. 11.) as one of the two harbours of Chalcedon.
1 The inhahitants of Constantinople were generally subject to the nm apBpmie; jand Theopbylact insinuates, (lib. 8. c. 9.) that if it Were consistent with the rules ofliistory, he could assign the medical cause. Yet such a digression would not havebeen more impertinent than his inquiry (lib. 7. c. 16,17.) into the annual inundatiousof the Nile, and all the opinions of the Greek philosophers on that subject.







OCR Output








498 DECLINE AND FALL - [CHAP. XLVI.


not be denied, that tyrants of every age and sect are thebest entitled to such infernal abodes. The glory of thehouse of Sassan ended with the life of Chosroes; his un­natural son enjoyed only eight months the fruit of hiscrimes; and in the space of four years the regal title wasassumed by nine candidates, who disputed, with thesword or dagger, the fragments of an exhausted mon­archy. Every province, and each city of Persia, was thescene of independence, of discord, and of blood, and thestate of anarchy prevailed about eight years longer, tillthe factions were silenced and united under the commonyoke of the Arabian caliphs.' ,Treaty of As soon as the mountains became passable, the empe-
peace be- , r i
tween the ror received the welcome news of the success of the con-pTres6,™ spiracy, the death of Chosroes, and the elevation of hisMarcii6&e' ^dest son to the throne of Persia. The authors of therevolution, eager to display their merits in the count orcamp of Tauris, preceded the ambassadors of Siroes, whodelivered the letters of their master to his brother the em­peror of the Romans.1, In the language of the usurpersof every age, he imputes his own crimes to the Deity, and,without degrading his equal majesty, he offers to recon­cile the long discord of the two nations, by a treaty ofpeace and alliance more durable than brass or iron. Theconditions of the treaty were easily defined and faithfullyexecuted. In the recovery of the standards and prisonerswhich had fallen into the hands of the Persians, the em­peror imitated the example of Augustus: their care ofthe national dignity was celebrated by the poets of thetimes, but the decay of genius may be measured by thedistance between Horace and George of Pisidia; the sub­jects and brethren of Heraclius were redeemed from per­secution, slavery, and exile; but instead of the Roman
vioSn tit t« xara^Oona .. . eic to rup axaraff-^ta-roVj &c.) in the letter of Heraclius: healmost applauds the parricide of Siroes as an act of piety and justice.
1 The best oriental accounts of this last period of the Sassanian kings are foundio Entychius, (Annal. tom. 2. p. 251—256.) who dissembles the parricide of Siroes;d'Herbelot, (Bibliotheque Orientate, p. 789.) and Assemanni, Bibliothec. Oriental,tom. 3. p. 415—420.
r The letter of Siroes in the Paschal Chronicle, (p, 402.) unfortunately ends be­fore he proceeds to business. The treaty appears in its execution, in the historiesof Theophancs and Nicephorus. . . «







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIIIi] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


the Goths and Romans in the name of the emperor, whohad suspended for awhile the conquest of Persia, andlistened to the prayers of his Italian subjects. He gentlytouched on the causes and the authors of the recent dis­asters; striving to remove the fear of punishment forthe past, and the hope of impunity for the future, andlabouring, with more zeal than success, to unite all themembers of his government in a firm league of affectionand obedience. Justinian, his gracious master, was in­clined to pardon and reward; and it was their interest, aswell as duty, to reclaim their deluded brethren, who hadbeen seduced by the arts of the usurper. Not a man wastempted to desert the standard of the Gothic king. Be­lisarius soon discovered, that he was sent to remain theidle and impotent spectator of the glory of a young Bar­barian; and his own epistle exhibits a genuine and livelypicture of the distress of a noble mind.'—" Most excel­lent prince; we are arrived in Italy, destitute of all thenecessary implements of war, men, horses, arms, andmoney. In our late circuit through the villages ofThrace and Illyricum, we have collected, with extremedifficulty, about four thousand recruits, naked, and un­skilled in the use of weapons and the exercises of thecamp. The soldiers already stationed in the provinceare discontented, fearful, and dismayed; at the sound ofan enemy, they dismiss their horses, and cast their armson the ground. No taxes can be raised, since Italy is inthe hands of the barbarians; the failure of payment hasdeprived us of the right of command, or even of admo­nition. Be assured, dread sir, that the greater part ofyour troops have already deserted to the Goths. If thewar could be achieved by the presence of Belisariusalone, your wishes are satisfied; Belisarius is in the midstof Italy. But if you desire to conquer, far other prepa­rations are requisite: without a military force, the titleof general is an empty name. It would be expedient torestore to my service my own veterans and domestic


t 2







OCR Output








428 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLV.


laws of the Lombards, they are the genuine fruit of thereason of the barbarians, who never admitted the bishopsof Italy to a seat in their legislative councils. But thesuccession of their kings is marked with virtue and abi-rlity; the troubled series of their annals is adorned withfair intervals of peace, order, and domestic happiness;and the Italians enjoyed a milder and more equitable go­vernment, than any of the other kingdoms which hadbeen founded on the ruins of the western empire.1Misery Amidst the arms of the Lombards, and under thedes-of Rome. p0f-ism 0f ^e Gree]lSj we again inquire into the fate ofRome,1" which had reached, about the close of the sixthcentury, the lowest period of her depression. By theremoval of the seat of empire, and the successive loss ofthe provinces, the sources of public and private opulencewere exhausted; the lofty tree, under whose shade thenations of the earth had reposed, was deprived of its leavesand branches, and the sapless trunk was left to wither onthe ground. The ministers of command, and the mes­sengers of victory, no longer met on the Appian or Fla-minian way; and the hostile approach of the Lombardswas often felt and continually feared. The inhabitantsof a potent and peaceful capital, who visit without ananxious thought the garden of the adjacent country, willfaintly picture in their fancy the distress of the Romans;they shut or opened their gates with a trembling hand,beheld from the. walls the flames of their houses, andheard the lamentations of their brethren, who were cou­pled together like dogs, and dragged away into distantslavery beyond, the sea and the mountains. 'Such inces­sant alarms must annihilate the pleasures and interruptthe labours of a rural life; and the Campagna of Romewas speedily reduced to the state of a dreary wilderness,
1 Read the history of I'anl Warnefrid: particularly lib. 3. e. 16. Baronins rejectsthe praise, which appears to contradict the invectives of pope Gregory the Great;but Muratori (Annnli d'ltalia, tom. 5. p. 217.) presumes to insinuate that the saintmay have magnified the faults of Arians and enemies.
1° The passages of the homilies of Gregory, which represent the miserable state ofthe city and country, are transcribed in the Annals of Baronius, A. D. 590. no. 16.A. D.595. no. 2, &o. &c.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


Camillas, but of St. Peter, repulsed the barbarians fromtheir walls. But the relief was accidental, the dangerwas perpetual and pressing: and the clergy and senate,collecting the remains of their ancient opulence, a sum ofthree thousand pounds of gold, dispatched the patricianPamphronius to lay their gifts and their complaints atthe foot of the Byzantine throne. The attention of thecourt, and the forces of the east, were diverted by thePersian war; but the justice of Tiberius applied the sub­sidy to the defence of the city: and he dismissed the pa­trician with his best advice, either to bribe the Lombardchiefs, or to purchase the aid of the kings of France.Notwithstanding this weak invention, Italy was still af­flicted, Rome was again besieged, and the suburb ofClasse, only three miles from Ravenna, was pillaged andoccupied by the troops of a simple duke of Spoleto.Maurice gave audience to a second deputation of priestsand senators; the duties and-the menaces of religionwere forcibly urged in the letters of the Roman pontiff;and his nuncio, the deacon Gregory, was alike qualifiedto solicit the powers either of heaven or of the earth. Theemperor adopted, with stronger effect, the measures ofhis predecessor; some formidable chiefs were persuadedto embrace the friendship of the Romans; and one ofthem, a mild and faithful barbarian, lived and died in theservice of the exarch: the passes of the Alps were deli­vered to the Franks; and the pope encouraged them toviolate, without scruple, their oaths and engagements tothe misbelievers. Childebert, the great-grandson of Clo-vis, was persuaded to invade Italy by the payment of fiftythousand pieces; but as he had viewed with delight someByzantine coin of the weight of one pound of gold, theking of Austrasia might stipulate, that the gift should berendered more worthy of his acceptance, by a proper mix­ture of these respectable medals. The dukes of the Lom­bards had provoked by frequent inroads their powerfulneighbours of Gaul. As soon as they were apprehensive







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIII.] OF THE R0MAM EMPIRE. 201


Romans. Their industry had scooped the Sibyl's cave*into a prodigious mine; combustible materials were in­troduced to consume the temporary props: the wall andthe gate of Cumae sunk into the cavern, but the ruinsformed a deep and inaccessible precipice. On the frag­ment of a rock Aligern stood alone and unshaken, till hecalmly surveyed the hopeless condition of his country,and judged it more honourable to be the friend of Nar-ses than the slave of the Franks. After the death ofTeias, the Roman general separated his troops to reducethe cities of Italy; Lucca sustained a long and vigoroussiege: and such was the humanity or the prudence ofNarses, that the repeated perfidy of the inhabitants couldnot provoke him to exact the forfeit lives of their host­ages. These hostages were dismissed in safety; andtheir grateful zeal at length subdued the obstinacy oftheir countrymen
Before Lucca had surrendered, Italy was overwhelmed Invasionby a new deluge of barbarians. A feeble youth, the uJpnnk*grandson of Clovis, reigned over the Austrasians or aild ^le"oriental Franks. The guardians of Theodebald enter- A-D- sss,tained with coldness and reluctance the magnificent pro-mises of the Gothic ambassadors. But the spirit of amartial people outstripped the timid counsels of thecourt: two brothers, Lothaire and Buccelin,b the dukesof the Alemanni, stood forth as the leaders of the Ita­lian war; and seventy-five thousand Germans descendedin the autumn from the Rhastian Alps into the plain ofMilan. The vanguard of the Roman army was sta-
1 Agathias (lib. 1. o. 21.) settles the Sibyll's cave under Hie walls of Cumos; heagrees with Servins; (ad lib. 6. jEneid.) nor can I perceive wby their opinion shouldbe rejected by Heyne, the excellent editor of Virgil, (tom. 2. p. 650, 651.) In orbemedia secreta religio! ButCmme was not yet built; and the lines (lib. 6.96, 97.)would become ridiculous, if iEneas were actually in a Greek city.
»JThere is some difficulty in connecting the thirty-fifth chapter of the fourth bookof the Gothic war of Procopius with the first book of the history of Agnthias. Wemust now relinquish a statesman and soldier, to attend the footsteps of a poet andrhetoriciau. (lib. 1. p. 11. lib. 2. p. 51. edit. Louvre.)'''
b Among the fabulous exploits of Buccelin, he discomfited and slew Belisarius,subdued Italy aud Sicily, &e. See, in the Historians of France, Gregory of Tours(tom. 2. lib. 3. c. 32. p. 203.), and Almoin. (tom. 3. lib. 2. o> Gestis Francorum,c 23. p. 59) '■ >







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


slightly baked by the same fire which warmed the bathsof Constantinople: and when the sacks were opened, asoft and mouldy paste was distributed to the army. Suchunwholesome food, assisted by the heat of the climateand season, vsoon produced an epidemical disease, whichswept away five hundred soldiers. Their health was re- .stored by the diligence of Belisarius, who provided freshbread at Methone, and boldly expressed his just and hu­mane indignation: the emperor heard his complaint; thegeneral was praised; but the minister was not punished.From the port of Methone, the pilots steered along thewestern coast of Peloponnesus, as far as the isle of Za-cynthus or Zant, before they undertook the voyage (intheir eyes a most arduous voyage) of one hundred leaguesover the Ionian sea. As the fleet was surprised by acalm, sixteen days were consumed in the slow navigation;and even the general would have suffered the intolerablehardship of thirst, if the ingenuity of Antonina had notpreserved the water in glass bottles, which she burieddeep in the sand in a part of the ship impervious to therays of the sun. At length the harbour ofCaucana,"on the southern side of Sicily, afforded a secure and hos­pitable shelter. The Gothic officers, who governed theisland in the name of the daughter and grandson of The-odoric, obeyed their imprudent orders, to receive thetroops of Justinian like friends and allies; provisions wereliberally supplied, the cavalry was remounted,0 and Pro-copius soon returned from Syracuse with correct informa­tion, of the state and designs of the Vandals. His intel­ligence determined Belisarius to hasten his operations,and his wise impatience was seconded by the winds. Thefleet lost sight of Sicily, passed before the isle of Malta,discovered the capes of Africa, ran along the coast with1
"Caucana, near Camarlna, is rtleast fifty miles (three hundred and fifty or four'hundred stadia) from Syracuse. (C. iver, Sicilia Antiqua, p. 191.) t
° Procopius, Gothic, lib. 1. o. 3\ Tibi tollil hinnitum apta quadrigis equa, in,
the Sicilian pastures of Grosphuus. (titirat. Carm. 2. 16.) Acragas magna-
nimiim quondam generator cquorum. (Virg. ./Bneid, .3.701.) There's horses, nhos».victories are immortalized by Pindar, were bred in this couatry.







OCR Output








CHAP. XM.j OF THE R6MAN EMPIRE.


Csesaria, and pitched their camps, with impunity, in thefertile province of Byzaci um. The form idable strengthand artful conduct of Belisarius secured the neutralityof the Moorish princes, whose vanity aspired to re­ceive, in the emperor's name, the ensigns of their re­gal dignity!' They were astonished by the rapid event,and trembled in the presence of their conqueror. Buthis approaching departure soon relieved the apprehen­sions of a savage and superstitious people; the numberof their wives allowed them to disregard the safety ofiheir infant hostages; and when the Roman generalhoisted sail in the port of Carthage, he heard the cries,and almost beheld the flames, of the desolated province.Yet he persisted in his resolution; and, leaving only apart of his guards to reinforce the feeble garrisons, heintrusted the command of Africa to the eunuch Solo­mon,™ who proved himself not unworthy to be the suc­cessor of Belisarius. In the first invasion, some detach­ments, with two officers of merit, were surprised and in­tercepted; but Solomon speedily assembled his troops,marched from Carthage into the heart of the country,and in two great battles destroyed sixty thousand of thebarbarians. The Moors depended on their multitude,their swiftness, and their inaccessible mountains; andthe aspect and smell of their camels are said to have pro­duced some confusion in the Rom an; cavalry .* But assoon as they were commanded to dismount, they deridedthis contemptible obstacle: as soon as the columns as­cended the hills, the naked and disorderly crowd was
'The customary gifts were a sceptre, a crown-or a cap, a white cloak, a figured1 tnnio and shoes, all adorned with gold and silver; nor were these precious metalsless acceptable in the shape of coin. (Procop. Vandal, lib. 1. c. 25.)
u See the African government and warfare of Solomon, in Procopius. (Vandal. lib.2. c. 10—13. 19, 20.) He was recalled, and again restored; and his last victorydates in the thirteenth year of Justinian. (A. D. 539.) An accident in his childhoodhad rendered him an eunnch: (lib. 1. c. 11.) the other Roman' generals were ainjtlyfurnished with beards, wxyomt timt>.apmt. (lib. 2. c. 8.)
* This natural antipathy of the horse for the camel, is allirmed by the ancients;(Xcnophon. Cyropird. lib. 6. p. 438; lib. 7. p. 483. 492. edit. Hatchiuson. Polyson.Stratagem. 7. 6. Plin. Hist. Nat. 8. 26. iElian de Natur. Animal, lib. 3. c. 7.) but it'is disproved, by daily experience, and derided by the best judges, the Orientals.(Voyage d'Olearius, p. 553.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


tive of prudence or superstition,' determined his retreatinto the province of Albania, along the shores of theCaspian; and his tents were most probably pitched inthe plains of Mogari," the favourite encampment of ori­ental princes. In the course of this successful inroad, hesignalized the zeal and revenge of a Christian emperor:at his command, the soldiers extinguished the fire, anddestroyed the temples of the Magi: the statues of Chos-roes, who aspired to divine honours, were abandoned tothe flames ; and the ruins of Thebarma or Ormia* whichhad given birth to Zoroaster himself, made some atone­ment for the injuries of the holy sepulchre. A purerspirit of religion was shewn in the relief and deliveranceof fifty thousand captives. Heraclius was rewarded bytheir tears and grateful acclamations ; but this wise mea­sure, which spread the fame of his benevolence, diffusedthe murmurs of the Persians against the pride and obsti­nacy of their own sovereign.
Amidst the glories of the succeeding campaign, He­raclius is almost lost to our eyes, and to those of the By­zantine historians.7 From the spacious and fruitful plainsof Albania, the emperor appears to follow the chain ofHyrcanian mountains, to descend into the province ofMedia or Irak, and to carry his victorious arms as far asthe royal cities of Casbin and Ispahan, which had neverbeen approached by a Roman conqueror. Alarmed by
i He opened the gospel, and applied or interpreted the first casual passage to thename and situation of Alhania. Theophanes, p. 258.
"The heath of Mogan, between the Cyras and the Araxes, is sixty parasangs inlength and twenty in breadth, (Olearius, p. 1023,1024.) abounding in waters andand frnitful pastures. (Hist, de Nader Shah, translated by Mr. Jones from a PersianMS. part 2. p. 2, 3.) See the encampments of Timur, (Hist. par Skerefeddin Ati,lib. 5. c. 37. lib. 6. c. 13.) and the coronation of Nader Shah. (Hist. Persanue, p. 3—13. and the English Life by Mr. Jones, p. 64, 65.)
x Theharma and Ormia, near the lake Spauto, are proved to be the same city byD'Anville. (Memoires de l'Academie, tom. 28. p. 564, 565.) It is honoured as thehirth-place of Zoroaster, according to the Persians; (Schnlteni,1 Index Geograph. p.48.) and their tradition is fortified by M. Perron d'Anqnetil, (Mem. de l'Acad. desInsoript. tom. 31. p. 375.) with some texts from his, or their Zendavesta.
1 I cannot find, and (what is much more) M. D'Anville does not attempt to seek,the Bilhao, Tarentum, territory of the Huns, &c. mentioned by Theophaues. (p. 260—262.) Eutychius, (Annal. tom. 2. p. 231, 232.) an insufficient anthor, names As-pahan ; and Cashin is most prohably the city of Sapor. Ispahan is twenty-four days'journey from Tauris, and Cashin half way between them. (Voyages de Tareriiier, tom.1. p. 63—82.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.] OF, THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 465


rather than in a future life. After the abdication ofMaurice, the two factions disputed the choice of an em­peror; but the favourite of the blues was rejected by thejealousy of their antagonists, and Germanus himself washurried along by the crowds, who rushed to the palaceof Hebdomon, seven miles from the city, to adore the *majesty of Phocas the centurion. A modest wish ofresigning the purple to the rank and merit of Germanuswas opposed by his resolution, more obstinate and equallysincere: the senate and clergy obeyed his summons,and as soon as the patriarch was assured of his orthodoxbelief, lie consecrated the successful usurper in the churchof St. John the Baptist. On the third day, amidst theacclamations of a thoughtless people, Phocas made hispublic entry in a chariot drawn by four white horses;the revolt of the troops was rewarded by a lavish dona­tive, and the new sovereign, after visiting the palace,beheld from his throne the'games of the hippodrome.In a dispute of precedency between the two factions,his partial judgment inclined in favour of the greens. -"Remember that Maurice is still alive," resoundedfrom the opposite side; and the indiscreet clamour ofthe blues admonished and stimulated the cruelty of, thetyrant. The ministers of death were dispatched to Chal-cedon: they dragged the emperor from his sanctuary;and the five sons of Maurice were successively murderedbefore the eyes of their agonizing parent. At eachstroke which he felt in his heart, he found strength torehearse a pious ejaculation,—" Thou art just, O Lord! Death ofand thy judgments are righteous." And such, in the BndTi»elast moments, was his rigid attachment to truth and aI'd^osjustice, that he revealed to the soldiers the pious false- NoT- *7-hood of a nurse who presented her own child in theplace of a royal infant.2 The tragic scene was finally
* From this generous attempt, Corneille has deduced the intricate web of his tra­gedy of Heraclius, which requires more than one representation to be clearly under­stood; (Corneille de Voltaire, tom. 5. p. 300.) and which, after an interval of someyears, is said to hare puzzled the author himself. (Anecdotes Dramatiuues, tom. 1.p. 422.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


loved, the famous Theodora," whose strange elevationcannot be applauded as the triumph of female virtue.Under the reign of Anastasius, the care of the wildbeasts maintained by the green faction of Constanti­nople, was intrusted to Acacius, a native of the isle ofCypress, who, from his employment, was surnamed themaster of the bears. This honourable office was givenafter his death to another candidate, notwithstanding thediligence of his widow, who had already provided a hus­band and a successor. Acacius had left three daughters,Comito," Theodora, and Anastasia, the eldest of whomdid not then exceed the age of seven years. On a so­lemn festival, these helpless orphans were sent by theirdistressed and indignant mother, in the garb of suppli­ants, into the midst of the theatre: the green factionreceived them with contempt, the blues with compassion;and this difference, which sunk deep into the mind ofTheodora, was felt long afterward in the administrationof the empire. As they improved in age and beauty, tl>ethree sisters were successively devoted to the public andprivate pleasures of the Byzantine people; and Theo­dora, after following Comito on the stage, in the dress ofa slave, with a stool on her head, was at length permittedto exercise her independent talents. She neither danced,nor sung, nor played on the flute; her skill was con-*fined to the pantomime arts; she excelled in buffooncharacters, and as often as the comedian swelled hercheeks, and complained with a ridiculous tone and ges­ture of the blows that were inflicted, the whole theatreof Constantinople resounded with laughter and applause.The beauty of Theodora* was the subject of more flat-
"For the life and manners of the empress Theodora, see the Anecdotes; moreespeciatly c. 1—5. 9—17. with the learned notes of Alemannus—a reference towhich, is always implied.
* Comito, was afterward married to Sittas duke of Armenia, tho father perhaps, atleast she might be the mother, of the empress Sophia. Two nephews of Theodora,may be the sons of Anastasia. (Aleman. p. 30, 31.)
y Her statue was raised at Constantinople, on a porpbyry column. See Procnpius(4e K<Uf. Uh. I. c. 11.) who gives her portrait in the Anecdotes, (c. 10.) AJema"-(p. 47.) produces one from a .Mosaic at Ravenna, loaded with pearls and jewels, andyet handsome. /







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 75


been justly accused by the voice of the people and ofposterity: but public discontent is credulous; privatemalice is bold; and a lover of truth will peruse with asuspicious eye the instructive anecdotes of Procopius.The secret historian represents only the vices of Justinian,and those vices are darkened by his malevolent pencil.Ambiguous actions are imputed to the worst motives:error is confounded with guilt, accident with design, andlaws with abuses: the partial injustice of a moment isdexterously applied as the general maxim of a reign ofthirty-two years: the emperor alone is made responsi­ble for the faults of his officers, the disorders of the times,and the corruption of his subjects; and even the calami­ties of nature, plagues, earthquakes, and inundations, areimputed to the prince of the demons, who had mischiev­ously assumed the form of Justinian.p
After this precaution, I shall briefly relate the anec­dotes of avarice and rapine, under the following heads.—[. Justinian was so profuse that he could not be libe­ral. The civil and military officers, when they were PenJeiwnadmitted into the service of the palace, obtained a hum- sau"B!"ble rank and a moderate stipend; they ascended byseniority to a station of affluence and repose; the an­nual pensions, of which the most honourable class wasabolished by Justinian, amounted to four hundred thou­sand pounds; and this domestic economy was deploredby the venal or indigent courtiers as the last outrage onthe majesty of the empire. The posts, the salaries ofphysicians, and the nocturnal illuminations, were objectsof more general concern; and the cities might justlycomplain, that he usurped the municipal revenues whichhad been appropriated to these useful institutions. Eventhe soldiers were injured; and such was the decay ofmilitary spirit, that they were injured with impunity.
Centenaries of gold were brought by strong arms into the hippodrome.—"Dehita genitoris persolut, caata recepit."» The Anecdotes (c. 11—14. 18. 20. 30.) supply many faots and more com­plaints.


G 2







OCR Output








314 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAT. XLIV.


versal corruption of the air, that the pestilence, whichhurst forth in the fifteenth year of Justinian, was notchecked or alleviated by any difference of the seasons.In time, its first malignity was abated and dispersed; thedisease alternately languished and revived; but it wasnot till the end of a calamitous period of fifty-two years,that mankind recovered their health, or the air resumedits pure and salubrious quality. No facts have been pre­served to sustain an account, or even a conjecture, ofthe numbers that perished in this extraordinary mortal­ity. I only find, that during three months, five, and atlength ten thousand persons died each day at Constanti­nople; that many cities of the east were left vacant, andthat in several districts of Italy the harvest and the vin­tage withered on the ground. The triple scourge ofwar, pestilence, and famine, afflicted the subjects of Jus­tinian, and his reign is disgraced by a visible decrease ofthe human species, which has never been repaired in,some of the fairest countries of, the globe.c


CHAP. XLIV.
Idea of the Roman jurisprudence.—The laws of the kings.—The twelve tables of thedecemvirs.—The laws of the people.—The decrees of the senate.—The edicts ofthe magistrates and emperors.—Authority of the civilians.—Code, pandects, no­vels, and institntes, of Justinian.—I. Rights of persons.—-II. Rights of things.—Ill, Private injuries and actions.—IV. Climes and punishments.
The civil Xhe vain titles of the victories of Justinian are crumbledlaw. ^us^., kuj. ^e name Q£ j.jje legislator is inscribed on
a fair and everlasting monument. Under his reign, andby his care, the civil jurisprudence was digested in theimmortal works of the Code, the Pandects, and the
c After some figures of rhetoric, the sands of the sea, &c. Frocopius (Anecdot,C.18.) attempts a more definite account: that juugta&a; juvgixiw (xupia; had been exter­minated under the reign of the imperial demon. The expression is obscure in gram­mar and arithmetic, and a literal interpretation would produce several millions ofmillions. Aleraannus, (p. 80.) and. Cousin, (lorn. 3. p. 178.) translate this passage"two hundred millions;" but I am ignorant of their motives. If we drop the juuput-8ac, tfie remaining fcupta&uv juuput;, a myriad of myriads, would furnish one hundredmillions, a Bomber not wholly inadmissible.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIII.) OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


brandishing his weapons, denounced implacable waragainst the worshippers of fire. But the proposal of thesilk-trade was eluded; and notwithstanding the assu­rances, and perhaps the wishes, of the Abyssinians, thesehostile menaces evaporated without effect. The Home-rites were unwilling to abandon their aromatic groves^ toexplore a sandy desert, and to encounter, after all theirfatigues, a formidable nation from whom they had neverreceived any personal injuries. Instead of enlarging hisconquests, the king of ^Ethiopia was incapable of defend­ing his possessions. Abrahah, the slave of a Romanmerchant of Adulis, assumed the sceptre of the Home-rites; the troops of Africa were seduced by the luxury ofthe climate; and Justinian solicited the friendship of theusurper, who honoured, with a slight tribute, the supre­macy of his prince. After a long series of prosperity, thepower of Abrahah was overthrown before the gates ofMecca; his children were despoiled by the Persian con­queror; and the ^Ethiopians were finally expelled fromthe continent of Asia. This narrative of obscure and re­mote events is not foreign to the decline and fall of theRoman empire. If a Christian power had been main­tained in Arabia, Mahomet must have been crushed inhis cradle, and Abyssinia would have prevented a revo­lution which has changed the civil and religious state ofthe world.h


CHAP. XLIII.
Rebellion! of Africa.—Restoration of the Gothic kingdom by Totila.—Loss and re­covery of Rome.—Final conquest of Italy by Narses.—Extinction of the Ostro­goths.—Defeat of the Franks) and Alemanni.—Last victory, disgraoe, and deathof Belisarius.—Death and character of Justinian.—Comet, earthquakes, andplague.
The review of the nations from the Danube to theNile has exposed on every side the weakness of the Ro-
h The revolutions of Yemen in the sixth century must he collected from Procopins;(Persic, lib. 1. c, 19, 20.) Thcophanes Brunt, (apod Phot. cod. 63. p. 60); St.







OCR Output








. .DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XXXIX.


he servilely copied the institutions, and even the abuses,of the political system which had been framed by Con-stantine and his successors. From a tender regard tothe expiring prejudices of Rome, the barbarian declinedthe name, the purple, and the diadem, of the emperors;but he assumed, under the hereditary title of king, thewhole substance and plenitude of imperial prerogative.*His addresses to the eastern throne were respectful andambiguous; he celebrated in pompous style the harmonyof the two republics, applauded his own government as,the perfect similitude of a sole and undivided empire, andclaimed above the kings of the earth the same pre-emi­nence which he modestly allowed to the person or rankof Anastasius. The alliance of the east and west wasannually declared by the unanimous choice of two con­suls; but it should seem that the Italian candidate whowas named by Theodoric, accepted a formal confirmationfrom the sovereign of Constantinople.11 The Gothic pa­lace of Ravenna reflected the image of the court of Theo-dosius or Valentinian. The prastorian prefect, the pre­fect of Rome, the queestor, the master of the offices,with the public and patrimonial treasurers, whose func­tions are painted in gaudy colours by the rhetoric of Cas-siodorius, still continued to act as the ministers of state.And the subordinate care of justice and the revenue wasdelegated to seven consulars, three correctors, and fivepresidents, who governed the fifteen regions of Italy,according to the principles and even the forms of Romanjurisprudence.1 The violence of the conquerors was
The image of Theodoric is engrayed on hi$ coins: his' modest successors weres&tisfied with adding their own name to the head of the reigning emperor. (MuratoriAntiquitat. Italiae Medii M\\, tom. 2. dissert. 27. p. 577—579.) Giannone IstoriaCivile di Napoli, tom. 1. p. 166.)
h The alliance of the emperor and the king of Italy are represented by Cassiodo-rias (Var. 1. 1. 2. 2. 3. 6. 1.) and Procopius (Goth. 1. 2. c. 6. lib. 3. c. 21.) whocelebrate the friendship of Anastasius and Theodoric: hat the figurative style ofcompliment was interpreted in a very different sense at Constantinople and Ravenna.
1 To the seventeen provinces of the Notitia, Paul Warnefrid the deacon (De Reb.Longohard.lib. 2. c. 14—22.) has subjoined an eighteenth, the Appennine. (MuratoriScript. Rerum Italicarum, tom. 1. p. 431—433.) But of these Sardiniaand Corsicawere possessed by the Vandals, and the two Rbnetias, as well as the Cottian Alps,seem in have been ahandoned to a military goverument. The state of the four pro­







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 46Q


A daughter of Phocas, his only child, was given in Hi« *JJmarriage to, the patrician Crispus,' and the royal images a. d. eio,of the bride and bridegroom were indiscreetly placed in the Ootu etcircus by the side of the emperor. The father must desirethat his posterity should inherit the fruit of his crimes,but the monarch was offended by this premature and po- ,>pular association : the tribunes of the green faction, whoaccused the officious error of their sculptors, were con­demned to instant death: their lives were granted to the ,prayers of the people; but Crispus might reasonably <doubt whether a jealous usurper could forget and par­don his involuntary competition. The green faction wasalienated by the ingratitude of Phocas and the loss oftheir privileges; every province of the empire was ripefor rebellion; and Heraclius, exarch of Africa, persistedabove two years in refusing all tribute and obedience tothe centurion who disgraced the throne of Constantino­ple. By the secret emissaries of Crispus and the senate,the independent exarch was solicited to save and to go­vern his country: but his ambition was chilled, by age,and he resigned the dangerous enterprise to his son He­raclius, and to Nicetas, the son of Gregory his friend andlieutenant. The powers of Africa were armed by the twoadventurous youths; they agreed that the one shouldnavigate the fleet from Carthage to Constantinople, thatthe other should lead an army through Egypt andA.sia,and that the imperial purple should be the reward of di­ligence and success. A faint rumour of their under-staking was conveyed to the ears of Phocas, and the wife .and mother of the younger Heraclius were secured as thehostages of his faith: but the treacherous art of Crispusextenuated the distant peril, the means of defence wereneglected or delayed, and the tyrant supinely slept till
1777.) -roc -rugawiSo? o Siwxaflejtro; xai BiofyQcpcs Spaxcvy. The latter epithet is jast—bat the corrupter of life was easily vanquished.
*" In the1 writers, and in the copies of those writers, there is such hesitation hetweenthe names of Priscus and Crispus, (Ducange, Fam. Bj'zant. p. 111.) that I havebeen tempted to identify the son-in-taw of Phocas with the hero five times victoriousov«r the Ava'r».







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIV.


Etruscans3 and Greeks :h in the mad abuse of prosperityand power, every pleasure that is innocent was deemedinsipid; and the Scatinian law,' which had been extortedby an act of violence, was insensibly abolished by the lapseof time and the multitude of criminals. By this law, therape, perhaps the seduction, of an ingenious youth, wascompensated, as a personal injury, by the poor damagesof ten thousand sesterces, or fourscore pounds; the ra-visher might be slain by the resistance or revenge of chas­tity; and I wish to believe, that at Rome, as in Athens,the voluntary and effeminate deserter of his sex was de­graded from the honours and the rights of a citizen.k Butthe practice of vice was not discouraged by the severityof opinion: the indelible stain of manhood was confound­ed with the more venial transgressions of fornication andadultery, nor was the licentious lover exposed to the samedishonour which he impressed on the male or femalepartner of his guilt. From Catullus to Juvenal,1 thepoets accuse and celebrate the degeneracy of the times,and the reformation of manners was feebly attempted bythe reason and authority of the civilians, till the mostvirtuous of the Caesars proscribed the sin against natureas a crime against society.1"
t Times (lib. 1.) and Theopompos (lib. 43. apod Athenaeum, lib. 12. p. 517.) de­scribe the luxury and last of the Etruscans : woXu fxtv roi yi yjuftvei a-uvmnts tw; tw-trt xat rut /uiigoxiu;. About the same period, (A. U. C. 445.) the Roman youth stu­died in Etruria. (Lib. 9. 36.)
* The Persians had been corrupted in the same sohool : air' EXXnrav fxistmrtt ira.t-ci jxirymai. (Herodot. lib. 1. c. 135.) A curious dissertation might be formed onthe introduction of paederasty after the time of Homer, its progress among the Greeksof Asia and Europe, the vehemence of their passions, and the thin device of virtue and'friendship which amused the philosophers of Athens. But, scelera ostendi oportetdum puniuntur, abscoudi flagitia.
1 The name, the date, and the provisions of this law, are equally doubtful. (Gra-vina, Opp. p. 432.433. Heineccius, Hist. Jur. Rom. no. 108. Ernesti, Clav. Cice-ron. in Indice Legum.) But I will observe that the nefanda Venus of the honestGerman is styled aversa by the more polite Italian.
• See the Oration of yEschines against the catamite Timarchus. (in Reiske, Ora­tor. Grace, tom. 3. p. 21—184.)
1 A crowd of disgraceful passages will force themselves on the memory of the -classic reader: I will only remind him of the cool declaration of Ovid.— -Odi concuhitas qui non utrumque resolvunt.Hoc est quod poerum tangar amore minus.m /Elins, Lampridias, in Vit. Heliogahal. in Hist. August, p. 112. Aurelins Vic­tor, in Philippo, Codex Theodos. lib. 9. tit. 7. leg. 7. and Godefroy's Commentary,toiu. 3. p. 63. Theodosius abolished the subterraneous brothels of Rome, in whichthe prostitution of both sexes was aoled with impunity.







OCR Output








•I







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


an aerial cupola, is entitled to the praise of bold designand skilful execution. The dome of St. Sophia, illumi­nated by four-and-twenty windows, is formed with sosmall a curve, that the depth is equal only to one-sixthof its diameter; the measure of that diameter is one hun­dred and fifteen feet, and the lofty centre, where a cres­cent has supplanted the cross, rises to the perpendicularheight of one hundred and eighty feet above the pave­ment. The circle, which encompasses the dome, lightlyreposes on four strong arches, and their weight is firmlysupported by four massy piles, whose strength is assistedon the northern and southern sides by four columns ofEgyptian granite. A Greek cross, inscribed in a quad­rangle, represents the form of the edifice; the exactbreadth is two hundred and forty-three feet, and twohundred and sixty-nine may be assigned for the extremelength from the sanctuary in the east to the nine westerndoors which open in the vestibule, and from thence intothe narthex, or exterior portico. That portico was thehumble station of the penitents. The nave or body ofthe church was filled by the congregation of the faithful;but the two sexes were prudently distinguished, and theupper and lower galleries were allotted for the more pri­vate devotion of the women. Beyond the northern andsouthern piles, a balustrade, terminated on either side bythe thrones of the emperor and the patriarch, dividedthe nave from the choir: and the space, as far as thesteps of the altar, was occupied by the clergy and singers.The altar itself, a name which insensibly became fa­miliar to Christian ears, was placed in the eastern recess,artificially built in the form of a demi-cylinder; and thissanctuary communicated by several doors with the sa­cristy, the vestry, the baptistery, and the contiguousbuildings, subservient either to the pomp of worship, orthe private use of the ecclesiastical ministers. The me­mory of past calamities inspired Justinian with a wise re­solution, that no wood, except for the doors, should be







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


lewdness and perfidy." By these implacable enemies,Heraclius, on either side, was insulted and besieged: andthe Roman empire was reduced to the walls of Constan­tinople, with the remnant of Greece, Italy, and Africa,and some maritime cities, from Tyre to Trebizond, ofthe Asiatic coast. After the loss of Egypt, the capitalwas afflicted by famine and pestilence; and the emperor,incapable of resistance, and hopeless of relief, had resolvedto transfer his person and government to the more secureresidence of Carthage. His ships were already laden withthe treasures of the palace, but his flight was arrested bythe patriarch, who armed the powers of religion in thedefence of his country, led Heraclius to the altar of St.Sophia, and extorted a solemn oath, that he would liveand die with the people whom God had intrusted to hiscare. The chagan was encamped in the plains of Thrace,but he dissembled his perfidious designs, and solicited aninterview with the emperor near the town of Heraclea.Their reconciliation was celebrated with equestriangames; the senate and people in their gayest apparel re­sorted to the festival of peace, and the Avars beheld, withenvy and desire, the spectacle of Roman luxury. On asudden the hippodrome was encompassed by the Scythiancavalry, who had pressed their secret and nocturnalmarch: the tremendous sound of the chagan's whip gavethe signal of the assault; and Heraclius, wrapping hisdiadem round his arm, was saved, with extreme hazard,by the fleetness of his horse. So rapid was the pursuit,that the Avars almost entered the golden gate of Con­stantinople with the flying crowds ;b but the plunder ofthe suburbs rewarded their treason, and they transportedbeyond the Danube, two hundred and seventy thousandcaptives. On the shore of Chalcedon, the emperor held
» Panl Warnefrid, de Gestis Langobardorum, lib. 4. c. 38. 42. Muratori, Annalid'ltalia, torn. 5. p.'S05, &c.
b The Paschal Chronicle, which sometimes Introduces fragments of history into »barren list of names and dates, gives the best account of the treason of the Avars,f. 389, 390. The number of captives is added by Nicenhorus.







OCR Output








326 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIV.


Conscience and reason as the sacred measure of hisconduct. 2. A similar dependance was implied in thedecrees of the senate, which, in every reign, definedthe titles and powers of an elective magistrate. But itwas not before the ideas, and even the language, ofthe Romans had been corrupted, that a royal law,iand an irrevocable gift of the people, were created bythe fancy of Ulpian, or more probably of Tribonianhimself :r and the origin of imperial power, thoughfalse in fact, and slavish in its consequence, was sup­ported on a principle of freedom and justice. "Thekg'"-pleasure of the emperor has the vigour and effect ofpower. law, since the Roman people, by the royal law, havetransferred to their prince the full extent of their ownpower and sovereignty."5 The will of a single man,of a child perhaps, was allowed to prevail over the wis­dom of ages and the inclinations of millions; and thedegenerate Greeks were proud to declare, that in hishands alone the arbitrary exercise of legislation could besafely deposited. '" What interest or passion (exclaimsTheophilus in the court of Justinian) can reach the calmand sublime elevation of the monarch? he is alreadymaster of the lives and fortunes of his subjects; andthose who have incurred his displeasure, are alreadynumbered with the dead."' Disdaining the language offlattery, the historian may confess, that in questions ofprivate jurisprudence, the absolute sovereign of a great
ranee of Dion Cassias, (tom. 1. lib. 53. p. 713.) On this occasion, his editor, Rei-mar, joins the universal censure which freedom and criticism hare pronounced against »that slavish historian.
i The word (lex regia) was still more recent than the thing. The slaves ofCommodus or Caracalla would have started at the name of royalty.
r See Gravina, (Opp. p.-501—512.) and Beaufort, (Republique Romaine, tom. 1.p. 255—274.) He has made a proper use of two dissertations by Johu FrederickGronovius and Noodt, both translated with valuable notes, by Barbeyrac, 2 vols, in12mo. 1731.
_ ' Institut. lib. 1. tit. 2. no. 6. Pandect, lib. 1. tit. 4. leg. 1. Cod. Justinian. lib. 1.tit . 17. leg. 1. no. 7. In his antiquities and elements, Heineccius has amply treatedde constitntionibus principum, which are illustrated by Godefroy, (Comment ad Cod.Theodos. lib. 1. tit. 1—3.) and Gravina. (p. 87—90.)
'Theophilus, in Paraphras. Graec. Institut. p. 33, 34. edit. Reitl. For his per­son, time, writings, see the Theophilus of J. H. Mylius, Excnrs. 3. p. 1034—r







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 47$


out in the neighbourhood of Tripoli: the Greek coloniesof Cyrene were finally extirpated; and the conqueror, (treading in the footsteps of Alexander, returned in tri­umph through the sands of the Lybian desert. In the of Asiafirst campaign, another army advanced from the'Euphra- a!"d%i6,tes to the Thracian Bosphorus; Chalcedon surrendered &0-after a long siege, and a Persian camp was maintainedabove ten years in the presence of Constantinople. Thesea-coast of Pontus, the city of Ancyra, and the isle ofRhodes, are enumerated among the last conquests of thegreat king; and if Chosroes had possessed any maritimepower, his boundless ambition would have spread slaveryand desolation over the provinces of Europe.
From the long disputed banks of the Tigris and Eur His reignphrates, the reign of the grandson of Nushirvan was Smoencl.suddenly extended to the Hellespont and. the Nile, theancient limits of the Persian monarchy. But the pro­vinces, which had been fashioned by the habits of sixhundred years to the virtues and vices of the Romangovernment, supported with reluctance the yoke of thebarbarians. The idea of a republic was kept alive by theinstitutions, or at least by the writings, of the Greeksand Romans, and the subjects of Heraclius had beeneducated to pronounce the words of liberty and law.But it has always been the pride and policy of orientalprinces, to display the titles and attributes of their om­nipotence; to upbraid a nation of slaves with their truename and abject condition, and to enforce, by cruel andinsolent threats, the rigour of their absolute commands.The Christians of the east were scandalized by the wor­ship of fire, and the impious doctrine of the two princi­ples ; the Magi were not less intolerant than the bishops,and the martyrdom of some native Persians, who haddeserted the religion of Zoroaster/ was conceived to be
to Carthage instead of Chalcedon, is founded on the near resemblance of the Greekwords KaX^fiSeva and Ka^niova, in the text of Theophanes, ccc. which have beensometimes confounded by transcribers and sometimes by critics.
r The genuine acts of St. Anastasius are published in those of the seventh generalcouncil, from whence Baronius (Annal. Eocles. A. D. Gil. 62G, 627.) and Butler


2 I 2







OCR Output








110 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL.


pronounced five lessons, and composed seven hundredlines. His sagacious mind explored the deepest questionsof morals and metaphysics, and he ventured to urge eigh­teen arguments against the Christian doctrine of thecreation of the world. But, in the intervals of study, hepersonally conversed with Pan, iEsculapius, and Miner­va, in whose mysteries he was secretly initiated, andwhose prostrate statues he adored; in the devout per­suasion that the philosopher, who is a citizen of the uni­verse, should be the priest of its various deities. Aneclipse of the sun announced his approaching end; andhis life, with that of his scholar Isidore,p compiled bytwo of their most learned disciples, exhibits a deplora­ble picture of the second childhood of human reason.hu snc- Yet the golden chain, as it was fondly styled, of thea. d. 435 Platonic succession, continued forty-four years from the~"°29- death of Proclus, to the edict of Justinian,q which im­posed a perpetual silence on the schools of Athens, andexcited the grief and indignation of the few remainingvotaries of Grecian science and superstition. Sevenfriends and philosophers, Diogenes and Hermias, Eula-lius and Priscian, Damascius, Isidore, and Simplicius,who dissented from the religion of their sovereign, em­braced the resolution of seeking in a foreign land thefreedom which was denied in their native country. Theyhad heard, and they credulously believed, that the re­public of Plato was realized in the despotic governmentof Persia, and that a patriot king reigned over the hap­piest and most virtuous of nations. They were soon as­tonished by the natural discovery that Persia resembledthe other countries of the globe; that Chosroes, whoaffected the name of a philosopher, was vain, cruel, andambitious; that bigotry, and a spirit of intolerance, pre-
P The life of Isidore was composed by Damascius, (apud Photiam, cod. 243. p.1028—1076.) See the last age of the Pagao philosophers io Brncker, (ton. 2. p.341—351.)
1 The suppression of the schools of Athens is recorded by John Malala, (tom. i.p. 187. sur Declo Cos. Sol.) and an anonymous Chronicle in the Vatican library,(apud Aleman. p. 106/)







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI1I.


halted in order of battle, apprehensive of treachery or-ambush ; but the troops of Bessas, with their leader, hadalready escaped; and when the king was pressed todisturb their retreat, he prudently replied, that no sightcould be more grateful than that of a flying enemy. ThePatricians, who were still possessed of horses, Decius, Ba-silius, &c. accompanied the governor; their brethren,among whom Olybrius, Orestes, and Maximus arenamed by the historian, took refuge in the church of St.Peter; but the assertion, that only five hundred personsremained in the capital, inspires some doubt of the fideli­ty either of his narrative or of his text. As soon asdaylight had displayed the entire victory of the Goths,their monarch devoutly visited the tomb of the princeof the apostles; but while he prayed at the altar, twenty-.five soldiers, and sixty citizens, were put to the sword inthe vestibule of the temple. The archdeacon Pelagius"stood before him with the gospels in his hand. "OLord, be merciful to your servant." "Pelagius (saidTotila with an insulting smile), your pride now conde­scends to become a suppliant." "I am a suppliant,(replied the prudent archdeacon) God has now made usyour subjects, and as your subjects we are entitled to yourclemency." At his humble prayer, the lives of the Ro­mans were spared; and the chastity of the maids andmatrons was preserved inviolate from the passions of thehungry soldiers. But they were rewarded by the free­dom of pillage, after the most precious spoils had beenreserved for the royal treasury. The houses of thesenators were plentifully stored with gold and silver;and the avarice of Bessas had laboured with so muchguilt and shame for the benefit of the conqueror. Inthis revolution, the sons and daughters of Roman con-
"During the long exile, and after the death of Vigilius, the Roman church was go­verned, at first by the archdeacon, and at length (A. D. 555.) by the pope Pelagius,who was not thought guiltless of the sufferings of his predecessor. See the originallives of the popes under the name of Anastasius, (Muratori, Script. Rer. Italicarum,tom. 3.' p. 1. 130, 131.) who relates several curious incidents of the sieges of Romeand the wars of Italy.







OCR Output








160 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI.


pence, two Roman generals, who had entered the pro­vince of Dalmatia, were defeated and slain by the Gothictroops. From blind and abject despair, Theodatus ca^priciously rose to groundless and fatal presumption/and dared to receive, with menace and contempt, theambassador of Justinian; who claimed his promise, so­licited the allegiance of his subjects, and boldly assertedthe inviolable privilege of his own character. Themarch of Belisarius dispelled this visionary prideandas the first campaign11 was employed in the reduction ofSicily, the invasion of Italy is applied by Procopius tothe second year of the Gothic war.'Belisarius After Belisarius had left sufficient garrisons in Paler-
lnvades O .
Italy, and mo and Syracuse, he embarked his troops at Messina,Naples, and landed them, without resistance, on the oppositea. d. 8o7. shores Gf Rhegium. A Gothic prince, who had marriedthe daughter of Theodatus, was stationed with an armyto guard the entrance of Italy; but he imitated, withoutscruple, the example of a sovereign, faithless to his publicand private duties. The perfidious Ebermor desertedwith his followers to the Roman camp, and was dismiss­ed to enjoy the servile honours of the Byzantine court.5From Rhegium to Naples; the fleet and army of Belisa­rius, almost always in view of each other, advancednear three hundred miles along the sea-coast. The peo­ple of Brattium, Lucania, and Campania, who abhorredthe name and- religion of the Goths, embraced the spe-
'P A Sibylline oracle was ready to pronounce—Africa capta mundus cam nato pe-rihit; a sentence of portentous amhiguity, (Gothio. lib. 1. c. 7.) which has beenpublished in unknown characters by Opsopaeus, an editor of the oracles. The PereJMaltret has promised a commentary; but all his promises have been vain and fruit­less.' , .'
i In his chronology, imitated in some degree from Thucydides, Procopius beginseach spring the years of Justinian and of the Gothic war; and his first era coincideswith the first of April 535, and not 536, according to the Annals of Baronios (PagiCrit. tom. 2. p. 555, who is followed by Muratori and the editors of Sigonius). Yetin some passages we are at a loss to reconcile the dates of Procopius with himself,and with the Chronicle of Marcellinus.
'The series of the first Gothic war is represented by Procopius (lib. 1. c. 5—29.lib. 2. c. 1—30. lib. 3. c. 1.) till the captivity of Vitiges. With the aid of Sigonius(0|>p. tom. 1. de Imp. Occident. lib. 17,18.) and Muratori (Annali d'ltalia, tom. 5.)I have gleaned some few additional facts.
• Jornandes, de Rebus Geticis, C. 60. p, 702, edit Grot, and tom.l. p. 221. Mu-raUiii, dc Success. Kegn. p. 241.







OCR Output








CHAP. XXXIX.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


ous inquiry into the creed of the apostle.1 His favouriteGoths, and even his mother, were permitted to retain orembrace the Athanasian faith, and his long reign couldnot afford the example of an Italian Catholic, who eitherfrom choice or compulsion, had deviated into the religionof the conqueror.' The people, and the barbarians them­selves, were edified by the pomp and order of religiousworship; the magistrates were instructed to defend thejust immunities of ecclesiastical persons and possessions;the bishops held their synods, the metropolitans exercisedtheir jurisdiction, and the privileges of sanctuary were'maintained or moderated according to the spirit of theRoman jurisprudence.1 With the protection, Theodoricassumed the legal supremacy, of the church; and his firmadministration restored or extended some useful preroga­tives, which had been neglected by the feeble emperorsof the west. He was not ignorant of the dignity andimportance of the Roman pontiff, to whom the vene­rable name of Pope was now appropriated. The peaceor the revolt of Italy might depend on the character ofa wealthy and popular bishop, who claimed such ampledominion, both in heaven and earth; who had been de­clared in a numerous synod to be pure from all sin, andexempt from all judgment.™ When the chair of St.Peter was disputed by Symmachus and Laurence, theyappeared at his summons before the tribunal of an Arianmonarch, and he confirmed the election of the mostworthy or the most obsequious candidate. At the end
1 Devotissimus ac si Catbolious ; (Anonym. Vales, p. 720.)yet his offering was nomore than two silver candlesticks (cerostrata) of the weight of seventy pounds, far in­ferior to the gold and gems of Constantinople and France. (Anastasius in Vit. Pont,in Hnrinisda, p. 34. edit. Paris.)
k The tolerating system of his reign (Ennodius, p. 1612. Anonym. Vales, p. 719.Procop. Goth. lib. 1. c. 1. lib. 2. c.6.)may be studied in the Epist les of Cassiodorius,under the following heads: bishops, (Var. 1. 9. 8. 15. 24.11. 23.) immunities, (1. 26.2.29. 3P. ) churchlands,{4.17. 20.) sanctuaries, (2.11.3. 47.) church-plate,(12. 20.)discipline; (4. 44.) which prove at the same time that he was the head of the churchas welt as of the state.
1 We may reject a foolish tale of his beheading a Catholic deacon who turnedArian. (Theodor. Lector, no. 17.) Wby is Theodoric surnamed Afer? From Vafer f(Vales, ad. loc.) A light conjecture.
"Knnodius, p. 1621,1622. 1636.1638. , His libel was approved and registered(synodaliter) by a Roman council. (Baronius, A. D. 503. no. 6. Franciscns Pagi inBreviar. Pont. Rom. tom. 1. p. 242.)


D 2







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [cHAP". Ht.iV.


preference; but as the order of Justinian is different inhis three works, it is possible that all may be wrong ; andit is certain that two cannot be right. In the selectionof ancient laws, he seems to have viewed his predeces­sors without jealousy, and with equal regard: the seriescould not ascend above the reign of Hadrian, and thenarrow distinction of Paganism and Christianity, intro­duced by the superstition of Theodosius, had been abo^lished by the consent of mankind. But the jurispru­dence of the pandects is circumscribed within a periodof a hundred years, from the perpetual edict to the deathof Severus Alexander: the civilians who lived under thefirst Caesars, are seldom permitted to speak, and onlythree names can be attributed to the age of the republic-The favourite of Justinian (it has been fiercely urged)was fearful of encountering the light of freedom and thegravity of Roman sages. Tribonian condemned to ob­livion the genuine and native wisdom of Cato, the Scse-volas, and Sulpicius; while he invoked spirits more con­genial to his own, the Syrians, Greeks, and Africans^who flocked to the imperial court to study Latin as aforeign tongue, and jurisprudence as a lucrative profes­sion. But the ministers of Justinian' were instructed tolabour, not for the curiosity of antiquarians, but for theimmediate benefit of his subjects. It was their duty toselect the useful and practical parts of the Roman law;and the writings of the old republicans, however curiousor excellent, were no longer suited to the new systemof manners, religion, and government. Perhaps, if thepreceptors and friends of Cicero were still alive, our can­dour would acknowledge, that, except in purity of lan­guage,11 their intrinsic merit was excelled by the school;
'An ingenious and learned oration of Schullingius (Jurisprudentia Ante-Justinia-nea, p. 883—907.) justifies the choice of Tribouian, against the passionate charges ofFrancis Huttoman and his sectaries.
k Strip away the crust of Tribonian, and allow for the use of technical words, andthe Latin of the Pandects will be found not unworthyof the silver age. It has been 1vehemently attacked by Laurentius Valla, a fastidious grammarian of the fifteenthcentury, and by his apologist Floridus Sabinus. It has been defended by Alciat anda nameless advocate most probably James Capellus). Their various treatises are







OCR Output








CHAP. XLII.] OP" THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 143


cease of his father, Zathus was exalted to the regal dig­nity by the favour of the great king; but the pious youthabhorred the ceremonies of the Magi, and sought, inthe palace of Constantinople, an orthodox baptism, a no­ble wife, and the alliance of the emperor Justinian. Theking of Lazica was solemnly invested with the diadem,and his cloak and tunic of white silk, with a gold border,displayed, in rich embroidery, the figure of his new pa­tron; who soothed the jealousy of the Persian court,and excused the revolt of Colchos, by the venerablenames of hospitality and religion. The common inte­rest of both empires imposed on the Colchians the dutyof guarding the passes of mount Caucasus, where a wallof sixty miles is now defended by the monthly service ofthe musketeers of Mingrelia.
But this honourable connexion was soon corrupted Revolt andby the avarice and ambition of the Romans. Degraded Sn*? 80from the rank of allies, the Lazi were incessantly re-minded, by words and actions, of their dependant state. —54?.At the distance of a day's journey beyond the Apsarus,they beheld the rising fortress of Petra,° which com­manded the maritime country to the south of the Pha-sis. Instead of being protected by the valour, Colchoswas insulted by the licentiousness, of foreign merce­naries; the benefits of commerce were converted intobase and vexatious monopoly; and Gubazes, the nativeprince, was reduced to a pageant of royalty, by the supe­rior influence of the officers of Justinian. -Disappointedin their expectations of Christian virtue, the indignantLazi reposed some confidence in the justice of an unbe­liever. After a private assurance that their ambassadorshould not be delivered to the Romans, they publicly so-
» Jolin Malala, Cbron. torn. 2. p. 134—137. Theophanes, p. 144. Hist. Miscell.lib. 15. p. 103. The fact is authentic, but the dates seem loo recent. In speakingof their Persian allianoe, the Lazi contemporaries of Justinian employ the most obso­lete words—tv yjaj«f«!tin /uvnjutut;, wjoyowi, &o, Could they belong to a connexionwhich had not been dissolved above twenty years?
° The sole vestige of Petra subsists in the writings of Procopius and Agnthias.Most of the towns and castles of Lazica may be found by comparing their names andposition with the map of Mingrelia, in Lauiberti.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


extinguish their resentment: the Turkish ambassadorspursued the footsteps of the vanquished to the Jaik, theVolga, mount Caucasus, the Euxine, and Constanti­nople, and at length appeared before the successor ofConstantine, to request that he would not espouse thecause of rebels and fugitives. Even commerce had someshare in this remarkable negotiation: and the Sogdoites^who were now the tributaries of the Turks, embracedthe fair occasion of opening, by the north of the Cas­pian, a new road for the importation of Chinese silkinto the Roman empire. The Persian, who preferredthe navigation of Ceylon, had stopped the caravans ofBochara and Samarcand: their silk was contemptuouslyburnt: some Turkish ambassadors died in Persia, witha suspicion of poison; and the great khan permitted hisfaithful vassal Maniach, the prince of the Sogdoites, topropose, at the Byzantine court, a treaty of allianceagainst their common enemies. Their splendid appareland rich presents, the fruit of oriental luxury, distin­guished Maniach and his colleagues from the rude sa­vages of the north: their letters, in the Scythian cha-*-racter and language, announced a people who had at­tained the rudiments of science," they enumerated theconquests, they offered the friendship and military aidof the Turks; and their sincerity was attested by direfulimprecations (if they were guilty of falsehood) againsttheir own head, and the head of Disabul their master.The Greek prince entertained with hospitable regardthe ambassadors of a remote and powerful monarch:the sight of silk-worms and looms disappointed thehopes of the Sogdoites; the emperor renounced, orseemed to renounce, the fugitive Avars, but he accepted
* The Russians hare found characters, rude hieroglyphics, on the Irtish and Yeni­sei, on medals, tombs, idols, rocks, obelisks, &o. (Strahleoberg, Hist. or Siberia, p.324. 346. 406. 439.) Dr. Hyde(de Religione Veterum Persarum, p. 521, &c.) hasIfiven two alphabets of Thibet and of the Eygours. I have long harboured a suspi­cion that aUthe Scythian, and some, perhaps much, of the Indian science, was derivedfrom the Greeks of Bactruuia.
: you v. '■..'. ; . ..







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 57


The popular dissensions, founded on the most seriousinterest, or holy pretence, have scarcely equalled the ob­stinacy of this wanton discord, which invaded the peaceof families, divided friends and brothers, and temptedthe female sex, though seldom seen in the circus, to es­pouse the inclinations of their lovers, or to contradictthe wishes of their husbands. Every law, either humanor divine, was trampled under foot, and as long as theparty was successful, its deluded followers appeared care­less of private distress or public calamity. The licence,without the freedom, of democracy, was revived at An-tioch and Constantinople, and the support of a factionbecame necessary to every candidate for civil or ecclesi­astical honours. A secret attachment to the family orsect of Anastasius was imputed to the greens; the blueswere zealously devoted to the cause of orthodoxy andJustinian,2 and their grateful patron protected, above Justinianfive years, the disorders of a faction, whose seasonable hiuel" *tumults overawed the palace, the senate, and the capi­tals of the east. Insolent with royal favour, the bluesaffected to strike terror by a peculiar and barbaric dress,the long hair of the Huns, their close sleeves and am­ple garments, a lofty step, and a sonorous voice. In theday they concealed their two-edged poignards, but inthe night they boldly assembled in arms, and in nume­rous bands, prepared for every act of violence and rapine.Their adversaries of the green faction, or even inoffen­sive citizens, were stripped and often murdered by thesenocturnal robbers, and it became dangerous to wear anygold buttons or girdles, or to appear at a late hour in thestreets of a peaceful capital. A daring spirit, rising withimpunity, proceeded to violate the safeguard of privatehouses; and fire was employed to facilitate the attack,or to conceal the crimes of those factious rioters. No
(p. 26.) has quoted a fine passage from Gregory Nazianzen, which proves the in­veteracy of the evil.
1 The partiality of Jastinian for the bines (Anecdot. c. 7.) is attested by Evagrius,(Hist. Eceles. lib. 4. c. 32.) John Malala, (tom. 2. p. 138,139.) especially for An-tioch; and Theophanes. (p. 142.)
VOL. V. F







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


that of a wild cat. While the nation trembled, whileHormouz disguised his terror by the name of suspicion,and his servants concealed their disloyalty under themask of fear, Bahram alone displayed his undauntedcourage and apparent fidelity: and as soon as he foundthat no more than twelve thousand soldiers would followhim against the enemy, he prudently declared, that tothis fatal number, heaven had reserved the honours ofthe triumph. The steep and narrow descent of the PuleRudbarm or Hyrcanian rock, is the only pass throughwhich an army can penetrate into the territory of Rei andthe plains of Media. From the commanding heights,a band of resolute men might overwhelm with stonesand darts the myriads of the Turkish host: their em­peror and his son were transpierced with arrows; andthe fugitives were left, without council or provisions, tothe revenge of an injured people. The patriotism of thePersian general was stimulated by his affection for thecity of his forefathers; in the hour of victory every pea­sant became a soldier, and every soldier a hero; andtheir ardour was kindled by the gorgeous spectacle ofbeds, and thrones, and tables of massy gold, the spoilsof Asia, and the luxury of the hostile camp. A princeof a less malignant temper could not easily have forgot­ten his benefactor, and the secret hatred of Hormouzwas envenomed by a malicious report, that Bahram hadprivately retained the most precious fruits of his Turkishvictory. But the approach of a Roman army on theside of the Araxes compelled the implacable tyrant tosmile and to applaud; and the toils of Bahram were re­warded with the permission of encountering a new ene­my, by their skill and discipline more formidable than aScythian multitude. Elated by his recent success, hedespatched a herald with a bold defiance to the camp ofthe Romans, requesting them to fix a day of battle, and
■ See an accurate description of this mountain by Olearios, (Voyage en Perse,p. 997, 99B.) who ascended it with much difficulty and danger in his return from Is­pahan to the Caspian sea.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


you not already the worst of slaves, the slave of the vilenation of the Moors? Would it not be preferable to sustainat Constantinople a life of poverty and servitude ratherthan to reign the undoubted monarch of the mountainof Papua? Do you think it a disgrace to be the subjectof Justinian? Belisarius is his subject; and we ourselves,whose birth is not inferior to your own, are not ashamedof our obedience to the Roman emperor. That gene­rous prince will grant you a rich inheritance of lands, aplace in the senate, and the dignity of patrician: suchare his gracious intentions, and you may depend withfull assurance on the word of Belisarius. So long asHeaven has condemned us to suffer, patience is a virtue;but if we reject the proffered deliverance, it degene­rates into blind and stupid despair."—" I am not insen­sible (replied the king of the Vandals) how kind and ra­tional is your advice. But I cannot persuade myself tobecome the slave of an unjust enemy, who has deservedmy implacable hatred. Him I had never injured eitherby word or deed; yet he has sent against me, I know notfrom whence, a certain Belisarius, who has cast me head­long from the throne into this abyss of misery. Justi­nian is a man; he is a prince; does he not dread forhimself a similar reverse of fortune; I can write no more:my grief oppresses me. Send me, I beseech you, mydear Pharas, send me, a lyre,g a sponge, and a loaf ofbread." From the Vandal messenger, Pharas was in­formed of the motives of this singular request. It waslong since the king of Africa had tasted bread; a de-fluxion had fallen on his eyes, the effect of fatigue or in­cessant weeping; and he wished to solace the melancholyhours, by singing to the lyre the sad story of his ownmisfortunes. The humanity of Pharas was moved; hesent the three extraordinary gifts; but even his human­ity prompted him to redouble the vigilance of his guard,
s By Procopius it is stylod a lyre; perhaps harp would have been more national.The instruments of music are thus distinguished by Venanlius Fortunatus.—Human usque lyrt tibi plaudat, Barbaras harpd.







OCR Output








3{}0C - feECLINE AND FALL: [CHAP. XLIV.


provinces Were filled, in the time of Justinian, with -mill--,titudes of slaves, either born or purchased for the use oftheir masters; and the price, from ten to seventy piecesof gold, was determined by their age, their strength, andtheir education." But the hardships of this dependantstate were continually diminished by the influence of go--vernment and religion i and the pride of a subject wasno longer elated by his absolute dominion over the lifeand happiness of his bondsman.' . • .- •_;
Fathers The law of nature instructs roost animals to cherish *§nm. and educate their infant progerty. The law of reason in­culcates to the human species the returns of filial piety.But the exclusive, absolute* and perpetual dominion ofthe father Over his children, is peculiar to the Roman ju­risprudence,1 arid seems to be coeval with the foundation;of the city.' The paternal power was instituted or con-■firmed by Romulus himself; arid after the practice of»three centuries, it was inscribed on the fourth table ofthe decemvirs. In the Forum, the senate, or the camp,;the adult son of a Roman citizen enjoyed the public andprivate rights of a person: in his father's house, he was>a mere thing; confounded by the laws with the move-*ables, the cattle, and the slaves, whom the capricious'
*> If the option of a slave was bequeathed to several legatees, they drew lots, andthe losers were entitled to then1 share of his value; ten pieces of gold for a common'servant or maid under ten years; if above that age, twenty,; if they knew a trade,thirty ; notaries or writers, fifty; mid wives or pbysicians, sixty; eunuchs under tenyears, thirty pieces; above, fifty; if tradesmen, seventy. (Cod. lib. 6. til. 43. leg. 3.)These legal prices are generally below those of the market.
For the state of slaves and freedmen, see Institutes, lib. 1. tit. 3—8. lib. 2. tit.9. lib. 3. tit. 8.9. Pandects or Digest, lib. 1. tit. 5,6. lib. 38. tit. 1—4. and the wholeof the fortieth book: Cade, lib. 6. tit. 4, 5. lib. 7. tit. 1—33. Be it henceforward'understood that, with the original text, of the Institutes and Pandects, the correspondclent articles in the Antiquities and Elements of Heineccius are implicitly quoted Jand with the twenty-seven first books of the Pandects, the learned and rational Com­mentaries of Gerard Noodt. (Opera, tom. 2. p. 1—590. the end. JLugd. Bat.
"»
k See the patria potesta in the Institutes, (lib. 1. tit. 9.) the Pandects' (lib. 1.tit. 6, 7.) and the Code. (lib. 8. tit. 47—49.) Jus potestatis quod in liberos habe-'snusproprium est civium Ronianorum. Nulli enim alii sunt homines, qui talem inliberos habeant potestatem qualem nos habemus.
1 Dionyaius Hal. lib. 2. p. 94, 95. Gravina (Opp. p. 286.) produces the words,cf the twelve tables. Papiniah (in Collatione Legum Roman et Mosaicaruw, tit.4. p. 304.) styles this, patria potestatis, lex regis: Ulpian (ad Sahin. lib. 26. inPandect, lib. 1. tit. 6, leg. 8,) stys, jus potestatis moribus receptum; and fuii-dsjufiliumin potestate habebit. How sacred—or rather, how absurd!' J'







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 173


unsuccessful. These partial advantages diffused an impa­tient ardour among the soldiers and people, who beganto feel the hardships of a siege, and to disregard thedangers of a general engagement. Each plebeian con­ceived himself to be a hero, and the infantry, who/since the decay of discipline, were rejected from the line:of battle, aspired to the ancient honours of the Romanlegion. Belisarius praised the spirit of his troops, con­demned their presumption, yielded to their clamours,'and prepared the remedies of a defeat, the possibility ofwhich he alone had courage to suspect. In the quarterof the Vatican, the Romans prevailed; and if the irrepa­rable moments had not been wasted in the pillage of thecamp, they might have occupied the Milviah bridge,and charged in the rear of the Gothic host. On theother side of the Tiber, Belisarius advanced from thePincian and Salarian gates. But his army, four thousandsoldiers perhaps, was lost in a specious plain; they wereencompassed and oppressed by fresh multitudes, whocontinually relieved the broken ranks of the barbarians.The valiant leaders of the infantry were unskilled to con­quer: they died: the retreat (a hasty retreat) was co­vered by the prudence of the general, and the victorsstarted back with affright from the formidable aspect ofan armed rampart. The reputation of Belisarius wasunsullied by a defeat; and the vain confidence of theGoths was not less serviceable to his designs than therepentance and modesty of the Roman troops. '«"
From the moment that Belisarius had determined to Distress ofsustain a siege, his assiduous care provided Rome against1 *Ctt)'the danger of famine, more dreadful than the Gothicarms. An extraordinary supply of corn was importedfrom Sicily: the harvests of Campania and Tuscanywere forcibly swept for the use of the city: and the
mana. (Opp. tom. 3. lib, 4. Dialog. 10. p. 195—129.) A mode of distinguishingthe charge by the horse-trumpet of solid brass, and the retreat by the foot-ttiimpet ofleather and light wood, was recommended by Prueopius, and adopted by Belisarius.VGoth. lib.'J. e. ii3.) '•







OCR Output













OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.] OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 337


conciled the victors and the vanquished. Like the con­temporary philosophers, the lawyers of the age of theAntonines disclaimed the authority of a master, andadopted from every system the most probable doctrines.8But their writings would have been less voluminous, hadtheir choice been more unanimous. The conscience ofthe judge was perplexed by the number and weight ofdiscordant testimonies, and every sentence that his pas­sion or interest might pronounce, was'justified by thesanction of some venerable name. An indulgent edictof the younger Theodosius excused him from the labourof comparing and weighing their arguments. Five ci­vilians, Caius, Papinian, Paul, Ulpian, and Modestinus,were established as the oracles of jurisprudence: a ma­jority was decisive; but if their opinions were equallydivided, a casting vote was ascribed to the superior wis­dom of Papinian.8
When Justinian ascended the throne, the reformation Reforma-of the Roman jurisprudence was an arduous but indis- R°°°^th*pensable task. In the space of ten centuries, the infinitelaw ]>yvariety of laws and legal opinions had filled many thou- a. d. 527,sand volumes, which no fortune could purchase and no &0"capacity could digest. Books could not easily be found;and the judges, poor in the midst of riches, were reducedto the exercise of their illiterate discretion. The sub­jects of the Greek provinces were ignorant of the lan­guage that disposed of their lives and properties; andthe barbarous dialect of the Latins was imperfectly stu­died in the academies of Berytus and Constantinople.As an Illyrian soldier, that idiom was familiar to the in­fancy of Justinian; his youth had been instructed by thelessons of jurisprudence, and his imperial choice selected
1 fylascou, de Sectis, c. 8. p. 120—144. de Heriscundis, a legal term which wasapplied to these eolectic lawyers: herciscere is synonymous to dividere.
a See the Theodosian Code, lib. 1. tit. 4. with Godefroy's Commentary, tom. 1.p. 30—35. This decree might give occasion to Jesuitical disputes like those inthe Lettres Provinciales, whether a judge was obliged to follow the opinion of Pa­pinian, or of a majority, against his judgment, against his conscience, &c. Yeta legislator might give that opinion, however false, the validity, not of truth, butof law.







OCR Output








348 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL1V.


selected by the imperial delegates, Tribonian, Theophi-lus, and Dorotheus: and the freedom and purity of the.Antonines was incrusted with the coarser materials of a■degenerate age. The same volume which introducedthe youth of Rome, Constantinople, and Berytus, to thegradual study of the Code and Pandects, is still preciousto the historian, the philosopher, and the magistrate.The institutes of Justinian are divided into fourbooks; they proceed, with no contemptible method,from, l.Persons, to II. Things, and from things, to III.fictions; and the article IV. of Private Wrongs, is ter­minated by the principles of Criminal Law. . ..•I. of I, The distinction of ranks and persons, is the firmestFreemen' basis of a mixed and limited government. In France,and dares. tne remains of liberty are kept alive by the spirit, the ho­nours, and even the prejudices, of fifty thousand nobles.8Two hundred families supply, in lineal descent, the se­cond branch of the English legislature, which maintains,between the king and commons, the balance of the con­stitution, A gradation of patricians and plebeians, ofstrangers and subjects, has supported the aristocracy oft: Genoa, Venice, and ancient Rome. The perfect equality.. .of men is the point in which the extremes of democracy'■and despotism are confounded, since the majesty of theprince or people would be offended, if any heads were exTalted above the level of their fellow-slaves or fellow-citiTzens. In the decline of the Roman empire, the prou4distinctions of the republic were gradually abolished, andthe reason or instinct of Justinian completed the simpleform of an absolute monarchy. The emperor could noteradicate the popular reverence which always waits onthe possession of hereditary Wealth, or the memory of
famous ancestors. He delighted to honour with titles
i '.' •' , .
f See the Annates Politiques de l'abbe de Si. Pierre, ton. 1. p. 25. who dates inthe year 1735. The most ancient families claim the immemorial possession of armsand fiefs. Since the crusades, some, the most truly respectable, have been created by. the king, for merit and services. The recent and vulgar crowd is derived from themultitude of .venal offices without trust or dignity, which continually ennoble thewealthy plebeians.
■







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FAIX [CHAP. XLVI .


of Commeniiolus0 is the object of satire or comedy ratherthan of serious history, since he was even deficient in thevile and vulgar qualification of personal courage. Hissolemn councils, strange evolutions, and secret orders,always supplied an apology for flight or delay. If hemarched against the enemy, the pleasant valleys of mountHasmus opposed an insuperablebarrier; but in his retreat,he explored, with fearless curiosity, the most difficultand obsolete paths, which had almost escaped the me­mory of the oldest native. The only blood which helost was drawn, in a real or affected malady, by the lan­cet of a surgeon; and his health, which felt with exqui­site sensibility the approach of the barbarians, was uni­formly restored by the repose and safety of the winterseason. A prince who could promote and support thisunworthy favourite, must derive no glory from the acci­dental merit of his colleague Priscus.p In five succes­sive battles, which seem to have been conducted with skilland resolution, seventeen thousand two hundred barba­rians were made prisoners; near sixty thousand, withfour sons of the chagan, were slain: the Roman generalsurprised a peaceful district of the Gepidas, who sleptunder the protection of the Avars; and his last trophieswere erected on the banks of the Danube and the Teyss.Since the death of Trajan, the arms of the empire hadnot penetrated so deeply into the old Dacia: yet the suc­cess of Priscus was transient and barren ; and he was soonrecalled, by the apprehension, that Baian, with dauntless'spirit and recruited forces, was preparing to avenge hisdefeat under the walls of Constantinople.11,
The theory of war was not more familiar to the camps'of Cassar and Trajan, than to those of Justinian and Mau-
• See the shameful conduct of Commentiolus, in Theophylact, lib. 2. c. 10—15;lib. 7. c. 13, 14; lib. 8. c. 2.4. ''
P See the exploits of Prisons, lib. 8. c. 2, 3.
1 The general detail of the war against the Avars, may be traced in the first,second, sixth, seventh, and eighth books of the History of the Emperor Maurice, bjTheophylact Simocatta. As he wrote in the reign of Heraclius, he had no temptationto flatter; but his want of judgment renders him diffuse in trifles, and concise in themost interesting facts. . ■







OCR Output








IT PREFACE. -»


have carefully marked the secondary evidence, on whose faitha passage or a fact were reduced to depend.
I shall soon revisit the banks of the lake of Lausanne, acountry which I have known and loved from my early youth.Under a mild government, amidst a beauteous landscape, ina life of leisure and independence, and among a people ofeasy and elegant manners, I have enjoyed, and may againhope to enjoy, the varied pleasures or retirement and society.But I shall ever glory in the name and character of an Eng­lishman: I am proud of my birth in a free and enlightenedcountry; and the approbation of that country is the best andmost honourable reward of my labours. Were I ambitiousof any other patron than the public, I would inscribe thiswork to a Statesman, who, in a long, a stormy, and at lengthan unfortunate administration, had many political opponents,almost without a personal enemy; who has retained, in hisfall from power,many faithful and disinterested friends; andwho, under the pressure of severe infirmity, enjoys the livelyvigour of his mind, and the felicity of his incomparable tem­per. Lord North will permit me to express the feelings offriendship in the language of truth: but even truth andfriendship should be silent, if he still dispensed the favoursof the crown. . .
In a remote solitude, vanity may still whisper in my ear,that my readers, perhaps, may inquire, whether, in the con­clusion of the present work, I am now taking an everlastingfarewell. They shall hear all that I know myself, all that Icould reveal to the most intimate friend. The motives ofaction or silence are now equally balanced; nor can 1 pro­nounce in my most secret thoughts on which side the scalewill preponderate. I cannot dissemble that six ample quartosmust have tried, and may have exhausted, the indulgence ofthe Public; that in the repetition of similar attempts, a suc­cessful author has much more to lose, than he cart hope togain; that I am now descending into the vale of years; andthat the most respectable of my countrymen, the men whomI aspire to imitate, have resigned the pen of history aboutthe same period of their lives. Yet I consider that the an­nals of ancient and modern times may afford many rich andinteresting subjects; that I am still possessed of health andleisure; that by the practice of writing, some skill and faci­lity must be acquired; and that, in the ardent pursuit of







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 435


paid to his memory the same tribute, which he freelygranted to the virtue of his own or the preceding gene­ration. The celestial honours have been liberally bestow­ed by the authority of the popes; but Gregory is the lastof their own order whom they have presumed to inscribein the calendar of saints.
Their temporal power insensibly arose from the cala- »nd tr­inities of the times: and the Roman bishops, who have ve™mwt;deluged Europe and Asia with blood, were compelled toreign as the ministers of charity and peace. I. Thechurch of Rome, as it has been formerly observed, wasendowed with ample possessions in Italy, Sicily, and themore distant provinces; and her agents, who were fre­quently subdeacons, had acquired a civil, and even cri­minal, jurisdiction over their tenants and husbandmen.The successor of St. Peter administered his patrimony estates,with the temper of a vigilant and moderate landlord ;dand the epistles of Gregory are filled with salutary in­structions to abstain from doubtful or vexatious law­suits; to preserve the integrity of weights and measures;to grant every reasonable delay, and to reduce the capi­tation of the slaves of the glebe, who purchased the rightof marriage by the payment of an arbitrary fine.* Therent or the produce of these estates was transported tothe mouth of the Tiber, at the risk and expense of thepope; in the use of wealth he acted like a faithful stew­ard of the church and the poor, and liberally applied totheir wants the inexhaustible resources of abstinence andorder. The voluminous account of his receipts and dis-
cated the right of Gregory to the entire nonsense of the Dialogues. Dapin (tom. 5.p. 138.) does not think that any one will vouch for the truth of all these miracles; Ishould like to know how many of them he believed himself.
d Baronius is unwilling to expatiate on the care of the patrimonies, lest he shouldbetray that they consisted not of kingdoms but farms. The French writers, the Be­nedictine editors, (tom. 4. lib. 3. p. 272, &c.) and Fleury, (tom. 8. p. 29, &c.) arenot afraid of entering into these humble, though useful, details; and the humanity ofFleury dwells on the social virtues of Gregory.
* I much suspect that this pecuniary fine on the marriages of villains produced thefamous, and often fabulous, right, de cuissage, de marquette, &c. With the consentof her hushand, a handsome bride might commute the payment in the arms of a younglandlord, and the mutual favour might afford a precedent of local rather than legaltyranny,"







OCR Output








230 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLH.


Chosroes was easily persuaded to imitate the examplewhich he condemned: but the Persian, ambitious ofmilitary tame, disdained the inactive warfare of a rival,He invades who issued his sanguinary commands from the securea. D/540, station of the Byzantine palace. - • .
Whatever might be the provocation of Chosroes, heabused the confidence of treaties; and the just reproachesof dissimulation and falsehood could only be concealedby the lustre of his victories.q The Persian army, whichhad been assembled in the plains of Babylon, prudentlydeclined the strong cities of Mesopotamia, and followedthe western bank of the Euphrates, till the small thoughpopulous town of Dura presumed to arrest the progressof the great king. The gates of Dura, by treachery andsurprise, were burst open ; and as soon as Chosroes hadstained his scymitar with the blood of the inhabitants,he dismissed the ambassador of Justinian to inform hismaster in what place he had left the enemy of the Ro­mans. The conqueror still affected the praise of hu­manity and justice: and as he beheld a noble matronwith her infant rudely dragged along the ground, hesighed, he wept, and implored the divine justice to pu­nish the author of these calamities. Yet the herd oftwelve thousand captives was ransomed for two hundredpounds of gold; the neighbouring bishop of Sergio-polis pledged his faith for the payment; and in thesubsequent year the unfeeling avarice of Chosroes ex­acted the penalty of an obligation which it was ge­nerous to contract, and impossible to discharge. Headvanced into the heart of Syria; but a feeble enemy,who vanished at his approach, disappointed him of thehonour of victory ; and as he could not hope to establishhis dominion, the Persian king displayed in this inroadthe mean and rapacious vices of a robber. Hierapolis,
1 The invasion of Syria, the ruin of Antiocli, &c. are related in a full and regularseries by Procopius. (Persic, lib. 2. c. 5—14.) Small collateral aid can be drawnfrom the orientals : yet not they, but D'Herbelot himself, (p. 6U0.) should blush, whenlie blames them for making Justinian and Nushirvan contemporaries. On the geogra­phy of the seat of war, D'Anville (J'Enphrate el le Tigre) is suflicieat and satisfactory.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 245


nature or education was wounded by the impious prac­tice of exposing the dead bodies of their parents, on thesummit of a lofty tower, to the crows and vultures of theair.q Conscious of the increasing hatred, which retardedthe execution of his great designs, the just Nushirvanhad secretly given orders to assassinate the king of theLazi, to transplant the people into some distant land,and to fix a faithful and warlike colony on the banks ofthe Phasis. The watchful jealousy of the Colchiansforesaw and averted the approaching ruin. Their re­pentance was accepted at Constantinople by the pru­dence, rather than the clemency, of Justinian; and hecommanded Dagisteus, with seven thousand Romans,and one thousand of the Zani, to expel the Persians fromthe coast of the Euxine.
The siege of Petra, which the Roman general, with i»'eet^ofthe aid of the Lazi, immediately undertook, is one of A 5^1549the most remarkable actions of the age. The city wasseated on a craggy rock, which hung over the sea, andcommunicated by a steep and narrow path with the land.Since the approach was difficult, the attack might bedeemed impossible; the Persian conqueror had strength­ened the fortifications of Justinian; and the places leastinaccessible were covered by additional bulwarks. Inthis important fortress, the vigilance of Chosroes had de­posited a magazine of offensive and defensive arms, suf­ficient for five times the number, not only of the garri­son, but of the besiegers themselves. The stock of flourand salt provisions was adequate to the consumption offive years; the want of wine was supplied by vinegar,and of grain, from whence a strong liquor was extracted;and a triple aqueduct eluded the diligence, and even thesuspicions, of the enemy. But the firmest defence of
1 See Herodotus, (lib. 1. o. 140. p. 69.) who speaks with diffidence; Larcher;(tom. 1. p. 399—401. Notes sur Herodote) Procopius, (Persic. lib. 1. c. 11.) andAgathias. (lib. 2. p. 61, 62.) This practice, agreeable to the Zendauesta, (Hyde, deRelig. Pers. c. 34. p. 414—421.) demonstrates that the burial of the Persian kings,(Xenophon. Cyropaed. lib. 8. p. 658.) ti yop rourai ^axapian-sjov tsu rp yj jju^Bmai,is a Greek fiction, and that their tombs could be no more thau-cenotaphs.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLII.


and renown. Their manners were not less ferocious.The assassination of a royal guest was executed in thepresence, and by the command, of the king's daughter,who had been provoked by some words of insult, anddisappointed by his diminutive stature; and a tribute,the price of blood, was imposed on the Lombards, by hisbrother, the king of the Heruli. Adversity revived asense of moderation and justice, and the insolence ofconquest was chastised by the signal defeat and irrepara­ble dispersion of the Heruli, who were seated in thesouthern provinces of Poland.1 The victories of theLombards recommended them to the friendship of theemperors: and at the solicitation of Justinian, theypassed the Danube, to reduce, according to their treaty,the cities of Noricum and the fortresses of Pannonia.But the spirit of rapine soon tempted them beyond theseample limits; they wandered along the coast of the Ha-driatic as far as Dyrrachium, and presumed, with familiarrudeness, to enter the towns and houses of their Romanallies, and to seize the captives who had escaped fromtheir audacious hands. These acts of hostility, the sallies,as it might be pretended, of some loose adventurers, weredisowned by the nation, and excused by the emperor;but the arms of the Lombards were more seriously en­gaged by a contest of thirty years, which was terminatedonly by the extirpation of the Gepida?. The hostile na­tions often pleaded their cause before the throne of Con­stantinople; and the crafty Justinian, to whom the bar­barians were almost equally odious, pronounced a partialand ambiguous sentence, and dexterously protracted thewar by slow and ineffectual succours. Their strengthwas formidable, since the Lombards, who sent into thefield several myriads of soldiers, still claimed, as theweaker side, the protection of the Romans. Their spirit
1 Two facts in the narrative of Paul Diaconus (lib. 1. c. 20.) are expressive of na­tional manners.—1. Dum ad tabutam luderet—while be played at draughts. 2. Cam-porum viridantia Una. The cultivation of flax supposes property, commerce, agri­culture, and manufactures. -v







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 177.


The epistle of Belisarius to the emperor announced DeliTCfr"(|jhis victory, his danger, and his resolution. "Accord-oitj.ing to your commands, we have entered the dominionsof the Goths, and reduced to your obedience, Sicily,Campania, and the city of Rome: but the loss of theseconquests will be more disgraceful than their acquisitionwas glorious. Hitherto we have successfully foughtagainst the multitude of the barbarians, but their multi­tudes may finally prevail. Victory is the gift of Provi­dence, but the reputation of kings and generals dependson the success or the failure of their designs. Permitme to speak with freedom: if you wish that we shouldlive, send us subsistence; if you desire that we shouldconquer, send us arms, horses, and men. The Romanshave received us as friends and deliverers; but in ourpresent distress, they will be either betrayed by theirconfidence, or we shall be oppressed by their treacheryand hatred. For myself, my life is consecrated to yourservice: it is yours to reflect, whether my death in thissituation will contribute to the glory and prosperity ofyour reign." Perhaps that reign would have beenequally prosperous, if the peaceful master of the east hadabstained from the conquest of Africa and Italy ; but asJustinian was ambitious of fame, he made some efforts,they were feeble and languid, to support and rescue hisvictorious general. A reinforcement of sixteen hun­dred Sclavonians and Huns was led by Martin and Va­lerian; and as they had reposed during the winter sea­son in the harbours of Greece, the strength of the menand horses was not impaired by the fatigues of a sea-voyage; and they distinguished their valour in the firstsally against the besiegers. About the time of the sum­mer solstice, Euthalius landed at Terracina with largesums of money for the payment of the troops; he cau­tiously proceeded along the Appian way, and this con­voy entered Rome through the gate Capena/ while Be-
* The old Capena was removed bj Aurcliau lo, or near, the modern gate of St. Sc-.







OCR Output








332 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIV.


Third ander and Justinian, the oracles of jurisprudence wereA?u. C. almost mute. The measure of curiosity had been filled:988—1230 ^e tjlrone was OCCUpied by tyrants and barbarians; theactive spirits were diverted by religious disputes, and theprofessors of Rome, Constantinople, and Berytus, werehumbly content to repeat the lessons of their more en­lightened predecessors. From the slow advances andrapid decay of these legal studies, it may be inferred, thatthey require a state of peace and refinement. From themultitude of voluminous civilians who fill the interme­diate space, it is evident, that such studies may be pur­sued, and such works may be performed, with a commonshare of judgment, experience, and industry. The ge­nius of Cicero and Virgil was more sensibly felt, as eachrevolving age had been found incapable of producing asimilar or a second: but the most eminent teachers ofthe law were assured of leaving disciples equal or supe­rior to themselves in merit and reputation.iosopbyhl" The jurisprudence which had been grossly adapted tothe wants of the first Romans, was polished and improvedin the seventh century of the city, by the alliance ofGrecian philosophy. The Scaevolas had been taught byuse and experience; but Servius Sulpicius was the firstcivilian who established his art on a certain and generaltheory.11 For the discernment of truth and falsehood, heapplied, as an infallible rule, the logic of Aristotle andthe stoics, reduced particular cases to general principles,and diffused over the shapeless mass, the light of orderand eloquence. Cicero, his contemporary and friend,declined the reputation of a professed lawyer; but thejurisprudence of his country was adorned by his incom­parable genius, which converts into gold every objectthat it touches. After the example of Plato, he com­posed a republic; and, for the use of his republic, a trea-
h Crassns, or rather Cicero himself, proposes (de Oratore, 1. 41, 42.) an idea ofthe art or science of jnrisprndence, which the eloquent, bnt illiterate, Anlonius (1.58.) effects to deride. It was partly executed by Servius Sntpicins, (in Brnto, c. 41.)whose praises are elegantly varied in the classic Latinity of the Roman Grarina.(p. 60.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.] OF THE SOMAN EMPIRE. i$t


Diocletian, thedecuries of Roman judges had sunk to anempty title; the humble advice of the assessors might beaccepted or despised; and in each tribunal the civil and cri­minal jurisdiction was administered by a single magistrate,who was raised and disgraced by the will of the emperor.
A Roman accused of any capital crime might prevent voluntarythe sentence of the law by voluntary exile, or death, death.8'"1Till his guilt had been legally proved, his innocence waspresumed, and his person was free; till the votes of thelast century had been counted and declared, he mightpeaceably secede to any of the allied cities of Italy, orGreece, or Asia.™ His fame and fortunes were preserv­ed, at least to his children, by this civil death; and hemight still be happy in every rational and sensual enjoy­ment, if a mind accustomed to the ambitious tumult ofRomecould support the uniformity and silence of Rhodesor Athens. A bolder effort was required to escape fromthe tyranny of the Caesars; but this effort was renderedfamiliar by the maxims of the Stoics, the examples ofthe bravest Romans, and the legal encouragements ofsuicide. The bodies of condemned criminals were ex­posed to public ignominy, and their children, a moreserious evil, were reduced to poverty by the confiscationof their fortunes. But if the victims of Tiberius andNero anticipated the decree of the prince or senate, theircourage and dispatch were recompensed by the applauseof the public, the decent honours of burial, and the vali­dity of their testaments/ The exquisite avarice andcruelty of Domitian appear to have deprived the unfor­tunate of this last consolation, and it was still denied evenby the clemency of the Antonines. A voluntary death,which, in the case of a capital offence, intervened be­tween the accusation and the sentence, was admitted as,a confession of guilt, and the spoils of the deceased were
"Polyb. lib. 6. p. 643. The extension of the empire and city of Rome, obliged theexile to seek a more distant place of retirement.
* Qui de se statuehant, humahantur corpora, manebant testamenta; pretimu fes-linandi. Tacit. Annal. 6. lb. with the notes of Lipsi'us.







OCR Output








116 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI.


ment; and his unfortunate sovereign 6unk without astruggle from the throne to a dungeon, where he wasstrictly guarded with a faithful counsellor, and his unpo­pular nephew, the Achilles of the Vandals. But the in­dulgence which Hilderic had shewn to his Catholic sub­jects had powerfully recommended him to the favour ofJustinian, who, for the benefit of his own sect, could ac­knowledge the use and justice of religious toleration:their alliance, while the nephew of Justin remained in aprivate station, was cemented by the mutual exchange ofgifts and letters; and the emperor Justinian asserted thecause of royalty and friendship. In two successive em­bassies, he admonished the usurper to repent of his trea­son, or to abstain, at least, from any further violence;which might provoke the displeasure of God and of theRomans; to reverence the laws of kindred and succes­sion, and to suffer an infirm old man peaceably to endhis days, either on the throne of Carthage, or in the pa­lace of Constantinople. The passions or even the pru­dence of Gelimer compelled him to reject these requests,which were urged in the haughty tone of menace andcommand; and he justified his ambition in a languagerarely spoken in the Byzantine court, by alleging theright of a free people to remove or punish their chief"'_ magistrate, who had failed in the execution of the kinglyoffice. After this fruitless expostulation, the captivemonarch was more rigorously treated, his nephew wasdeprived of his eyes, and the cruel Vandal, confident inhis strength and distance, derided the vain threats andslow preparations of the emperor of the east. Justinianresolved to deliver or revenge his friend; Gelimer tomaintain his usurpation: and the war was preceded, ac­cording to the practice of civilized nations, by the mostsolemn protestations that each party was sincerely desir­ous of peacej
Debutes on The report of an African war was grateful only tomli. Km thc vain and idle populace of Constantinople, whose pa-'







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP; XLJ


potamia were diligently strengthened, and the posts whichappeared to have any command of ground or water,were occupied by numerous forts, substantially built ofstone, or more hastily erected with the obvious materialsof earth and brick. The eye of Justinian investigatedevery spot; and his cruel precautions might attract thewar into some lonely vale, whose peaceful natives, con­nected by trade and marriage, were ignorant of nationaldiscord and the quarrels of princes. Westward of theEuphrates, a sandy desert extends above six hundredmiles to the Red sea. Nature had interposed a vacantsolitude between the ambition of two rival empires: theArabians, till Mahomet arose, were formidable only asrobbers: and, in the proud security of peace, the fortifica­tions of Syria were neglected on the most vulnerable side.
But the notional enmity, at least the effects of thatenmity, had been suspended by a truce, which continuedabove fourscore years. An ambassador from the empe^ror Zeno accompanied the rash and unfortunate Perozes,in his expedition against the Nepthalites or White Huns,whose conquest had been stretched from the Caspian tothe heart of India, whose throne was enriched with eme-rraids,5 and whose cavalry was supported by a line of twothousand elephants.' The Persians were twice circum-fvented, in a situation which made valour useless andflight impossible; and the double victory of the Hunswas achieved by military stratagem, They dismissed
superstitions, of Herodotus. The promise was not in th,e primitive lie of Eusehius,but dates at least from the year 400; and a third lie, the Veronica, was soon raisedon the two former. (Evagrius, lib. 4. c. 27.) As Edessa has been taken, Tillemontmust disclaim the promise. (Mem. Ecules. tom. 1. p. 362.383. 617.)
• They were purchased from the merohants of Adulis who traded to India; (Cos-mas, Topograph. Christ. lib. 11. p. 339.) yet, in the estimate of precioas stones, theScythian emerald was the first, the Bactrian the second, the jEthiopian only thethird. (Hill's Theophrastus. p. 61. &c. 92.) The production, mines, &c. of eme­ralds, are involved in darkness; and it is doubtful whether we possess any of thetwelve sorts known to the ancients. (Goguet. Origine des'Loix, &c. part 2. lib. 2. o. 2.art. 3.) In this war Ihe Huns got, or at least Perozes lost, the fmest pearl in the'world, of which Procopius relates a ridiculous fable. ■•
1 The Indo-Scythai continued to reign from the time of Augustus (Dionys. Perie-get. 1088. with the Commentary of Eustathius, jo Hudson, Geograph. Minor, tom.4.)to that of the eldest Justin. (Cosmas, Topograph. Christ. lib. 11. p. 338, 339.) Ontheir origin and conquests, see d'Anville (sur l'lude, p. 18. 45. &c. 69. 83. 8,9.) I».the second century they were musters of Larice or Guezernl,







OCR Output








158 .~ DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI.


which was kindled during his absence in his own camp."Disorder and disobedience were the common malady ofthe times: the genius to command, and the virtue toobey, resided only in the mind of Belisarius.Reign and Although Theodatus descended from a race of heroes,
WAR k DOSS
of Theoda- he was ignorant of the art, and averse to the dangers, ofkicking°fwar. Although he had studied the writings of PlatoaUd' 534 anc* Tally, philosophy was incapable of purifying hisOctober, mind from the basest passions, avarice and fear. He
A. D. 536
August. 'had purchased a sceptre by ingratitude and murder: atthe first menace of an enemy, he degraded his own ma­jesty, and that of a nation, which already disdained theirunworthy sovereign. Astonished by the recent exam­ple of Gelimer, he saw himself dragged in chains throughthe streets of Constantinople; the terrors which Belisa­rius inspired, were heightened by the eloquence of Peter,the Byzantine ambassador ; and that bold and subtle ad­vocate persuaded him to sign a treaty, too ignominious tobecome the foundation of a lasting peace. It was stipu­lated, that, in the acclamations of the Roman people,the name of the emperor should be always proclaimedbefore that of the Gothic king; and that as often as thestatue of Theodatus was erected in brass or marble, thedivine image of Justinian should be placed on its righthand. Instead of conferring, the king of Italy was re­duced to solicit, the honours of the senate; and the con­sent of the emperor was made indispensable before hecould execute, against a priest or senator, the sentenceeither of death or confiscation. The feeble monarch re­signed the possession of Sicily; offered, as the annualmark of his dependance, a crown of gold, of the weightof three hundred pounds; and promised to supply, atthe requisition of his sovereign, three thousand Gothicauxiliaries for the service of the empire. Satisfied with
* Procopius (Vandal. lib. 2. c. 14, 15.) so clearly relates tbe retai n of Belisariusinto Sicily, (p. 146. edit. Hoescbelii) that I am astonisbed at the strange misappre­hension and reproaches of a learned critic. (CEuvres de la Mothe le Vayer, torn. 8. p.
162, 163.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


successors, and the laws of the Lombards have been es­teemed the least imperfect of the barbaric codes.h Se­cure by their courage in the possession of liberty, theserude and hasty legislators were incapable of balancing thepowers of the constitution, or of discussing the nice the­ory of political government. Such crimes as threatenedthe life of the sovereign, or the safety of the state, wereajudged worthy of death; but their attention was prin­cipally confined to thedefence of the person and proper­ty of the subject. According to the strange jurispru­dence of the times, the guilt of blood might be redeemedby a fine; yet the high price of nine hundred pieces ofgold declares a just sense of the value of a simple citizen.Less atrocious injuries, a wound, a fracture, a blow, anopprobrious word, were measured with scrupulous andalmost ridiculous diligence; and the prudence of the le­gislator encouraged the ignoble practice of barteringhonour and revenge for a pecuniary compensation. Theignorance of the Lombards, in the state of Paganism orChristianity, gave implicit credit to the malice and mis­chief of witchcraft; but the judges of the seventeenthcentury might have been instructed and confounded bythe wisdom of Rotharis, who derides the absurd super­stition, and protects the wretched victims, of popular orjudicial cruelty.1 The same spirit of a legislator, superiorto his age and country, may be ascribed to Luitprand, whocondemns, while he tolerates, the impious and inveterateabuse of duels,11 observing from his own experience, thatthe juster cause had often been oppressed by successfulviolence. Whatever merit may be discovered in the
"Montesquieu, Esprit des Loix, lib. 28. c. 1. Les loix des Bourguignons sontassez. judicieuses; celles de Rotharis et des autres princes Lomhards le font encoreplus.
'See Leges Rotharis, no. 379. p. 47. Strigais used as the name of a witch. Itis of ihe purest classic origin; (Horat. epod. 5. 20. Petron. c. 134.) and, from thewords of Petronius, (quae striges comederunt nervostuos ?) it may be inferred that theprejudioe was of Italian rather than harhario extraction.
k Quia incerte flumns de judicio Dei, et multos audivimus per pugnam sine jnstacausa suam causam perdere. Sed propter consuetudinem gen tem nostrum Langohar-dorum legem inipiam vetare non possumus. See p. 74. no. 65. of the Laws of Luit­prand, promulgated A. D. 724.


2 F 2







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLVI.


rian provinces."1 The plains of the lower Hungary were1covered with the Avar horse, and a fleet of large boatswas built in the Hyrcinian wood, to descend the Danube,and to transport into the Save the materials of a bridge.But as the strong garrison of Singidunum, which com­manded the conflux of the two rivers, might have stop­ped their passage and baffled his designs, he dispelledtheir apprehensions by a solemn oath, that his viewswere not hostile to the empire. He swore by his sword,the symbol of the god of war, that he did not, as the ene­my of Rome, construct a bridge upon the Save. "If Iviolate my oath (pursued the intrepid Baian), may I my­self, and the last of my nation, perish by the sword? maythe heavens and fire, the deity of the heavens, fall uponour heads! may the forests and mountains bury us intheir ruins! and the Save returning, against the laws ofnature, to his source, overwhelm us in his angry waters!"After this barbarous imprecation, he calmly inquired,what oath was most sacred and venerable among theChristians, what guilt of perjury it was most dangerousto incur. The bishop of Singidunum presented the gos­pel, which the chagan received with devout reverence."I swear (said he) by the God who has spoken in thisholy book, that I have neither falsehood on my tongue,nor treachery in my heart." As soon as he rose fromhis knees, he accelerated the labour of the bridge, anddispatched an envoy to proclaim what he no longer wishedto conceal. "Inform the emperor (said the perfidiousBaian) that Sirmium is invested on every side. Advisehis prudence to withdraw the citizens and their effects,and resign a city which it is now impossible to relieve ordefend." Without the hope of relief, the defence ofSirmium was prolonged above three years; the wallswere still untouched; but famine was enclosed withinthe walls, till a merciful capitulation allowed the escape
* Menander (in Excerpt. Legat. p. 126—132.174, 175.) describes the perjury ofBaian and the surrender of Sirmium. We have lost his account of the siege, which iscommended by Theopb jlact, lib. 1, c. 3. To )' oir»; Miraviv wtgifavei a-a^xq Sibj-j»8vt»i.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.J OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


of cavalry, which adopted the name of their benefactor,and supported in the Persian wars the glory of their an­cestors. But these rare exceptions, the reward of birthi or valour, are insufficient to explain the fate of a nation,whose numbers, before a short and bloodless war,amounted to more than six hundred thousand persons.After the exile of their king and nobles, the servile crowdmight purchase their safety, by abjuring their character,religion, and language; and their degenerate posteritywould be insensibly mingled with the common herd ofAfrican subjects. Yet even in the present age, and inthe heart of the Moorish tribes, a curious traveller hasdiscovered the white complexion and long flaxen hair ofa northern race ;m and it was formerly believed, that theboldest of the Vandals fled beyond the power, or eventhe knowledge, of the Romans, to enjoy their solitaryfreedom on the shores of the Atlantic ocean." Africahad been their empire, it became their prison; nor couldthey entertain a hope, or even a wish, of returning tothe banks of the Elbe, where their brethren, of a spiritless adventurous, still wandered in their native forests.It was impossible for cowards to surmount the barriersof unknown seas and hostile barbarians: it was impos­sible for brave men to expose their nakedness and defeatbefore the eyes of their countrymen, to describe thekingdoms which they had lost, and to claim a share ofthe humble inheritance, which, in a happier hour, theyhad almost unanimously renounced." In the countrybetween the Elbe and the Oder, several populous villagesof Lusatia are inhabited by the Vandals: they still pre­serve their language, their customs, and the purity of
m Shaw, p. 59. Vet since Procopius (lib. 2. o. 13.) speaks of a people of mountAtlas, as already distinguished by white bodies and yellow hair, the phenomenon(which is likewise visible in the Andes of Peru, Buffon, tom. 3. p. 504.) may natu­rally be ascribed to the elevation of the ground and the temperature ofthe air.
» The geographer of Ravenna (lib. 3. c. 11. p. 129—131. Paris, 1688.) describesIhe Mauritania Gaditana, (opposite to Cadiz,) uhi gens Vandaloram, a Belisariode-victa in Africa, fugit, et nunquamcomparnit.'
° A single voice had protested, and Genserio dismissed, without a formal answer,ihe Vandals of Germany: but those of Africa derided his prudence, and effected todespise the poverty of their forests. (Procopius, Vandal, lib. 1. c. 22.)







OCR Output








368 DfeCXINE AND FALX [CHAP. XLIII.


guards. Before I can take the field, I must receive anadequate supply of light and heavy-armed troops; and itis only with ready money that you can procure the in­dispensable aid of a powerful body of the cavalry of theHuns."1 An officer, in whom Belisarius confided, wassent from Ravenna to hasten and conduct the succours;but the message was neglected, and the messenger wasdetained at Constantinople by an advantageous marriage.After his patience had been exhausted by delay and dis­appointment, the Roman general repassed the Hadriatic,and expected at Dyrrachium the arrival of the troops,which were slowly assembled among the subjects and al­lies of the empire. His powers were still inadequate tothe deliverance of Rome, which was closely besieged bythe Gothic king. The Appian way, a march of fortydays, was covered by the barbarians; and as the pru­dence of Belisarius declined a battle, he preferred thesafe and speedy navigation of five days from the coast ofEpirus to the mouth of the Tiber.Rome be- After reducing, by force or treaty, the towns of infe-the Goth*, rior note in the midland provinces of Italy, Totila pro-May. 546' ceeded, not to assault, but to encompass and starve, theancient capital. Rome was afflicted by the avarice, andguarded by the valour, of Bessas, a veteran chief of Go­thic extraction, who filled, with a garrison of three thou­sand soldiers, the spacious circle of her venerable walls.From the distress of the people he extracted a profitabletrade, and secretly rejoiced in the continuance of thesiege. It was for his use that the granaries had been re­plenished; the charity of pope Vigili us had purchasedand embarked an ample supply of Sicilian corn; butthe vessels which escaped the barbarians were seized by arapacious governor, who imparted a scanty sustenance tothe soldiers, and sold the remainder to the wealthy Ro­mans. The medimnus, or fifth part of the quarter of
1 Procopius, lib. 3. c;12. The soul of a hero is deeply impressed on the letter:nor can we confound such genuine and original acts with the elaborate and oftenempty speeches of the Byzantine historians.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


in which the land is barren, the waters are impure, andthe air is infectious. Curiosity and ambition no longerattracted the nations to the capital of the world: but ifchance or necessity directed the steps of a wanderingstranger, he contemplated with horror the vacancy and•solitude of the city, and might be tempted to ask, Whereis the senate, and where are the people? In a season ofexcessive rains, the Tiber swelled above its banks, andrushed with irresistible violence into the valleys of theseven hills. A pestilential disease arose'from the stag­nation of the deluge, and so rapid was the contagion,that fourscore persons expired in an hour, in the midstof a solemn procession, which implored the mercy of Hea­ven." A society, in which marriage is encouraged andindustry prevails, soon repairs the accidental losses of pes­tilence and war; but as the far greater part of the Ro­mans was condemned to hopeless indigence and celibacy,the depopulation was constant and visible, and thegloomyenthusiasts might expect the approaching failure of thehuman race." Yet the number of citizens still exceededthe measure of subsistence: their precarious food wassupplied from the harvests of Sicily or Egypt; and thefrequent repetition of famine betrays the inattention ofthe emperor to a distant province. The edifices of Romewere exposed to the same ruin and decay; the moulderingfabrics were easily overthrown by inundations, tempests,and earthquakes, and the monks, who had occupied themost advantageous stations, exulted in their base triumphover the ruins of antiquity.p It is commonly believed,that pope Gregory L attacked the temples and mutilated
n The inundation and plague were reported by a deacon, whom his hishop, Gre­gory of Tours, had dispatched to Rome for some relics. The ingenious messengerembellished his tale and the river with a great dragon and a train of little serpents.(Greg. Turon, lib. 10. c. 1.)
° Gregory of Rome (Dialog. lib. 2. c. 15.) relates a memorable prediction of St.Benedict. Roma a Gentilibus non exterminahitur sed tempestatibus, ooruscis turhi-nibus ac terrae motu in semetipsa marcescet. Such a prophecy melts into true his­tory, and becomes the evidence of the fact after which it was invented.
p Quia in uno so ore cum Jovis laudibus, Christi laudes hon capiunt, et quamgrave nefandumque sit episcopis canere quod nec laico religioso cpnveniat, ipsecon^sidera. (lib. 9. ep. 4.) The writings of Gregory himself attest his innocence of anyclassic taste or literature.







OCR Output








440 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLVI.


tute of troops and magazines, the valour of the inhabit­ants resisted above five months the archers, the elephants,and the military engines of the great king. In the mean­while his general Adarman advanced from Babylon, tra­versed the desert, passed the Euphrates, insulted the su­burbs of Antioch, reduced to ashes the city of Apamea,and laid the spoils of Syria at the feet of his master, whoseperseverance, in the midst of winter, at length subvertedthe bulwark of the east. But these losses, which asto­nished the provinces and the court, produced a salutaryeffect in the repentance and abdication of the emperorJustin; a new spirit arose in the Byzantine councils;and a truce of three years was obtained by the prudenceof Tiberius. That seasonable interval was employed inthe preparations of war; and the voice of rumour pro­claimed to the world, that from the distant countries ofthe Alps and the Rhine, from Scythia, Massia, Panno-nia, Illyricum, and Isauria, the strength of the imperialcavalry was reinforced with one hundred and fifty thou­sand soldiers. Yet the king of Persia, without fear, orwithout faith, resolved to prevent the attack of the ene­my: again passed the Euphrates, and dismissing the am-*bassadors of Tiberius, arrogantly commanded them toawait his arrival at Caesarea, the metropolis of the Cap-padocian provinces. The two armies encountered eachother in the battle of Melitene; the barbarians, who-darkehed the air with a cloud of arrows, prolonged theirline, and extended their wings across the plain; whilethe Romans, in deep and solid bodies, expected to pre­vail in closer action, by the weight of their swords andlances. A Scythian chief, who commanded their rightwing, suddenly turned the flank of the enemy, attackedtheir rear-guard in the presence of Chosroes, penetratedto the midst of the camp, pillaged the royal tent, pro-- faned'the eternal fire, loaded a train of camels with thespoils of Asia, cut his way through the Persian host, andreturned with songs of victory to his friends, who had







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 7Q


1


abused her triumph over the impotence of the laws.
VI. The testament of Eulalius, count of the domestics,declared the emperor his sole heir, on condition, how­ever, that he should discharge his debts and legacies,allow to his three daughters a decent maintenance, andbestow each of them in marriage, with a portion of tenpounds of gold. But the splendid fortune of Eulaliushad been consumed by fire; and the inventory of hisgoods did not exceed the trifling sum of five hundredand sixty-four pieces of gold. A similar instance inGrecian history, admonished the emperor of the honour­able part prescribed for his imitation. He checked theselfish murmurs of the treasury, applauded the confidenceof his friend, discharged the legacies and debts, educatedthe three virgins under the eye of the empress Theodora,and doubled the marriage-portion which had satisfiedthe tenderness of their father." The humanity of aprince (for princes cannot be generous) is entitled tosome praise; yet even in this act of virtue we may dis­cover the inveterate custom of supplanting the legal ornatural heirs, which Procopius imputes to the reign ofJustinian. His charge is supported by eminent namesand scandalous examples; neither widows nor orphanswere spared; and the art of soliciting, or extorting, orsupposing testaments, was beneficially practised by theagents of the palace. This base and mischievous tyrannyinvades the security of private life; and the monarch,who has indulged an appetite for gain, will soon be tempt­ed to anticipate the moment of succession, to interpretwealth as an evidence of guilt, and to proceed, from theclaim of inheritance, to the power of confiscation,
VII. Among the forms of rapine, a philosopher may bepermitted to name the conversion of Pagan or hereticalriches to the use of the faithful; but in the time of Jus­tinian this holy plunder was condemned by the sec-
» A similar or more generous acl of friendship is related by Lncian of Kudanmlasof Corinth, (in Toiare, o. 22, 23. turn. I. p. 530.) and the story hat prodaced an in-jftiious, though feeble, comedy of Fonlencllc.







OCR Output








128 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. IU,


In three generations prosperity and a warm climate haddissolved the hardy virtue of the Vandals, who insensiblybecame the most luxurious of mankind. In their villasand gardens, which might deserve the Persian name ofparadise* they enjoyed a cool and elegant repose; and,,after the daily use of the bath, the barbarians were seatedat a table profusely spread with the delicacies of the landand sea. Their silken robes, loosely flowing, after thefashion of the Medes, were embroidered with gold: loveand hunting were the labours of their life; and their va­cant hours were amused by pantomimes, chariot-races,and the music and dances of the theatre.hi" ^n a marcn °ften or twelve days, the vigilance of Be-.
a first bat- lisarius was constantly awake and active against his un­seen enemies, by whom, in every place, and at everyhour, he might be suddenly attacked. An officer ofconfidence and merit, John the Armenian, led the van­guard of three hundred horse; six hundred Massageta?covered at a pertain distance the left flank; and thewhole fleet, steering along the coast, seldom lost sight ofthe army, which moved each day about twelve miles, and.lodged in the evening in strong camps or in friendlytowns. The near approach of the Romans to Carthagefilled the mind of Gelimer with anxiety and terror. Heprudently wished to protract the war till his brother, with,his veteran troops, should return from the conquest ofSardinia; and he now lamented the rash policy of his.ancestors, who, by destroying the fortifications of Africa^had left him only the dangerous resource of risking a bat­tle in the neighbourhood of his capital. The Vandalconquerors, from their original number of fifty thousand,were multiplied, without including their women and
s children, to one hundred and sixty thousand fighting
men: and such forces, animated with valour and union,
* nafaSsicot xttMurm; wmanm Ann/xti; nrfj.ii. The paradises, a name and fashionadopted from Persia, may be represented by tbe royal garden of Ispahan. (Voyage d*.Olearius, p. 774.) See.in the Greek romances, their most perfect model. (Longus,Pastoral, lib. 4. p. 99.101. Achilles Tatius, lib. 1. p. 2f>, 23.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


cious excuse, that their ruined walls were incapable ofdefence; the soldiers paid a just equivalent for a plenti­ful market; and curiosity alone interrupted the peacefuloccupations of the husbandman or artificer. Naples,which has swelled to a great and populous capital, longcherished the language and manners of a Grecian colo­ny;' and the choice of Virgil had ennobled this elegantretreat, which attracted the lovers of repose and study;from the noise, the smoke, and the laborious opulence ofRome." As soon as the place was invested by sea andland, Belisarius gave audience to the deputies of the peo­ple, who exhorted him to disregard a conquest unworthyof his arms, to seek the Gothic king in a field of battle,and, after his victory, to claim, as the sovereign of Rome,the allegiance of the dependant cities.—" When I treatwith my enemies (replied the Roman chief,'with ahaughty smile), I am more accustomed to give than toreceive counsel: but I hold in one hand inevitable ruin,and in the other, peace and freedom, such as Sicily nowenjoys." The impatience of delay urged him to grantthe most liberal terms; his honour secured their perform­ance; but Naples was divided into two factions; and theGreek democracy was inflamed by their orators, who,with much spirit and some truth, represented to the mul­titude, that the Goths would punish their defection, andthat Belisarius himself must esteem their loyalty and va­lour. Their deliberations, however, were not perfectlyfree: the city was commanded by eight hundred barba­rians, whose wives and children were detained at Ravennaas the pledge of their fidelity; and even the Jews, whowere rich and numerous, resisted, with desperate enthu-rsiasm, the intolerant laws of Justinian. In a much later
'Nero (says Tacitus, Annal. 15.35.) Neapolim quasi Grascain nrbem delegit. Onehundred and fifty years afterward, in the time ofSeplimiiM Severus, the Hellenism ofthe Neapolitans is praised by Philostralus: yim EMuvsc *« ao-ruxoi, Sti xoi rajcrmvSa; im \oym EXXnnxoi eitri. (loon. lib. 1. p. 763. edit. Olear.)
■ The otinin of Naples is praised by the Roman poets, by Virgil, Horace, SiliusItalicus, andStatius (Cluver. Ital. Ant. lib. 4. p. 1149,1159). Iu an elegant episllc(Sylv. lib. 3. 5. p. 94—98. edit. Markland), Slatius undertakes the difficult task ofdrawing his wife from the pleasures of Rome to that calm retreat.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL, &C. {CHAP. XLVI.


France and India: and the feme of Moses, Alexander,and Hercules," was eclipsed, in the popular estimation, bythe superior merit and glory of the great Heraclius. Yetthe deliverer of the east was indigent and feeble. Of thePersian spoils, the most valuable portion had been ex­pended in the war, distributed to the soldiers, or buried,by an unlucky tempest, in the waves of the Euxine.The conscience of the emperor was oppressed by the ob­ligation of restoring the wealth of the clergy, which hehad borrowed for their own defence: a perpetual fundwas required to satisfy these inexorable creditors; theprovinces, already wasted by the arms and avarice of thePersians, were compelled to a second payment of thesame taxes; and the arrears of a simple citizen, the trea­surer of Damascus, were commuted to a fine of one hun­dred thousand pieces of gold. The loss of two hundredthousand soldiers* who had fallen by the sword, was ofless fatal importance than the decay of arts, agriculture,and population, in this long and destructive war: andalthough a victorious army had been formed under thestandard of Heraclius, the unnatural effort appears tohave exhausted rather than exercised their strength.While the emperor triumphed at Constantinople or Je­rusalem, an obscure town on the confines of Syria waspillaged by the Saracens, and they cut in pieces sometroops who advanced to its relief: an ordinary and triflingoccurrence, had it not been the prelude of a mightyrevolution. These robbers were the apostles of Maho­met; their fanatic valour had emerged from the desert;and in the last eight years of his reign, Heraclius lost tothe Arabs the same provinces which he had rescued fromthe Persians.
« George of Pisitlia, Acroas. 3. de Expedit. contra Persas, 415, &c. and Hera-cleid, Acroas. 1. 65—138. I neglect the meaner parallels of Daniel, Timotheus, &c.Chosroes and the chagan were of course compared to Belshazzar, Pharaoh, the ordserpent, &c.
* Suidas (in Excerpt. Hist. Byzant. p. 46.) gives this number; but either thePersian must be read for the I saurian war, or this passage does not belong to the em­peror Heraclius.
END OF VOL. V.


Printed by J. F. Dove, St. John's Square, London.







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 105


and heroes to mankind. Both these institutions hadlong since degenerated from their primitive glory; yetsome reproach may be justly inflicted on the avarice andjealousy of a prince, by whose hands such venerable ruinswere destroyed.
Athens, after her Persian triumphs, adopted the phi- T*A|j;'1001*losophy of Ionia and the rhetoric of Sicily; and thesestudies became the patrimony of a city whose inhabitants,about thirty thousand males, condensed, within the pe­riod of a single life, the genius of ages and millions.Our sense of the dignity of human nature is exalted bythe simple recollection, that Isocrates6 was the companionof Plato and Xenophon; that he assisted, perhaps withthe historian Thucydides, at the first representations ofthe CEdipus of Sophocles and the Iphigenia of Euripi­des; and that his pupils iEschines and Demosthenescontended for the crown of patriotism in the presenceof Aristotle, the master of Theophrastus, who taught atAthens with the founders of the Stoic and Epicureansects/ The ingenious youth of Attica enjoyed the be­nefits of their domestic education, which was communi­cated without envy to the rival cities. Two thousand dis­ciples heard the lessons of Theophrastus;8 the schools ofrhetoric must have been still more populous than thoseof philosophy; and a rapid succession of students dif­fused the fame of their teachers, as far as the utmostlimits of the Grecian language and name. Those limitswere enlarged by the victories of Alexander; the artsof Athens survived her freedom and dominion; andthe Greek colonies, which the Macedonians planted inEgypt, and scattered over Asia, undertook long and fre -
'The life of Isocrates extends from Olymp. 86. 1. to 110. 3. (ante Christ. 43(i—•438.) See Dionys. Halioarn. torn. 2. p. 149, 150. edit. Hndson; Plutarch (siveanonymous) in Vit. X. Oratornm, p. 1538—1543. edit. II. Steph. Phot. cod. 259.p. 1453.
f The schools of Alliens are copiously, thotigh concisely, represented in the Fortn-.na Attica of Meursins. (c. 8. p. 59—73. in torn. 1. Opp.) For the state and ai ts ofthe city, see the first book of Pausanias, and a small tract of Dicaearchns (in the se­cond volame of Hudson's Geographers), who wrote'abont Olymp. 117* Dodwelt'sDjssei tat. seel. 4.
t Diogeit. Laerl. dc Vit. Phiks >pli.l. v. segra. 37v p. 289.
VOL. V. I







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


dined, by injuries, benefits, and promises ; and tbe inter­pretation of voluntary contracts and testaments, whichare often dictated by fraud or ignorance, affords a longand laborious exercise to the sagacity of the judge. Thebusiness of life is multiplied by the extent of commerceand dominion, and the residence of the parties in the dis­tant provinces of an empire, is productive of doubt, de­lay, and inevitable appeals from the local to the suprememagistrate. Justinian, the Greek emperor of Constan­tinople and the east, was the legal successor of the Latianshepherd who had planted a colony on the banks ofthe Tiber. In a period of thirteen hundred years, thelaws had reluctantly followed the changes of governmentand manners: and the laudable desire of conciliatingancient names with recent institutions, destroyed theharmony, and swelled the magnitude, of the obscure andirregular system. The laws which excuse on any occa­sions the ignorance of their subjects, confess their ownimperfections; the civil jurisprudence, as it was abridgedby Justinian, still continued a mysterious science and aprofitable trade, and the innate perplexity of the studywas involved in tenfold darkness by the private industryof the practitioners. The expense of the pursuit some­times exceeded the value of the prize, and the fairestrights were abandoned by the poverty or prudence of theclaimants. Such costly justice might tend to abate thespirit of litigation, but the unequal pressure serves onlyto increase the influence of the rich, and to aggravatethe misery of the poor. By these dilatory and expensiveproceedings, the wealthy pleader obtains a more certainadvantage than he could hope from the accidental cor­ruption of his judge. The experience of an abuse, fromwhich our own age and country are not perfectly exempt,may sometimes provoke a generous indignation, and ex­tort the hasty wish of exchanging our elaborate jurispru­dence for the simple and summary decrees of a Turkishcadhi. Our calmer reflection will suggest, that suchvol. v. 2 D







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIII.] 6F THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


without applying a part of the spoil to his private emolu­ment. The hero had escaped the sword of the Barba­rians, but the dagger of conspiracy' awaited his return.In the midst of wealth and honours, Artaban, who hadchastised the African tyrant, complained of the ingrati­tude of courts. He aspired to Praejecta, the emperor'sniece, who wished to reward her deliverer; but the im­pediment of his previous marriage was asserted by thepiety of Theodora. The pride of royal descent was irri­tated by flattery; and the service, in which he gloried,had proved him capable of bold and sanguinary deeds.The death of Justinian was resolved, but the conspira­tors delayed the execution till they could surprise Belisa-rius disarmed, and naked, in the palace of Constanti­nople. Not a hope could be entertained of shaking hislong-tried fidelity; and they justly dreaded the revenge,or rather justice, of the veteran general, who mightspeedily assemble an army in Thrace to punish the as­sassins, and perhaps to enjoy the fruits of their crime.Delay afforded time for rash communications and honestconfessions: Artaban and his accomplices were condemn­ed by the senate, but the extreme clemency of Justinian de­tained them in the gentle confinement of the palace, tillhe pardoned their flagitious attempt against his throne,and life. If the emperor forgave his enemies, he mustcordially embrace a friend whose victories were alone re­membered, and who was endeared to his prince by therecent circumstance of their common danger. Belisa-rius reposed from his toils, in the high station of generalof the east and count of the domestics; and the olderconsuls apd patricians respectfully yielded the precedencyof rank to the peerless merit of the first of the Romans."The first of the Romans still submitted to be the slave of
'This conspiracy is related by Procopias (Gothic. lib. 3. c. 31, 32.) with such free­dom and candour, that the liberty of the Anecdotes gives him nothing to add.
« The honours of Belisarius are gladly commemorated by his secretary. (Procop.Goth. lib. 3. c. 35. lib. 4. c. 21.) The title of Zrjai-nyo; is ill translated, at least inthis instance, by praefectus prsrtorio; and to a military character, magister militum ismore proper and applicable. (Ducange, Gloss. Gnec. p. 1468,1459.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


they might boast, perhaps with some exaggeration, thatthey surpassed, in a tenfold proportion, the diminutivepowers of the Romans. But these powers were underthe command of Belisarius: and, as he was conscious oftheir superior merit, he permitted the barbarians to sur­prise him at an unseasonable hour. The Romans wereinstantly under arms: a rivulet covered their front; thecavalry formed the first line, which Belisarius supportedin the centre, at the head of five hundred guards; theinfantry, at some distance, was posted in the second line;and the vigilance of the general watched the separatestation and ambiguous faith of the Massagetse, who se­cretly reserved their aid for the conquerors. The histo­rian has inserted, and the reader may easily supply, thespeeches" of the commanders, who, by arguments themost apposite to their situation, inculcated the impor­tance of victory, and the contempt of life. Zano, withthe troops which had followed him to the conquest ofSardinia, was placed in the centre; and the throne ofGenseric might have stood, if the multitude of Vandalshad imitated their intrepid resolution. Casting awaytheir lances and missile weapons, they drew their swords,and expected the charge: the Roman cavalry thricepassed the rivulet; they were thrice repulsed; and theconflict was firmly maintained, till Zano fell, and thestandard of Belisarius was displayed. Gelimer retreatedto his camp; the Huns joined the pursuit; and the vic­tors despoiled the bodies of the slain. Yet no morethan fifty Romans, and eight hundred Vandals, werefound on the field of battle; so inconsiderable was thecarnage of a day, which extinguished a nation, and trans­ferred the empire of Africa. In the evening, Belisariusled his infantry to the attack of the camp; and the pu­sillanimous flight of Gelimer exposed the vanity of hisrecent declarations, that, to the vanquished, death was arelief, like a burden, and infamy the only object of ter-
s These orations always express the seDse of the times, and sometimes of the ac­tors. 1 have condensed that sense, and thrown ana; declamation.







OCR Output








62 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL.


actions had deserved a thousand deaths, was at last con­demned for a crime of which he was innocent. Agreat minister, who had been invested with the honoursof consul and patrician, was ignominiously scourged likethe vilest of malefactors; a tattered cloak was the soleremnant of his fortunes; he was transported in a barkto the place of his banishment at Antinopolis in UpperEgypt, and the prefect of the east begged his breadthrough the cities which had trembled at his name.* During an exile of seven years, his life was protractedand threatened by the ingenious cruelty of Theodora;and when her death permitted the emperor to recal aservant, whom he had abandoned with regret, the am­bition of John of Cappadocia was reduced to the humbleduties of the sacerdotal profession. His successors con­vinced the subjects of Justinian, that the arts of op­pression might still be improved by experience and in­dustry; the frauds of a Syrian banker were introducedinto the administration of the finances; and the exampleof the prefect was diligently copied by the quasstor, thepublic and private treasurer, the governors of provinces,and the principal magistrates of the eastern empire.bni»edi6oes V. The edifices of Justinian were cemented with thetects!" " blood and treasure of his people; but those stately struc­tures appeared to announce the prosperity of the em­pire, and actually displayed the skill of their architects.Both the theory and practice of the arts, which dependon mathematical science and mechanical power, werecultivated under the patronage of the emperors; thefame of Archimedes was rivalled by Proclus and Anthe-mius; and if their miracles had been related by intelli­gent spectators, they might now enlarge the speculations,instead of exciting the distrust, of philosophers. A tra­dition has prevailed, that the Roman fleet was reduced
b The chronology of Procopius is loose and obscure; but, with the aid of Pagi, Ican discern that John was appointed praetorian prefect of the east in the year 530;that he was removed in January 532—restored before Jane 533—hanished in 541 —and recalled between June 548 and April 1, 549. Aleman (p. 96, 97.) gives the listof his ten successors—a japid series in a single reign.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


martial train of one thousand nobles, and five thousandGothic soldiers, who signalized theirvalour in the Moor­ish wars. Their merit was overrated by themselves, andperhaps neglected by the Vandals: they viewed thecountry with envy, and the conquerors with disdain ; buttheir real or fictitious conspiracy was prevented by amassacre; the Goths were oppressed, and the captivityof Amalafrida was soon followed by her secret and sus­picious death. The eloquent pen of Cassiodorius wasemployed to reproach the Vandal court with the cruelviolation of every social and public duty; but the ven­geance which he threatened, in the name of his sovereign,might be derided with impunity, as long as Africa wasprotected by the sea, and the Goths were destitute of anavy. In the blind impotence of grief and indignation,they joyfully saluted the approach of the Romans, en­tertained the fleet of Belisarius in the ports of Sicily,and were speedily delighted or alarmed by the surprisingintelligence, that their revenge was executed beyond themeasure of their hopes, or perhaps of their wishes. Totheir friendship the emperor was indebted for the king­dom of Africa, and the Goths might reasonably think,that they were entitled to resume the possession of a bar­ren rock, so recently separated as a nuptial gift from theisland of Sicily. They were soon undeceived by thehaughty mandate of Belisarius, which excited their tardyand unavailing repentance. "The city and promontoryof Lilyba?um (said the Roman general), belonged to theVandals, and I claim them by the right of conquest.Your submission may deserve the favour of the emperor;your obstinacy will provoke his displeasure, and mustkindle a war, that can terminate only in your utter ruinIf you compel us to take up arms, we shall contend, notto regain the possession of a single city, but to depriveyou of all the provinces which you unjustly withholdfrom their lawful sovereign." A nation of two hundredthousand soldiers might have smiled at the vain menace







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 4»


Justin was far inferior to that of the Gothic king: theexperience of a soldier had not qualified him for thegovernment of an empire; and, though personallybrave, the consciousness of his own weakness was natu­rally attended with doubt, distrust, and political appre­hension. But the official business of the state wasdiligently and faithfully transacted by the quaestor Pro-clus;" and the aged emperor adopted the talents andambition of his nephew Justinian, an aspiring youth,whom his uncle had drawn from the rustic solitude ofDacia, and educated at Constantinople, as the heir ofhis private fortune, and at length of the eastern empire.
Since the eunuch Amantius had been defrauded of his Adoptionmoney, it became necessary to deprive him of his life, cession ofThe task was easily accomplished by the charge of a real ^Tmoor fictitious conspiracy; and the judges were informed, as ~~527,an accumulation of guilt, that he was secretly addicted tothe Manichaean heresy/ Amantius lost his head; threeof his companions, the first domestics of the palace, werepunished either with death or exile; and their unfor- •tunate candidate for the purple was cast into a deepdungeon, overwhelmed with stones, and ignominiouslythrown, without burial, into the sea. The ruin of Vi-talian was a work of more difficulty and danger. ThatGothic chief had rendered himself popular by the civilwar which he boldly waged against Anastasius for thedefence of the orthodox faith, and, after the conclusionof an advantageous treaty, he still remained in the neigh­bourhood of Constantinople, at the head of a formidableand victorious army of barbarians. By the frail securityof oaths, he was tempted to relinquish this advantageoussituation, and to trust his person within the walls of acity, whose inhabitants, particularly the blue faction,
e His virtues are praised by Procopius. (Persic. lib. 1. o. 11.) The quxstor Pro-clus was the friend of Justinian, and the enemy of every other adoption.
f Manichaean signifies Eutychian. Hear the furious acclamations of Constantinopleand Tyre, the former nu more than six days afler the decease of Anastasins. Theyproduced, the latter applauded, the eunuch's death. (Baronim, A.D. 518. p. 2. no. 15.Fleury, Hist. Eccles. tom. 7, p, 200. 205. from the councils, tom. 5. p. 182. 207.)
VOL. V. E







OCR Output








CHAP. Xhll.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 221


his restoration. The peop lewas deluded and inflamedhy the fanaticism of Ma2dak,p who asserted the commu­nity of women,q and the equality of mankind, whilst heappropriated the richest lands and most beautiful femalesto the use of his sectaries. The view of these disorders,"which had been fomented by his laws and example/ em­bittered the declining age of the Persian monarch; andhis fears were increased by the consciousness of his de­sign to reverse the natural and customary order of suc­cession, in favour of his third and most favoured son, sofamous under the names of Chosroes and Nushirvan.To render the youth more illustrious in the eyes of thenations, Kobad was desirous that he should be adoptedby the emperor Justin: the hope of peace inclined theByzantine court to accept this singular proposal; andChosroes might have acquired a specious claim to theinheritance of his Roman parent. But the future mis­chief was diverted by the advice of the quaestor Proclus:a difficulty was started, whether the adoption should beperformed as a civil or military ritethe treaty wasabruptly dissolved; and the sense of this indignity sunkdeep into the mind of Chosroes, who had already ad­vanced to the Tigris on his road to Constantinople.His father did not long survive the disappointment ofhis wishes; the testament of their deceased sovereignwas read in the assembly of the nobles; and a powerfulfaction, prepared for the event, and regardless of thepriority of age, exalted Chosroes to the throne of Persia.He filled that throne during a prosperous period of forty-
P See d'Herbelot, (Bibliot. Orient, p. 568.929.) Hyde, (de Religione Vet. Pent-rum, c. 21. p. 290, 291.) Pocock, (Specimen Hist. Arab. p. ?0, 71.) Eutychius,(Annul, tom. 2. p. 176.) Texeira. (in Stevens, Hist, of Persia, lib. 1. c.34.)
1 The fame of the new law for the community of women was soon propagat­ed in Syria (Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, tom. 3. p. 402.) and Greece. (Procop. Persic,lib. 1. c. 5.)
'He offered his own wife and sister to the prophet; but the prayers of Nushirvansaved his mother, and the indignant monarch never forgave the humiliation to whichhis filial piety had stooped: pedes tuos deosoulatus, (said he to Mazdak) cujus factoradhuc nares occupat. (Pocock, Specimen Hist. Arab. p. 71.)
* Procopius, Persic. lib. 1. c. 11. Was not Proclus over-wise? Was not thedanger imaginary ?—The excuse, at least, was injurious to a nation not ignorant ofletters: cv y^appaa-i oi (3«£&xpoi touc waiSa; iroiouv-rai aXX* faXuv cxEui. Whelher anymodi of adoption was practised in Persia 1 much doubt.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


fruits of the earth. Within less than seventy years, thisartificial system was abolished by a more simple and solidtenure.' Either the Roman landlord was expelled by hisstrong and insolent guest; or the annual payment, athird of the produce, was exchanged by a more equitabletransaction for an adequate proportion of landed property.Under these foreign masters, the business of agriculture,in the cultivation of corn, vines, and olives, was exercisedwith degenerate skill and industry by the labour of theslaves and natives. But the occupations of a pastoral lifewere more pleasing to the idleness of the barbarians. Inthe rich meadows of Venetia, they restored and improvedthe breed of horses for which that province had oncebeen illustrious ;u and the Italians beheld with asto­nishment a foreign race of oxen or buffaloes." The de­population of Lombardy, and the increase of forests, af­forded an ample range for the pleasures of the chace.yThat marvellous art which teaches the birds of the air toacknowledge the voice, and execute the commands, oftheir master, had been unknown to the ingenuity of theGreeks and Romans.2 Scandinavia and Scythia produce
t Paul, lib. 2. c. 31, 32. lib. 3. c. 16. The laws of Rotharis, promulgaied A. D.643. do not contain the smallest vestige of this payment of thirds; but they pre­serve many curious circumstances of the state of Italy and the manners of the Lom-hards.
11 The studs of Dionysius of Syracuse, and his frequent victories in the Olympicgames, had diffused among the Greeks the fame of the Venetian horses ; but the breedwas extinct in the time of Strabo. (lib. 5. p. 325.) Gisulf obtained from his unclegcnerosarum equarum greges. Paul, lib. 2. c. 9. The Lomhards afterward intro­duced cahalli sylvatici—wild horses. Pan I, lib. 4. c. 11.
v Tunc (A. D. 596.)primum, buhali in Ttaliam delati Italiae populis miracula fuere.(Paul Warnefrid, lib. 4. c. 11.) The buffaloes, whose native climate appears to beAfrica and India, are unknowu to Europe, except in Italy, where they are numerousand useful. The ancients were ignorant of these animals, unless Aristotle (Hist.Animal, lib. 2. c. 1. p. 58. Paris 1783.) has described them as the wild oxen of Ara-chosia. See Buffon. Hist. Naturelle, tom. 11. and Supplement, tom. 6; Hist. Gene-rale des Voyages, tom. 1. p. 7. 481; 2.105 ; 3. 291 :4. 234.461; 5. 193 ; 6. 491; 8.400 ; 10. 666; Pennant's Quadrupedes, p. 24; Dictionaire d'Hist. Naturelle, par Val-mont de Romare, tom. 2. p. 74. Yet I must not conceal the suspicion that Paul, bya vulgar error, may have applied the name of buhalus to the aurochs, or wild bull, ofancient Germany.
y Consult the twenty-first Dissertation of Muratori.
1 Their ignorance is proved by the silence even of those who professedly treat ofthe arts of hunting and the history of animals. Aristotle, (Hist. Animal, lib. 9. o. 36.tom. 1. p. 586. and the notes of his last editor, M. Camus, tom. 2. p. 314.) Pliny,(Hist. Natur. lib. 10. c. 10.) iElian, (de Natur. Animal, lib. 2. c. 42.) and perhapsHomer, (Odyss. 22. 302—306.) describe with astonishment a tacit league and com­mon chace between the hawks and the Thracian fowlers.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


the sacred ensign of the cross was displayed in the front,and Maurice reviewed, with conscious pride, the armsand numbers of the veterans who had fought and con­quered beyond the Tigris. Anchialus saw the last termof his progress by sea and land; he solicited, withoutsuccess, a miraculous answer to his nocturnal prayers;his mind was confounded by the death of a favouritehorse, the encounter of a wild boar, a storm of wind andrain, and the birth of a monstrous child, and he forgotthat the best of omens is to unsheath our sword in thedefence of our country." Under the pretence of receivingthe ambassadors of Persia, the emperor returned to Con­stantinople, exchanged the thoughts of war for those ofdevotion, and disappointed the public hope, by his ab­sence and the choice of his lieutenants. The blind par­tiality of fraternal love might excuse the promotion ofhis brother Peter, who fled with equal disgrace from thebarbarians, from his own soldiers, and from the inhabit­ants of a Roman city. That city, if we may credit theresemblance of name and character, was the famous Azi-muntium,n which had alone repelled the tempest of Attila.The example of her warlike youth was propagated tosucceeding generations; and they obtained, from thefirst or the second Justin, an honourable privilege, thattheir valour should be always reserved for the defence oftheir native country. The brother of Maurice attemptedto violate this privilege, and to mingle a patriot band withthe mercenaries of his camp; they retired to the church,he was not awed by the sanctity of the place; the peo­ple rose in their cause, the gates were shut, the rampartswere manned; and the cowardice of Peter was foundequal to his arrogance and injustice. The military fame
m 'Ej; oiwoc ttficro; a/jtmstrBai wt^i vrarpni. Iliad. 12. 243.This noble Terse, which unites the spirit of a hero with the reason of a sage, mayprove that Homer was in every light superior to bis age and country.
"Tbeophvlact, lib. 7. c. 3. On the evidence ol'this fact, which had not occurredto my memory, the candid reader will correct and excuse a note in the fourth volumeof this History, p. 2o7, which hastens the decay of Asiinus, or Azimunlioui: anothercentury of patriotism and valour is cheaply purchased by such a confession.


2 H 2







OCR Output








CHAP. XLII.] OF fHE ROMAN EMPIRE. 233


Assyria the pleasures of a Greek capital. By the mu­nificence of the royal founder, a liberal allowance wasassigned to these fortunate exiles; and they enjoyed thesingular privilege of bestowing freedom on the slaveswhom they acknowledged as their kinsmen. Palestine,and the holy wealth of Jerusalem, were the next objectsthat attracted the ambition, or rather the avarice, of Chos- ■ .roes. Constantinople, and the palace of the Caesars, nolonger appeared impregnable or remote; and his aspir­ing fancy already covered Asia Minor with the troops,and the black sea with the navies, of Persia.
These hopes might have been realized, if the con- Defence ofqueror of Italy had not been seasonably recalled to the BMiMrftu'defence of the east.' While Chosroes pursued his am- A"D"iiubitious designs on the coast of the Euxine, Belisarius atthe head of an army without pay or discipline, encamp­ed beyond the Euphrates, within six miles of Nisibis.He meditated, by a skilful operation, to draw the Per­sians from their impregnable citadel, and improving hisadvantage in the field, either to intercept their retreat,or perhaps to enter the gates With the flying barbarians.He advanced one day's journey on the territories of Per­sia, reduced the fortress of Sisaurane, and sent the go­vernor, with eight hundred chosen horsemen, to servethe emperor in his Italian wars. He detached Arethasand his Arabs, supported by twelve hundred Romans, topass the Tigris, and to ravage the harvests of Assyria, afruitful province, long exempt from the calamities of war.But the plans of Belisarius were disconcerted by the un-tractable spirit of Arethas, who neither returned to thecamp, nor sent any intelligence of his motions. TheRoman general was fixed in anxious expectation to thesame spot; the time of action elapsed, the ardent sun ofMesopotamia inflamed with fevers the blood of his Eu­ropean soldiers; and the stationary troops and officers of
r In the public history of Procopius, (Persic. lib. 2. c. 16. 18—21. 21—28.) unciwith some slight exceptions, we may reasonably shot our ears against the malevolentwhisper of the Anecdotes, (c. 2, 3. with the notes, as usual, of Alomaunus.)
VOL. V. R







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE BOMAN EMPIRE. . 155


one of her cousins, the regal title, and of reserving inher own hands the substance of supreme power. Hereceived the proposal with profound respect and affectedgratitude; and the eloquent Cassiodorius announced tothe senate and the emperor, that Amalasontha and The*odatus had ascended the throne of Italy. His birth (forhis mother was the sister of Theodoric) might be con­sidered as an imperfect title; and the choice of Amalas­ontha was more strongly directed by her contempt of hisavarice and pusillanimity, which had deprived him of thelove of the Italians, and the esteem of the barbarians.But Theodatus was exasperated by the contempt whichhe deserved; her justice had repressed and reproachedthe oppression which he exercised against his Tuscanneighbours; and the principal Goths, united by com­mon guilt and resentment, conspired to instigate hisslow and timid disposition. The letters of congratulation Her exilewere scarcely dispatched before the queen of Italy was SId^ms'imprisoned in a small island of the lake of Bolsena,'April 30.where, after a short confinement, she was strangled inthe bath, by the order, or with the connivance, of thenew king, who instructed his turbulent subjects to shedthe blood of their sovereigns.
Justinian beheld with joy the dissensions of the Goths;■ BelisariuKand the mediation of an ally concealed and promoted and" Sub-the ambitious views of the conqueror. His ambassadors, d""Sicilr-in their public audience, demanded the fortress of Lily-basum, ten barbarian fugitives, and a just compensationfor the pillage of a small town on the Illyrian borders;but they secretly negotiated with Theodatus, to betraythe province of Tuscany, and tempted Amalasontha toextricate herself from danger and perplexity, by a freesurrender of the kingdom of Italy. A false and servile
'The Like, from the neighbouring towns of Etruria, was styled either Vulsiniensis(now of Bolsena) or Tarquiniensis. It is surrounded with white rocks, and storedwith fish and wild fowl. The younger Pliny (Epist. 2. 96.) celebrates two woodyislands that floated on its waters: if a fablet how credulous the ancients!—if a fact,how careless the moderns! Yet since Pliny, the island may have been fixed by newand gradual successions. '. '• ■ .


M 2







OCR Output








214 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL1L,


pelled the Turkish monarch to establish three subordi­nate princes of his own blood, who soon forgot theirgratitude and allegiance. The conquerors were ener­vated by luxury, which is always fatal except to an indus­trious people; the policy of China solicited the vanquish­ed nations to resume their independence; and the powerof the Turks was limited to a period of two hundredyears. The revival of their name and dominion in thesouthern countries of Asia, are the events of a later age;and the dynasties, which succeeded to their native realms,may sleep in oblivion; since their history bears no rela­tion to the decline and fall of the Roman empire.15The Avars In the rapid career of conquest, the Turks attackedtheTork*, and subdued the nation of the Ogors or Varchonites oftP^ach the *ne banks of the river Til, which derived the epithet ofempire. black from its dark water or gloomy forests.11 The khanof the Ogors was slain with three hundred thousand ofhis subjects, and their bodies were scattered over thespace of four days' journey ; their surviving countrymenacknowledged the strength and mercy of the Turks; anda small portion, about twenty thousand warriors, prefer­red exile to servitude. They followed the well-knownroad of the Volga, cherished the error of the nationswho confounded them with the Avars, and spread theterror of that false though famous appellation, whichhad not, however, saved its lawful proprietors from theyoke of the Turks.' After a long and victorious march,the new Avars arrived at the foot of mount Caucasus,
It For the origin and revolutions of the first Turkish empire, the Chinese detailsare borrowed from De Guignes, (Hist. des Hons, tom. 1. p. 2. p. 367—462.) andVisdelou (Supplement a la Bibliotheque Orient. d'Herbelot, p. 82—114.) TheGreek or Roman hints are gathered in Menander, (p. 108—164.) and TheopbylactSimocatta. (lib. 7. c. 7, 8.)
h The river Til, or Tola, according lo the geograpby of De Guignes, (tom. 1. part2. p. 58. and 352.) is a small though grateful stream of the desert, that falls into theOrbon, Selinga, &c. See Bell, Journey from Petersburgh to Pekin ; (vol. 2. p. 124.)yet his own description of the Keat, down which he sailed into the Oby, representsthe name and attributes of the black river, (p. 139.)
'Theopbylact, lib. 7. c. 7, 8. And yet his true Avars are invisible even to theeyes of M. da Guignes; and what can he more illustrious than the/a(se? 'The right«f the fugitive Ogors to that national appellation is confessed by the Turks themselves,(Menander, p. 108.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


factured silk which they transported into Persia for theuse of the Roman empire. In the vain capital of China,the Sogdian caravans were entertained as the suppliantembassies of tributary kingdoms, and if they returned insafety, the bold adventure was rewarded with exorbitantgain. But the difficulty and perilous march from Sa-marcand to the first town of Shensi, could not be per­formed in less than sixty, eighty, or one hundred days:as soon as they had passed the Jazartes, they entered thedesert; and the wandering hordes, unless they are re­strained by armies and garrisons, have always consideredthe citizen and the traveller as the objects of lawfulrapine. To escape the Tartar robbers, and the tyrantsof Persia, the silk caravans explored a more southernroad; they traversed the mountains of Thibet, de­scended the streams of the Ganges or the Indus, andpatiently expected, in the ports of Guzerat and Mala­bar, the annual fleets of the west.2 But the dangers ofthe desert were found less intolerable than toil, hunger,and the loss of time; the attempt was seldom renewed,and the only European, who has passed that unfrequentedway, applauds his own diligence, that, in nine monthsafter his departure from Pekin, he reached the mouthof the Indus. The ocean, however, was open to thefree communication of mankind. From the great riverto the tropic of Cancer, the provinces of China were sub­dued and civilized by the emperors of the north; theywere filled about the time of the Christian era withcities and men, mulberry-trees and their precious in­habitants; and if the Chinese, with the knowledge ofthe compass, had possessed the genius of the Greeks orPhoenicians, they might have spread their discoveriesover the southern hemisphere. I am not qualified toexamine, and I am not disposed to believe, their distant
z The roads from China to Persia and Hindostan may be investigated in the rela­tions of Hacklayt and -Thevenot. (the amhassadors of Sharokh, Anthony Jenkiusmi,the I'ere Grenber, &o. See likewise Hanway's Travels, vol. 1. p. 345—357.) Acommunication through Thibet has been lately explored by the English sovereigns ofBengal.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIII.


The next morning the Bulgarian cavalry advanced to thecharge. But they heard the shouts of multitudes, theybeheld the arms and discipline of the front; theywereassaulted on the flanks by two ambuscades which rosefrom the woods; their foremost warriors fell by the handof the aged hero and his guards; and the swiftness oftheir evolutions was rendered useless by the close attackand rapid pursuit of the Romans. In this action (sospeedy was their flight) the Bulgarians lost only fourhundred horse; but Constantinople was saved; and Za-bergan, who felt the hand of a master, withdrew to arespectful distance. But his friends were numerous inthe councils of the emperor, and Belisariug obeyed withreluctance, the commands of envy and Justinian, whichforbade him to achieve the deliverance of his country.On his return to the city, the people, still conscious oftheir danger, accompanied his triumph with acclamationsof joy and gratitude, which were imputed as a crime tothe victorious general. But when he entered the pa­lace, the courtiers were silent, and the emperor after acold and thankless embrace, dismissed him to minglewith the train of slaves. Yet so deep was the impressionof his glory on the minds of men, that Justinian, in theseventy-seventh year of his age, was encouraged to ad­vance near forty miles from the capital, and to inspect inperson the restoration of the long wall. The Bulgarianswasted the summer in the plains of Thrace; but theywere inclined to peace by the failure of their rash at­tempts on Greece and the Chersonesus. A menace ofkilling their prisoners quickened the payment of heavyransoms; and the departure of Zabergan was hastenedby the report, that double-prowed vessels were built onthe Danube to intercept his passage. The danger wassoon forgotten; and a vain question, whether their sove­reign had shewn more wisdom or weakness, amused theidleness of the city.5
■ The Bulgarian war, and the last victory of Belisarius, are imperfectly represent­







OCR Output








CHAP.XLVI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 473


duced and destroyed by the Persian monarch : he passed H'»<">"-the Euphrates, occupied the Syrian cities, Hierapolis; Syria,"Chalehis, and Berrhaea or Aleppo, and soon encompassed A" D,6U*the walls of Antioch with his irresistible arms. The ra­pid tide of success discloses the decay of the empire, theincapacity of Phocas, and the disaffection of his subjects;and Chosroes provided a decent apology for their sub­mission or revolt, by an imposter who attended his camp,as the son of Maurice™ and the lawful heir of the mo­narchy.
The first intelligence from the east which Heracliusreceived," was that of the loss of Antioch; but the agedmetropolis, so often overturned by earthquakes and pil­laged by the enemy, could supply but a small and languidstream of treasure and blood. The Persians were equallysuccessful and more fortunate in the sack of Cassarea,the capital of Cappadocia; and as they advanced beyondthe ramparts of the frontiers, the boundary of ancientwar, they found a less obstinate resistance and a moreplentiful harvest. The pleasant vale of Damascus has beenadorned in every age with a royal city: her obscure fe­licity has hitherto escaped the historian of the Romanempire: but Chosroes reposed his troops in the paradiseof Damascus before he ascended the hills of Libanus3 orinvaded the cities of the Phenician coast. The conquest of Paies-of Jerusalem," which had been meditated by Nushirvan,AneD. r,u;was achieved by the zeal and avarice of his grandson;
m The Persian historians have been themselves deceived; but Theophanes (p.244.) accuses Chosroos of the fraud and falsehood; and Eutychius believes (Annal,tom. 2. p. 211.) that the son of Maurice, who was saved from the assassins, livedand died a monk on mount Sinai.
» Entyohius dates all the losses of the empire under the reign of Phocas, an errorwhich saves the honour of Heraclius, whom he brings not from Carthage, but Salonica,with a fleet laden with vegetables for the relief of Constantinople. (Annal. tom. 2.p. 223, 224.) The other Christians of the east, Barbebraus, (apud Asseman, Bi-bliothec. Oriental, tom. 3. p. 412, 413.) Elmacin, (Hist. Saraceu. p. 13—16.)Abulpharagins, (Dynast. p. 98, 99.) are more sincere and acourate. The years ofthe Persiau war are disposed in the chronology of Pagi.
° On the conquest of Jerusalem, an event so interesting to the church, see theAnnals of Entychins, (tom. 2. p. 212—223.) and the lamentations of the monk An-tioohus, (apud Baronium, Annal. Ecoles. A. D. 614. no. 16—26.) whose one hun­dred and twenty-nine homilies are stjjl extant, if what no one reads may be said tobe extant.
VOL. V. 1 I







OCR Output








458 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLVI.


subjects were divided and transplanted by the jealous po­licy of the conqueror.' The eastern regions of Germa­ny, which had been left vacant by the emigration of theVandals, were replenished with the Sclavonian colonists;the same tribes are discovered in the neighbourhood ofthe Hadnatic and of the Baltic, and with the name ofBaian himself, the Illyrian cities of Neyss and Lissa areagain found in the heart of Silesia. In the dispositionboth of his troops and provinces, the chagan exposed thevassals, whose lives he disregarded,1" to the first assault;and the swords of the enemy were blunted before theyencountered the native valour of the Avars.Wmr«.of The Persian alliance restored the troops of the east to
Maurice > « J
•gainst the the defence of Europe ; and Maurice, who had supporteda*d"'s95 ten years the insolence of the chagan, declared his reso-~60i- lution to march in person against the barbarians. In thespace of two centuries, none of the successors of Theo-dosius had appeared in the field, their lives were supinelyspent in the palace of Constantinople; and the Greekscould no longer understand, that the name of emperor,in its primitive sense, denoted the chief of the armies ofthe republic. The martial ardour of Maurice was op­posed by the grave flattery of the senate, the timid su­perstition of the patriarch, and the tears of the empressConstantina; and they all conjured him to devolve onsome meaner general the fatigues and perils of a Scy­thian campaign. Deaf to their advice and entreaty, theemperor boldly advanced1 seven miles from the capital;
with tome itinerant harpers from that remote country, and only seems to hare mis­taken a trade for a nation. Tbeophylact, lib. 6. o. 2.
> This, is one of the most probable and luminous conjectures of the learned countde Bunt. (Hist, des I'euples Barbaras, torn. 11. p. 546—568.) The Txechi and Serbiare found together near mount Caucasus, in Illyricum, and on the Lower Elbe.Even the wildest traditions of the Bohemians, 5ic. afford some colour to his hy­pothesis.
* See Fredegarius, in the Historians of France, torn. 2. p. 432. Baian did notconceal his proud insensibility. On Touvraif (not T*7wrou?, according to a foolishemendation) Wayne* Tp Fn/taXn, in it km mpfUm yi fftiri davaTa i\mtu, aXX jusi
> See the march and return of Maurice, in Theophylaot, lib. 5. c. 16. lib. 6. c. 1—3. If he were a writer of taste or genius, we might suspect him of an elegant irony:but Tbeophylact is surely harmless.







OCR Output








CHAP. XXXIX.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


fused a universal ardour; the Walamirs were multi­plied by the Gothic swarms already engaged in theservice, or seated in the provinces, of the empire; andeach bold barbarian, who had heard of the wealth andbeauty of Italy, was impatient to seek, through themost perilous adventures, the possession of such enchant­ing objects. The march of Theodoric must be consi­dered as the emigration of an entire people; the wivesand children of the Goths, their aged parents, and mostprecious effects, were carefully transported; and someidea may be formed of the heavy baggage that now fol­lowed the camp, by the loss of two thousand waggons,which had been sustained in a single action in the warof Epirus. For their subsistence, the Goths dependedon the magazines of corn which was ground in portablemills by the hands of their women; on the milk and fleshof their flocks and herds; on the casual produce of thechase, and upon the contributions which they might im­pose on all who should presume to dispute the passage, orto refuse their friendly assistance. Notwithstanding theseprecautions, they were exposed to the danger, and almostto the distress, of famine, in a march of seven hundredmiles, which had been undertaken in the depth of arigorous winter. Since the fall of the Roman power,Dacia and Pannonia no longer exhibited the rich pros­pect of populous cities, well-cultivated fields, and conve­nient highways: the reign of barbarism and desolationwas restored, and the tribes of Bulgarians, Gepidas, andSarmatians, who had occupied the vacant province, wereprompted by their native fierceness, or the solicitationsof Odoacer, to resist the progress of his enemy. Inmany obscure though bloody battles, Theodoric foughtand vanquished; till at length, surmounting every ob­stacle by skilful conduct and persevering courage, he de­scended from the Julian Alps, and displayed his invinci­ble banners on the confines of Italy/
* Theodoric's march is supplied and illnstrated by Ennodios,(p. 1598—1602.)when the bomhast of Ike oration is translated into the language of cummon sense.
VOLr V. C







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL IJ


rights of private property were infringed by the strongplea of the public safety. It might easily be foreseenthat the enemy would intercept the aqueducts; and thecessation of the water-mills was the first inconvenience,which was speedily removed by mooring large vessels,and fixing millstones in the current of the river. Thestream was soon embarrassed by the trunks of trees,and polluted with dead bodies ; yet so effectual were theprecautions of the Roman general, that the waters of theTiber still continued to give motion to the mills anddrink to the inhabitants; the more distant quarters weresupplied from domestic wells ; and a besieged city mightsupport, without impatience, the privation of her publicbaths. A large portion of Rome, from the Praenestinegate to the church of St. Paul, was never invested by theGoths; their excursions were restrained by the activityof the Moorish troops; the navigation of the Tiber, andthe Latin, Appian, and Ostian ways, were left free andunmolested for the introduction of corn and cattle, orthe retreat of the inhabitants, who sought a refuge inCampania or Sicily. Anxious to relieve himself froman useless and devouring multitude, Belisarius issuedhis peremptory orders for the instant departure of thewomen, the children, and the slaves; required his sol­diers to dismiss their male and female attendants, and re­gulated their allowance, that one moiety should be givenin provisions, and the other in money. His foresightwas justified by the increase of the public distress, assoon as the Goths had occupied two important posts inthe neighbourhood of Rome. By the loss of the port,or, as it is now called, the city of Porto, he was deprivedof the country on the right of the Tiber, and the bestcommunication with the sea; and he reflected with griefand anger, that three hundred men, could he have sparedsuch a feeble band, might have defended its impregnableworks. Seven miles from the capital, between the Ap­pian and the Latin ways, two principal aqueducts, cross­







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLVI.


thorsof epic poetry and romance, they ascribe the victory,not to the military conduct, but to the personal va­lour, of their favourite hero. On this memorable day,Heraclius, on his horse Phallus, surpassed the bravest ofhis warriors: his lip was pierced with a spear, the steedwas wounded in the thigh, but he carried his mastersafe and victorious through the triple phalanx of the bar­barians. In the heat of the action, three valiant chiefswere successively slain by the sword and lance of the em­peror; among these was Rhazates himself; he fell likea soldier, but the sight of his head scattered grief anddespair through the fainting ranks of the Persians. Hisarmour of pure and massy gold, the shield of one hun­dred and twenty plates, the sword and belt, the saddleand cuirass, adorned the triumph of Heraclius, and if hehad not been faithful to Christ and his mother, thechampion of Rome might have offered the fourth opimespoils to the Jupiter of the Capitol.1 In the battle ofNineveh, which was fiercely fought from day-break tothe eleventh hour, twenty-eight standards, besides thosewhich might be broken or torn, were taken from the^Persians; the greatest part of their army was cut inpieces, and the victors, concealing their own loss, passedthe night on the field. They acknowledged, that on thisoccasion it was less difficult to kill than to discomfit thesoldiers of Chosroes; amidst the bodies of their friends,no more than two bow-shot from the enemy, the rem­nant of the Persian cavalry stood firm till the seventhhour of the night; about the eighth hour they retired totheir unrifled camp, collected their baggage, and dispers­ed on all sides, from the want of orders rather than ofresolution.' The diligence of Heraclius was not less ad­mirable in the use of victory; by a march of forty-eightmiles in four-and-twenty hours, his vanguard occupiedthe bridges of the greater and the lesser Zab; and the
1 Rex regia arma fero (says Romulus, in the first consecration) .... hina postea(continues Livy, 1.10.) inter tot bella, opima parta sunt spolia, adeo rara ejus for-tuna decoris. If Varro (apud Pomp. Festum, p. 306. edit. Dacier) conld justify hisliberality in granting the opime spoils to a common soldier who had slain the king orgeneral of the enemy, tbe honour would have been much more cheap and common.







OCR Output








216 . DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLII.


collars incrusted with gold. The ambassadors, contentv with such liberal reception, departed from Constanti­nople, and Valentin, one of the emperor's guards, wassent with a similar character to their camp at the footof mount Caucasus. As their destruction or their suc­cess must be alike advantageous to the empire, he per­suaded them to invade the enemies of Rome; and theywere easily tempted, by gifts and promises, to gratifytheir ruling inclinations; These fugitives, who fled be­fore the Turkish arms, passed the Tanais and Borysthe-nes, and boldly advanced into the heart of Poland andGermany, violating the law of nations, and abusing therights of victory. Before ten years had elapsed, theircamps were seated on the Danube and the Elbe, manyBulgarian and Sclavonian names were obliterated fromthe earth, and the remainder of their tribes are found,as tributaries and vassals, under, the standard of theAvars. The chagan, the peculiar title of their king,still affected to cultivate the friendship of the emperor;and Justinian entertained some thoughts of fixing themin Pannonia, to balance the prevailing power of theLombards. But the virtue or treachery of an Avar be­trayed the secret enmity and ambitious designs of theircountrymen; and they loudly complained of the timid,though jealous policy, of detaining their ambassadors,and denying the arms which they had been allowed topurchase in the capital of the empire.1, Perhaps the apparent change in the dispositions ofthe emperors, may be ascribed to the embassy whichEmhassies was received from the conquerors of the Avars.™ TheTurk's and immense distance, which eluded their arms, could not
Rotians,
A. D. 569- ......
58 j. 1 The emhassies and first conquests of the Avars may bo read in Menander, (Er-
cerpt. Legat. p. 99—101. 154,155.) Theophanes, (p. 196.) the Historic. Misoella,.(lib. 16. p. 109.)and Gregory ofTours. (lib. 4. c. 23.29.inthe Historians ofFrance,
tom. 2. p. 214. 217.)
, m Theophanes, (Chron. p. 204.) and the Hist. Misoella, (lib. 16. p..110.) asunderstood by De Guignes, (tom. 1. part 2. p. 354.) appear to speak of a Turkishemhassy to Justinian himself;- but that of Maniach, in the fourth year of his suc­cessor Justin, is positively the first that reached Constantinople. (Menander, p. 108.)







OCR Output








DECLtNfi AND FALL [eHAf. JttUt.


respected his genius, his virtue, attd even the laudablemotive which had urged the servant of Justinian to de-*ceive and reject them. They had lost their king (aninconsiderable loss), their capital, their treasures, the pro­vinces from Sicily to the Alps, and the military force oftwo hundred thousand barbarians, magnificently equip­ped with horses and arms. Yet all was not lost, as longas Pavia was defended by one thousand Goths, inspiredby a sense of honour, the love of freedom, and the me­mory of their past greatness. The supreme commandwas unanimously offered to the brave Uraias; and it wasin his eyes alone that the disgrace of his uncle Vitigescould appear as a reason of exclusion. His voice in­clined the election in favour of Hildibald, whose personalmerit was recommended by the vain hope that his kins­man Theudes, the Spanish monarch, would support thecommon interest of the Gothic nation. The success ofhis arms in Liguria and Venetia seemed to justify theirchoice; but he soon declared to the world, that he wasincapable of forgiving or commanding his benefactor.The consort of Hildibald was deeply wounded by thebeauty, the riches, and the pride of the wife of Uraias;and the death of that virtuous patriot excited the indig­nation of a free people. A bold assassin executed theirsentence by striking off the head of Hildibald in the midstof a banquet: the Rugians, a foreign tribe, assumed theprivilege of election; and Totila, the nephew of the lateking, was tempted, by revenge, to deliver himself andthe garrison of Trevigo into the hands of the Romans.But the gallant and accomplished youth was easily per­suaded to prefer the Gothic throne before the service ofJustinian; and as soon as the palace of Pavia had beenpurified from the Rugian usurper, he reviewed the na­tional force of five thousand soldiers, and generouslyundertook the restoration of the kingdom of Italy.
The successors of Belisarius, eleven generals of equalrank, neglected to crush the feeble and disunited Goths,







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 14Q


The Moorish war continued several years after the de­parture of Belisarius; but the laurels which he resigned toa faithful lieutenant, may be justly ascribed to his owntriumph.
The experience of past faults, which may sometimescorrect the mature age of an individual, is seldom pro- Neutralityfitable to the successive generations of mankind. The goths.nations of antiquity, careless of each other's safety, wereseparately vanquished and enslaved by the Romans.This awful lesson might have instructed the barbariansof the west to oppose, with timely counsels and confede­rate arms, the unbounded ambition of Justinian. Yetthe same error was repeated, the same consequenceswere felt, and the Goths, both of Italy and Spain, insen­sible of their approaching danger, beheld with indiffer­ence, and even with joy, the rapid downfal of the Van­dals. After the failure of the royal line, Theudes, a va­liant and powerful chief, ascended the throne of Spain,which he had formerly administered in the name ofTheodoric, and his infant grandson. Under his com­mand, the Visigoths besieged the fortress of Ceuta onthe African coast: but, while they spent the sabbath-day in peace and devotion, the pious security of theircamp was invaded by a sally from the town; and theking himself, with some difficulty and danger, escapedfrom the hands of a sacrilegious enemy.1 It was notlong before his pride and resentment were gratified by asuppliant embassy from the unfortunate Gelimer, whoimplored, in his distress, the aid of the Spanish monarch.But, instead of sacrificing these unworthy passions to thedictates of generosity and prudence, Theudes amusedthe ambassadors, till he was secretly informed of the lossof Carthage, and then dismissed them with obscure andcontemptuous advice, to seek in their native country a
* Isidor. Cbron. p. 722. edit. Grot. Mariana, Hist. Hispan. lib. 5. c. 8. p. 173.Yet according to Isidore, the siege of Ceuta, and the death of Theudes, happened,A. M. H. 586. A< D. 548. and the place was defended, not by the Vandals, bnt by theRomans.







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.J OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. &}


Justinian was lost, if the prostitute whom he raised Firmnes. orfrom the theatre had not renounced the timidity, as well TheoJu'a•as the virtues, of her sex. In the midst of a council, •where Belisarius was present, Theodora alone displayedthe spirit of a hero; and she alone, without apprehend­ing his future hatred, could save the emperor from theimminent danger, and his unworthy fears. "If flight(said the consort of Justinian) were the only means ofsafety, yet I should disdain to fly. Death is the con­dition of our birth; but they who have reigned shouldnever survive the loss of dignity and dominion. I im­plore Heaven that I may never be seen, not a day, withoutmy diadem and purple; that I may no longer behold thelight, when I cease to be saluted with the name of queen.If you resolve, O Caesar! to fly, you have treasures;behold the sea, you have ships: but tremble lest the de­sire of life should expose you to wretched exile and igno­minious death. For my own part, I adhere to the maximof antiquity, that the throne is a glorious sepulchre."The firmness of a woman restored the courage to deli­berate and act, and courage soon discovers the resourcesof the most desperate situation. It was an easy and adecisive measure to revive the animosity of the factions;the blue were astonished at their own guilt and folly, thata trifling injury should provoke them to conspire withtheir implacable enemies against a gracious and liberalbenefactor; they again proclaimed the majesty of Jus-Tiie»edi-tinian, and the greens, with their upstart emperor, were prenssed.npleft alone in the hippodrome. The fidelity of the guardswas doubtful; but the military force of Justinian con­sisted in three thousand veterans, who had been trainedto valour and discipline in the Persian and Illyrian wars.Under the command of Belisarius and Mundus, theysilently marched in two divisions from the palace, forcedtheir obscure way through narrow passages, expiringflames, and falling edifices, and burst open, at the samemoment, the two opposite gates of the hippodrome.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


provide all the instruments of attack which antiquity hadinvented. Fascines were prepared to fill the ditches,scaling ladders to ascend the walls. The largest treesof the forest supplied the timbers of four battering rams;their heads were armed with iron; they were suspendedby ropes, and each of them was worked by the labour offifty men. The lofty wooden turrets moved on wheels orrollers, and formed a spacious platform of the level of therampart. On the morning of the nineteenth day, a ge­neral attack was made from the Preenestine gate to theVatican: seven Gothic columns, with their military en­gines, advanced to the assault; and the Romans wholined the ramparts, listened with doubt and anxiety tothe cheerful assurances of their commander. As soonas the enemy approached the ditch, Belisarius himselfdrew the first arrow; and such was his strength anddexterity, that he transfixed the foremost of the barba­rian leaders. A shout of applause and victory was re­echoed along the wall. He drew a second arrow, andthe stroke was followed with the same success and thesame acclamation. The Roman general then gave theword, that the archers should aim at the teams of oxen;they were instantly covered with mortal wounds; thetowers which they drew, remained useless and immove­able, and a single moment disconcerted the laborious pro­jects of the king of the Goths. After this disappoint­ment, Vitiges still continued, or feigned to continue, theassault of the Salarian gate, that he might divert theattention of his adversary, while his principal forces morestrenuously attacked the Praenestine gate and the sepul­chre of Hadrian, at the distance of three miles from eachother. Near the former, the double walls of the Viva­rium"1 were low or broken; the fortification of the latterwere feebly guarded: the vigour of the Goths was ex­cited by the hope of victory and spoil; and if a single
1 Vivarium was an angle in Ibe new wall, inclosed for wild beasts. (Procopins,Goth, lib.l. c. 23.) The spot is still visible in Nardini, (lib. 4. c. 2. p. 159, 160.)ind Nolli's great plan of Rome.


N 1







OCR Output













OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


form nature. The person and property of an orphanmust always be trusted to the custody of some discreetfriend. If the deceased father had not signified hischoice, the agnats, or paternal kindred of the nearestdegree, were compelled to act as the natural guardians:the Athenians were apprehensive of exposing the infantto the power of those most interested in his death; butan axiom of Roman jurisprudence has pronounced, thatthe charge of tutelage should constantly attend the emo­lument of succession. If the choice of the father, andthe line of consanguinity, afforded no efficient guardian,the failure was supplied by the nomination of the praetorof the city, or the president of the province. But theperson whom they named to this public office might belegally excused by insanity or blindness, by ignorance orinability, by previous enmity or adverse interest, by thenumber of children or guardianships with which he wasalready burdened, and by the immunities which weregranted to the useful labours of magistrates, lawyers, phy­sicians, and professors. Till the infant could speak andthink, he was represented by the tutor, whose authoritywas finally determined by the age of puberty. Withouthis consent, no act of the pupil could bind himself to hisown prejudice, though it might oblige others for his per­sonal benefit. It is needless to observe, that the. tutoroften gave security, and always rendered an account; andthat the want of diligence or integrity exposed him toa civil and almost criminal action for the violation of hissacred trust. The age of puberty had been rashly fixedby the civilians, at fourteen; but as the faculties of themind ripen more slowly than those of the body, a cura­tor was interposed to guard the fortunes of the Romanyouth from his own inexperience and headstrong pas­sions. Such a trustee had been first instituted by theprastor, to "save a family from the blind havoc of a prodi­gal or a madman; and the minor was compelled by thelaws, to solicit the same protection, to give validity to


2 B 2







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHA1\ XLV1.


the verge of the two great empires of the east, Mahometobserved with secret joy the progress of their mutual de­struction; and in the midst of the Persian triumphs, heventured to foretel, that before many years should elapse,victory would again return to the banners of the Romans.1At the time when this prediction is said to have beendelivered, no prophecy could be more distant from its ac­complishment, since the first twelve years of Heracliusannounced the approaching dissolution of the empire.If the motives of Chosroes had been pure and honour­able, he must have ended the quarrel with the death ofPhocas, and he would have embraced as his best ally, thefortunate African who had so generously avenged the in­juries of his benefactor Maurice. The prosecution of thewar revealed the true character of the barbarian; and thesuppliant embassies of Heraclius to beseech his clemency,that he would spare the innocent, accept a tribute, andgive peace to the world, were rejected with contemptu­ous silence or insolent menace. Syria, Egypt, and theprovinces of Asia, were subdued by the Persian arms,while Europe, from the confines of Istria to the long wallof Thrace was oppressed by the Avars, unsatiated withthe blood and rapine of the Italian war. They hadcoolly massacred their male captives in the sacred field ofPannonia; the women and children were reduced to ser­vitude, and the noblest virgins were abandoned to thepromiscuous lust of the barbarians. The amorous ma­tron who opened the gates of Friuli passed a short nightin the arms of her royal lover; the next evening Romil-da was condemned to the embraces of twelve Avars, andthe third day the Lombard princess was impaled in thesight of the camp, while the chagan observed with a cruelsmile, that such a husband was the fit recompense of her
* See the thirtieth chapter of the Koran, entitled the Greeks, Our honest andlearned translator Sale, (p. 330, 331.) fairly states this conjecture, guess, wager, ofMahomet; but Bonlainvilliers, (p. 329—344.) with wicked intentions, labours to esrtabliah this evident prophecy of a future event, wliioh must, in his opinion, embarrassthe Christian polemics.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 22$


tempted to seduce the fidelity of Almondar, while hecalled from the extremities of the earth, the nations of-/Ethiopia and Scythia to invade the dominions of his ri­val. But the aid of such allies was distant and precari­ous, and the discovery of this hostile correspondencejustified the complaints of the Goths and Armenians,who implored, almost at the same time, the protectionof Chosroes. The descendants of Arsaces, who werestill numerous in Armenia, had been provoked to assertthe last relics of national freedom and hereditary rank;and the ambassadors of Vitiges had secretly traversed theempire to expose the instant, and almost inevitable, dan­ger of the kingdom of Italy. Their representations wereuniform, weighty, and effectual. "We stand beforeyour throne, the advocates of your interest as well as ofour own. The ambitious and faithless Justinian aspiresto be the sole master of the world. Since the endlesspeace which betrayed the common freedom of mankind,that prince, your ally in words, your enemy in actions,has alike insulted his friends and foes, and has filled theearth with blood and confusion. Has he not violatedthe privileges of Armenia, the independence of Colchos,and the wild liberty of the Tzanian mountains? Hashe not usurped, with equal avidity, the city of Bosphoruson the frozen Maeotis, and the vale of palm-trees on theshores of the Red sea? The Moors, the Vandals, theGoths, have been successively oppressed, and each nationhas calmly remained the spectator of their neighbour'sruin. Embrace, O king! the favourable moment; theeast is left without defence, while the armies of Justinianand his renowned general are detained in the distant re­gions of the west. If you hesitate and delay, Belisariusand his victorious troops will soon return from the Tiberto the Tigris, and Persia may enjoy the wretched conso­lation of being the last devoured."11 By such arguments,
P I have blended, in a short speech, the two orations of the Arsacides of Armeniaand the Gothic amhassadors. Procopius, in his public history, feels, and makes usfeel that Justinian was the true author of the war. (Persic lib. 2. c. 2. 3.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 153


tues, she revived the prosperity of his reign: while shestrove, with pious care, to expiate the faults, and to ob­literate the darker, memory of his declining age. Thechildren of Boethius and Symmachus were restored totheir paternal inheritance; her extreme lenity neverconsented to inflict any corporal or pecuniary penaltieson her Roman subjects; and she generously despisedthe clamours of the Goths, who, at the end of fortyyears, still considered the people of Italy as their slavesor their enemies. Her salutary measures were directedby the wisdom, and celebrated by the eloquence, of Cas-siodorius; she solicited and deserved the friendship ofthe emperor; and the kingdoms of Europe respected,both in peace and war, the majesty of the Gothicthrone. But the future happiness of the queen and ofItaly depended on the education of her son, who wasdestined, by his birth, to support the different and almostincompatible characters of the chief of a barbarian camp,and the first magistrate of a civilized nation. Fromthe age of ten years," Athalaric was diligently instructedin the arts and sciences, either useful or ornamental fora Roman prince; and three venerable Goths were cho­sen to instil the principles of honour and virtue into themind of their young king. But the pupil, who is insen­sible of the benefits, must , abhor the restraints of edu­cation; and the solicitude of the queen, which affectionrendered anxious and severe, offended the uhtractablenature of her son and his subjects. On a solemn fes­tival, when the Goths were assembled in the palace ofRavenna, the royal youth escaped from his mother'sapartment, and, with tears of pride and anger, com­plained of a blow which his stubborn disobedience hadprovoked her to inflict. The barbarians resented theindignity which had been offered to their king; ac­cused the regent of conspiring against his life and
h At the death of Theodoric, his grandson Athalaric is described by Procopins as aboy about eight years old—oxtm yeymx; etd. Cassiodorius, with authority and reason,adds two years to his age—infantulura adhuc vix decennem. , ,
VOL. V. M







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. HQ


moted to military command. After a bold inroad intoPersarmenia, in which his glory was shared by a col­league, and his progress was checked by an enemy, Be-lisarius repaired to the important station ofDara, wherehe first accepted the service of Procopius, the faithful Hi»
• 111 r f oes lu
companion, and diligent historian, of his exploits. The PersianMirranes of Persia advanced, with forty thousand of her a"d. 5*9best troops, to raise the fortifications of Dara; and sig- ~"53i'nified the day and the hour on which the citizens shouldprepare a bath for his refreshment after the toils of vic­tory. He encountered an adversary equal to himself, bythe new title of general of the east; his superior in thescience of war, but much inferior in the number andquality of his troops, which amounted only to twenty-five thousand Romans and strangers, relaxed in theirdiscipline, and humbled by recent disasters. As the le­vel plain of Dara refused all shelter to stratagem andambush, Belisarius protected his front with a deep trench,which was prolonged at first in perpendicular, and after­ward in parallel, lines, to cover the wings of cavalry,and advantageously posted to command the flanks andrear of the enemy. When the Roman centre was shaken,their well-timed and rapid charge decided the conflict:the standard of Persia fell; the immortals fled; the in­fantry threw away their bucklers, and eight thousand ofthe vanquished were left on the field of battle. In thenext campaign, Syria was invaded on the side of the de­sert; and Belisarius, with twenty thousand men, hast­ened from Dara to the relief of the province. Duringthe whole summer, the designs of the enemy were baf­fled by his skilful dispositions: he pressed their retreat,occupied each night their camp of the preceding day,and would have secured a bloodless victory, if he couldhave resisted the impatience of his own troops. Theirvaliant promise was faintly supported in the hour of bat­tle; the right wing was exposed by the treacherous or
'The two first Persian campaigns of Belisarius are fairly and copiousl}' related byhis secretary. (Persic. lib. U c. 12—18.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XXXIX.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 21


abated or eluded by the slow artifice of judicial proceed­ings; the civil administration, with its honours and emo­luments, was confined to the Italians; and the peoplestill preserved their dress and language, their laws andcustoms, their personal freedom, and two-thirds of theirlanded property. It had been the object of Augustusto conceal the introduction of monarchy; it was the po­licy of Theodoric to disguise the reign of a barbarian.1If his subjects were sometimes awakened from this pleas­ing vision of a Roman government, they derived moresubstantial comfort from the character of a Gothicprince, who had penetration to discern, and firmness topursue, his own and the public interest. Theodoricloved the virtues which he possessed, and the talents ofwhich he was destitute. Liberius was promoted to theoffice of praetorian prefect for his unshaken fidelity tothe unfortunate cause of Odoacer. The ministers ofTheodoric, Cassiodorius,1 and Boethius, have reflectedon his reign the lustre of their genius and learning.More prudent or more fortunate than his colleague, Cas­siodorius preserved his own esteem without forfeiting theroyal favour; and after passing thirty years in the ho­nours of the world, he was blessed with an equal term ofrepose in the devout and studious solitude of Squillace.
As the patron of the republic, it was the interest and Prosperityduty of the Gothic king to cultivate the affections of thesenate" and the people. The nobles of Rome were flat­tered by sonorous epithets and formal professions of re-
vinces that now form the kingdom of Naples, is laboured by Giannone (tom.l . p. 172.178). with patriotic diligence.
k See the Gothic history of Procopins, (lib. 1. c. 1. lib. 2. c. 6.) the Epistles ofCassiodorius,(passim, but especially the fifth and sixth books, which contain Iheformttletor patents of offices,) and the Civil History of Giannone. (tom. 1. lib. 2, 3.) The Gfn-thic counts, which he places in every Italian city, are annihilated, however, by Maffei(Verona Illastrata, p. 1. lib. 8. p. 227.) for those of Syracuse and Naples, (Var. 6. 22,23.) were special and temporary commissions.
1 Two Italians of the name of Cassiodorius, the father (Var. 1. 24. 40.) and the son(9. 24, 25.) were successively employed in the administration of Theodoric. Theson was born in the year 479, his various epistles as quaestor, master of the offices,and praetorian prefect, extend from 509 to 539, and he lived as a monk about thirtyyears. (Tiraboschi Storia della Letteratura Italiana, tom. 3. p. 7—24. Fabricius,Bibliot. Lat. Med. Mvi, tom. 1 p. 357, 358. edit Mansi.)■ See his regard for the senate iu Cochloeus. (Vit. Theod. 8. p. 72—80.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XXXIX.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 15


instruments of their victories, but of the missile weapons,which they were too much inclined to neglect; ascl thelively image of war was displayed in the daily exerciseand annual reviews of the Gothic cavalry. A firm thoughgentle discipline imposed the habits of modesty, obe­dience, and temperance; and the Goths were instructedto spare the people, to reverence the laws, to understandthe duties of civil society, and to disclaim the barbarouslicence of judicial combat and private revenge.'
Among the barbarians of the west, the victory of The- pXyofodoric had spread a general alarm. But as soon as it ap- 'fiisodoric.peared that he was satisfied with conquest, and desirousof peace, terror was changed into respect, and they sub­mitted to a powerful mediation, which was uniformlyemployed for the best purposes of reconciling their quar­rels and civilizing their manners.11 The ambassadorswho resorted to Ravenna from the most distant countriesof Europe, admired his wisdom, magnificence,1 and cour­tesy; and if he sometimes accepted either slaves or arms,white horses or strange animals, the gift of a sun-dial, awater-clock, or a musician, admonished even the princesof Gaul, of the superior art and industry of his Italiansubjects. His domestic alliances,™ a wife, two daughters,a sister, and a niece, united the family of Theodoric withthe kings of the Franks, the Burgundians, the Visigoths,the Vandals, and the Thuringians; and contributed tomaintain the harmony, or at least the balance, of thegreat republic of the west." It is difficult, in the dark
1 The view of the military establishment of the Goths in Italy, is collected fromthe Epistles of Cassiodorins. (Var. 1.24. 40. 3. 3. 24. 48. 4. 13,14. 5. 26,27. 8. 3.4. 25.) They are illustrated by the learned Mascou. (Hist. of the Germans, lib. 11.40—44. annotation 14.)
k See the clearness and vigour of his negotiations in Ennodios (p. 1607.) andCassiodorins (Var. 3. 1—4. 4. 13 5. 43. 41.) who gives the different styles offriendship, counsel, expostulation, &c.
1 Even of his table (Var. 6. 9.) and palace (7. 5.) The admiration of strangers isrepresented as the most rational motive to justify these vain expenses, and to stimu­late the diligence of the officers to whom those provinces were intrusted,
m See the public and private alliances of the Gothic monarch, with the Burgundians,(Var. 1. 45, 46.) with the Franks, (2. 40.) with the Thuringians, (4. 1.) and with theVandals. (5. 1.) Rach of these epistles affords some curious knowledge of the policyand manners of the harharians,
"ilis political system may be observed in Cassiodorius, (Var. i. 1. 9.1.) Jornandes,







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 137


and the certain intelligence that the Vandal had fled tothe inaccessible country of the Moors, determined Beli-sarius to relinquish the vain pursuit, and to fix his winter-quarters at Carthage. From thence he dispatched hisprincipal lieutenant, to inform the emperor, that in thespace of three months he had achieved the conquest ofAfrica.
Belisarius spoke the language of truth. The surviving Conqnest ofVandals yielded, without resistance, their arms and their Beiinrior.freedom: the neighbourhood of Carthage submitted to A'D"534'his presence; and the more distant provinces were suc­cessively subdued by the report of his victory. Tripoliwas confirmed in her voluntary allegiance; Sardinia andCorsica surrendered to an officer, who carried, instead ofa sword, the head of the valiant Zano; and the isles ofMajorca, Minorca, and Yvica, consented to remain ahumble appendage of the African kingdom. Caesarea, aroyal city, which in looser geography may be confoundedwith the modern Algiers, was situate thirty days' marchto the westward of Carthage: by land, the road was in­fested by the Moors; but the sea was open, and theRomans were now masters of the sea. An active anddiscreet tribune sailed as far as the straits, where he oc­cupied Septem or Ceuta/ which rises opposite to Gib­raltar on the African coast; that remote place was af­terward adorned and fortified by Justinian; and he seemsto have indulged the vain ambition of extending his em­pire to the columns of Hercules. He received the mes­sengers of victory at the time when he was preparing topublish the pandects of the Roman law; and the devout
of tlve Lomhards, transported them (A. D. 721.) from Sardinia to Pavia. In theyear 1695, the Augustin friars of that oity found a brick arch, marble coffin, silvercase, silk wrapper, bones, blood, &c. and perhaps an inscription of Agostino, in Go­thic letters. But this useful discovery has been disputed by reason and jealousy.(Baronias, Annal. A. D. 725. no. 2—9. Tillemont, Mem. Eccles. lom. 13. p. 944. *Montfaucon, Diarium Ital. p. 26—30. Muratori. Antiq. Ital. Medii Mvi. tom. 5. dis­sert. 58. p. 9. who had composed a separate treatise before the decree of the hishopof Pavia, and pope Benedict XIII.) ,1 T* rn; aroXitnin w(W|Uia, is the expression of Procopius (de Edific. lib. 6. c. 7.)Ceuta, which has been defaced by the Portuguese, flourished in nobles and palaces,in agriculture and manufactures, under the more prosperous reign of the Arabs. (I'Af-riqne de Marmol. lom. 2, p. 236 ) . ,
VOL. V. L







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 385


ethics, and jurisprudence. Whenever their judgmentsagree, they corroborate each other; but as often as theydiffer, a prudent legislator appreciates the guilt and pu­nishment according to the measure of social injury. Onthis principle, the most daring attack on the life and pro­perty of a private citizen, is judged less atrocious thanthe crime of treason or rebellion, which invades the ma­jesty of the republic: the obsequious civilians unani­mously pronounced, that the republic is contained in theperson of its chief: and the edge of the Julian law wassharpened by the incessant diligence of the emperors.The licentious commerce of the sexes may be toleratedas an impulse of nature, or forbidden as a source of dis­order and corruption: but the fame, the fortunes, thefamily of the husband, are seriously injured by the adul­tery of the wife. The wisdom of Augustus, after curb­ing the freedom of revenge, applied to this domestic of­fence the animadversion of the laws: and the guilty par­ties, after the payment of heavy forfeitures and fines,were condemned to long or perpetual exile in two sepa­rate islands.' Religion pronounces an equal censureagainst the infidelity of the husband: but as it is not ac­companied by the same civil effects, the wife was neverpermitted to vindicate her wrongs;' and the distinctionof simple or double adultery, so familiar and so importantin the canon law, is unknown to the jurisprudence of thecode and pandects. I touch with reluctance, and dispatch unnaturalwith impatience, a more odious vice, of which modestyrejects the name, and nature abominates the idea. Theprimitive Romans were infected by the example of the
offence was most frequent, condemns the criminals, ad gladium, lndi damnationem.(Ulpian de Oliicio Prouonsulis, lib. 8. in Collatione Legum Mosaic, et Rom. tit. 11.p. 235.)
* Till the publication of the Julias Paulus of Soholting, (lib. 2. tit. 26. p. 317—323.) it was affirmed and believed, that the Julian laws punished adulter; withdeath ; and the mistake arose from the fraud or error of Tribonian. Yet Lipsius hadsuspected the truth from the narrative of Tacitus, (Annal. 2. 50, 3. 24. 4. 42.) andeven from the practice of Augustus, who distinguished the treasonable frailties of hisfemale kindred.
'In cases of adultery, Several confined to the husband the righlof public accusa­tion. (Cod. Justinian, lib. 9. til. 9. leg. 1.) Nor is this privilege unjust—so differentare the effects of male or female infidelity.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIV.


the praetor, *o the cognisance of external actions: virtu­ous principles and habits were inculcated by the disciplineof education; and the Roman father was accountable tothe state for the manners of his children, since he dis­posed, without appeal, of their life, their liberty, and theirinheritance. In some pressing emergencies, the citizenwas authorized to avenge his private or public wrongs.The consent of the Jewish, the Athenian, and the Ro­man laws, approved the slaughter of the nocturnal ihief;though in open daylight a robber could not be slain with­out some previous evidence pf danger and complaint.Whoever surprised an adulterer in his nuptial bed mightfreely exercise his revengethe most bloody or wan­ton outrage was excused by the provocationnor wasit before the reign of Augustus that the husband was re­duced to weigh the rank, of the offender, or that the pa­rent was condemned to sacrifice his daughter with herguilty seducer. After the expulsion of the kings, the am­bitious Roman who should dare to assume their title, orimitate their tyranny, was devoted to the infernal gods:each of his fellow-citizens was armed with a sword ofjustice; and the act of Brutus, however repugnant togratitude or prudence, had been already sanctified by thejudgment of his country.™ The barbarous practice ofwearing arms in the midst of peace," and the bloodymaxims of honour, were unknown to the Romans; and,during the two purest ages, from the establishment of
* The first speech of Lysias (Reiske, Orator. Graec. tom. 5. p. 2—48.) is in de­fence of a hushand who had killed the adulterer. The right of hushands ami fathersat Rome and Athens is discussed with mnch learning by Dr. Taylor. (Lectiones Ly-eiacae, c. 11. in Reiske, tom. 6. p. 301—308.)
'See Casaobon ad Athenaeum, (lib, 1. o. 5. p. 19.) Percurrent raphanique ma-gilesque. (Catull. p. 41, 43. edit. Vossian). Ha DO mugilis i nt rat. (Juvenal, Satir.10. 317.) Huno perminxere calones (Horat. lib. 1. Satir. 2. 44.) familiae stupran-dum dedit. . . fraudi non fait. (Val. Maxim, lib. 6. c. l.Bo. 13.)
u This law is noticed by Livy (2. 8.) and Plutarch; (in Publicola, tom. 1. p. 197.)and it fully justifies the public opinion on the death of Caesar, which Suetonius couldpublish under the imperial government. Jure caesus existimatur. (in Julio, o. 76.)Read the letters that passed between Cicero and Marias a few months after the idesor March, (ad Fam. 11. 27,28.)
11 njojroi Si aSwoioi tov rt a-i5nfw jtartSfwo. Thncydid. lib. 1. c. 6. The historianwho considers this circumstance as the test of civilization, would disdain the har­barism of an European court.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE;


the eyes and ears of the king, informed him of the pro­gress of disorder, that the provincial governors flew totheir prey with the fierceness of lions and eagles, and thattheir rapine and injustice would teach the most loyal ofhis subjects to abhor the name and authority of their so­vereign. The sincerity of this advice was punished withdeath, the murmurs of the cities were despised, their tu­mults were quelled by military execution; the intermediatepowers between the throne and the people were abolished;and the childish vanity of Hormouz,who affected the dailyuse of the tiara, was fond of declaring, that he alone wouldbe the judge as well as the master of his kingdom. Inevery word, and in every action, the son of Nushirvan de­generated from the virtues of his father. His avarice de­frauded the troops; his jealous caprice degraded the sa­traps; the palace, the tribunals, the waters of the Tigris,were stained with the blood of the innocent, and the tyrantexulted in the sufferings and execution of thirteen thou­sand victims. As the excuse of his cruelty, he sometimescondescended to observe, that the fears of the Persianswould be productive of hatred, and that their hatred mustterminate in rebellion: but he forgot that his own guiltand folly had inspired the sentiments which he deplored,and prepared the event which he so justly apprehended.Exasperated by long and hopeless oppression, the pro­vinces of Babylon, Susa, and Carmania, erected the stand­ard of revolt; and the princes of Arabia, India, and Scy-thia, refused the customary tribute to the unworthysuccessor of Nushirvan. The arms of the Romans, inslow sieges and frequent inroads, afflicted the frontiersof Mesopotamia and Assyria; one of their generals pro­fessed himself the disciple of Scipio, and the soldierswereanimated by a miraculous image of Christ, whose mildaspect should never have been displayed in the front ofbattle.' At the same time the eastern provinces of Persia
1 See the imitation of Scipio in Theopbylact, lib. 1. o. 14. the image of Christ,lib. 2. c. 3. Hereafter I shall speak more amply of the Christian images—1 had al­most said idols. This, if I am not mistaken, is the oldest sjfstftmiunt of divine ma­


2 G 2







OCR Output








210 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLII.


of retaliation. In the siege of Topirus," whose obstinatedefence had enraged the Sclavonians, they massacredfifteen thousand males; but they spared the women andchildren; the most valuable captives were always re­served for labour or ransom; the servitude was not ri­gorous, and the terms of their deliverance were speedyand moderate. But the subject, or the historian of Jus­tinian, exhaled his just indignation in the language ofcomplaint and reproach; and Procopius has confidentlyaffirmed, that in a reign of thirty-two years, each annualinroad of the barbarians consumed two hundred thousandof the inhabitants of the Roman empire. The entirepopulation of Turkish Europe, which nearly correspondswith the provinces of Justinian, would perhaps be inca­pable of supplying six millions of persons, the result ofthis incredible estimate.1monn'rciwof *n tne ™idst of these obscure calamities, Europe felt«heTurks in the shock of a revolution, which first revealed to thea. d. si.?, world the name and nation of the Tukks. Like Ro­mulus, the founder of that martial people was suckledby a she-wolf, who afterward made him the father of a-numerous progeny; and the representation of that ani­mal in the banners of the Turks preserved the memory,or rather suggested the idea, of a fable, which was in­vented, without any mutual intercourse, by the shepherdsof Latium and those of Scythia. At the equal distanceof two thousand miles from the Caspian, the Icy, theChinese, and the Bengal seas, a ridge of mountains isconspicuous, the centre, and perhaps the summit, ofAsia; which, in the language of different nations, hasbeen styled Imaus, and Caf,z and Altai, and the Golden
* Topiins was situate near Philippi in Thrace, or Macedonia, opposite to tbeisle of Thasos, twelve clays journey from Constantinople. (Cellarius, torn. 1. p.676. 840.)
> According to tile malevolent testimony of the Anecdotes, (c. 18.) these in­roads had reduced tbe provinces, south of the Dannbe, to the state of a Scythianwilderness. • •
*■ From Caf to Caf; which a more rational geography would interpret from Imaus,perhaps in mount Atlas. According to the religious philosophy of the Mahometans,the basis of mount Cat' is an emerald, whoso reflection produces the azure of the sky.







OCR Output








350 .' Decline And fall' [fcHAP. xlYv,


freedomof the ma­trimonialo m tract.


gamy was unknown, he could never admit to his ted afairer or more favoured partner.
After the Punic triumphs, the matrons of Rome as­pired to the common benefits of a free and opulent re­public: their Wishes were gratified by the indulgence offathers and lovers, and their ambition was unsuccessfullyresisted by the gravity of Cato the Censor/ They de­clined the solemnities of the bid nuptials, defeated theannual prescription by an absence of three days, and-,without losing their name or independence, subscribed"the liberal and definite terms of a marriage-contractOf their private fortunes, they communicated the use,and secured the property; the estates of a wife couldneither be alienated nor mortgaged by a prodigal hus-<band; their mutual gifts were prohibited by the jealousyof the laws; and the misconduct of either party mightafford, under another name, a future subject for an acjtion of theft. To this loose and voluntary compact,religious and civil rites were no longer essential; and*between persons of a similar rank, the apparent commu­nity of life was allowed as sufficient evidence'of theirnuptials. The dignity of marriage was restored by theChristians, who derived all spiritual grace from the pray­ers of the faithful and the benediction of the priest orbishop. The origin, validity, and duties of the holy in­stitution, were regulated by the tradition of the syna­gogue, the precepts of the Gospel, and the canons'ofgeneral or provincial synods ;f and the conscience of theChristians was awed'by the decrees and censures of their
But the student or doctor was free from tribute; and no wife, if she received a weeklysustenance, could sue for divorce: for one week a vow of abstinence was allowed.Polygamy divided, without multiplying, the duties of the hushand. (Selden.'Uxor.Ebraica, "lib. 3. c. 6. in his works, vol. 2. p. 717—720.)
■ On the Oppian law we may hear the mitigating speech of Valerius Flaccus, andthe severe censorial oration of the elder Cato, (Liv. 34. 1—8.) But we shall ra­ther hear the polished historian nf the eighth, than the rough orators of the sixth,century of Rome. The principles, and even the style, of Cato are more accuratelypreserved by Aulas Gellius. (10. 23.)
f For the system of Jewish and Catholic matrimony, see Selden, (Uxor Ebraica,Opp. vol. 2. p. 529—860.) Bingham, (Christian Antiquities, lib. 2J.) and Chardot.(Hist, des Sacremens, tom. 6.)







OCR Output













OCR Output








310 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIII.


chres. The ricli marbles of a patrician are dashed onhis own head: a whole people is buried under the ruinsof public and private edifices, and the conflagration iskindled and propagated by the innumerable fires whichare necessary for the subsistence and manufactures ofa great city. Instead of the mutual sympathy whichmight comfort and assist the distressed, they dreadfullyexperience the Vices and passions which are releasedfrom the fear of punishment: the tottering houses' arepillaged by intrepid avarice; revenge embraces the mo­ment, and selects the victim; and the earth often swal­lows the assassin, or the ravisher, in the consummationof their crimes. Superstition involves the present dan­ger with invisible terrors ; and if the image of death maysometimes be subservient to the virtue or repentance ofindividuals, an affrighted people is more forcibly movedto expect the end of the world, or to deprecate with ser­vile homage the wrath of an avenging Deity..^*s»e— III. ^Ethiopia and Egypt have been stigmatized inand natare, every age, as the original source and seminary of the* plagae.* In a damp, hot, stagnating air, this Africanfever is generated from the putrefaction of animal sub­stances, and especially from the swarms of locusts, notless destructive to mankind in their death than in theirlives. The fatal disease which depopulated the earth inthe time of Justinian and his successors,' first appeared inthe neighbourhood of Pelusium, between the Sefbonianbog and the eastern channel of the Nile. From thence,tracing as it were a double path, it spread to the east,over Syria, Persia, and the Indies, and penetrated to thewest, along the coast of Africa, and over the continentof Europe. In the spring of the second year, Constan-
• I have read with pleasure Mead's short, bat elegant treatise, concerning Pesti­lential Disorders, the eighth edition, London, 1722.
• The great plagne which raged in 542, and the following years, (Pagi, Critica,torn. 2. p. 518.) must be traced in Procopius, (Persic, lib. 2. c. 22, 23.) Agalhias,(lib. 5. p. 153, 154.) Evagrius, (lib. 4. c. 29.) Paul Diaconus, (lib. 2. c. 4. p. 776,777.) Gregory of Tours, (torn. 2. lib. 4. c. 5. p. 205.) who styles it Lues Inguinaria,.and the Chronicles of Victox Tunnunensis, (p. 9. in Thesaar. Temporum,) of Marcel-linus, (p. 54.) and of Theophanes. (p. 153.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV.] OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 421


Modena, the grand dutchy of Tuscany, and a large por­tion of the ecclesiastical state from Perugia to the Adriatic.The dukes, and at length the princes, of Beneventumsurvived the monarchy, and propagated the name of theLombards. From Capua to Tarentum, they reignednear five hundred years over the greatest part of the pre­sent kingdom of Naples.0
In comparing the proportion of the victorious and the Languagevanquished people, the change of language will afford ™ra™f"hethe most probable inference. According to this standard Lombards-it will appear, that the Lombards of Italy, and the Visi­goths of Spain, were less numerous than the Franks orBurgundians; and the conquerors of Gaul must yield, intheir turn, to the multitude of Saxons and Angles whoalmost eradicated the idioms of Britain. The modernItalian has been insensibly formed by the mixture of na­tions; the awkwardness of the barbarians in the nice ma­nagement of declensions and conjugations, reduced themto the use of articles and auxiliary verbs; and many newideas have been expressed by Teutonic appellations. Yetthe principal stock of technical and familiar words isfound to be of Latin derivation ;p and if we were suffici­ently conversant with the obsolete, the rustic, and themunicipal dialects of ancient Italy, we should trace theorigin of many terms which might, perhaps, be rejectedby the classic purity of Rome. A numerous army con­stitutes but a small nation, and the powers of the Lom­bards were soon diminished by the retreat of twenty thou­sand Saxons, who scorned a dependant situation, and re­turned, after many bold and perilous adventures, to theirnative country.q The camp of Alboin was of formidable
0 I have described llie slate of Italy from the excellent Dissertation of Beretti.Giannone (Istoria Civile, torn. 1. p. 374—387.) has followed the learned CamillaPelegrini in the geography of the kingdom of Naples. After the loss of the trueCalabria, the vanity of the Greeks substituted that name instead of the more ignobleappellation of Brutlium; and the change appears to have taken place before the limeof Charlemagne. (Eginard, p. 75.)
'Madei,(Verona Ulustrata, part 1. p. 310—321.) and Mnratori, (Antichita Ilali-aie, torn.2. Dissertazione 32, 33. p. 71—365.) baveasserted the native claims of (hel'alian idiom: tho former with enthusiasm, the latter with discretion; both with learn­ing, ingenuity, and truth.
« Paul, deGest. Langobard. lib. 3. c. 5—7.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XXXIX.


forests of Germany and Poland, to pursue the emigra­tions of the Heruli, a fierce people, who disdained theuse of armour, and who condemned their widows andaged parents not to survive the loss of their husbands,or the decay of their strength.0 The king of these savagewarriors solicited the friendship of Theodoric, and waselevated to the rank of his son, according to the barba­ric rites of a military adoption.13 From the shores of theBaltic, the iEstians, or Livonians, laid their offerings ofnative amberq at the feet of a prince, whose fame had ex­cited them to undertake an unknown and dangerous jour­ney of fifteen hundred miles. With the country7 fromwhence the Gothic nation derived their origin, he main­tained a frequent and friendly correspondence; the Italianswere clothed in the rich sables' of Sweden; and one ofits sovereigns, after a voluntary or reluctant abdication,found a hospitable retreat in the palace of Ravenna.He had reigned over one of the thirteen populous tribeswho cultivated a small portion of the great island or pe­ninsula of Scandinavia, tp which the vague appellation ofThule has been sometimes applied. That northern re­gion was peopled, or had been explored, as high as thesixty-eighth degree of latitude, where the natives of thepolar circle enjoy and lose the presence of the sun at each
(c. 58. p. 698, 699 ) and the Valesian Fragment, (p. 720,721.) Peace, honourablepeace, was the constant aim of Theodoric.
'• The carious reader may contemplate the Heroli of Procopius, (Goth. lib. 2.c. 14.) and the patient reader may plunge into the dark and minute researches ofM. de Bual. (Hist, des Peoples Anciens, torn. 9. p. 348—396.)
P Variarum, 4. 2. The spirit and forms of this martial institution are noticed byCassiodorius; but he seems to have only translated the sentiments of the Gothic kinginto the language of Roman eloquence.
i Cassiodorius, who quotes Tacitus to the iEstians, the unlettered savages of theBaltic, (Var. 5. 2.) describes the amber for which their shores have ever been famous,as the'gum of a tree, hardened by the sun, and purified and wafted by the waves.When that singular substance is analyzed by the chemists, it yields a vegetable oiland a mineral acid. ,
r Scanzia, or Thule, is described by Jornades (c. 3. p. 610—613.) and Procopius.(Goth. lib. 2. c. 15.) Neither the Goth nor the Greek had visited the country: bothhad conversed with the natives in their exile at Ravenna or Constantinople.
» Sapherinas pellet, la the time of Joruandes, they inhabited Snethaiis, the properSweden; bnt that beautiful race of animals has gradually been driven into the easternparts of Siberia. See Buffon (Hist. Nat. torn. 13. p. 309—313. quarto edition),Pennant, (System of Quadrupeds, vol. 1. p. 322—328.) Giuelin, (Hist. Qen. desVoyages, torn. 18. p. 257, 258.) and Levesque. (Hist, de Russie, torn. 5. p. 165,,Kit). 514, 515.) _-■./..;•.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XXXIX.


spect, which had been more justly applied to the meritand authority of their ancestors. The people enjoyed,without fear or danger, the three blessings of a capital-order, plenty, and public amusements. A visible dimi­nution of their numbers may be found even in the mea­sure of liberality ;n yet Apulia, Calabria, and Sicily, pour­ed their tribute of corn into the granaries of Rome; anallowance of bread and meat was distributed to the indi­gent citizens; and every office was deemed honourablewhich was consecrated to the care of their health and hap­piness. The public games, such as a Greek ambassadormight politely applaud, exhibited a faint and feeble copyof the magnificence of the Caesars: yet the musical, thegymnastic, and the pantomime arts, had not totally sunkin oblivion; the wild beasts of Africa still exercised in theamphitheatre the courage and dexterity of the hunters;and the indulgent Goth either patiently tolerated orgently restrained the blue and green factions, whose con­tests so often filled the circus with clamour, and even withblood.0 In the seventh year of his peaceful reign, Theo-doric visited the old capital of the world; the senate andpeople advanced in solemn procession to salute a secondTrajan, a new Valentinian; and he nobly supported thatcharacter by the assurance of a just and legal govern­ment,1" in a discourse which he was not afraid to pro­nounce in public, and to inscribe on a tablet of brass.Rome, in this august ceremony, shot a last ray of de­clining glory; and a saint, the spectator of this pompousscene, could only hope in his pious fancy, that it was. ex­celled by the celestial splendour of the New Jerusalem.qDuring a residence of six months, the fame, the person,
* No more than one hundred and twenty thousand moilii, or four thousand quarters.(Anonym. Valesian. p. 721. and Var. 1. 35. 6. 18. It. 5. 39.)
° See his regard and indulgence for the spectacles of the circus, the amphitheatre,and the theatre, in the Chronicle and Epistles of Cassiodorius (Var. 1. 20. 27. S0»31,32. 3. 5 I. 4.51.) illustrated by the fourteenth annotation of Mascou's History),who has contrived to sprinkle the subject with ostentatious, though agreeable, learning.
P Anonym. Vales, p. 721. Marius Aventicensis in Chron. In the scale of publioand personal merit, the Gothic conqueror is at least as much above Valentinian as hemay seem inferior lo Trajan.
4 Vit. Fiiigeiitii in Baron. Annal, Eccles. A. D. 500. no. 10.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 453


bishops, the impression was erased by the zeal and elo­quence of the Magi; if he was armed with philosophicindifference, he accommodated his belief, or rather hisprofessions, to the various circumstances' of an exile and .. . -a sovereign. The imaginary conversion of the king ofPersia was reduced to a local and superstitious venerationfor Sergius,1 one of the saints of Antioch, who heard hisprayers and appeared to him in dreams; he enriched hisshrine with offerings of gold and silver, and ascribed tohis invisible patron, the success of his arms, and thepregnancy of Sira, a devout Christian, and the best be­loved of his wives." The beauty of Sira or Schirin,*her wit, her musical talents, are still famous in the his­tory, or rather in the romances of the east: her ownname is expressive, in the Persian tongue, of sweetnessand grace; and the epithet of Parvis alludes to the charmsof her royal lover. Yet Sira never shared the passionwhich she inspired, and the bliss of Chosroes was tor­tured by a jealous doubt, that while he possessed her per­son, she had bestowed her affections on a meaner fa­vourite/ •1
While the majesty of the Roman name was revived in Pride, po-
* Sergius and his companion Bacchus, who are said to have suffered in the perse­cution of Maximian, obtained divine kouoor in France, Italy, Constantinople, and theeast. Their tomb at Rasaphe was famous for miracles, and that Syrian town acquiredthe more honourable name of Sergiopolis. Tillemont, Mem. Socles, torn. 5. p. 491—496. Butler's Saints, vol. 10. p. 155.
"Evagriua, (lib. 6. c. 21.) and Theophylact, (lib. 5. c. 13,14.) hare preserved theoriginal letters of Chosroes, written in Greek, signed with his own hand, and after­ward inscribed on crosses and tables of gold, which were deposited in the church ofSergiopolis. They had been sent to the bishop of Antioch, as primate of Syria. ,
* The Greeks only describe her as a Roman by birth, a Christian by religion; but•he is represented as the daughter of the emperor Maurice in the Persian and TurkishRomances, which celebrate the love of Khosrou for Schirin, of Schirin'fur Ferhad, themost beautiful youth of the east. D'Herbelot, Biblioth. Orient, p. 789. 997, 998.
T The whole series of the tyranny of Hormouz, the revolt of Bahrain, and the flightand restoration of Chosroes, is related by two contemporary Greeks—more conciselyby Kvagrius, (lib. 6. c. 16—19.)—and most diffusely by Theophylaot Simocatta:(lib. 3. c. 6—18. lib. 4. c. 1—16* lib. 5. c. 1—15.) succeeding compilers, Zonarasand Cedrenus, can only transcribe and abridge. The Christian Arabs Eutycliius, (An-nal. torn. 2. p. 200—20G.) and Ahnlpharagius, (Dynast, p. 96—98.) appear to haveoousulted some particular memoirs. The great Persian historians of the fifteenth cen­tury, Mirkhond and Khondemir, are only known to ine by the imperfect extracts ofShikard, (Tarikh, p. 150—155.) Texeira, or rather Stevens, (Hist, of Persia, p. 182—186.) a Turkish MS. translated by the abbe Fourmont, (Hist, de l'Acadeinie desInscriptions, torn. 7. p. S25—334.) and d'Herbelot, (aux mots, Hormouz, p. 457—459. Bahrain, p. 174. Khosrou Parviz, p. 996.) Were I perfectly satisfied of theirauthority, I could wish these oriental materials had been more copious.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 199


tained the sentence of his fate. "You cannot be igno­rant how much you have deserved my displeasure. I amnot insensible of the services of Antonina. To her me­rits and intercession I have granted your life, and permityou to retain a part of your treasures, which might bejustly forfeited to the state. Let your gratitude, whereit is due, be displayed, not in words, but in your futurebehaviour." I know not how to believe or to relate thetransports with which the hero is said to have receivedthis ignominious pardon. He fell prostrate before hiswife, he kissed the feet of his saviour, and he devoutlypromised to live the grateful and submissive slave of An­tonina. A fine of one hundred and twenty thousandpounds sterling was levied on the fortunes of Belisarius;and with the office of count, or master of the royal sta­bles, he accepted the conduct of the Italian war. At hisdeparture from Constantinople, his friends, and even thepublic, were persuaded, that as soon' as he regained hisfreedom, he would renounce his dissimulation; and thathis wife, Theodora, and perhaps the emperor himself,would be sacrificed to the just revenge of a virtuous rebel.Their hopes were deceived; and the unconquerable pa­tience and loyalty of Belisarius appear either below orabove the character of a MAN.b


CHAP. XLII.
Slnte of the harharic world.—Establishment of the Lomhards on the Dannbe.—Tribes and iuroads of the Sclavonians.—Origin, empire, and emhassies of theTurks.—The flight of the Avars.—Chosroes I. or Nushirvan, king of Persia.—Hisprosperous reign and wars with the Romans.—The Cholchian or Lazic war.—The^Ethiopians.
Our estimate of personal merit is relative to the com- weaknessmon faculties of mankind. The aspiring efforts of ge- Pire °r jus-nius, or virtue, cither in active or speculative life, are a'd"^?-
—565.
b The continnator of the chronicle of Marcellinus gives, in a few decent words,the substance of the Anecdotes.—Belisarius de Oriente evocatus, in ofl'unsam pe-riculumque incurreus grave, ct invidiae suhjacens, rursus remittitur in Italiaro,(p. 54.)







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XXXXI.


obstinate bigots, who refused their contributions, werewhipped through the streets by the hand of the execu­tioner. This simple act of justice exasperated the dis­content of the Catholics, who applauded the merit andpatience of these holy confessors; three hundred pulpitsdeplored the persecution of the church; and if the chapelof St. Stephen at Verona was demolished by the com­mand of Theodoric, it is probable that some miracle hos­tile to his name and dignity had been performed on thatsacred theatre. At the close of a glorious life, the kingof Italy discovered that he had excited the hatred of apeople whose happiness he had so assiduously labouredto promote; and his mind was soured by indignation,jealousy, and the bitterness of unrequited love. TheGothic conqueror condescended to disarm the unwarlikenatives of Italy, interdicting all weapons of offence, andexcepting only a small knife for domestic use. The de­liverer of Rome was accused of conspiring with the vilestinformers against the lives of senators whom he suspectedof a secret and treasonable correspondence with the By­zantine court.5 After the death of Anastasius, the dia­dem had been placed on the head of a feeble old man;but the powers of government were assumed by his ne­phew Justinian, who already meditated the extirpation ofheresy, and the conquest of Italy and Africa. A rigor­ous law, which was published at Constantinople, to reducethe Arians by the dread of punishment within the paleof the church, awakened the just resentment of Theo­doric, who claimed, for his distressed brethren of the east,the same indulgence which he had so long granted tothe Catholics of his dominions. At his stern command,the Roman pontiff, with four illustrious senators, em­barked on an embassy, of which he must have alikedreaded the failure or the success. The singular vene­ration shewn to the first pope who had visited Constan-
« Rex avidus communis exitii, &c. (BoeUiius. lib. 1. p. 59.) rex dolam Komanistendebat. (Auonym. Vales, p. 723.) These are hard words: they speak the passionsof the Italians, and those (1 fear) of Theodoric himself.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL.


tering praise, and the source of more exquisite delight.Her features were delicate and regular; her complexion,though somewhat pale, was tinged with a natural colour;every sensation was instantly expressed by the vivacity ofher eyes; her easy motions displayed the graces of asmall but elegant figure; and either love or adulationmight proclaim, that painting and poetry were incapableof delineating the matchless excellence of her form.But this form was degraded by the facility with which itwas exposed to the public eye, and prostituted to licen­tious desire. Her venal charms were abandoned to apromiscuous crowd of citizens and strangers, of everyrank, and of every profession; the fortunate lover whohad been promised a night of enjoyment, was oftendriven from her bed by a stronger or more wealthy fa­vourite; and when she passed through the streets, herpresence was avoided by all who wished to escape eitherthe scandal or the temptation. The satirical historianhas not blushed2 to describe the naked scenes whichTheodora was not ashamed to exhibit in the theatre.1After exhausting the arts of sensual pleasure,6 she mostungratefully murmured against the parsimony of nature;°but her murmurs, her pleasures, and her arts, must beveiled in the obscurity of a learned language. Afterreigning for some time, the delight and contempt of thecapital, she condescended to accompany Ecebolus, a na-
z A fragment of the Anecdotes (e. 9.) somewhat too naked, was surpressed byAlemannus, though extant in the Vatican MS. nor has the defect been supplied in theParis or Venice editions. La Mothe le Vayer (tom. 8. p. 155.) gave the first hintof this carious and genuine passage (Jortin's Remarks, vol. 4. p. 366.) which hehad received from Rome, and it has been since published in the Menagiana, (tom. 3.1». 254—259.) with a Latin version.
a After the mention of a narrow girdle (as none conld appear starknaked in thetheatre), Procopius thus proceeds.—AvawCTrroxwa rt v/ryttajpu uittw 6iEeito. 0>ite«$e rivc; .... xpi9a; aur»i viriqQii ra>v atim&v tpgtirrov a; 5s oi ot E? touto iretpeo~HEvito~-
fxvfot miy%avov toi? a-rofxaa-iv ei8a$s xara fxtav aveXojuEvoi tcr9iov. 1 have heard that alearned prelato, now deceased, was fond of quoting this passage in conversation.
b Theodora surpassed the Crispa of Ansonius, (Epigram 71.) who imitated thecapitalis luxus of the females of Nola. See Quintilian Institut. 8. 6. and Torrentiusad Morat. Sermon. lib.l. sat. 2.5. 101. At a memorable supper, thirty slaves wait­ed round the table; ten young men feasted with Theodora. Her charity was universal.Kt lassata viris, necdum satiata, recessit.
c h8e xaK rpiiwv rpuTTnfxcmuv tpyafyf/.tv'i mxuXu rr. <pu?u XurqcgcvfxivtI on 3i fxiI Kmrirrat/; avm tvfvrifw n \uv ua-i rfuTra>v, oitxs SVvarnoj Kai exiivjj ipya£eo~dai. She wishedfor a fourth altar, on which she might pour lihations to the god of lore,







OCR Output








474 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLVI.


the ruin of the proudest monument of Christianity wasvehemently urged by the intolerant spirit of the Magi;and he could inlist, for this holy warfare, an army of sixand twenty thousand Jews, whose furious bigotry mightcompensate, in some degree, for the want of valour anddiscipline. After the reduction of Galilee, and the re­gion beyond the Jordan, whose resistance appears to havedelayed the fate of the capital, Jerusalem itself was takenby assault. The sepulchre of Christ, and the statelychurches of Helena and Constantine, were consumed, orat least damaged, by the flames; the devout offerings ofthree hundred years were rifled in one sacrilegious day;the patriarch Zachariah, and the true cross, were trans­ported into Persia; and the massacre of ninety thousandChristians is imputed to the Jews and Arabs who swelledthe disorder of the Persian march. The fugitives ofPalestine were entertained at Alexandria by the charityof John the archbishop, who is distinguished among acrowd of saints by the epithet of alms-giver :v and the re­venues of the church, with a treasure of three hundredthousand pounds, were restored to the true proprietors,the poor of every country and every denomination. ButEgypt itself, the only province which had been exempt,since the time of Diocletian, from foreign and domesticof Egypt, war, was again subdued by the successors of Cyrus. Pe-a. d. 616. jusjumj f-ne of tnat impervious country, was surprisedby the cavalry of the Persians: they passed, with impu­nity, the innumerable channels of the Delta, and exploredthe long valley of the Nile, from the pyramids of Mem­phis to the confines of ./Ethiopia. Alexandria mighthave been relieved by a naval force, but the archbishopand the prefect embarked for Cyprus; and Chosroes en­tered the second city of the empire, which still preserveda wealthy remnant of industry and commerce. His west­ern trophy was erected, not on the walls of Carthage/*
P The life of this wortby saint is composed by Leontius, a contemporary hishop;and I find in Baronins, (Annal. Eccles. A. D. 610. no. 10, &c.) and Fleury, (torn.8. p. 235—*242.) sufficient extracts of this edifying work.
i The error of Bnronius, and many others who hare carried the arms of Chosroes







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 411


tred his brothers and cousins, the rivals of his hopes; norcould he depend on the gratitude of those who would ac-• cept the purple as a restitution, rather than a gift. Ofthese competitors, one had been removed by exile, andafterward by death; and the emperor himself had in­flicted such cruel insults on another, that he must eitherdread his resentment or despise his patience. This do­mestic animosity was refined into a generous resolution ofseeking a successor, not in his family, but in the repub­lic: and the artful Sophia recommended Tiberius,b hisfaithful captain of the guards, whose virtues and fortunethe emperor might cherish as the fruit of his judiciouschoice. The ceremony of his elevation to the rank of AmocU-Cassar or Augustus, was performed in the portico of the Tinerins,palace, in the presence of the patriarch and the senate. December.'Justin collected the remaining strength of his mind andbody, but the popular belief that his speech was inspiredby the Deity betrays a very humble opinion both of theman and of the times.0—" You behold (said the emperor)the ensigns of supreme power. You are about to receivethem not from my hand, but from the hand of God.Honour them, and from them you will derive honour.Respect the empress your mother ; you are now her son;before, you were her servant. Delight not in blood, ab­stain from revenge, avoid those actions by which I haveincurred the public hatred, and consult the experiencerather than the example of your predecessor. As a man,I have sinned; as a sinner, even in this life, I have beenseverely punished : but these servants (and he pointed tohis ministers) who have abused my confidence, and in-flamedmy passions, willappear with mebeforethe tribunalof Christ. I have been dazzled by the splendour of the
b The praise bestowed on princes before their elevation, is the purest and mostweighty. Corippus has celebrated Tiberius at the time of the accession of Justin.(lib. 1. 212—222.) Yet even a captain of the guards might attract the flattery of anAfrican exile.
c Evagrius (lib. 5. c. 13.) has added the reproach to his ministers. He applies thisspeech to the ceremony when Tiberius was invested with the rank of Caesar. The looseexpression, rather than the positive error, of Theophanes, &o. has delayed it to hisAugustan investituro immediately before the death of Justin.


2 E 2







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 103


and a third platform, spacious and secure, was raised oftthe summit of the towers. The exterior wall appearsto have been less lofty, but more solid; and each towerwas protected by a quadrangular bulwark. A hard rockysoil resisted the tools of the miners, and on the south­east where the ground was more tractable, their approachwas retarded by a new work, which advanced in theshape of a half-moon. The double and treble ditche$were filled with a stream of water; and in the manage-,ment of the river, the most skilful labour was employedto supply the inhabitants, to distress the besiegers, andto prevent the mischiefs of a natural or artificial inunda­tion. Dara continued more than sixty years to fulfil thewishes of its founders, and to provoke the jealousy ofthe Persians, who incessantly complained, that this im­pregnable fortress had been constructed in manifest vio­lation of the treaty of peace between the two empires.
Between the Euxine and the Caspian, the countries of The cM-Cholchos, Iberia, and Albania, are intersected in every iberiandirection by the branches of mount Caucasus; and the 8ates'two principal gates, or passes, from north to south, havebeen frequently confounded in the geography both ofthe ancients and moderns. The name of Caspian orAlbanian gates, is properly applied to Derbend," whichoccupies a short declivity between the mountains andthe sea; the city, if we give credit to local tradition, hadbeen founded by the Greeks; and this dangerous en-'trance was fortified by the kings of Persia with a mole,double walls, and doors of iron. The Iberian gates" areformed by a narrow passage of six miles in mount Cau­casus, which opens from the northern side of Iberia orGeorgia, into the plain that reaches to the Tanais and
1 For the city and pass of Derbend, see d'Herbelot, (Bihliot. Orient. p. 157. 291.807.) Petite de la Croix, (Hist, de Gengiscan, lib. 4. c. 9.) Histoire Genealogiqaede Tatars, (tom. i. p. 120.) Olesrius, (Voyage en Perse, p. 1039—1041.) and Cor-■eille le Brune, (Voyages, tom. i. p. 146,147.) his view may be compared with theplan of Olearius, who judges the wall to be of shells and gravel hardened by time.
1 Procopius, though with some confusion, always denominates them Caspian.(Persic. lib. 1. c. 10.) The pass is now styled Tatartopa, the Tartar-gates. (d'An-ville, Geographie Ancienne, tom. 2. p. 119, 120.)







OCR Output








338 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XH-V.


the most learned civilians of the east, to labour withthejr sovereign in the work of reformation .b The the­ory of professors was assisted by the practice of advo­cates, and the experience of magistrates; and the wholeT"d "aSr Vn^erta^'.nff was animated by the spirit of Tribonian.0—546. This extraordinary man, the object of so much praiseand censure, was a native of Side in Pamphylia; and hisgenius, like that of Bacon, embraced, as bis own, all thebusiness and knowledge of the age. Tribonian com­posed, both in prose and verse, on a strange diversity ofcurious and abstruse subjects'1—a double panegyric ofJustinian and the life of the philosopher Theodotus; thenature of happiness, and the duties of government; Ho­mer's catalogue and the four-and-twenty sorts of metre;the astronomical canon of Ptolemy; the changes of themonths; the houses of the planets; and the harmonicsystem of the world. To the literature of Greece headded the use of the Latin tongue; the Roman civilians. were deposited in his library and in his mind; and hemost assiduously cultivated those arts which opened theroad of wealth and preferment. From the bar of thepraetorian prefects, he raised himself to the honours ofquaestor, of consul, and of master of the offices: thecouncil of Justinian listened to his eloquence and wisdom,and envy was mitigated by the gentleness and affabilityof his. manners. The reproaches of impiety and avaricehave .stained the v irtues or the reputation of Tribonian.
'• « ■ •
* For the legal labours of Justinian, I have studied the preface to the Institutes;the first, second, and third prefaces to the Pandects; the first and second preface tothe Code; and the Code itself, (lib. 1. tit. 17. de Veteri Jure enucleando). Afterthese originat testimonies, I have consulted, among the moderns, Heineccius, (Hist.J.R. no. 383—404.) Terasson, (Hist. de la Jurisprudence Romaine, p. 295—356.)Gravina, (Opp. p'. 93—100.) and Ludewig, in hfs life of Justinian, (p. 19—123.318—321. for the Code and Novels, p. 209—261. for the Digest or Pandects, p.262—317.) ': ''. ■■<-''
c For the character of Tribonian, see the testimonies of Procopius, (Persic. lib. 1.£. 23, 24.' Anecdot. c. 13. 20.) and Suidas. (tow. 3. p. 501.'edit. Kuster.) Lude­wig (in Vit.'juttiniajt. p. 175—209.) works hard, very hard, to white-wash—tlieblack-a-moor.
d I apply the two passages of Suidas to the same man; every circumstance so ex­actly tallies. Yet the lawyers appear ignorant; and Fabricibs is inclined to separatethe two characters. (Bihliot. Graec. tom. 1. p. 341. 2. p. 518. 3. p. 418. 12. p. 346.
363. 474.) ; • •







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLII.'


selves. Their importance was measured by their vicinityto the empire; and the level country of Moldavia andWalachia was occupied by the Antes/1 a Sclavonian-tribe, which swelled the titles of Justinian with an epi­thet of conquest/ Against the Antes he erected thefortifications of the Lower Danube; and laboured to se­cure the alliance of a people seated in the direct chan­nel of northern inundation, an interval of two hundredmiles between the mountains of Transylvania and theEuxine sea. But the Antes wanted power and inclina^tion to stem the fury of the torrent: and the light-armedfSclavonians, from a hundred tribes, pursued with almostequal speed the footsteps of the Bulgarian horse. Thepayment of one piece of gold for each soldier, procureda safe and easy retreat through the country of the Ge-pida3, who commanded the passage of the Upper Da­nube.' The hopes or fears of the barbarians; their in­testine union or discord; the accident of a frozen orshallow stream; the prospect of harvest or vintage; theprosperity or distress of the Romans; were the causes"which produced the uniform repetition of annual visits,1tedious in the narrative, and destructive in the event,The same year, and possibly the same month, in whichRavenna surrendered, was marked by an invasion of theHuns or Bulgarians, so dreadful, that it almost effacedthe memory of their past inroads. They spread fromthe suburbs of Constantinople to the Ionian Gulf, de*-stroyed thirty-two cities or castles, erazed Potidaea,which Athens had built and Philip had besieged, andrepassed the Danube, dragging at their horses' heels
i Antes eorum forlissimi.. . Taysis qui rapidns et vorticosus in H istri fluenla fa-rens devolvitur. (Jornandes, e. 5. p. 194. edit. Murator. Procopius, Goth. lib. 3. Cy14. et de Kdific. lib. 4. c. 7.) Yet the same Procopius mentions the Goths and Hungas neighbours. yurovouvTa, to the Danube, (de Edifio. lib. 4. c. 1.)
r The national title of Anlicus, in the laws and inscriptions of Justinian, was adopt­ed by his successors, and is justified by the pious Ludewig (in Vit. Justinian, p. 515.)It had strangely puzzled the civilians of the middle age.
8 Procopius, Goth. lib. 4. c. 25.
* An inroad of the Huns is connected, by Procopius, with a comet; porhaps thatof 531. (Persic, lib. 2. c. 4.) Agathaias (lib. 5. p. 154, 155.) borrows from hispredecessor some early facts.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND f ALL [CHAP. XLIV.


the enemies of Justinian; that the jurisprudence of an­cient Rome was reduced to ashes by the author of thePandects, from the vain persuasion, that it was noweither false or superfluous. Without usurping an officeso invidious, the emperor might safely commit to igno­rance and time the accomplishment of this destructivewish. Before the invention of printing and paper, thelabour and the materials of writing could be purchasedonly by the rich; and it may reasonably be computed,that the price of books was a hundred fold their presentvalue." Copies were slowly multiplied and cautiouslyrenewed: the hopes of profit tempted the sacrilegiousscribes to erase the characters of antiquity, and Sopho­cles or Tacitus were obliged to resign the parchment tomissals, homilies and the golden legend.p If such wasthe fate of the most beautiful compositions of genius,what stability could be expected for the dull and barrenworks of an obsolete science? The books of jurispru­dence were interesting to few, and entertaining to none;their value was connected with present use, and theysunk for ever as soon as that use was superseded by theinnovations of fashion, superior merit, or public autho­rity. In the age of peace and learning, between Ciceroand the last of the Antonines, many losses had been al­ready sustained, and some luminaries of the school, orForum, were known only to the curious by tradition andreport. Three hundred and sixty years of disorder anddecay accelerated the progress of oblivion; and it mayfairly be presumed, that of the writings, which Justinianis accused of neglecting, many were no longer to befound in the libraries of the east.q The copies of Papi-
° When Fust, or Paustus, suld at Paris his first printed hibles as manuscripts, theprice of a parchment copy was reduced from four or five hundred to sixty, fifty, andforty crowns. The public was at first pleased with the cheapness, and at length pro-Yoked by the discovery of the fraud. (Mattaire, Annal. Typograph. tom. 1. p. 12.first
edition.)
P This execrable practice prevailed from the eighth, and more especially from thetwelth, century, when it became almost universal. (Montfaucon, in the Memoires del'Academie, tom. 6. p. 606, &c. Bibliotheque Raisonnee de la Diplomatique, tom. 1.p. 176.)
1 Pomponins (Pandect, lib. 1. tit, 2. leg. 5.) observes, that of the three founders







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.} OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 49$


guilty or unfortunate general. The dispatches weretransmitted to Sarbar himself; and as soon as he read thesentence of his own death, he dexterously inserted the .,•names of four hundred officers, assembled a militarycouncil, and asked the cadarigan, whether he was pre­pared to execute the commands of their tyrant? ThePersians unanimously declared, that Chosroes had for­feited the sceptre; a separate treaty was concluded withthe government of Constantinople; and if some consi­derations of honour or policy restrained Sarbar from join­ing the standard of Heraclius, the emperor was assured,that he might prosecute, without interruption, his de­signs of victory and peace.
. Deprived of his firmest support, and doubtful of the Hi«third
_ _ . _ . 11 expedition,
fidelity of his subjects, the greatness of Chosroes was a. d. 6z7.still conspicuous in its ruins. The number of five hun­dred thousand may be interpreted as an oriental meta­phor, to describe the men and arms, the horses and ele­phants, that covered Media and Assyria against the in­vasion of Heraclius. Yet the Romans boldly advancedfrom the Araxes to the Tigris, and the timid prudence ofRhazates was content to follow them by forced marchesthrough a desolate country till he received a peremptorymandate to risk the fate of Persia in a decisive battle.Eastward of the Tigris, at the end of the bridge of Mo-sal, the great Nineveh had formerly been erected thecity, and even the ruins of the city, had long since disap­peared :k the vacant space afforded a spacious field for theoperations of the two armies. But these operations areneglected by the Byzantine historians, and, like the au-
'Ctesias (apud Diodnr. Sicul. torn. 1. lib. 2. p. 115. edit. Wesseling, assigns fourhundred and eight; stadia (perhaps only thirty-two miles) for the circumference ofNineveh. Jonas talks of three days' journey: the one hundred and twenty thousandpersons described by the prophet as incapable of discerning their right band fromtheir left, may afford about seven hundred thousand persons of all ages for the inha­bitants of that ancient capital, (Goguet, Origincs des Loix, &c. torn. 3. part 1. p. 92,93.) which ceased to exist six hundred years before Christ. The western suburbstill subsisted, and is mentioned under the name of Mosul in the first age of the Ara­bian caliphs.
k Niebuhr (Voyage en Arable, &c. torn. 2. p. 286.) passed over Nineveh withoutperceiving it. He mistook for a ridge of hills the old rampart of brick or earth. Itis said to have been one hundred feet high, flanked with fifteen hundred towers, eachof the height of two hundred feet.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI.


most faithful of the enemy; and his fortunate captives,the Vandals, the Moors, and the Goths, emulated theattachment of his domestic followers. By the union ofliberality and justice, he acquired the love of the soldiers,without alienating the affections of the people. Thesick and wounded were relieved with medicines andmoney; and, still more efficaciously, by the healing visitsand smiles of their commander. The loss of a weaponor a horse was instantly repaired, and each deed of valourwas rewarded by the rich and honourable gifts of a brace­let or a collar, which were rendered more precious bythe, judgment of Belisarius. He was endeared to thehusbandmen, by the peace and plenty which they enjoy­ed under the shadow of his standard. Instead of beinginjured, the country was enriched by the march of theRoman armies; and such was the rigid discipline of theircamp, that not an apple was gathered from the tree, nota path could be traced in the fields of corn. Belisariuswas chaste and sober. In the licence of a military life,none could boast that they had seen him intoxicated withwine: the most beautiful captives of Gothic or Vandalrace were offered to his embraces; but he turned asidefrom their charms, and the husband of Antonina wasnever suspected of violating the laws of conjugal fidelity.The spectator and historian of his exploits has observed,that, amidst the perils of war, he was daring withoutrashness, prudent without fear, slow or rapid accordingto the exigencies of the moment; that in the deepestdistress he was animated by real or apparent hope, butthat he was modest and humble in the most prosperousfortune. By these virtues, he equalled or excelled theancient masters of the military art. Victory, by sea andland, attended his arms. He subdued Africa, Italy, andthe adjacent islands, led away captives the successors ofGenseric and Theodoric; filled Constantinople with thespoils of their palaces, and in the space of six years reco­vered half the provinces of the western empire. In his







OCR Output








324 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLiy.


ly absurd. The secret or probable wish of the dead wassuffered to prevail over the order of succession and theforms of testaments; and the claimant, who was ex­cluded from the character of heir, accepted with equalpleasure from an indulgent praetor the possession of thegoods of his late kinsman or benefactor. In the redressof private wrongs, compensations and fines were substi­tuted to the obsolete rigour of the twelve tables; timeand space were annihilated by fanciful suppositions; andthe plea of youth, or fraud, or violence, annulled the ob­ligation, or excused the performance, of an inconvenientcontract. A jurisdiction thus vague and arbitrary wasexposed to the most dangerous abuse; the substance,as well as the form, of justice, were often sacrificedto the prejudices of virtue, the bias of laudable affec­tion, and the grosser seductions of interest or resent-,ment. But the errors or vices of each praetor expiredwith his annual office; such maxims alone as had beenapproved by reason and practice were copied by succeed­ing judges; the rule of proceeding was defined by thesolution of new cases; and the temptations of injusticewere removed by the Cornelian law, which compelledthe praetor of the year to adhere to the letter and spiritof his first proclamation,1 It was reserved for the curi­osity and learning of Hadrian, to accomplish the designwhich had been conceived by the genius of Ceesar; andthe praetorship of Salvius Julian, an eminent lawyer,uw! edict0" w^s immortalized by the composition of the perpetualedict. This well-digested code was ratified by the em­peror and the senate; the long divorce of law and equitywas at length reconciled; and, instead of the twelvetables, the perpetual edict was fixed as the invariablestandard of civil jurisprudence.™
1 Dion Cassius (tom. 1. lib. 36. p. 100.) fixes perpetual edicts in the year of Rome686. Their institution, however, is ascribed to the year 585 in the Acta Diurna,which have been published from the papers of Ludnvicus Vivea. Their authenticity'is supported or allowed by Pighius, (Annal. Roman. tom. 2. p. 377, 378.) Gravida,(ad Sueton. p. 778.) Dodwell, (PraJection. Camden, p. 665.) and Heineccius; hat asingle word, Scutum Cimbricum, detects the forgery. (Moyle's Works ,vol. I. p. 303.)
m The history of edicts is composed, and the text of the perpetual edict is restored







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FAIL [CHAP. XL1Y.


malice of an incendiary. After the previous ceremonyof whipping, he himself was delivered to the flames ; andin this example alone our reason is tempted to approvethe justice of retaliation. 5. Judicial perjury. Thecorrupt and malicious witness was thrown headlong fromthe Tarpeian rock to expiate his falsehood, which wasrendered still more fatal by the severity of the penal laws,and the deficiency of written evidence. 6. The corrup­tion of a judge, who accepted bribes, to pronounce an ini­quitous sentence. 7. Libels and satires, whose rudestrains sometimes disturbed the peace of an illiterate city.The author was beaten with clubs, a worthy chastise­ment, but it is not certain that he was left to expireunder the blows of the executioner.*1 8. The nocturnalmischief of damaging or destroying a neighbour's corn.The criminal was suspended as a grateful victor to Ceres.But the Sylvan deities were less implacable, and the extir­pation of a more valuable tree was compensated by themoderate fine of twenty-five pounds of copper. Q. Ma­gical incantations; which had power, in the opinion ofthe Latin shepherds, to exhaust the strength of an ene­my, to extinguish his life, and remove from their seatshis deep-rooted plantations. The cruelty of the twelvetables against insolvent debtors still remains to be told;and I shall dare to prefer the literal sense of antiquity, tothe specious refinements of modern criticism/ Afterthe judicial proof or confession of the debt, thirty daysof grace were allowed before a Roman was delivered intothe power of his fellow-citizens. In this private prison,twelve ounces of rice were his daily food; he might be
tarch in Romnlo, tom. 1. p. 57.) Baring the Cimbric, P. Malleolus was guilty ofthe first matricide, (liy. Epitom. lib. 68.)
'1 Horace talks of the furmidine fastis; (lib. 2. epist. 2. 154.) hat Cicero de Re­publics (lib. 4. apud Augustin. de Civitat. Dei, 9. 6. in Fragment. Philosoph. tom. 3.p. 393. edit Olivet) affirms that the decemvirs made libels a capital offence : cam per-pancas res capite faxissent—perpaucus!
r Bynkershoek (Observat. Juris Rom. lib. 1. c. 1. in Opp. tom. 1. p. 9—11.) la­bours to prove that the creditors divided not the body, but the price of the insolventdebtor. Yet his interpretation is one perpetual harsh metaphor; nor can he surmount,the Roman authorities of Quiutilian, Cacciiius, Favonius, and Terlullian. See AulusGeltias, Noct. Attie. SI.







OCR Output








CHAP. XXXIX.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 31


tinople was punished as a crime by his jealous monarch;the artful or peremptory refusal of the Byzantine courtmight excuse an equal, and would provoke a larger,measure of retaliation; and a mandate was prepared inItaly', to prohibit, after a stated day, the exercise of theCatholic worship. By the bigotry of his subjects andenemies, the most tolerant of princes was driven to thebrink of persecution; and the life of Theodoric was toolong., since he lived to condemn the virtue of Boethiusand Symmachus.'
The senator Boethius" is the last of the Romans whom character,Cato or Tully could have acknowledged for their coun- and L™-tryman. As a wealthy orphan, he inherited the patri- so"hiL.mony and honours of the Anician family, a name ambi­tiously assumed by the kings and emperors of the age;and the appellation of Manlins asserted his genuine orfabulous descent from a race of consuls and dictators,who had repulsed the Gauls from the Capitol, and sacri­ficed their sons to the discipline of the republic. In theyouth of Boethius, the studies of Rome were not totallyabandoned; a Virgil" is now extant, corrected by thehand of a consul; and the professors of grammar, rhe­toric, and jurisprudence, were maintained in their privi­leges and pensions, by the liberality of the Goths. Butthe erudition of the Latin language was insufficient tosatiate his ardent curiosity; and Boethius is said to haveemployed eighteen laborious years in the schools ofAthens,1 which were supported by the zeal, the learning,
'I have laboured to extract a rational narrative from the dark, concise, and varioushints of the Valesian Fragment, (p. 722—724.) Theophanes, (p. 145.) Anastasins,(in Johanne.p. 35.)and the Hist.Miscella. (p. 108.edit.(Moratori.) A gentle pressureand paraphrase of their words is no violence. Consult likewise Muratori (Annalid'ltalia, tom. 4. p. 471—478.) with the Annals and Breviary (tom. 1. 259—263.) ofthe two Pagis, the uncle and the nephew.
• Le Clerc has composed a ciitical and philosophical life of Anioius Manlius Seve­ring Boethius, (Blbliot. Chdisie, tom. 16. p. 168—275.) and both Tiraboschi (tom. 3.)and Fabricius (Bibllot. Latin.) may be usefully consulted. The date of his hirth mayhe placed about the year 470, and his death in 524, in a premature old age. (Consot.Phil. Metrica, 1. p. 5.)
"For the age and value of this MS. now in the Medicean library at Florence, seethe Cenotaphia Pisana (p. 430—447.) of cardinal Noris.
? The Athenian studies of Boethius are doubtful (Baronius, A. D. 510. no. 3. from»' sburious tract, De Disciplina Scholarum), and the term of eighteen years is doubt-







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.] OF THE ROMAM EMPIRE. 32£


, From Augustus to Trajan, the modern Cassars werd [j™5tj1,fI,"hecontent to promulgate their edicts in the various charac- emperors,ters of a Roman magistrate: and, in the decrees of thefsenate, the epistles and orations of the prince were respect­fully inserted. Hadrian" appears to have been the firstwho assumed, without disguise, the plenitude of legisla­tive power. And this innovation, so agreeable to hisactive mind, was countenanced by the patience of thetimes, and his long absence from the seat of government.The same policy was embraced by succeeding monarchs,and, according to the harsh metaphor of Tertullian,"the gloomy and intricate forest of ancient laws wascleared away by the axe of royal mandates and consti­tutions"" During four centuries, from Hadrian to Jus­tinian, the public and private jurisprudence was mouldedby the will of the sovereign; and few institutions, eitherhuman or divine, were permitted to stand on their for­mer basis. The origin of imperial legislation was con­cealed by the darkness of ages and the terrors of armeddespotism; and a double fiction was propagated by. theservility, or perhaps the ignorance, of the civilians whobasked in the sunshine of the Roman and Byzantinecourts. 1. To the prayer of the ancient Cassars, thepeople or the senate had sometimes granted a personalexemption from the obligation and penalty of particularstatutes; and each indulgence was an act of jurisdictionexercised by the republic over the first of her citizens.His humble privilege was at length transformed into theprerogative of a tyrant; and the Latin expression of"released from the laws,"p was supposed to exalt theemperor above all human restraints, and to leave his
by the master-hand of Heineccius, (Opp. tom. 7. P. 2. p. 1—564.) in whoso re­searches I might safely acquiesce. In the Academy of Inscriptions, M. Boachaudhas given a series of memoirs to this interesting snbject of law and literature.• n [lis laws are the first in the Code. See Dodwell, (Praelect. Camden, p'. 319—■340.) who wanders from the subject in confused reading and feeble paradox.- ° Totam illam veterem et squalleutem sylvam legum novis principalium rescrip--torum et edictorum securibus ruscatis ct carditis. (Apologet. c. 4. p. 50. edit. Haver-camp.) He proceeds to praise the recent firmness of Severns, who repealed the use­less or pernicious laws, without any regard to their age or authority.
P The constitutional style of Legibus Suiutus is misinterpreted by the art or igno-







OCR Output








GHAP. Xi.IV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 330.


In a bigoted and persecuting court, the principal minis­ter was accused of a secret aversion to the Christian faith,and was supposed to entertain the sentiments of an athe­ist and a Pagan, which have been imputed, inconsistentlyenough, to the last philosophers of Greece. His avaricewas more clearly proved and more sensibly felt. If hewere swayed by gifts in the administration of justice, theexample of Bacon will again occur; nor can the meritof Tribonian atone for his baseness, if he degraded thesanctity of his profession ;.and if laws were every dayenacted, modified, or repealed, for the base considera­tion of his private emolument. In the sedition of Con­stantinople, his removal was granted to the clamours,perhaps to the just indignation, of the people; but thequaestor was speedily restored, and till the hour of hisdeath, he possessed, above twenty years, the favour andconfidence of the emperor. His passive and dutiful sub­mission has been honoured with the praise of Justinianhimself, whose vanity was incapable of discerning howoften that submission degenerated into the grossest adu­lation. Tribonian adored the virtues of his graciousmaster: the earth was unworthy of such a prince; andhe affected a pious fear, that Justinian, like Elijah orRomulus, would be snatched into the air, and translatedalive to the mansions of celestial glory."
- If Caesar had achieved the reformation of the Roman The Codelaw, his creative genius, enlightened by reflection andean/'study, would have given to the world a pure and original p^ig28,system of jurisprudence. Whatever flattery might sug- *'I?1-y29'gest, the emperor of the east was afraid to establish hisprivate judgment as the standard of equity: in the pos­session of legislative power, he borrowed the aid of time
e This story is related by Hesychius (de'Viris lllustribus), Procopius, (Anecdot.c. 13.) and Suidas. (tom. 3. p. 501.) Such flattery is incredible!
Nihil est quod credere de se
Non poterit cum laudator Diis scqua potestas.Fontenelle (tom. 1. p. 32—39.) has ridiculed the impudence of the modest Virgil.But the same Fontenelle places his king above the divine Augustus; and the sagettoileau has not blushed to say,—" Le destin a ses yeux u'oseroit halancer." Yetneither Augustus nor Louis XIV". were fools.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAF. XU1I.


 


historian Procopius, escaped to Sicijy: two-thirds of thearmy were involved in the guilt of treason; and eightthousand insurgents, assembling in the field of Bulla,elected Stoza for their chief, a private soldier, who pos­sessed, in a superior degree, the virtues of a rebel; Un­der the mask of freedom, his eloquence could leadj or atleast impel, the passions of his equals. He raised him­self to a level with Belisarius, and the nephew of theemperor, by daring to encounter them in the field; andthe victorious generals were compelled to acknowledge,that Stoza deserved a purer cause and a more legitimatecommand. Vanquished in battle, he dexterously em­ployed the arts of negotiation; a Roman army was se­duced from their allegiance, and the chiefs, who hadtrusted to his faithless promise, were murdered, by hisorder, in a church of Numidia. When every resourcejeither of force or perfidy, was exhausted, Stoza, withsome desperate Vandals, retired to the wilds of Mauri­tania, obtained the daughter of a barbarian prinCe, andeluded the pursuit of his enemies, by the report of hisdeath. The personal weight of Belisarius, the rank, thespirit, and the temper, of Germanus, the emperor's ne­phew, and the vigour and success of the second adminis­tration of the eunuch Solomon, restored the modesty ofthe camp, and maintained, for a while,. the tranquillity ofAfrica. But the vices of the Byzantine court were feltjn that distant province; the troops complained that theywere neither paid nor relieved * and' as Soon as the publicdisorders were sufficiently mature, Stoza was again alive^in arms, and at the gates of Carthage. He feH in a sin­gle combat, but he smiled in the agonies of death, whenhe was informed that his own javelin had reached theheart of his antagonist. The example of Stoza, and theassurance that a fortunate soldier had been the first king,encouraged the ambition of Gontharis, and he promised,by a private treaty, to divide Africa with the Moors, if,with their dangerous aid, he should ascend the throne of







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XXXIX.


of the Ostrogoths; and the three brothers, Walamir,Theodemir, and Widimir, who ruled that warlike na­tion with united counsels, had separately pitched theirhabitations in the fertile though desolate province ofPannonia. The Huns still threatened their revoltedsubjects, but their hasty attack was repelled by the sin­gle forces of Walamir, and the news of his victory reach­ed the distant camp of his brother in the same auspiciousmoment that the favourite concubine of Theodemir wasdelivered of a son and heir. In the eighth year of hisage, Theodoric was reluctantly yielded by his father tothe public interest, as the pledge of an alliance whichLeo, emperor of the east, had consented to purchase byan annual subsidy of three hundred pounds of gold. Theroyal hostage was educated at Constantinople with care'and tenderness. His body was formed to all the exer­cises of war, his mind was expanded by the habits of li­beral conversation; he frequented the schools of themost skilful masters; but he disdained or neglected thearts of Greece, and so ignorant did he always remain ofthe first elements of science, that a rude mark was con­trived to represent the signature of the illiterate king ofItaly.0 As soon as he attained the age of eighteen, hewas restored to the wishes of the Ostrogoths, whom theemperor ■ aspired to gain by liberality and confidence.Walamir had fallen in battle; the youngest of the bro­thers, Widimir, had led away into Italy and Gaul an armyof barbarians, and the whole nation acknowledged fortheir king the father of Theodoric. His ferocious sub­jects admired the strength and stature of their youngprince ;d and he soon convinced them that he had notdegenerated from the valour of his ancestors. At the
c The four - first letters of his name (OEftA) were inscribed on a gold plate, andwhen it was fixed on the paper, the king drew his pen through the intervals. (Ano­nym. Valesian. ad Calcein Ainin. Marcellin. p. 722.) This authentic fact, with thetestimony of Procopius, or at least of the contemporary Coths, Gothic, lib. 1. o. 2.p. 311.) far outweighs the vague praises of Ennodius (Sirmodd Opera, torn. 1. p.1596.) and Theophaues. (Chronograph, p. 112.)
d Statura est qua? resignet procerifale regimnlem. (Ennodius, p. 1614.) Thebishop of Pavia (I mean the ecclesiastic who wished to be a bishop) then proceedsto celebrate the complexion, eyes, hands, &c. of his sovereign.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [cHAP. X


the streets: a general persecution is exercised againstour name and colour. Let us die, O emperor! but letus die by your command, and for your service!" Butthe repetition of partial and passionate invectives de­graded, in their eyes, the majesty of the purple; theyrenounced allegiance to the prince who refused justice tohis people; lamented that the father of Justinian hadbeen born; and branded his son with the opprobriousnames of a homicide, an ass, and a perjured tyrant."Do you despise your lives?" cried the indignant mo­narch: the blues rose with fury from their seats; theirhostile clamours thundered in the hippodrome; and theiradversaries, deserting the unequal contest, spread terrorand despair through the streets of Constantinople. Atthis dangerous moment, seven notorious assassins ofboth factions, who had been condemned by the prefect,were carried round the city, and afterward transportedto the place of execution in the suburb of Pera. Fourwere immediately beheaded; a fifth was hanged: butwhen the same punishment was inflicted on the remain­ing two, the rope broke, they fell alive to the ground,the populace applauded their escape, and the monks ofSt. Conon, issuing from the neighbouring convent, con­veyed them in a boat to the sanctuary of the church.*As one of these criminals was of the blue, and the otherof the green livery, the two factions were equally pro­voked by the cruelty of their oppressor, or the ingratitudeof their patron ; and a short truce was concluded till theyhad delivered their prisoners, and satisfied their revenge.The palace of the prefect, who withstood the seditioustorrent, was instantly burnt, his officers and guards weremassacred, the prisons were forced open, and freedomwas restored to those who could only use it for the pub­lic destruction. A military force, which had been dis­patched to the aid of the civil magistrate, was fiercelyencountered by an armed multitude, whose numbers
e See this church and monastery in Dacange, C P. Christiana, lib. 4. p. 182.







OCR Output








76 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL.


The emperor refused, at the return of each fifth year,the customary donative of five pieces of gold, reduced hisveterans to beg their bread, and suffered unpaid armiesRemit- to melt away in the wars of Italy and Persia. II. The«Doei. humanity of his predecessors had always remitted, insome auspicious circumstance of their reign, the arrearsof the public tribute; and they dexterously assumed themerit of resigning those claims, which it was impracti­cable to enforce. "Justinian, in the space of thirty-twoyears, has never granted a similar indulgence; and manyof his subjects have renounced the possession of thoselands, whose value is insufficient to satisfy the demandsof the treasury. To the cities, which had suffered byhostile inroads, Anastasius promised a general exemptionof seven years: the provinces of Justinian have been ra­vaged by the Persians and Arabs, the Huns and Sclavo-nians; but his vain and ridiculous dispensation of a singleyear has been confined to those places which were actu­ally taken by the enemy." Such is the language of thesecret historian, who expressly denies that any indul­gence was granted to Palestine after the revolt of theSamaritans; a false and odious charge, confuted by theauthentic record, which attests a relief of thirteen cen­tenaries of gold (52,000/.), obtained for that desolateprovince by the intercession of St. Sabas.q III. Pro-copius has not condescended to explain the systemof taxation^ which fell like a hail-storm upon the land,like a devouring pestilence on its inhabitants; but weshould become the accomplices of his malignity, if weimputed to Justinian alone, the ancient though rigorousprinciple, that a whole district should be condemned tosustain the partial loss of the persons or property of in-Taxes." dividuals. The Anona, or supply of corn for the use ofthe army and capital, was a grievous and arbitrary ex-
1 One to Scythopolis, capital of the second Palestine, and twelve for the rest ofthe province. Alenian. (p. 59.) honestly prodnces this fact from a MS. life of St.Sahas, by his disciple Cyril, in the Vatioan library, and since published by Cott-lerins.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


these extraordinary concessions, the successful agent ofJustinian hastened his journey to Constantinople; butno sooner had he reached the Alban villa," than he wasrecalled by the anxiety of Theodatus; and the dialoguewhich passed between the king and the ambassador de­serves to be represented in its original simplicity. —Areyou of opinion that the emperor will ratify this treaty?Perfiaps. If he refuses, what consequence will ensue?fVar. Will such a war be just or reasonable? Most as­suredly: every one should act according to his character.What is your meaning? You are a philosopher—Justi­nian is emperor of the Romans: it ivould ill become thedisciple of Plato to shed the blood of thousands in hisprivate quarrel: the successor of Augustus should vindi­cate his rights, and recover by arms the ancient provincesof his empire." This reasoning might not convince,but it was sufficient to alarm and subdue the weaknessof Theodatus; and he soon descended to his last offer,that for the poor equivalent of a pension of 48,00O/.sterling, he would resign the kingdom of the Goths andItalians, and spend the remainder of his days in the in<-nocent pleasures of philosophy and agriculture. Bothtreaties were intrusted to the hands of the ambassador,on the frail security of an oath, not to produce the se­cond till the first had been positively rejected. Theevent may be easily foreseen: Justinian required and ac­cepted the abdication of the Gothic king. His indefa­tigable agent returned from Constantinople to Ravenna,with ample instructions; and a fair epistle, which praisedthe wisdom and generosity of the royal philosopher,granted his pension, with the assurance of such honours,as a subject and a Catholic might enjoy; and wisely re­ferred the final execution of the treaty, to the presenceand authority of Belisarius. But in the interval of sus-
° The ancient Alha was ruined in the first age of Rome. Qn the same spot, or atleast in the neighbourhood, successively arose, 1. The villa of Pompey, &c. '2. Acamp of the praetorian cohorts. 8. The modern episcopal city of Alhanam or Alha-no. (Procop. Goth. lib. 2. c. i. Clover. Hat. Antirj. tum. 8. p. 914.)







OCR Output








202 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLII.


the kingdoms of the Goths and Vandals, the emperor,*timid, though ambitious, balanced the forces of the bar­barians, fomented their divisions by flattery and false-^hood, and invited by his patience and liberality the repe­tition of injuries.' The keys of Carthage, Rome, andRavenna, were presented to their conqueror, while An-tioch was destroyed by the Persians, and Justinian trem­bled for the safety of Constantinople.
bubiHuM* Even the Gothic victories of Belisarius were prejudi­cial to the state, since they abolished the important bar­rier of the Upper Danube, which had been so faithfullyguarded by Theodoric and his daughter. For the defenceof Italy, the Goths evacuated Pannonia and Noricum,which they left in a peaceful and flourishing condition:the sovereignty was claimed by the emperor of the Rod­mans: the actual possession was abandoned to the bold­ness of the first invader. On the opposite banks of theDanube, the plains of Upper Hungary and the Transyl-vanian hills were possessed, since the death of Attila, by
TheGepidie the tribes of the Gepidae, who respected the Gothicarms, and despised, not indeed the gold of the Romans,but the secret motive of their annual subsidies. Thevacant fortifications of the river were instantly occupiedby these barbarians: their standards were planted on thewalls of Sirmium and Belgrade; and the ironical tone oftheir apology aggravated this insult on the majesty of theempire. "So extensive, O Cassar, are your dominions;so numerous are your cities; that you are continuallyseeking for nations to whom, either in peace or war,you may relinquish these useless possessions. The Ge-pidas are your brave and faithful allies; and if they haveanticipated your gifts, they have shewn a just confidencein your bounty." Their presumption was excused by
* Agathias, lib. S. p. 157,158. He confines this weakness of the emperor andtheempire to the old age of Justinian; bat, alas! be was never young.
'This mischievous policy, which Procopius (Anecdot. c. 19.) imputes to the em­peror, is revealed in his epistle to a Scj thian prince, who was capable of understand­ing it. kym irftfxiBiiiKtu ayppvcwTaTov;, says Agathias, (lib. 5. p. 170, 171.)







OCR Output








THR


HISTORY


OF THI


THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


EDWARD GIBBON, Esq.


A NEW EDITION,WITH MAPS AND PORTRAIT;COMPLETE IN EIGHT VOLUMES.
* VOL. V.


LONDON:
PRINTED FOR R. PRIESTLEY, HIGH HOLBORN;J. OFFOR, NEWGATE STREET; W. H. REID, CIIARING-CROSS;
PRIESTLEY AND WEALE, HIGH STREET, BLOOMSBURY;M, DOYLE, HIGH IIOHSORN t AND D. A. TALBOYS, OXFORD:
By J. F. Dove, St. John's Square.


1821.







OCR Output








388 • DECLINE AND FALL [CHAV. XLIV.


\'. and Alexander of Diospolis, were dragged through thestreets of Constantinople, while their brethren were ad­monished by the voice of a crier, to observe this awfullesson, and not to pollute the sanctity of their character.Perhaps these prelates were innocent. A sentence ofdeath and infamy was often founded on the slight andsuspicious evidence of a child or a servant; the guilt ofthe green faction, of the rich, and of the enemies ofTheodora, was presumed by the judges, and paederastybecame the crime of those to whom no crime could beimputed. A French philosopherp has dared to remark,that whatever is secret must be doubtful, and that our na­tural horror of vice may be abused as an engine of tyranny.But the favourable persuasion of the same writer, that alegislator may confide in the taste and reason of mankind,is impeached by the unwelcome discovery of the antiquityand extent of the disease.'judgments The free citizens of Athens and Rome enjoyed, in allpeople. criminal cases the invaluable privilege of being tried bytheir country.1 1. The administration of justice is themost ancient office of a prince: it was exercised by theRoman kings, and abused by Tarquin; who alone, with­out law or council, pronounced his arbitrary judgments.The first consuls succeeded to this regal prerogative; butthe sacred right of appeal soon abolished the jurisdictionof the magistrates, and all public causes were decided by
■ P Montesquieu, Esprit des Loix, lib. 12. c. 6. That eloquent philosopher conci­liates the rights of liberty and of nature, which should never be placed in oppositionto each other. ',
1 For the corruption of Palestine, two thousand years before the Christian era, seethe history and laws of Moses. Ancient Gaul is stigmatized by Diodorus Sicuius,(tom.,1. lib. 5. p. 356.) China by the Mahometan and Christian travellers* (AncisntRelations of India and China, p. 34. translated by Renaudot, and his hitter critic, thePere Premare, Lettres Edinantes, tom. 19. p. 435.)and native America by the Spanishhistorians. (Garcillasso de la Vega, lib. 3. c. 13. Rycaut's translation, and Dic-tionaire de Bayle, tom. 3. p. 88.) I believe, and hope, that the negroes, in their owncountry, were exempt from this moral pestilence.
''Hie important subject of'the public questions and judgments at Rome is ex­plained with much learning, and in a classic style, by Charles Sigonius, (lib. 3. deJudiciis, in Opp. tom. 3. 679—864.) and a good abridgment may be found in the Re-pnblique Romaine of Beaufort. (tom. 2. lib. 5. p. 1—121.) Those who wish for moreabstruse law, may study Noodt, (de Jurisdictione et Imperio Libri duo, tom. 1. p. 93—)34.)Heineccius, (ad Pandect. lib. 1. et 2. ad Ihstitut. lib. 4. tit. 17. Element, adAntiquitat.) and Gravina. (Opp. 230—2a1.) •'







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


the corrupt appellation of Giustendil still indicates, abouttwenty miles to the south of Sophia, the residence of aTurkish sanjak.* For the use of the emperor's country­men, a cathedral, a palace, and an aqueduct, were speedi­ly constructed; the public and private edifices wereadapted to the greatness of a royal city; arid the strengthof the walls resisted, during the lifetime of Justinian, theunskilful assaults of the Huns and Sclavonians. Theirprogress was sometimes retarded, and their hopes of ra­pine were disappointed, by the innumerable castles,which, in the provinces of Dacia, Epirus, Thessaly, Ma­cedonia, and Thrace, appeared to cover the whole face ofthe country. Six hundred of these forts were built orrepaired by the emperor: but it seems reasonable to be­lieve, that the far greater part consisted only of a stoneor brick tower, in the midst of a square or circular area,which was surrounded by a wall and ditch, and affordedin a moment of danger some protection to the peasantsand cattle of the neighbouring villages.1 Yet these mi-rlitary works, which exhausted the public treasure, couldnot remove the just apprehensions of Justinian and hisEuropean subjects. The warm baths of Anchialus inThrace were rendered as safe as they were salutary; butthe rich pastures of Thessalonica were foraged by theScythian cavalry; the delicious vale of Tempe, threehundred miles from the Danube, was continually alarm­ed by the sound of war ;a and no unfortified spot, how­ever distant or solitary, could securely enjoy the blessingsof peace. The straits of Thermopylae, which seemedto protect, but which had so often betrayed, the safety
J See d'Anville; (Memoires de l'Auademie, &c. lorn. 31. p. 289, 290.) Rycaut(Present State of the Turkish empire, p. 97. 316.) Ivlarsigli. (Stato Mililare del Iro-perio Ottomano, p. 130.) The sanjak of Giostendil is one of the twenty nnder thebeglerheg of Romulia, and his district maintains forty-eight zaims and five hundredand eighty-three timariots.
* These fortifications may be compared to the castles in Mingrelia (Chardin, Voy­ages en Perse, torn. 1. p. 60. 131.)—a natural picture.
» The valley of Tempe is situate along the river Peneus, between the hills of Ossaand Olympas: it is only five miles long, and in some places no more than one hundredend twenty feel in breadth. lis verdant beauties are elegantly described by Pliny^(Hist. Natur. lib. i. IS.)'and more diffusely by ..Elian. (Hist.Var. lih-3. c. 1.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


later times, was devoted to the study of the law; astro­nomy and physic were cultivated in the museum ofAlexandria; but the Attic schools of rhetoric and philo­sophy maintained their superior reputation from the Pe-loponnesian war to the reign of Justinian. Athens,though situate in a barren soil, possessed a pure air, a freenavigation, and the monuments of ancient art. Thatsacred retirement was seldom disturbed by the businessof trade or government; and the last of the Athenianswere distinguished by their lively wit, the purity of theirtaste and language, their social manners, and some traces,at least in discourse, of the magnanimity of their fathers.In the suburbs of the city, the academy of the Platonists,the lyceum of the Peripatetics, the portico of the Stoics,and the garden of the Epicureans, were planted withtrees and decorated with statues: and the philosophers,instead of being immured in a cloister, delivered their in­structions in spacious and pleasant walks, which, at dif­ferent hours, were consecrated to the exercises of themind and body. The genius of the founders still livedin those venerable seats; the ambition of succeeding tothe masters of human reason, excited a generous emula­tion; and the merit of the candidates was determined, oneach vacancy, by the free voices of an enlightened people.The Athenian professors were paid by their disciples:according to their mutual wants and abilities, the priceappears to have varied from a mina to a talent; and Iso-crates himself, who derides the avarice of the sophists,required, in his school of rhetoric, about thirty poundsfrom each of his hundred pupils. The wages of industryare just and honourable, yet the same Isocrates shedtears at the first receipt of a stipend; the Stoic mightblush when he was hired to preach the contempt of mo­ney; and I should be sorry to discover, that Aristotle orPlato so far degenerated from the example of Socrates,as to exchange knowledge for gold. But some propertyof lands and houses was settled by the permission of the


i 2







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL II


was covered by fifteen hundred chosen horse, destined,according to the emergencies of action, to sustain the re­treat of their friends, or to encompass the flank of theenemy. From his proper station at the head of the rightwing, the eunuch rode along the line, expressing by hisvoice and countenance the assurance of victory; excitingthe soldiers of the emperor to punish the guilt and mad­ness of a band of robbers; and exposing to their view,gold chains, collars, and bracelets, the rewards of militaryvirtue. From the event of a single combat, they drewan omen of success; and they beheld with pleasure thecourage of fifty archers, who maintained a small emi­nence against three successive attacks of the Gothic ca­valry. At the distance only of two bow-shots, the ar­mies spent the morning in dreadful suspense, and the Ro­mans tasted some necessary food, without unlooseningthe cuirass from their breast, or the bridle from theirhorses. Narses awaited the charge; and it was delayedby Totila till he had received his last succours of twothousand Goths. While he consumed the hours infruitless treaty, the king exhibited in a narrow space thestrength and agility of a warrior. His armour was en­chased with gold; his purple banner floated with thewind; he cast his lance into the air; caught it with theright hand; shifted it to the left; threw himself back­wards; recovered his seat; and managed a fiery steed inall the paces and evolutions of the equestrian school.As soon as the succours had arrived, he retired to histent, assumed the dress and arms of a private soldier,and gave the signal of battle. The first line of cavalryadvanced with more courage than discretion, and left be­hind them the infantry of the second line. They weresoon engaged between the horns of a crescent, into whichthe adverse wings had been insensibly curved, and weresaluted from either side by the volleys of four thousandarchers. Their ardour, and even their distress, drovethem forwards to a close and unequal conflict, in which







OCR Output








CHAP. XLlJ Of THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


moved that guarded the entrance of the port; the gateswere thrown open, and the people, with acclamations ofgratitude, hailed and invited their Roman deliverers.The defeat of the Vandals, and the freedom of Africa,were announced to the city on the eve of St. Cyprian,when the churches were already adorned and illuminatedfor the festival of the martyr, whom three centuries ofsuperstition had almost raised to a local deity. TheArians, conscious that their reign had expired, resignedthe temple to the Catholics, who rescued their saint fromprofane hands, performed the holy rites, and loudly pro­claimed the creed of Athanasius and Justinian. Oneawful hour reversed the fortunes of the contending par­ties. The suppliant Vandals, who had so lately indulgedthe vices of conquerors, sought an humble refuge inthe sanctuary of the church; while the merchants ofthe east were delivered from the deepest dungeon of thepalace by their affrighted keeper, who implored the pro­tection of his captives, and shewed them, through anaperture in the wall, the sails of the Roman fleet. Af­ter their separation from the army, the naval commandershad proceeded with slow caution along the coast, tillthey reached the Hermaean promontory, and obtainedthe first intelligence of the victory of Belisarius. Faith­ful to his instructions, they would have cast anchor abouttwenty miles from Carthage, if the more skilful seamenhad not represented the perils of the shore, and thesigns of an impending tempest. Still ignorant of the re­volution, they declined, however, the rash attempt offorcing the chain of the port; and the adjacent harbourand suburb of Mandracium were insulted only by the ra­pine of a private officer who disobeyed and deserted hisleaders. But the imperial fleet, advancing with a fairwind, steered through the narrow entrance of the Go-letta, and occupied, in the deep and capacious lake ofTunis, a secure station about five miles from the capital.'
1 The neighbourhood of Carthage, the sea, the land, and the rivers, are changed







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


who patiently endured the loss of the1 port, and of allmaritime supplies. The siege of Rome would perhapshave been raised, if the liberality of Totila to the Isau-rians had not encouraged some of their venal country­men to copy the example of treason. In a dark night,while the Gothic trumpet sounded on another side, theysilently opened the gate of St. Paul: the Barbariansrushed into the city; and the flying garrison was inter­cepted before they could reach the harbour of Centum-cellae. A soldier trained in the school of Belisarius,Paul of Cilicia, retired with four hundred men to themole of Hadrian. They repelled the Goths; but theyfelt the approach of famine; and their aversion to thetaste of horse-flesh confirmed their resolution to risk theevent of a desperate and decisive sally. But their spiritinsensibly stooped to the offers of capitulation: they re­trieved their arrears of pay, and preserved their armsand horses, by enlisting in the service of Totila; theirchiefs, who pleaded a laudable attachment to their wivesand children in the east, were dismissed with honour;and above four hundred enemies, who had taken refugein the sanctuaries, were saved by the clemency of thevictor. He no longer entertained a wish of destroyingthe edifices of Rome,z which he now respected as theseat of the Gothic kingdom: the senate and people wererestored to their country ; the means of subsistence wereliberally provided; and Totila, in the robe of peace, ex­hibited the equestrian games of the circus. Whilst heamused the eyes of the multitude, four hundred vesselswere prepared for the embarkation of his troops. Thecities of Rhegium and Tarentum were reduced: he passedinto Sicily, the object of his implacable resentment, andthe island was stripped of its gold and silver, of the fruits
1 The Romans were still attached to the mouumenU of their ancestors; and, ac­cording to Procopius, (Goth. lib. 4. c. 22.) the galley or /Eneas, of a single rank ofoars, twenty-five feet in breadth, one hundred and twenty in length, was preservedentire in the navaiia, near Monte Testaceo, at the foot of the Aventine. (Nardini, Ro­ma Antica, lib. 7. c. 9. p. 466. Donatus, Roma Antiqua, lib. 4. c. 13. p. 334.) Butall antiquity is ignorant of this relic.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 117


verty exempted them from tribute, and whose cowardicewas seldom exposed to military service. But the wisercitizens, who judged of the future by the past, revolvedin their memory the immense loss, both of men andmoney, which the empire had sustained in the expedi­tion of Basiliscus. The troops, which after five laboriouscampaigns had been recalled from the Persian frontier,dreaded the sea, the climate, and the arms of an un­known enemy. The ministers of the finances computed,as far as they might compute, the demands of an Africanwar; the taxes which must be found and levied to sup­ply those insatiate demands; and the danger, lest theirown lives, or at least their lucrative employments, shouldbe made responsible for the deficiency of the. supply.Inspired by such selfish motives (for we may not suspecthim of any zeal for the public good), John of Cappado-cia ventured to oppose in full council the inclinations ofhis master. He confessed, that a victory of such impor­tance could not be too dearly purchased; but he repre­sented in a grave discourse the certain difficulties andthe uncertain event. "You undertake (said the prefect)to besiege Carthage by land ; the distance is not less thanone hundred and forty days journey; on the sea, a wholeyeard must elapse before you can receive any intelligencefrom your fleet. If Africa should be reduced, it can­not be preserved without the additional conquest of Si­cily and Italy. Success will impose the obligation ofnew labours; a single misfortune will attract the barba­rians into the heart of your exhausted empire." Justi­nian felt the weight of this salutary advice; he was con­founded by the unwonted freedom of an obsequious ser­vant ; and the design of the war would perhaps have beenrelinquished, if his courage had not been revived bya voice which silenced the doubts of profane reason.
d A year—absurd exaggeration! The conqnest of Africa may be dated A. D. 533,September 14: it is celebrated by Justinian in the preface to his Institutes, whichwere published November 21 of the same year. Including the voyage and return,such a computation might be truly applied to our Indian empire.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIH.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 309


cated to the whole surface of the globe, or at least of theRoman empire. An impulse or vibratory motion wasfelt; enormous chasms were opened, huge and heavybodies were discharged into the air, the sea alternately ad­vanced and retreated beyond its ordinary bounds, and amountain was torn from Libanus/ and cast into thewaves, where it protected, as a mole, the new harbour ofBotrysq in Phoenicia. The stroke that agitates an ant­hill, may crush the insect myriads in the dust; yet truthmust extort a confession, that man has industriouslylaboured for his own destruction. The institution ofgreat cities, which include a nation within the limits ofa wall, almost realizes the wish of Caligula, that the Ro­man people had but one neck. Two hundred and fifty a. d. 526,
. . May 20.
thousand persons are said to have perished in the earth­quake of Antioch, whose domestic multitudes wereswelled by the conflux of strangers to the festival of theAscension. The loss of Berytus' was of smaller account, a. d. 551.but of much greater value. That city, on the coast ofJttIy 9-Phoenicia, was illustrated by the study of the civil law,which opened the surest road to wealth and dignity : theschools of Berytus were filled with the rising spirits ofthe age, and many a youth was lost in the earthquake,who might have lived to be the scourge of the guardianof his country. In these disasters, the architect be­comes the enemy of mankind. The hut of a savage,or the tent of an Arab, may be thrown down withoutinjury to the inhabitant; and the Peruvians had reasonto deride the folly of their Spanish conquerors, whowith so much cost and labour erected their own sepul-
P An abrupt height, a perpendicular cape between Aradns and Botrys, named bythe Greeks Sim wpffmr* and luvpe-tovn or Xifarpwvffor, by the scrupulous Christians,(Polyb. lib. 5. p. 411. Pompon. Mela, lib. 1. c. 12. p. 87.) cum Isaac Voss. Obser-vat. Maandrell. Journey, p. 32, 33. Pocock's Description, vol. 2. p. 99.)
1 But,ys was founded (ann. ante Christ. 935—903.) by Itliobal, king of Tyre.(Marsham, Canon. Chron. p. 387, 388.) Its poor representative, the village of Pa-trone, is now destitute of a harbour.
'r The university, splendour, and ruin of Berytus, are celebrated by Heineooius,(p. 351—356.) as an essential part of the history of the Roman law. It was over­thrown in the twenty-fifth year of Justinian, A. D. 551, Jnly 9 ; (Theophanes, p. 192.)but Agathias (lib. 2. p. 51, 52.) suspends the earthquake till he has achieved, tlioItalian war. .







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [cBAP. XLI.


lisarius, on the other side, diverted the attention of theGoths by a vigorous and successful skirmish. Theseseasonable aids, the use and reputation of which weredexterously managed by the Roman general, revived thecourage, or at least the hopes, of the soldiers and peo­ple. The historian Procopius was dispatched with animportant commission to collect the troops and provi­sions which Campania could furnish, or Constantinoplehad sent; and the secretary of Belisarius was soon fol­lowed by Antonina herself/ who boldly traversed theposts of the enemy, and returned with the oriental suc­cours to the relief of her husband and the besieged city.A fleet of three thousand Isaurians cast anchor in the bayof Naples, and afterward at Ostia. Above two thou­sand horse, of whom a part were Thracians, landed atTarentum ; and, after the junction of five hundred sol­diers of Campania, and a train of waggons laden withwine and flour, they directed their march on the Appianway, from Capua to the neighbourhood of Rome. Theforces that arrived by land and sea were united at themouth of the Tiber. Antonina convened a council ofwar: it was resolved to surmount, with sails and oars,,the adverse stream of the river: and the Goths wereapprehensive of disturbing, by any rash hostilities, thenegotiation to which Belisarius had craftily listened.They credulously believed, that they saw no more thanthe vanguard of a fleet and army, which already coveredthe Ionian sea and the plains of Campania; and the illu­sion was supported by the haughty language of the Ro­man general, when he gave audience to the ambassadorsof Vitiges. After a specious discourse to vindicate thejustice of his cause, they declared that, for the sake ofpeace, they were disposed to renounce the possession ofSicily. "The emperor is not less generous (replied
bastian. (see Nolli's plan.) That memorable spot has been consecrated by the Ege-rian grove, the memory of Nnma, triumphal arches, the sepulchres of the Scipios,Metelli, &c.
* The expression-of Procopius has an invidious cast—rvyyv e* rov ay^»>.eu{ tnvvqifi s-vfiSfrojifm xowitxtir. (Goth, lib. 2. c. 4.) Yet he is speakiog of a nonuiti.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 455


chagan had never seen an elephant; and his curiositywas excited by the strange, and perhaps fabulous portraitof that wonderful animal. At his command, one of thelargest elephants of the imperial stables was equipped withstately caparisons, and conducted by a numerous train tothe royal village in the plains of Hungary. He surveyedthe enormous beast with surprise, with disgust, and pos­sibly with terror; and smiled at the vain industry of theRomans, who, in search of such useless rarities, couldexplore the limits of the land and sea. He wished, atthe expense of the emperor, to repose in a golden bed.The wealth of Constantinople, and the skilful diligenceof her artists, were instantly devoted to the gratificationof his caprice; but when the work was finished, he reject­ed with scorn a present so unworthy the majesty of agreat king." These were the casual sallies of his pride,but the avarice of the chagan was a more steady andtractable passion; a rich and regular supply of silk appa­rel, furniture, and plate, introduced the rudiments of artand luxury among the tents of the Scythians; their ap­petite was stimulated by the pepper and cinnamon of In­dia ;b the annual subsidy or tribute was raised from four­score to one hundred and twenty thousand pieces of gold;and after each hostile interruption, the payment of thearrears, with exorbitant interest, was always made thefirst condition of the new treaty. In the language of abarbarian without guile, the prince of the Avars affectedto complain of the insincerity of the Greeks,0 yet he wasnot inferior to the most civilized nations in the refine­ments of dissimulation and perfidy. As the successor ofthe Lombards, the chagan asserted his claim to the im­portant city of Sirmium, the ancient bulwark of the 111}%
» Theopbylact, lib. 1. c. 5, 6.
b Even in the Held, the chagan delighted in the use of these aromatics. He solicitedas a gift, IrfaiAC jutgvgMc, and received TMrip iuu fyvKhv/ Iviaiv, juwmv t« xat tot Xtya-juivov xoa-rov. Theopbylact, lib. 7. c. 13. The Europeans of the ruder ages consumedmore spices in their meat and drink than is compatible with the delicacy of a modernpalace. Vie Privee dcs Francois, tom. 2. p. 162, 163.
c Theopbylact, lib. 6. c. 6. lib. 7. c. 15. The Greek historian confesses the truthand justice of his reproach. ,







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIII.] OF THE ROMAN■ EMPIRE.


tinople, during three or four months, was visited by thepestilence ; and Procopius, who observed its progress andsymptoms with the eyes of a physician," has emulatedthe skill and diligence of Thucydides in the descriptionof the plague of Athens/ The infection was sometimesannounced by the visions of a distempered fancy, and thevictim despaired as soon as he had heard the menace andfelt the stroke of an invisible spectre. But the greaternumber, in their beds, in the streets, in their usual occu­pation, were surprised by a slight fever ; so slight, indeed,that neither the pulse nor the colour of the patient gaveany signs of the approaching danger. The same, thenext, or the succeeding day, it was declared by the swell­ing of the glands, particularly those of the groin, of thearm-pits, and under the ear; and when these buboes ortumours were opened, they were found to contain a coal,or black substance, of the size of a lentil. If they cameto-a just swelling and suppuration, the patient wassaved by this kind and natural discharge of the morbidhumour. But if they continued hard and dry, a morti­fication quickly ensued, and the fifth day was commonlythe term of his life. The fever was often accompaniedwith lethargy or delirium; the bodies of the sick werecovered with black pustules or carbuncles, fhe symptomsof immediate death; and in the constitutions too feebleto produce an eruption, the vomiting of blood was fol­lowed by a mortification of the bowels. To pregnant1women the plague was generally mortal: yet one infantwas drawn alive from his dead mother, and three mo­thers survived the loss of their infected foetus. Youthwas the. most perilous season; and the female ser was
« nr. Friend (Hist. Medioiu. in Opp. p. 416—420. Lond. 1733.) is satisfied thatProcopius must have studied pbysic, from his knowledge and use of the technicalwords. Yet many words that are now scientific, were common and popular in theGreek idiom.
1 See Thucydides, lib. 2. c. 47—54. p. 127—133. edit. Duker, and the poeticaldescription of the same plague by Lucretius, (lib. 6.1136—1284.) I was indebtedto Dr. Hunter for an elaborate commentary on this part of Thuoydides, a quarto ofsic hundred pages, (Vehet. 1603, apud Juntas,) which was pronounced in St. Mark'slibrary, by Fahius Paulliuus Utinensis, a pbysician and phih/sophey.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.] OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


eagles, the true wood of the holy cross was restored tothe importunate demands of the successor of Constantine.The victor was not ambitious of enlarging the weaknessof the empire; the son of Chosroes abandoned withoutregret the conquests of his father; the Persians who eva­cuated, the cities of Syria and Egypt were honourably con­ducted to the frontier, and a war which had wounded theVitals of the two monarchies, produced no change in theirexternal and relative situation. The return of Heracliusfrom Tauris to Constantinople was a perpetual triumph;and after the exploits of six glorious campaigns, he peace­ably enjoyed the sabbath of his toils. After a long im­patience, the senate, the clergy, and the people, went forthto meet their hero, with tears and acclamations, with olivebranches and innumerable lamps: he entered the capitalin a chariot drawn by four elephants; and as soon as theemperor could disengage himself from the tumult of pub­lic joy, he tasted more genuine satisfaction in the em­braces of his mother and his son.3
The succeeding year was illustrated by a triumph of avery different kind, the restitution of the true cross tothe holy sepulchre. Heraclius performed in person thepilgrimage of Jerusalem, the identity of the relic was ve­rified by the discreet patriarch,' and this august ceremonyhas been commemorated by the annual festival of theexaltation of the cross. Before the emperor presumedto tread the consecrated ground, he was instructed tostrip himself of the diadem and purple, the pomp and va­nity of the world: but in the judgment of his clergy, thepersecution of the Jews was more easily reconciled withthe precepts of the gospel. He again ascended his throneto receive the congratulations of the ambassadors of
• The burden of Corneille's song,
"Montrez Heraclius au people qui Tattend,"is muoh better suited to the present occasion. See his triumph in Theophanes,(p. 272, 273.) and Nicephorus, (p. 15, 16.) The life of the mother and tendernessof the son are attested by George of Pisidia, (Bell. Abar. 255, &o. p. 49.) The me­taphor of the sabbath is used, somewhat profanely, by these Byzantine Christians.
'See Baronius, (Annal. Eccles. A. D. 628. no. 1—4.) Entycliiiis, (Annal. torn. 2.p. 240—248.) Nicephorus, (Brev. p. 15.) The seals of the case had never beenbroken ; and this preservation of Ute cross is ascribed (under God) to the devotionof queen Sira.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


might have crushed, at their first landing, the feeble andexhausted bands of the Roman general. But the friendsof the captive king were more inclined to accept the in­vitations, than to resist the progress, of Belisarius; andmany a proud barbarian disguised his aversion to war un­der the more specious name of his hatred to the usurper.Yet the authority and promises of Gelimer collected aformidable army, and his plans were concerted withsome degree of military skill. An order was dispatchedto his brother Ammatas, to collect all the forces of Car­thage, and to encounter the van of the Roman army atthe distance of ten miles from the city; his nephew Gi-bamund, with two thousand horse, was destined to attacktheir left, when the monarch himself, who silently fol­lowed, should charge their rear, in a situation which ex­cluded them from the aid, or even the view, of their fleet.But the rashness of Ammatas was fatal to himself and hiscountry. He anticipated the hour of attack, outstrippedhis tardy followers, and was pierced with a mortal wound,after he had slain with his own hand twelve of his boldestantagonists. His Vandals fled to Carthage; the high­way, almost ten miles, was strewed with dead bodies; andit seemed incredible, that such multitudes could beslaughtered by the swords of three hundred Romans. Thenephew of Gelimer was defeated, after a slight combat, bythe six hundred Massagetas: they did not equal thethird part of his numbers: but each Scythian was firedby the example of his chief, who gloriously exercised theprivilege of his family, by riding foremost and alone toshoot the first arrow against the enemy. In the mean­while, Gelimer himself, ignorant of the event, and mis­guided by the windings of the hills, inadvertently passedthe Roman army, and reached the scene of action whereAmmatas had fallen. He wept the fate of his brotherand of Carthage, charged with irresistible fury the ad­vancing squadrons, and might have pursued, and perhapsdecided, the victory, if he had not wasted those inesti­







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 409


mankind was protected by the selfish policy of the ex­arch. With her daughter, the heiress of the Lombardthrone, her two lovers, her trusty Gepidae, and, thespoils of the palace of Verona, Rosamond descendedthe Adige and the Po, and was transported by a Greekvessel to the safe harbour of Ravenna. Longinus be­held with delight the charms and the treasures of thewidow of Alboin: her situation and her past conductmight justify the most licentious proposals; and she rea­dily listened to the passion of a minister, who, even inthe decline of the empire, was respected as the equal ofkings. The death of a jealous lover was an easy andgrateful sacrifice, and as Helmichis issued from the bath,he received the deadly potion from the hand of his mis­tress. The taste of the liquor, its speedy operation, andhis experience of the character of Rosamond, convincedhim that he was poisoned: he pointed his dagger to herbreast, compelled her to drain the remainder of the cup,and expired in a few minutes, with the consolation thatshe could not survive to enjoy the fruits of her wicked­ness. The daughter of Alboin and Rosamond, with therichest spoils of the Lombards, was embarked for Con­stantinople; the surprising strength of Peredeus amusedand terrified the imperial court; his blindness and re­venge exhibited an imperfect copy of the adventures ofSampson. By the free suffrage of the nation, in the as- ciepiio,sembly of Pavia, Clepho, one of their noblest chiefs, was ^f*s°elected as the successor of Alboin. Before the end of*- D.573.
August.
eighteen months, the throne was polluted by a secondmurder; Clepho was stabbed by the hand of a domestic;the regal office was suspended above ten years, duringthe minority of his son Autharis; and Italy was dividedand oppressed by a ducal aristocracy of thirty tyrants/
When the nephew of Justinian ascended the throne, Weaknesshe proclaimed a new era of happiness and glory. The j™s".
y See the history of Paul, lib. 2. c. 28—32. I have borrowed some interesting tiuian.eiroumslances from the Liber Ponlificalis of Agnellus, in Script. Rer. Ital. torn. 2.p. 124. Of all chronological gaides, Mnrttori is the safest.
VOL. V. 1 E ,







OCR Output








DECLINE ANI> FALL [CHAP. XLI.


contempt might perhaps be due to the naked youths whoappeared on foot in the fields of Troy, and, lurking be­hind a tombstone, or the shield of a friend, drew thebowstring to their breast,' and dismissed a feeble andlifeless arrow. But our archers (pursues the historian)are mounted on horses, which they manage with admi­rable skill; their head and shoulders are protected by aCasque or buckler; they wear greaves of iron on theirlegs, and their bodies are guarded by a coat of mail. Onjtheir right side hangs a quiver, a sword on the left, andtheir hand is accustomed to wield a lance, or javelin, incloser combat. Their bows are strong and weighty; theyshoot in every possible direction, advancing, retreating,* to the front, to the rear, or to either flank; and as theyare taught to draw the bowstring not to the breast, butto the right ear} firm indeed must be the armour thatcan resist the rapid violence of their shaft." Five hun­dred transports, navigated by twenty thousand marinersof Egypt? Cilicia, and Ionia, were collected in the har­bour of Constantinople. The smallest of these vesselsmay be computed at thirty, the largest at five hundred(tons; and the fair average will supply an allowance, li­beral, but not profuse, of about one hundred thousandtons,* for the reception of thirty-five thousand soldiersand sailors, of five thousand horses, of arms, engines, andmilitary stores, and of a sufficient stock of water and pro­of Diomede, (Iliad, A. 335, &c.) and the permittere vulnera ventis of Lacan: (8.3f!4.) yet fhe Romans conld not despise the arrows of the Farthians: and in the siegeof Troy, Pandarus, Paris, and Teucer, pierced those haughty warriors who insultedthem as women or children.
1 Nsupijv mev f/.afa TueXswev, to£v Se <Ti5iigCT. (Iliad, A, 123.) How concise—howjust—how beautiful is the whole picture! I see the attitudes of the archer—I hearthe twanging of the bow,— -
Aiyfe &t°;, vsugfl Se fj.ty ia.~xp, aXro S' siVto;.k The. t?xt appears to allow for the largest vessels fifty thousand medimni, orthree*thousand tons (since the medimnus weighed one hundred and sixty Roman, orone hundred and twenty avoirdupois, pounds). I have given a more rational interpre­tation, by supposing that the Attic style of Procopius conceals the legal and popu­lar modius, a sixth part of the medimnus. (Hooper's Ancient Measures, p. 152, &c.)A contrary, and indeed a stranger, mistake, has crept into an oration of Dmarchus(contra fiemosthenem, in Reiske Orator. Griec. tom. 4. p. 2. p. 34.) By reduoingthe number of ships from five hundred to fifty, and translating wSifMai by mines orpounds. Cousin has generously allowed five hundred tons for the whole of the impe­rial fleet!—Did he never think?







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLV.


voices of the barbarians attempted to imitate the melodyof the Roman school.b Experience had shewn him theefficacy of these solemn and pompous rites, to soothe thedistress, to confirm the faith, to mitigate the fierceness,and to dispel the dark enthusiasm of the vulgar; and hereadily forgave their tendency to promote the reign ofpriesthood and superstition. The bishops of Italy andthe adjacent islands acknowledged the Roman pontiff astheir special metropolitan. Even the existence, the union,or the translation of episcopal seats, was decided by hisabsolute discretion: and his successful inroads into theprovinces of Greece, of Spain, and of Gaul, might coun­tenance the more lofty pretensions of succeeding popes.He interposed to prevent the abuses of popular elec­tions; his jealous care maintained the purity of faith anddiscipline, and the apostolic shepherd assiduously watch­ed over the faith and discipline of the subordinate pas­tors. Under his reign, the Arians of Italy and Spainwere reconciled to the Catholic church, and the conquestof Britain reflects less glory on the name of Caesar, thanon that of Gregory I. Instead of six legions, fortymonks were embarked for that distant island, and thepontiff lamented the austere duties which forbade him topartake-the perils of their spiritual warfare. In less thantwo years he could announce to the archbishop of Alex­andria, that they had baptized the king of Kent withten thousand of his Anglo-Saxons; and that the Romanmissionaries, like those of the primitive church, werearmed only with spiritual and supernatural powers. Thecredulity or the prudence of Gregory was always disposedto confirm the truths of religion by the evidence ofghosts, miracles, and resurrections ;c and posterity has
11 John the deacon (in Vit. Greg. lib. 2. c. 7.) expresses the early contempt of theItalians for tramontane singing. Alpina scilicet corpora vocum suarum tonitruis al-tisone perstrepentia, sosr.eptze modulations dulcedinem proprie non resultant: qnifthihali gatturis harhara feritas dum inflexionibus et repercussionibus mitem nititoredere cantilenam, naturati quodam fragore quasi planstra per gradus confuse sonantiarigidas voces jaotat, &c. In the time of Charlemagne, the Franks, though with somereluctance, admitted the justice of the reproach. Muratori, Dissert. 25.
c A French critic (Petras Gassanvillius, Opera, tom. 2. p. 105—112.) has vindi­







OCR Output








140 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI.


of Numidia. He was immediately besieged by Pharas,an officer whose truth and sobriety were the more ap­plauded, as such qualities could seldom be found amongthe Heruli, the most corrupt of the barbarian tribes.To his vigilance Belisarius had intrusted this importantcharge; and, after a bold attempt to scale the mountain,in which he lost a hundred and ten soldiers, Pharas ex­pected, during a winter siege, the operation of distressand famine on the mind of the Vandal king. From thesoftest habits of pleasure, from the unbounded commandof industry and wealth, he was reduced to share the po­verty of the Moors/ supportable only to themselves bytheir ignorance of a happier condition. In their rudei novels, of mud and hurdles, which confined the smokeand excluded the light, they promiscuously slept on theground, perhaps on a sheep-skin, with their wives, theirchildren, and their cattle. Sordid and scanty were theirgarments; the use of bread and wine was unknown; andtheir oaten or barley cakes, imperfectly baked in theashes, were devoured almost in a crude state by the hun­gry savages. The health of Gelimer must have sunkunder these strange and unwonted hardships, from what­soever cause they had been endured; but his actualmisery was embittered by the recollection of past great­ness, the daily insolence of his protectors, and the justapprehension, that the light and venal Moors might betempted to betray the rights of hospitality. The know­ledge of his situation dictated the humane and friendlyepistle of Pharas. "Like yourself (said the chief of theHeruli) I am an illiterate barbarian, but I speak the lan­guage of plain sense, and a honest heart. Why will youpersist in hopeless obstinacy? Why will you ruin your­self, your family, and nation? The love of freedom andabhorrence of slavery? Alas! my dearest Gelimer, are
'Shaw (Travels, p. 220.) most accurately represents the manners of the Bedo-weensand Kabyles, the last of whom, by their language, are the remnant of the Moors:yet how changed—how civilized are these modern savages !—provisions are plentyamong thcni, and bread is common, w -







OCR Output








420 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLV.


towns on the continent were overthrown by the Lom­bards, who beheld with impotent fury a new capital risingfrom the waves. The power of the dukes of Naples wascircumscribed by the bay and the adjacent isles, by thehostile territory of Capua, and by the Roman colony ofAmalphi,1" whose industrious citizens, by the inventionof the mariner's compass, have unveiled the face of theglobe. The three islands of Sardinia, Corsica, and Sicily,still adhered to the empire; and the acquisition of thefarther Calabria removed the land-mark of Autharis fromthe shore of Rhegium to the isthmus of Consentia. InSardinia, the savage mountaineers preserved the libertyand religion of their ancestors; but the husbandmen ofSicily were chained to their rich and cultivated soil. Romewas oppressed by the iron sceptre of the exarchs, and aGreek, perhaps an eunuch, insulted with impunity theruins of the Capitol. But Naples soon acquired the pri­vilege of electing her own dukes;" the independence ofAmalphi was the fruit of commerce: and the voluntaryattachment of Venice was finally ennobled by an equalalliance with the eastern empire. On the map of Italy,the measure of the exarchate occupies a very inadequatespace, but it included an ample proportion of wealth, in­dustry, and population. The most faithful and valuablesubjects escaped from the barbarian yoke; and the ban­ners of Pavia and Verona, of Milan and Padua, were dis­played in their respective quarters by the new inhabitantsTiiektng- of Ravenna. The remainder of Italy was possessed byLomhards, the Lombards; and from Pavia, the royal seat, theirkingdom was extended to the east, the north, and the. west, as far as the confines of the Avars, the Bavarians,and the Franks of Austrasia and Burgundy. In the lan­guage of modern geography, it is now represented by theTerra Firma of the Venetian republic, Tyrol, the Milan­ese, Piedmont, the coast of Genoa, Mantua, Parma, and
m See Brencmann, Dissert. 1 made Republics Amalphitana,p. 1—42. ad calceiiiHist. Pandect. Florent.
» Gregor. Magn. lib. 3. epist. 23. 25—2?.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [.CHAP. XLIV.


inquisitors the trial was prepared and directed; but theycould only pronounce the sentence of the majority ofjudges, who with some truth, and more prejudice, havebeen compared to the English juries.5 To discharge thisimportant though burdensome office, an annual list ofancient and respectable citizens was formed by the prae­tor. After many constitutional struggles, they werechosen in equal numbers from the senate, the equestrianorder, and the people; four hundred and fifty were ap­pointed for single questions; and the various rolls ordecuries of judges must have contained the names of somethousand Romans, who represented the judicial autho­rity of the state. In each particular cause, a sufficientnumber was drawn from the urn; their integrity wasguarded by an oath; the mode of ballot secured theirindependence; the suspicion of partiality was removedby the mutual challenges of the accuser and defendant:and the judges of Milo, by the retrenchment of fifteen oneach side, were reduced to fifty-one voices or tablets, ofacquittal, of condemnation, or of favourable doubt.' 3.In his civil jurisdiction, the praetor of the city was trulya judge, and almost a legislator; but as soon as he hadprescribed the action of law, he often referred to a dele­gate the determination of the fact. With the increaseof legal proceedings, the tribunal of the centumvirs, inwhich he precided, acquired more weight and reputation.But whether he acted alone, or with the advice of hiscouncil, the most absolute powers might be trusted to amagistrate who was annually chosen by the votes of thepeople. The rules and precautions of freedom have re­quired some explanation; the order of despotism is simpleand inanimate. Before the age of Justinian, or perhaps of
'The office, both at Rome and in England, must be considered as an occasionalduty, and not a magistracy or profession. But the obligation of a unanimous verdictis peculiar to our laws, which condemn the jurymen to undergo the torture fromwhence they have exempted the criminal.
'We are indebted for this interesting fact to a fragment of Asconins Pedianns,who flourished under the reign of Tiberius. The loss of his Commentaries, on theOrations of Cicero has deprived as of a valuable fund of historical and legal know.Udge.







OCR Output








CHAP. XH.] OF T*^E ROMAN EMPIRE. J30,


and ninety-six for the prefect himself, fifty for each ofhis vicegerents; and the rigid definition of their feesand salaries was more effectual to conform the right,than to prevent the abuse. These magistrates mightbe oppressive, but they were not idle: and the subtlequestions of justice and revenue were infinitely propa­gated under the new government, which professed torevive the freedom and equity of the Roman republic.The cqnqueror was solicitous to exact a prompt andplentiful supply from his African subjects; and he allow­ed them to claim, even in the third degree, and fromthe collateral line, the houses and lands of which theirfamilies had been unjustly despoiled by the Vandals.After the departure of Belisarius, who acted by a highand special commission, no ordinary provision was madefor a master-general of the forces; but the office ofpraetorian prefect was intrusted to a soldier ; the ci-yil and military powers were united, according to thepractice of Justinian, in the chief governor; and therepresentative of the emperor in Africa, as well as inItaly, was soon distinguished by the appellation ofExarch."
Yet the conquest of Africa was imperfect, till her for- Distressmer sovereign was delivered, either alive or dead, into Thy of1"1the hands of the Romans. Doubtful of the event, Ge- J^bum*.limer had given secret orders that a part of his treasure —".ieshould be transported to Spain, where he hoped to find asecure refuge at the court of the king of the Visigoths.§ujt these intentions were disappointed by accident, trea­chery, and the indefatigable pursuit of his enemies, whointercepted his flight from the sea-shore, and chased theunfortunate monarch, with some faithful followers, to theinaccessible mountain of Papua/ in the inland country
* The African laws of Justinian are illustrated by his German hiographer. (Cod.lib. 1. tit. 27. Novell. 36,37.131". Vit. Justinian, p.349—377.) .
t Monnf Papua is placed by d'Anville, (tom. 3. p. 92. and Tabttl. Imp. Rom. Oc­cident) near Hippo Regius and the sea ; yet this situation ill agrees with the longpursuit beypnd ljippo, and the words of Procopius, (lib. 2. c. 4.) iv tm; Nmi/wiSib; %t­


L 2







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.J OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 105


two years afterward, when despair had armed that officeragainst his general, her sanguinary advice decided andhastened his execution. Even the indignation of Pho-tius was not forgiven by his mother; the exile of her sonprepared the recal of her lover; and Theodosius conde­scended to accept the pressing and humble invitation ofthe conqueror of Italy. In the absolute direction of hishousehold, and in the important commissions of peaceand war,z the favourite youth most rapidly acquired a for­tune of four hundred thousand pounds sterling; and,after their return to Constantinople, the passion of An-tonina, at least, continued ardent and unabated. Butfear, devotion, and lassitude, perhaps, inspired Theodo­sius with more serious thoughts. He dreaded the busyscandal of the capital, and the indiscreet fondness of thewife of Belisarius; escaped from her embraces, and, re­tiring to Ephesus, shaved his head, and took refuge inthe sanctuary of a monastic life. The despair of the newAriadne could scarcely have been excused by the deathof her husband. She wept, she tore her hair, she filledthe palace with her cries; "she had lost the dearest offriends, a tender, a faithful, a laborious friend!" But herwarm entreaties, fortified by the prayers of Belisarius,were insufficient to draw the holy monk from the soli­tude of Ephesus. It was not till the general moved for­ward for the Persian war, that Theodosius could betempted to return to Constantinople; and the short in­terval before the departure of Antonina herself was boldlydevoted to love and pleasure.
A philosopher may pity and forgive the infirmities of Resentmentfemale nature, from which he receives no real injury ; "ius «nd'but contemptible is the husband who feels, and yet en- p"°J°"s.dures, his own infamy in that of his wife. Antoninapursued her son with implacable hatred; and the gallant
z In November 537, Photius arrested the pope. (Liberat. Brev. c. 22. Pagi. tom.2. p. 562.) About the end of 539, Belisarius sent Theodosius—tov n owia, t>i *utovi4>wr«rtt—on an important aud lucrative commission to Ravenna. (Goth. lib. 2.e. 18.)







OCR Output








328 DECLINE AND TALL [CHAP. XLIV,


rian, the Hermogenian, and the Theodosian codes. Thetwo first, of which some fragments have escaped, wereframed by two private lawyers, to preserve the constitu­tions of the Pagan emperors from Hadrian to Constan-tine. The third, which is still extant, was digested insixteen books by the order of the younger Theodosius,to consecrate the laws of the Christian princes from Con-stantine to his own reign. But the three codes obtainedan equal authority in the tribunals; and any act whichwas not included in the sacred deposit, might be disre­garded by the judge as spurious or obsolete."Pori«sof Among savage nations, the want of letters is imper­ial fectly supplied by the use of visible signs, which awakenattention, and perpetuate the remembrance of any publicor private transaction. The jurisprudence of the firstRomans exhibited the scenes of a pantomime; the wordswere adapted to the gestures, and the slightest error orneglect in the forms of proceeding was sufficient to annulthe substance of the fairest claim. The communion ofthe marriage-life was denoted by the necessary elementsof fire and water :° and the divorced wife resigned thebunch of keys, by the delivery of which she had beert in­vested with the government of the family. The manu­mission of a son, or a slave, was performed by turninghim round with a gentle blow on the cheek: a work wasprohibited by the casting of a stone; prescription was in­terrupted by the breaking of a branch; the clenched. fist was the symbol of a pledge or deposit; the righthand was the gift of faith and confidence. The inden­ture of covenants was a broken straw; weights andscales were introduced into every payment, and the heirwho accepted a testament, was sometimes obliged to
b Schnlting, Jurisprndentia Ante-Jnstinianea, p. 681—718. Cujacins assigned t6Gregory the reigns from Hadrian to Gatlienus, and the continuation to his fellow-1labourer Hermogenes. This general division may be just; hat they often trespassedon each other's ground.
c Soaevola, most prohably Q. Corvidius Scanvola the master of Papinian, considersthis acceptance of fire and water ns the essence of marriage. (Pandect, lib. 24. tit. 1.leg. 66. See Heineccius, Hist. J. B. no. 317.)







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLt.


Scythia, where a small fine was allowed to expiate thehasty sallies of intemperance and anger. Their com­plaints were specious, their clamours were loud, and theRomans were not averse to the example of disorder andimpunity. But the rising sedition was appeased by theauthority and eloquence of the general: and he repre­sented to the assembled troops the obligation of justice,the importance of discipline, the rewards of piety andvirtue, and the unpardonable guilt of murder, which, inhis apprehension, was aggravated rather than excused bythe vice of intoxication.1 In the navigation from theHellespont to Peloponnesus, which the Greeks, after thesiege of Troy, had performed in four days,"1 the fleet ofBelisarius was guided in their course by his master-gal­ley, conspicuous in the day by the redness of the sails,and in the night by the torches blazing from the mast­head. It was the duty of the pilots, as they steered be­tween the islands, and turned the capesof Malea andTaenarium, to preserve the just order and regular inter­vals of such a multitude of ships; as the wind was fairand moderate, their labours were not unsuccessful, andthe troops were safely disembarked at Methone on theMessenian coast, to repose themselves for a while afterthe fatigues of the sea. In this place they experiencedhow avarice, invested with authority, may sport with thelives of thousands which are bravely exposed for the pub­lic service. According to military practice, the breador biscuit of the Romans was twice prepared in the oven,and a diminution of one-fourth was cheerfully allowedfor the loss of weight. To gain this miserable profit,and to save the expense of wood, the prefect John ofCappadocia had given orders that the flour should be
'1 I have read of a Greek legislator, who inflicted a double penalty on tbo crimescommitted in a state of intoxication; but it seems agreed that this was rather a poli­tical than a moral law.
.' m Or even in three days, since they anchored the first evening inthe neighbouringisle ofTenedos: the second day they sailed to Lesbos, the third to the promontoryof Eobosa, and on the fourth they reached Argos. (Homer, Odyss. P. 130—183..Wood's Essay on Homer, p. 40—46.) A pirate sailed from the Hellespont lu theseaport at Sparta in three days. (Xenophon, Hellen. lib. 2. c. 1.)







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL fCHAP.XLII.


civil and paternal authority. Such a trade," which re­duces the human species to the level of cattle, may tendto encourage marriage and population: since the multi­tude of children enriches their sordid and inhuman pa­rent. But this source of impure wealth must inevitablypoison the national manners, obliterate the sense of ho­nour and virtue, and almost extinguish the instincts ofnature; the Christians of Georgia and Mingrelia are themost dissolute of mankind; and their children, who ina tender age are sold into foreign slavery, have alreadylearnt to imitate the rapine of the father and the prosti­tution of the mother. Yet amidst the rudest ignorance,the untaught natives discover a singular dexterity bothof mind and hand; and although the want of union anddiscipline exposes them to their more powerful neigh­bours, a bold and intrepid spirit has animated the Col-chians of every age. In the host of Xerxes, they servedon foot; and their arms were, a dagger or a javelin, awooden casque, and a buckler of raw hides. But in theirown country the use of cavalry has more generally pre­vailed: the meanest of the peasants disdain to walk; themartial nobles are possessed, perhaps, of two hundredhorses; and above five thousand are numbered in thetrain of the prince of Mingrelia. The Colchian govern­ment has been always a pure and hereditary kingdom;and the authority of the sovereign is only restrained bythe turbulence of his subjects. Whenever they wereobedient, he could lead a numerous army into the field;but some faith is requisite to believe, that the singletribe of the Suanians was composed of two hundredthousand soldiers, or that the population of Mingrelianow amounts to four millions of inhabitants.'
* The Mingrelian amhassador arrived at Constantinople with two hundred persons;hat he ate (sold) them day by day, till his retinue was diminished to a secretary andtwo valets. (Tavernier, toro. 1. p. 365.) To purchase his mistress, a Mingrelian gen­tleman sold twelve priests and his wife to the Turks. (Chardin, tom. p. 66.)
f Strabo, lib. 11. p. 765. Lamberti, Relation do la Mingrelie. Yet we mustavoid the contrary extreme of Chardin, who allows no more than twenty thousand in­hahitants to supply an annual exportation of twelve thousand slaves, an absurdity un­wortby of that judicious traveller.







OCR Output








10 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XXXIX-


T'featsof Odoacer, a rival not unworthy of his arms, had al-odoacer. ready occupied the advantageous and well-known post ofAng'ta, ' the river Sontius near the ruins of Aquileia, at the heada'd' 490 of a Powerful host, whose independent kings' or leadersAugust, disdained the duties of subordination and the prudence ofdelays. No sooner had Theodoric granted a short re­pose and refreshment to his wearied cavalry, than heboldly attacked the fortifications of the enemy; the Os­trogoths shewed more ardour to acquire, than the mer­cenaries to defend, the lands of Italy; and the reward ofthe first victory was the possession of the Venetian pro­vince as far as the walls of Verona. In the neighbour­hood of that city, on the steep banks of the rapid Adige,he was opposed by a new army, reinforced in its num­bers, and not impaired in its courage; the contest wasmore obstinate, but the event was still more decisive;Odoacer fled to Ravenna, Theodoric advanced to Milan,and the vanquished troops saluted their conqueror withloud acclamations of respect and fidelity. But theirwant either of constancy or of faith, soon exposed himto the most imminent danger; his vanguard, with se­veral Gothic counts, which had been rashly intrusted toa deserter, was betrayed and destroyed near Faenza byhis double treachery; Odoacer again appeared master ofthe field, and the invader, strongly intrenched in hiscamp of Pavia, was reduced to solicit the aid of a kindrednation, the Visigoths of Gaul. In the course of thehistory, the most voracious appetite for war will be abun­dantly satiated; nor can I much lament that our darkand imperfect materials do not afford a more ample nar­rative of the distress of Italy, and of the fierce conflict,which was finally decided by the abilities, experience,and valour, of the Gothic king. Immediately before thebattle of Verona, he visited the tent of his mother1 and
s Tot reges, &c. (Ennodius, p. 1602.) We must recollect how much the royaltitle was multiplied and degraded, and that the mercenaries of Italy were the frag­ments of many tribes and nations.
'See Ennodius, p. 1603, 1604. Since the orator, in the king's presence, couldmention and praise his mother, we may conclude that the magnanimity of Theodoricwas not burt by the vulgar reproaches of concuhine and hastard.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


finement, and perhaps of his death. Alarmed by thehasty intrusion and bold reproaches of the captive, Hor-mouz looked round, but in vain, for advice or assistance;discovered that his strength consisted in the obedienceof others, and patiently yielded to the sirigle arm of Bin-does, who dragged him from the throne to the samedungeon in which he himself had been so lately confined.At the first tumult, Chosroes, the eldest of the sons ofHormouz, escaped from the city; he'was persuaded toreturn by the pressing and friendly invitation of Bindoes,-who promised to seat him on his father's throne, andwho expected to reign under the name of an inexpe­rienced youth. In the just assurance, that his accom­plices could neither forgive nor hope to be forgiven, andthat every Persian might be trusted as the judge' andenemy of the tyrant, he instituted a public trial withouta precedent and without a copy in the annals of the east.The sonofNushirvan, who had requested to plead in hisown defence, was introduced as a criminal into the fullassembly of the nobles and satraps." He was heard withdecent attention as long as he expatiated on the advan­tages of order and obedience, the danger of innovation,and the inevitable discord of those who had encouragedeach other to trample on their lawful and hereditary sove­reign. By a pathetic appeal to their humanity, he ex­torted that pity which is seldom refused to the fallen for­tunes of a king; and while they beheld the abject pos­ture and squalid appearance of the prisoner, his tears, hischains, and the marks of ignominious stripes, it was im­possible to forget how recently they had adored the divinesplendour of his diadem and purple. But an angry mur­mur arose in the assembly as soon as he presumed to vin­dicate his conduct, and to applaud the victories of hisreign. He defined the duties of a king, and the Persiannobles listened with a smile of contempt; they were fired


» The orientals suppose that Bahram convened this assembly and proclaimedChosroes; but Theopbylact is, in this instance, more distinct and credible.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 320.


snap his fingers, to cast away his garments, and to leapand dance with real or affected transport.11 If a citizenpursued any stolen goods into a neighbour's house, heconcealed his nakedness with a linen towel, and hid hisface with a mask or basin, lest he should encounter theeyes of a virgin or a matron." In a civil action, theplaintiff touched the ear of his witness, seized his re­luctant adversary by the neck, and implored, in solemnlamentation, the aid of his fellow-citizens. The twocompetitors grasped each other's hand as if they stoodprepared for combat before the tribunal of the pras-tor: he commanded them to produce the object of thedispute; they went, they returned, with measured steps,and a clod of earth was cast at his feet to represent thefield for which they contended. This occult science ofthe words and actions of law was the inheritance of thepontiffs and the patricians. Like the Chaldean astrolo­gers, they announced to their clients the days of busi­ness and repose; these important trifles were interwovenwith the religion of Numa; and, after the publication ofthe twelve tables, the Roman people was still enslaved bythe ignorance of judicial proceedings. The treachery ofsome plebeian officers at length revealed the profitablemystery: in a more enlightened age, the legal actionswere derided and observed; and the same antiquitywhich sanctified the practice, obliterated the use andmeaning, of this primitive language.'
A more liberal art was cultivated, however, by the Successionsages of Rome, who, in a stricter sense, may be COnSl- lawyers,dered as the authors of the civil law. The alteration of
* Cicero (de Ofliciis, S. 19.) may state an Ideal case, hat St. Ambrose (de Officiis,S. 2.) appeals to the practice of his own times, which he understood as a lawyer and amagistrate. (Sclmlting ad Ulpian. Fragment, tit. 22. no. 28. p. 643, 644.)
« The furtum lance licinqne conceptum was no longer understood in the time ofthe Antonines. (Aulus Gellius, 16. 10.) The Attio derivation of Heineocius (Auti-quitat. Hom. lib. 4. tit. 1. no. 13—21.) is supported by the evidenoe of Aristophanes,his scholiast, and Pollux.
r In his oration for Murena, (c. 9—13.) Cicero tarns into ridicule the forms andmysteries of the civilians, which are represented with more candour by Aulus Collins,(Noot. Attic. 20. 10.) Gravina, (Opp. p. 265—267.) and Heineccius. (Antiquitat.lib. 4. tit. 6.)
VOL. V. Z







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 431


was rejected with the deepest abhorrence; and the popeasserted, most probably with truth, that a linen whichhad been sanctified in the neighbourhood of his body,or the filings of his chain, which it was sometimes easyand sometimes impossible to obtain, possessed an equaldegree of miraculous virtue/ But the power as well asvirtue of the apostles resided with living energy in thebreasts of their successors; and the chair of St. Peter wasfilled under the reign of Maurice by the first and great­est of the name of Gregory.5 His grandfather Felix had Birth andhimself been pope, and as the bishops were already bound of Grego-"by the law of celibacy, his consecration must have beenry tlle Ro"
J * mait.
preceded by the death of his wife. The parents of Gre­gory, Sylvia and Gordian, were the noblest of the senate,and the most pious of the church of Rome: his femalerelations were numbered among the saints and virgins;and his own figure with those of his father and motherwere represented near three hundred years in a familyportrait,' which he offered to the monastery of St. An­drew. The design and colouring of this picture affordah honourable testimony, that the art of painting was cul­tivated by the Italians of the sixth century ; but the mostabject ideas must be entertained of their taste and learn­ing, since the epistles of Gregory, his sermons, and his
r Gregor. lib. 3. epist. 24. edict. 12, &c. From the epistles of Gregory, and theeighth volume of the Annals of Baronins,-the pious reader may collect the particlesof holy iron which were inserted in keys or crosses of gold, and distributed in Bri­tain, Gaul, Spain, Africa, Constantinople, and Egypt. The pontifical smith who han­dled the file must have understood the miracles which it was in his own power to ope­rate or withhold ; a circumstance which ahates the superstition of Gregory at the ex»pense of his veracity.
• Besides the epistles of Gregory himself, which are methodised by Dupin, (Br-blintheque Eccles. tom. 5. p. 103—126.) we have three lives of the pope; the twofirst written in the eighth and ninth centuries (de Triplici Vita St. Greg. Preface tothe fourth volume of the Benedictine edition), by the deacons Paul (p. 1—18.) andJohn, (p. 19—188.) and containing much original, though doubtful, evidenee; thethird, a long and laboured compilation by the Benedictine editors, (p, 199—305.)The Annals of Barouius are a copious but partial history. His papal prejudices aretempered by the good sense of Fleury, (Hist. Ecoles. tom. 8.) and his chronologyhas been rectified by the criticism of Pagi and Muratori.
1 John the deacon has described them like an eye-wituess, (lib. 4. c. 83, 84.) andhis description is illustrated byAngelo Rocca, a Roman antiquary, (St. Greg. Opera,tom. 4. p. 312—326.) who observes, that some Mosaics of the popes of the seventhcentury are still preserved in the old churches of Rome. (p. 321—323.) The samewalls which represented Gregory's family, are now decorated with the martyrdom ofSt, Andrew, the noble contest of Pominichino and Guide. ,







OCR Output








CHA#. XLIV.] OF THE- BOM AN EMPfRE. tit


spirit of a prince, who sold without shame his judgmentsand his laws/ The charge of the secret historian is in­deed explicit and vehement; but the sole instance,which he produces, may be ascribed to the devotion aswell as to the avarice of Justinian, A wealthy bigot hadbequeathed his inheritance to the church of Emesa; andits value was enhanced by the dexterity of an artist, whosubscribed confessions of debt and promises of payment'with the names of the richest Syrians. They pleadedthe established prescription of thirty or forty years; buttheir defence was overruled by a retrospective edict,which extended the claims of the church to the term ofa century; an edict so pregnant with injustice and dis- v>?order, that after serving this occasional purpose, it was5 ". \'prudently abolished in the same reign.d If candour will • *■- *aoquit the emperor himself, and transfer the corruptionto his wife and favourites, the suspicion of so foul a vicemust still degrade the majesty of his laws: and the advo*eates of Justinian may acknowledge, that such levity,whatsoever be the motive, is unworthy of a legislatorand a man,
Monarchs seldom condescend to become the preeep The in»u-tors of their subjects; and some praise is due to Justi* a. d. sju,nian, by whose command an ample system was reduced Nov"ai*to a short and elementary treatise. Among the variousinstitutes of the Roman law," those of Caius' were themost popular in the east and west; and their use may beconsidered as an evidence of their merit. They wene
« Montesquieu, Consideration gar h Grandeur et la Decadence des Romains, fe,$0. torn. 3. p. oftl. in 4to. Op this oocasien he throws aside the gown and cap of apresident a Mortier. -
* IVocopius, Aoecdot. e. 28. A similar privilege was granted to the church ofBorne. (Novel.'9.) For the general repeal of these mischievous indulgences, Seenovel. 111. and edict. V i
• Laotantius, in his Institutes of Christianity, an elegant and specioas work, pro-'poses to imitate the title and method of the civilians. Quidam prndtsntes et arbitrisoquitatis Institationes Civilis Juris compositas ediderunt. (Institut. Divin. lib. 1. c 1.}- Such as Clpiau, Pad), Florentines, Marcian.
I The emperor Justinian calls him saum, though he died before the end of the sa-• ootid century. His Institutes are quoted by Servius, Boethias, Priician, &e. and theEpitome by Arrian is still extant; (see the prolegomena and notes to the edition of^Sehulting, in the Jurisprudents Ante-Justiuianea, Lugd, Bat. 1717. Heineccius,Hist. J. R. no. 313. Ludewig, iu Vit. Just. p. 199.)' • ■ • ■ .


2 A 2







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


a palace near Verona, which had not heen erected for thebarbarians, he feasted the companions of his arms; in­toxication was the reward of valour„and the king himselfwas tempted by appetite, or vanity, to exceed the ordi­nary measure of his intemperance. After draining manycapacious bowls of Rhaetian or Falernian wine, he calledfor the skull of Cunimund, the noblest and most pre­cious ornament of his sideboard. The cup of victory wasaccepted with horrid applause by the circle of the Lom­bard chiefs. "Fill it again with wine (exclaimed theinhuman conqueror), fill it to the brim; carry this gobletto the queen, and request in my name that she wouldrejoice with her father." In an agony of grief and rage,Rosamond had strength to utter, "Let the will of mylord be obeyed!" and, touching it with her lips, pro­nounced a silent imprecation, that the insult should bewashed away in the blood of Alboin. Some indulgencemight be due to the resentment of a daughter, if she hadnot already violated the duties of a wife. Implacable inher enmity, or inconstant in her love, the queen of Italyhad stooped from the throne to the arms of a subject,and Helmichis, the king's armour-bearer, was the secretminister of her pleasure and revenge. Against the pro­posal of the murder he could no longer urge the scruplesof fidelity or gratitude; but Helmichis trembled, whenhe revolved the danger, as well as the guilt, when he re­collected the matchless strength and intrepidity of a war­rior, whom he had so often attended in the field of bat­tle. He pressed and obtained, that one of the bravestchampions of the Lombards should be associated to theenterprise; but no more than a promise of secrecy couldbe drawn from the gallant Peredeus; and the mode ofseduction employed by Rosamond betrays her shamelessinsensibility both to honour and love. She supplied theplace of one of her female attendants, who was belovedby Peredeus, and contrived some excuse for darkness andsilence, till she could inform her companion that he had







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


tise of laws; in which he labours to deduce, from a ce­lestial origin, the wisdom and justice of the Roman con­stitution. The whole universe, according to his sublimehypothesis, forms one immense commonwealth: godsand men, who participate of the same essence, are mem­bers of the same community; reason prescribes the lawof nature and nations; and all positive institutions, how­ever modified by accident or custom, are drawn from therule of right, which the Deity has inscribed on every vir­tuous mind. From these philosophical mysteries, hemildly excludes the Sceptics who refuse to believe, andthe Epicureans who are unwilling to act. The latter dis­dain the care of the republic; he advises them to slum­ber in their shady gardens. But he humbly entreatsthat the new academy would be silent, since her bold ob­jections would too soon destroy the fair and well-orderedstructure of his lofty system.1 Plato, Aristotle, and Ze-no, he represents as the only teachers who arm and in­struct a citizen for the duties of social life. Of these,the armour of the Stoics'1 was found to be of the firmesttemper; and it was chiefly worn, both for use and orna­ment, in the schools of jurisprudence. From the por­tico, the Roman civilians learned to live, to reason, andto die: but they imbibed in some degree the prejudicesof the sect; the love of paradox, the pertinacious habitsof dispute, and a minute attachment to words and verbaldistinctions. The superiority of form to matter, was intro­duced to ascertain the right of property: and the equalityof crimes is countenanced by an opinion of Trebatius,1
1 Perlarbatricem autem omnium harura rerum acadeiniam, hanc ab Arcesila et Car-neade recentem, exoremua at sileat, nam si invaserit in bsec, quaa satis scite instructaet composita videantnr, nimis edel rninas, quam quidem ego placare oopio, submo-vere non audeo. (de Legibus, 1. 13.) Prom this passage alone Bentley (Remarks onFreethinking, p. 250.) might have learned how firmly Cicero believed in the spe­cious doctrines which he has adorned.
k The Stoic philosophy was first taught at Rome by Panoetius, the friend of theyounger Scipio. (see his life in the Mem. de l'Academie des Inscriptions, torn. 10. p.75—89.)
1 As he is quoted by TJpian. (leg. 40. ad Sabinum in Pandect, lib. 47. tit. 'i. leg.21.) YetTrebatius, after he was a leading civiliam, qui familiam duxit, became anEpicurean. (Cicero ad Fam. 7. 5.) Perhaps he was not constant or sincere in hisnew sect. f . *







OCR Output








CHA1'. XLV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 415


ven, a patriot king, had been confirmed as a proper andpermanent blessing. But in less than four years afterthe death of Justin, his worthy successor sunk into amortal disease, which left him only sufficient time to re­store the diadem, according to the tenure by which heheld it, to the most deserving of his fellow-citizens. Heselected Maurice from the crowd, a judgment more pre­cious than the purple itself: the patriarch and senatewere summoned to the bed of the dying prince; he be­stowed his daughter and the empire; and his last advicewas solemnly delivered by the voice of the quaestor.Tiberius expressed his hope, that the virtues of his sonand successor would erect the noblest mausoleum to hismemory. His memory was embalmed by the publicaffliction; but the most sincere grief evaporates in thetumult of a new reign, and the eyes and acclamationsof mankind were speedily directed to the rising sun.
The emperor Maurice derived his origin from ancient The reignRome/ but his immediate parents were settled at Arabis- ^f 582?susinCappadocia,andtheir singular felicity preserved them *ug.alive to behold and partake the fortune of their august son. Nov. 27.The youth of Maurice was spent in the profession ofarms ; Tiberius promoted him to the command of a newand favourite legion of twelve thousand confederates;his valour and conduct were signalized in the Persianwar; and he returned to Constantinople to accept, as hisjust reward, the inheritance of the empire. Mauriceascended the throne at the mature age of forty-threeyears; and he reigned above twenty years over the eastand over himself ;s expelling from his mind the wild de­mocracy of passions, and establishing (according to the
'It is therefore singular enough that Paul (lib. 3. c. 15.) should distinguish himas the first Greek emperor—primus ex Grrecorum genere in imperio oonstitutus.His immediate predecessors had indeed been born in the Latin provinces of Europe;and a various reading, in Graecorum imperio, would appty the expression to the em­pire rather than the prince.
* Consult for the character and reign of Maurice, the fifth and sixth books of Eva-grius, particularly lib. 6. c. 1. the eight books of his prolix and florid history byTheo-pbylact Simotatta; Theopbines, P. 213, &c. Zonaias, tom 2. lib. 14. P. 73. Cedrenus,p. 594.







OCR Output








466 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLVI.


closed by the execution of the emperor himself, in thetwentieth year of his reign, and the sixty-third year ofhis age. The bodies of the father and his five sonswere cast into the sea, their heads were exposed at Con­stantinople to the insults or pity of the multitude, andit was not till some signs of putrefaction had appeared,that Phocas connived at the private burial of these vene­rable remains. In that grave, the faults and errors ofMaurice were kindly interred. His fate alone "was re­membered; and at the end of twenty years, in the re­cital of the history of Theophylact, the mournful talewas interrupted by the tears of the audience."Phocas Such tears must have flowed in secret; and such com-a. d. 602, passion would have been criminal, under the reign ofa.°d. 6uo, Phocas, who was peaceably acknowledged in the pro-october 4. yinces of the east and west. The images of the emperorand his wife Leontia were exposed in the Lateran to theveneration of the clergy and senate of Rome, and after­ward deposited in the palace of the Caesars, between. those of Constaritine and Theodosius. As a subject anda Christian, it was the duty of Gregory to acquiesce inthe established government, but the joyful applause withwhich he salutes the fortune of the assassin, has sulliedwith indelible disgrace the character of the saint. Thesuccessor of the apostles might have inculcated with de­cent firmness the guilt of blood, and the necessity of re­pentance: he is content to celebrate the deliverance ofthe people and the fall of the oppressor; to rejoice thatthe piety and benignity of Phocas have been raised byProvidence to the imperial throne; to pray that hishands may be strengthened against all his enemies; andto express a wish, perhaps a prophecy, that after a longand triumphant reign, he may be transferred from atemporal to an everlasting kingdom .b I have already
» The revolt of Phocas and death of Maurice are told by Theopbvlact Simoca1ta,(lib. 8. c. 7—18.) the Paschal Chronicle, (p. 379, 380.1 Thecipl■anes, (Chrono­graph, p. 238—244.) Zonaras, (tom. 2. lib. 14. p. 77—80.) and Cedrenua. (p. 399—404.V
* Gregor. lib. 11. epist. 38. indict. 6. Benignitatem, vestroe pietatisad imperiale







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 6l


and boldness continually increased; and the Heruli, the.wildest barbarians in the service of the empire, overturnedthe priests and their relics, which, from a pious motive,had been rashly interposed to separate the bloody con­flict. The tumult was exasperated by this sacrilege, thepeople fought with enthusiasm in the cause of God;the women from the roofs and windows showered stoneson the heads of the soldiers, who darted firebrandsagainst the houses; and the various flames, which hadbeen kindled by the hands of citizens and strangers,spread without control over the face of the city. The con­flagration involved the cathedral of St. Sophia, the bathsof Zeuxippus, a part of the palace from the first entranceto the altar of Mars, and the long portico from the palaceto the forum of Constantine; a large hospital, with thesick patients, was consumed ; many churches and statelyedifices were destroyed, and an immense treasure of goldand silver was either melted or lost. From such scenesof horror and distress, the wise and wealthy citizens es­caped over the Bosphorus to the Asiatic side ; and, duringfive days, Constantinople was abandoned to the factions,whose watchword, Nik a, vanquish ! has given a name tothis memorable sedition/
As long as the factions were divided, the triumphant The di«-blues, and desponding greens, appeared to behold with jujunUn.the same indifference the disorders of the state. Theyagreed to censure the corrupt management of justice andthe finance; and the two responsible ministers, the artfulTribonian, and the rapacious John of Cappadocia, wereloudly arraigned as the authors of the public misery.The peaceful murmurs of the people would have beendisregarded; they were heard with respect when the citywas in flames; the quaestor, and the prefect, were in­stantly removed, and their offices were filled by two
'The history of the Nika sedition is extracted from Marcelliims, (in Chroo.)Proct>pios,(Persic. lib. 1.e. 26) John Malala, (tom. 2. p. 213 c. 218.)Chron. Paschal,(p. 336—340.) Theophaqcs, (Chronograph, p. 151—158.) and Zonaras. (lib. 14.p. 61—63.) . .







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP, XL^


to the attack of villages and defenceless towns; their fly-ring parties have sometimes touched the Hellespont, theEuxine, and the gates of Tarsus, Antioch, or Damascus ;f-and the spoil was lodged in their inaccessible mountains,before the Roman troops had received their orders, orthe distant province had computed its loss. The guiltof rebellion and robbery excluded them from the rightsof national enemies; and the magistrates were instructedby an edict, that the trial or punishment of an Isaurian,even on the festival of Easter, was a meritorious act ofjustice and piety.B If the captives were condemned todomestic slavery, they maintained, with their sword ordagger, the private quarrel of their masters; and it was.found expedient for the public tranquillity, to prohibitthe service of such dangerous retainers. When theircountryman Tarcalissaeus or Zeno ascended the throne,he invited a faithful and formidable band of Isaurians,who insulted the court and city, and were rewarded byan annual tribute of five thousand pounds of gold. Butthe hopes of fortune depopulated the mountains, luxury,enervated the hardiness of their minds and bodies,.and in,proportion as they mixed with mankind, they becameless qualified for the enjoyment of poor and solitary free­dom. After the death of Zeno, his successor Anastasiussuppressed their pensions, exposed their persons to therevenge of the people, banished them from Constant! -nople, and prepared to sustain a war, which left only thealternative of victory or servitude. A brother of thelast emperor usurped the title of Augustus; his causewas powerfully supported by the arms, the treasures, andthe magazines, collected by Zeno; and the native Isau­rians must have formed the smallest portion of the hun­dred and fifty thousand barbarians under his standard,
f See the full and wide extent of their inroads in PhilostorgiuJ, (Hist. Eccles. lib.,ll.c. 8.) with Godefro^'s learned Dissertations.
E Cod. Justinian, lib. 9. tit. 12. leg. 10. The punishments are severe—a line of ahundred pounds of gold, degradation, and even death. The public peace might af­ford a pretence, but Zeno was desirous of monopolizing the valour and service of theIsaurians.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


arid emoluments, his generals, magistrates, and senators;and his precarious indulgence Communicated some raysof their glory to the persons of their wives and children.But in the eye of the law, all Roman citizens were equal,and all subjects of the empire were citizens of Rome.That inestimable character was degraded to an obsoleteand empty name. The voice of a Roman could no lon­ger enact his laws, or create the annual ministers of hispower; his constitutional rights might have checked thearbitrary-will of a master; and the bold adventurer fromGermany or Arabia was admitted, with equal favour, ti>the civil and military command, which the citizen alonehad been once entitled to assume over the conquests"ofhis fathers. The first Cassars had scrupulously guardedthe distinction of ingenuous, and servile birth, which Wasdecided by the condition of the mother; and the candourof the laws was satisfied, if her freedom could be ascer­tained during a single moment between the conceptionand the delivery. The slaves, who were liberated by agenerous'master immediately entered into the middleclass of libertines or freedmen: but they could never beenfranchised from the duties of obedience and gratitude:whatever were the fruits of their industry, their patronand his family inherited the third part; or even the wholeof their fortune, if they died without children and with­out a testament. Justinian respected the rights of pa­trons; but his indulgence removed the badge of disgracefrom the two inferior orders of freedmen: whoeverceased to be a slave, obtained without reserve or delay,the station of a citizen; and at length the dignity of aningenuous birth, which nature had refused, was created,or supposed, by the omnipotence of the emperor. What­ever restraints of age, or forms, or numbers, had beenformerly introduced to check the abuse of manumissions^and the too rapid increase of vile and indigent Romans,he'finally abolished; and the spirit of his laws promotedthe extinction of domestic servitude. Yet the eastern







OCR Output








CHAP. XL'ir.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 381'


bound with a chain of fifteen pounds weight; and hismisery was thrice exposed in the market-place, to solicitthe compassion of his friends and countrymen. At theexpiration of sixty days, the debt was discharged by theloss of liberty or life ; the insolvent debtor was either putto death, or sold in foreign slavery beyond the Tiber:but if several creditors were alike obstinate and unrelent­ing, they might legally dismember his body, and satiatetheir revenge by his horrid partition. The advocates forthis savage law have insisted, that it must strongly ope­rate in deterring idleness and fraud from contracting debtswhich they are unable to discharge; but experience woulddissipate this salutary terror, by proving, that no credi­tor could be found to exact this unprofitable penalty of;life or limb. As the manners of Rome were insensiblypolished, the criminal code of the decemvirs was abolish­ed by the humanity of accusers, witnesses, and judges;and impunity became the consequence of immoderaterigour. The Porcian and Valerian laws prohibited themagistrates from inflicting on a free citizen any capital,or even corporal punishment; and the obsolete statutes'of blood were artfully, and perhaps truly, ascribed to thespirit, not of patrician, but of regal, tyranny.
In the absence of penal laws and the insufficiency of Abolitioncivil actions, the peace and justice of the city were im- of penal'0"perfectly maintained by the private jurisdiction of thelaw*'citizens. The malefactors who replenish our gaols, arethe outcasts of society, and the crimes for which theysuffer may be commonly ascribed to ignorance, poverty,and brutal appetite. For the perpetration of similarenormities, a vile pleheian might claim and abuse the sa­cred character of a member of the republic: but on theproof or suspicion of guilt, the slave, or the stranger,was nailed to a cross, and this strict and summary justicemight be exercised without restraint over the greatestpart of the populace of Rome. Each family containeda domestic tribunal, which was not confined, like that of







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLVI.


received an edict which deducted from their pay the priceof their arms and clothing, they execrated the avarice ofa prince insensible of the dangers and fatigues from whichhe had escaped. The camps both of Asia and Europewere agitated with frequent and furious seditions;5 theenraged soldiers of Edessa pursued, with reproaches, withthreats, with wounds, their trembling generals: theyoverturned the statues of the emperor, cast stones againstthe miraculous image of Christ, and either rejected theyoke of all civil and military laws, or instituted a danger­ous model of voluntary subordination. The monarch,always distant, and often deceived, was incapable of yield­ing or persisting according to the exigence of the mo­ment. But the fear of a general revolt induced him tooreadily to accept any act of valour, or any expression ofloyalty, as an atonement for the popular offence; thenew reform was abolished as hastily as it had been an­nounced, and the troops, instead of punishment and re­straint, were agreeably surprised by a gracious proclama­tion of immunities and rewards. But the soldiers accept­ed without gratitude the tardy and reluctant gifts of theemperor; their insolence was elated by the discovery ofhis weakness and their own strength; and their mutualhatred was inflamed beyond the desire of forgiveness orthe hope of reconciliation. The historians of the timesadopt the vulgar suspicion, that Maurice conspired to de­stroy the troops whom he had laboured to reform; the mis­conduct and favour of Commentiolus are imputed to thismalevolent design; and every age m ust condemn the inhu­manity or avarice' of a prince, Who by the trifling ransomof six thousand pieces of gold, might have prevented themassacre of twelve thousand prisoners in the hands of the
• See the mutinies under the reign of Maurice, in Theophylact, lib. 3. e. 1—4;lib. 6. o. 7, 8. 10; lib. 7. o. 1; lib. 8. c. 6, &c.
4 Theophylact and Theophanes seem ignorant of the conspiracy and avarice ofMaurice. These charges, so unfavourable to the memory of that emperor, are 6rstmentioned by the author of the Paschal Chronicle; (p. 379* 380) from whence Zona-ras (tom. 1. lib. 14. p. 77, 78.) has,transcribed them. Cedrenus (p. 399.) baa fol­lowed another computation of the ransom.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL.V.


annals of the second Justin1 are marked with disgraceabroad and misery at home. In the west the Romanempire was afflicted by the loss of Italy, the desolationof Africa, and the conquests of the Persians. Injusticeprevailed both in the capital and the provinces; the richtrembled for their property, the poor for their safety,the ordinary magistrates were ignorant or venal, the oc­casional remedies appear to have been arbitrary and vio­lent, and the complaints of the people could no longerbe silenced by the splendid names of a legislator and aconqueror. The opinion which imputes to the princeall the calamities of his times, may be countenanced bythe historian as a serious truth or a salutary prejudice.Yet a candid suspicion will arise, that the sentiments ofJustin were pure and benevolent, and that he might havefilled his station without reproach, if the faculties of hismind had not been impaired by disease, which deprivedthe emperor of the use of his feet, and confined him tothe palace, a stranger to the complaints of the people andthe vices of the government. The tardy knowledge ofhis own impotencedetermined him to lay down the weightof the diadem; and in the choice of a worthy substitute,he shewed some symptoms of a discerning and even mag­nanimous spirit. The only son of Justin and Sophiadied in his infancy: their daughter Arabia was the wifeof Baduarius,a superintendant of the palace, and after­ward commander of the Italian armies, who vainly as­pired to confirm the rights of marriage by those of adop­tion. While the empire appeared an object of desire,Justin was accustomed to behold with jealousy and ha-
* The original authors for the reign of Justin the Younger, are Evagrias, Hist.Eccles. lib, 5. o. 1—12. Theophanes, ir. Chronograph, p. 204—210. Zonaras, torn. 2.lib. 14. p. 70—72. Cedrenus, in Compend. p. 388—392.
11 Dispositorque novus sacne Baduarius aula;.Successor soceri mox factus Cura palali. Corippus.Baduarius is enumerated among the descendants and allies of the house of Justinian.A family of noble Venetians (Casa Badoero) built churches and gave dnkes to therepublic as early as the ninth century; and if their descent be admitted, no kings inEurope can produce a pedigree so ancient and illustrious. Ducange, Forn, Byzatilin.p. 99. Amelot de la Houssaye, Gouvernement dc Venise, lorn. 2. p. 555.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIV.


and opinion; and his laborious compilations are guardedby the sages and legislators of past times. Instead of astatue cast in a simple mould by the hand of an artist,the works of Justinian represent a tesselated pavement ofantique and costly, but too often of incoherent, fragments.In the first year of his reign, he directed the faithful Tri-bonian, and nine learned associates, to revise the ordi­nances of his predecessors, as they were contained, sincethe time of Hadrian, in the Gregorian, Hermogenianjand Theodosian codes; to purge the errors and contra­dictions, to retrench whatever was obsolete or superflu­ous, and to select the wise and salutary laws best adaptedto the practice of the tribunals and the use of his subjects.The work was accomplished in fourteen months; andthe twelve books or tables, which the new decemvirsproduced, might be designed to imitate the labours oftheir Roman predecessors. The new code of Justinianwas honoured with his name, and confirmed by his royalsignature: authentic transcripts were multiplied by thepens of notaries and scribes; they were transmitted tothe magistrates of the European, the Asiatic, and after­ward the African provinces: and the law of the empirewas proclaimed on solemn festivals at the doors ofchurches. A more arduous operation was still behind:to extract the spirit of jurisprudence from the decisionsand conjectures, the questions and disputes, of the Ro­man civilians. Seventeen lawyers, with Tribonian attheir head, were appointed by the emperor to exercise anabsolute jurisdiction over the works of their predecessors.If they had obeyed his commands in ten years, Justinianwould have been satisfied with their diligence; and therapid composition of the digest or pandects/ in threeyears, will deserve praise or censure, according to the
f nav5sitrai (general receivers) was a common title of the Greek miscellanies.(Plin. Praefat. ad Hist. Natur.) The digesta of Scaevola, Marcellinua, Celsns, wereatready familiar to the civilians: but Justinian was in the wrong when be used thaitwo appellations as synonymous. Is the word Pandects Greek or Latin—masculineor feminine? The diligent Branckman will not presume to decide these momcutom,controversies. (Hist. Paudect. Floreptin. p. 300—30-1.)







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL11.


measured, not so much by their real elevation, as by theheight to which they ascend above the level of their ageor country; and the same stature, which in a people ofgiants would pass unnoticed, must appear conspicuousin a race of pigmies. Leonidas, and his three hundredcompanions, devoted their lives at Thermopylae ; but theeducation of the infant, the boy, and the man, had pre­pared, and almost ensured, this memorable sacrifice;and each Spartan would approve, rather than admire, anact of duty, of which himself and eight thousand of hisfellow-citizens were equally capable." The great Pom-pey might inscribe on his trophies, that he had defeatedin battle two millions of enemies, and reduced fifteenhundred cities from the lake Maeotis to the Red Sea;bbut the fortune of Rome flew before his eagles; thenations were oppressed by their own fears, and the in­vincible legions which he commanded, had been formedby the habits of conquest and the discipline of ages. Inthis view, the character of Belisarius may be deservedlyplaced above the heroes of the ancient republics. Hisimperfections flowed from the contagion of the times;his virtues were his own, the free gift of nature or re­flection; he raised himself without a master or a rival;and so inadequate were the arms committed to his hand,that his sole advantage was derived from the pride andpresumption of his adversaries. Under his command,the subjects of Justinian often deserved to be called Ro­mans: but the unwarlike appellation of Greeks was im­posed as a term of reproach by the haughty Goths;who affected to blush, that they might dispute the king­dom of Italy with a nation of tragedians, pantomimes,and pirates." The climate of Asia has indeed been found
s It will be a pleasure, not a task, to read Herodotus, (lib. 7. c. 104.134. p.550. 615.) The conversation of Xerxes and Demaratus at Thermopylae, is one ofthe most interesting and moral scenes in history. It was the torture of the royalSpartan to behold, with anguish and remorse, the virtue of his country.
b See this proud inscription in Pliny. (Hist. Natur. 7. 27.) Few men have moreexquisitely tasted of glory and disgrace: nor could Juvenal (Satir. 10.) producea more striking example of the vicissitudes of fortune, and the vanity of humanwishes.
c r^aiKovs , . . , i£ in ra ia-(5orEpa ouSie* e; iraXiav ijxovra tiSov, ori f*ii rpayuiovs, Mt







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








P. XLIV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 321


nate and people, were deposited in the Capitol :* andsome of the acts, as the Julian law against extortion,surpassed the number of a hundred chapters.0 The de­cemvirs had neglected to import the sanction of Zaleu-cus, which so long maintained the integrity of his re­public. A Locrian, who proposed any new law, stoodforth in the assembly of the people with a cord roundhis neck, and if the law was rejected, the innovator wasinstantly strangled.
The decemvirs had been named, and their tables were ^wsof
* the people.
approved, by an assembly of the centuries, in whichriches preponderated against numbers. To the firstclass of Romans, the proprietors of one hundred thou­sand pounds of copper,*1 ninety-eight votes were assigned,and only ninety-five were left for the six inferior classes,distributed according to their substance by the artful po­licy of Servius. But the tribunes soon established amore specious and popular maxim, that every citizen hasan equal right to enact the laws which he is bound toobey. Instead of the centuries, they convened thetribes; and the patricians, after an impotent struggle,submitted to the decrees of an assembly, in which theirVotes were confounded with those of the meanest ple­beians. Yet as long as the tribes successively passedover narrow bridges," and gave their voices aloud, the
b Suetonius in Vespasiano, c. 8.c Cicero ad Familiares, 8. 8.
* Dionysius, with Arbuthnot, and most of the moderns, (except Eisenschmidt dePonderibus, &c. p. 137—140.) represent the one hundred thousand asses by tenthousand Attic drachmae, or somewhat more than three hundred pounds sterling.But their calculation can apply only to the latter times, when the as was diminishedto one-twenty-fourth of its ancient weight: nor can I believe that in the first ages,'however destitute of the precious metals, a single ounce of silver could have beenexchanged for seventy pounds of copper or brass. A more simple and rational me­thod is, to value the copper itself according to the present rate, and, after comparingthe mint and the market price, the Roman and avoirdupois weight, the primitive asor Roman ponnd of copper may be appreciated at one English shilling, and the onehundred thousand asses of the first class amounted to five thousand pounds sterling.It will appear from the same reckoning, that an ox was sold at Rome for 5(. a sheepfor 10s. and a quarter of wheat for 11.10s. (Festus, p. 330. edit. Dacier; Plin. Hist.Natur. 18. 4.) nor do I see any reason to reject these consequences, which moderatopur. ideas of the poverty of the first Romans.
, • Consult the common writers on the Roman Comitia, especially Sigonius andBeaufort. Spauheim (de Pnestantia et Usu Numismatum, tom. 2. dissert. 10. p. 192,shews, on a curious medal, the Cista, Pontes, Septa, Dirihitor, &o.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


found under the vague and common appellation of a'loan. In the former, the borrower was obliged to re­store the same individual thing with which he had been'accommodated for the temporary supply of his wants; inthe latter, it was destined for his use and consumption,and he discharged this mutual engagement, by substitu­ting the same specific value, according to a just estima­tion of number, of weight, and of measure. In the con­tract of sale, the absolute dominion is transferred to thepurchaser, and he repays the benefit with an adequatesum of gold or silver, the price and universal standard ofall earthly possessions. The obligation of another con­tract, that of location, is of a more complicated kind.Lands or houses, labour or talents, may be hired for a de­finite term; at the expiration of the time, the thing itselfmust be restored to the owner with an additional rewardfor the beneficial occupation and employment. In theselucrative contracts, to which may be added those of part­nership and commissions, the civilians sometimes imaginethe delivery of the object, and sometimes presume theconsent of the parties. The substantial pledge has beenrefined into the invisible rights of a mortgage or hypo-theca; and the agreement of sale, for a certain price, im­putes, from that moment, the chances of gain or loss tothe account of the purchaser. It may be fairly supposed,that every man will obey the dictates of his interest; andif he accepts the benefit, he is obliged to sustain the ex­pense, of the transaction. In this boundless subject, thehistorian will observe the location of land and money, therent of the one and the interest of the other, as they ma­terially affect the prosperity of agriculture and commerce.The landlord was often obliged to advance the stock andinstruments of husbandry, arid to content himself witha partition of the fruits. If the feeble tenant was oppress­ed by accident, contagion, or hostile violence, he claimeda proportionable relief from the equity of the laws: fiveyears were the customary term, and no solid or costly







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


value; it has not yet been viewed by any mortal eye;but the sight and the possession of this jewel are des­tined for my friend." As soon as the curiosity and impa­tience of Antonina were kindled, the door of a bed­chamber was thrown open, and she beheld her lover,whom the diligence of the eunuchs had discovered in hissecret prison. Her silent wonder burst into passionate ex­clamations of gratitude and joy, and she named Theodoraher queen, her benefactress, and her saviour. The monkof Ephesus was nourished in the palace with luxury andambition ; but, instead of assuming, as he was promised,the command of the Roman armies, Theodosius expiredin the first fatigues of an amorous interview. The griefof Antonina could only be assuaged by the sufferings ofher son. A youth of consular rank, and a sickly consti­tution, was punished, without a trial, like a malefactorand a slave: yet such was the constancy of his mind,that Photius sustained the tortures of the scourge andthe rack, without violating the faith which he had swornto Belisarius. After this fruitless cruelty, the son ofAntonina, while his mother feasted with the empress,was buried in her subterraneous prisons, which admittednot the distinction of night and day. He twice escapedto the venerable sanctuaries of Constantinople, thechurches of St. Sophia and of the Virgin: but his tyrantswere insensible of religion as of pity; and the helplessyouth, amidst the clamours of the clergy and people,was twice dragged from the altar to the dungeon. Histhird attempt was more successful. At the end of threeyears, the prophet Zacharia, or some mortal friend, indi­cated the means of an escape; he eluded the spies andguards of the empress, reached the holy sepulchre ofJerusalem, embraced the profession of a monk; and theabbot Photius was employed, after the death of Justinian,to reconcile and regulate the churches of Egypt. Theson of Antonina suffered all that an enemy can inflict:her patient husband imposed on himself the more ex­







OCR Output








392 DECLINE AND VALL [CHAP. XLIV.


seized by the inhumafi claims of the treasury.^ Yet thecivilians have always respected the natural right of a ci­tizen to dispose of his life ; and the posthumous disgraceinvented by Tarquin2 to check the despair of his subjects,was never revived or imitated by succeeding tyrants.The powers of this world have indeed lost their domi­nion over him who is resolved on death; and his armcan only be restrained by the religious apprehension of afuture state. Suicides are enumerated by Virgil amongthe unfortunate, rather than the guilty ;a and the poeti­cal fables of the infernal shades could not seriously in­fluence the faith or practice of mankind. But the pre­cepts of the gospel, or the church, have at length impos­ed a pious servitude on the minds of Christians, and con­demn them to expect, without a murmur, the last strokeof disease or the executioner. ;... .Abuses of The penal statutes form a very small proportion of theprudence, sixty-two books of the code and pandects ; and, in all ju­dicial proceeding, the life or death of a citizen is deter­mined with less caution and delay than the most ordinaryquestion of covenant or inheritance. This singular dis­tinction, though something may be allowed for the ur­gent necessity of defending the peace of society, is de­rived from the nature of criminal and civil jurisprudence.Our duties to the state are simple and uniform; the lawby which he is condemned, is inscribed not only on brassor marble, but on the conscience of the offender, andhis guilt is commonly proved by the testimony of a singlefact. But our relations to each other are various andinfinite: our obligations are created, annulled, and mo-
y Julias Paulas, (Sentent. Recept. lib. 5. tit. 12. p. 476.) the Pandects, (lib. 48.tit. 21.) the Code, (lib. 9. tit. 1.") Bynkershoek, (tom. 1. p. 59. Observat. J. C. R. 4.4.) and Montesquieu, (Esprit des Loix, tib. 29. c. 9.) define the civil limitations of th«liberty and privileges of suicide. The criminal penalties are the production of a laterand darker age. •' ■ '.J
* Plin. Hist. Natur. 36. 24. When he fatigued his subjects in building the Capi­tol, many of the labourers were provoked to dispatch themselves; he nailed theirdead bodies to crosses. , . . ''.'.''
* The sole resemblance of a violent and premature death has engaged Virgil (iEneid,6.434—439.) to confound suicides with infants, lovers, and persons unjustly con­demned. Heyne, the best of his editors, is at a loss to deduce the idea, or ascertainthe jurisprudence, of the Roman poet.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


some of the neighbouring gardens were pillaged; andBelisarius, after chastising the offenders, embraced theslight occasion, but the decisive moment, of inculcatingthe maxims of justice, moderation, and genuine policy.—4t When I first accepted the commission of subduingAfrica, I depended much less (said the general) on thenumbers, or even the bravery, of my troops, than upon'the friendly disposition of the natives, and their immortalhatred to the Vandals. You alone can deprive me ofthis hope: if you continue to extort by rapine whatmight be purchased for a little money, such acts of vio­lence will reconcile these implacable enemies, and unitethem in a just and holy league against the invaders oftheir country." These exhortations were enforced by arigid discipline, of which the soldiers themselves soonfelt and praised the salutary effects. The inhabitants,instead of deserting their houses, or hiding their corn,supplied the Romans with a fair and liberal market: thecivil officers of the province continued to exercise theirfunctions in the name of Justinian; and the clergy, frommotives of conscience and interest, assiduously labouredto promote the cause of a Catholic emperor. The smalltown of Sullecte,r one day's journey from the camp, hadthe honour of being foremost to open her gates, and toresume her ancient allegiance: the larger cities of Leptisand Adrumetum imitated the example of loyalty as soonas Belisarius appeared; and he advanced without opposi*tion as far as Grasse, a palace of the Vandal kings, at thedistance of fifty miles from Carthage. The weary Ro­mans indulged themselves in the refreshment of shadygroves, cool fountains, and delicious fruits; and^the pre­ference which Procopius allows to these gardens over anythat he had seen, either in the east or west, may be as*cribed either to the taste or the fatigue of the historian.
'Sollecteis perhaps the Turra Harmihalis, an old building, now as large as thetower of London. The march of Belisarius lo Leptis, Adrumetum, &c' is illustratedby the campaign of Caesar, (Hirtius de Bello Africano, with the Analyse of Gni-ehardt,) and Shaw's Travels, (p. 105—113.)in the same country.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 1Q5


aimed their arrows against a crowd of barbarians, who,instead of a cuirass and helmet, were covered by a loosegarment of fur or linen. They paused, they trembled,their ranks were confounded, and in the decisive momentthe Heruli, preferring glory to revenge, charged'withrapid violence the head of the column. Their leader,Sindbal, and Aligern, the Gothic prince, deserved theprize of superior valour; and their example incited thevictorious troops to achieve with swords and spears thedestruction of the enemy. Buccelin, and the greatestpart of his army, perished on the field of battle, in thewaters of Vulturnus, or by the hands of the enraged pea­sants: but it may seem incredible that a victory,' whichno more than five of the Alemanni survived, could bepurchased with the loss of fourscore Romans. Seventhousand Goths, the relics of the war, defended the for­tress of Campsatill the ensuing spring; and every mes­senger of Narses announced the reduction of the Italiancities, whose names were corrupted by the ignorance orvanity of the Greeks.* After the battle of Casilinum,Narses entered the capital; the arms and treasures ofthe Goths, the Franks, and Alemanni, were displayed;his soldiers, with garlands in their hands, chaunted thepraises of the conqueror; and Rome, for the last time,beheld the semblance of a triumph.
After a reign of sixty years, the throne of the Gothic Settlementkings was filled by the exarchs of Ravenna, the represen- a. d. 554tatives in peace and war of the emperor of the Romans. —568'Their jurisdiction was soon reduced to the limits of anarrow province: but Narses himself, the first and mostpowerful of the exarchs, administered above fifteen yearsthe entire kingdom of Italy. Like Belisarius, he haddeserved the honours of envy, calumny, and disgrace:
f Agalhias (lib. 2. p. 47.) has produced a Greek epigram of six lines on this victory-of Narses, which is favourably compared to the battles of Marathon and Platsea.The chief difference is indeed in their consequences—so trivial in the former instance—so permanent and glorious in the latter.
t The Beroi and Brincas of Theoplianes or his transcriber (p. 201.) must be reador understood Verona and Brixia.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI.


Belisarius may be added to the rare examples, of HenryIV. of Pyrrhus and of Alexander.
After this first and unsuccessful trial of their enemies,the whole army of the Goths passed the Tiber, andformed the siege of the city, which continued above ayear, till their final departure. Whatever fancy mayconceive, the severe compass of the geographer definesthe circumference of Rome within a line of twelve milesand three hundred and forty-five paces ; and that circum­ference, except in the Vatican, has invariably been thesame from the triumph of Aurelian to the peaceful, butobscure reign of the modern: popes.*1 But in the day ofher greatness, the space within her walls was crowdedwith habitations and inhabitants; and the populous sub-curbs, that stretched along the public roads, were dartedlike so many rays from one common centre. Adversityswept away these extraneous ornaments, and left nakedand desolate a considerable part even of the seven hills.Yet Rome, in its present state, could send into the fieldabove thirty thousand males, of a military age; ■ andnotwithstanding the want of discipline and exercise, thefar greater part, inured to the hardships of poverty,might be capable of bearing arms for the defence oftheir country and religion. The; prudence of Belisariusdid not neglect this important resource. His soldierswere relieved by the zeal and diligence of the people, whowatched while they slept, and laboured while they reposed;he accepted the voluntary service of the bravest and mostindigent of the Roman youth; and the companies oftownsmen sometimes represented, in a vacant post, thepresence of the troops which had been drawn' away to
"M. d'Anville has given, in the Memoirs of the Academy for the year 1756, (tom,30. p. 198—236.) a plan of Home on a smaller scale, bat far more, accurate than thatwhich he had delineated in 1738 for Rollin's history. Experience had improved his'knowledge; and, instead of Rossi's topograpby, he used the new and excellent mapof Nolli. Pliny's old measure of thirteen must he reduced to eighteen miles. It iseasier to alter a text, than to remove hills or buildings.
1 In the year 1709, Lahat (Voyages en Italie, tom. 3. p. 218.) reckoned one hun­dred and thirty-eight thousand five hundred and sixty-eight Christian souls, besideseight or ten thousand Jews—without souls? In the year 1703, the numbers exceededone hundred and sixty thousand.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CMA,?. XLI.


ed into the ditch on the heads of the besiegers.6 Toeach of his lieutenants, Belisarius assigned the defence ofa gate, with the wise and peremptory instruction, that,whatever might be the alarm, they should steadily adhereto their respective posts, and trust their general for thesafety of Rome. The formidable host of the Goths wasinsufficient to embrace the ample measure of the city; ofthe fourteen gates, seven only were invested from thePraenestine to the Flaminian way; and Vitiges dividedhis troops into six camps, each of which was fortifiedwith a ditch and rampart. On the Tuscan side of theriver, a seventh encampment was formed in the field orcircus of the Vatican, for the important purpose of com­manding the Milvian bridge and the course of the Tiber;but they approached with devotion the adjacent churchof St. Peter; and the threshold of the holy apostles wasrespected during the siege by a Christian enemy. In theages of victory, as often as the senate decreed some dis­tant conquest, the consul denounced hostilities, by un­barring, in solemn pomp, the gates of the temple of Ja­nus.1" Domestic war now rendered the admonitionsuperfluous, and the ceremony was superseded by theestablishment of a new religion. But the brazen templeof Janus was left standing in the Forum, of a size suf­ficient only to contain the statue of the god, five cubitsin height, of a human form, but with two faces, directedto the east and west. The double gates were likewiseof brass; and a fruitless effort to turn them on their rustyhinges, revealed the scandalous secret, that some Romanswere still attached to the superstition of their ancestors.a Eighteen days were employed by the besiegers, to
8 ° Praxiteles excelled in Fauns, and that of Athens was his own master-piece.Rome now contains above thirty of the same oharacter. When the ditch of St. Angelowas cleansed under Urban VIII., the workmen found the sleeping Faun of the Bar-berini palace: but a leg, a thigh, and the right arm, had been broken from that beau­tiful statue. (Winckeluian, Hist, de I'Art.tom. 2. p. St,S3, torn. 5. p. 265.)
P Procopios has given the best description of the temple of Janus, a national deityof Latium. (Hevne, Excurs. 5.ad lib. 7. JEneid.) It was once a gate in the primi­tive city of Romulus and Numa. (Nardini, p. 15. 256. 529.) Virgil has describedthe ancient rite, like a poet and an -antiquarian.







OCR Output








CH'AP. XLIV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


tional pride, both Livy and Dionysius are willing to be­lieve, that the deputies of Rome visited Athens underthe wise and splendid administration of Pericles; andthe laws of Solon were transfused into the twelve tables.If such an embassy had indeed been received from thebarbarians of Hesperia, the Roman name would havebeen familiar to the Greeks before the reign of Alex­ander ;5 and the faintest evidence would have been ex­plored and celebrated by the curiosity of succeedingtimes. But the Athenian monuments are silent; norWill it seem credible that the patricians should undertakea long and perilous navigation to copy the purest modelof a democracy. In the comparison of the tables of So­lon with those of the decemvirs, some casual resem­blance may be found; some rules which nature andreason have revealed to every society; some proofs of Acommon descent from Egypt or Plxenicia.' But in allthe great lines of public and private jurisprudence, thelegislators of Rome and Athens appear to be strangers oradverse to each other.
converting a hand of outlaws (the Locrians) into the most virtuous and orderly of theGreek repnbiics. (See two Memoires of the Baron de St. Croix, sur la Legislation dela Grande Grece; Mem. de l'Academie, tom. 42. p. 276. 533.) But the laws ofZalencns and Charondas, which imposed on Diodorus and Stobaeus, are the sparionscomposition of a Pythagorean sophist, whose fraud has been detected by the criticalsagacity of Bentley, (p. 335—377.)
« I seize the opportunity of tracing the progress of this national intercourse;1. Herodotus and Thucydides, (A. U. C. 330—350.) appear ignorant of the name andexistence of Rome. (Josepb. contra Apion. tom. 2. lib. 1. c. 12. p. 444. edit. Haver-camp.) 2. Theopompus (A. TJ. C. 400. Flin. 3. 9.) mentions the invasion of theGauls, which is noticed in looser terms by Heraclides Ponticus. (Plutarch in Cam-millo, p. 292. edit. H. Stephan.) 3. Tie real or fabulous emhassy of the Romans toAlexander (A. V. C. 430.) is attested by Clitarcbus, (Plin. 3. 9.) by Aristus and As-clepiades, (Arrian. lib. 7. p. 294, 295.) and by Memnon of Heraclea, (apud Photium,cod. 224. p. 725.) though tacitly denied by Livy. 4. Theophrastus (A. U. C. 440.)primus externnrum aliqua de Romania diligentius scripsit. (Plin. 3. 9.) 5. J,yco-phron (A. TJ. C. 480—500.) scattered the first seed of a Trojan colony and the fableof the jEneid, Cassandra, 1226—1280,— , '■
A bold prediction before the end of the first Punio war.
1 The tenth table, de mbdo sepulture, was borrowed from Solnn: (Cicero de Le-gibus, 2. 23—26.) the furtum per lancem et licium conceptuni, is derived by Het-neccius from the manners of Athens. (Antiquitat. Rom. tom. 2. p. 167—175.) Theright of killing a nocturnal thief, was declared by Moses, Solon, and the decemvirs,(Exodus, 22. 3. Demosthenes contra Timocratem, tom. 1. p. 736. edit. Reiske.jVTacrbb. Saturnalia, lib. 1. c. 4. Collati'o Legum Mosaicariun et Romaiarum, tit. 7.no. 1. p. 218. edit. Cannegieter.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIY.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 383


equal freedom to the end of the Punic wars, the city wasnever disturbed by sedition, and rarely polluted withatrocious crimes. The failure of penal laws was moresensibly felt when every vice was inflamed by faction athome and dominion abroad. In the time of Cicero, eachprivate citizen enjoyed the- privilege of anarchy; eachminister of the republic was exalted to the temptationsof legal power, and their virtues are entitled to the warm­est praise as the spontaneous fruits of nature or philoso­phy. After a triennial indulgence of lust, rapine, andcruelty, Verres, the tyrant of Sicily, could only be suedfor the pecuniary restitution of three hundred thousandpounds sterling; and such was the temper of the laws,the judges, and perhaps the accuser himself/ that on re­funding a thirteenth part of his plunder, Verres couldretire to an easy and luxurious exile.1
The first imperfect attempt to restore the proportion Revival ofof crimes and punishments, was made by the dictatorSylla, who, in the midst of his sanguinary triumph, as­pired to restrain the licence, rather than to oppress theliberty, of the Romans. He gloried in the arbitrary pro­scription of four thousand seven hundred citizens.* Butin the character* of a legislator, he respected the prejudicesof the times; and instead of pronouncing a sentence ofdeath against the robber or assassin, the general who be­trayed an army, or the magistrate who ruined a province,Sylla was content to aggravate the pecuniary damages bythe penalty of exile, or, in more constitutional language,by the interdiction of fire and water. The Cornelian,and afterward the Pompeian and Julian laws, introduced
T He first rated at millies (L. 800,000.) the damages of Sicily, (DivinatioinCasci-Uum, c. 5.) which he afterward reduced to quadringenties, (L. 320,000—-1. Actio inVerrem, c. 18.) and was finally content with tricies. (b. 24,000.) Plutarch inCice-ron. (torn. 3. p. 1584.) has not dissembled the popular suspicion and report.
* Verres lived near thirty years after his trial, till the second triumvirate, whenhe was proscribed bv the taste of Mark Antony for the sake of his Corinthian plate.(Plin. Hist. Natur. 34. 3.)
a Such is the number assigned by Valerius Maxima*, (lib. 9. c. 2. no. 1.) Floras(4. 21.) distinguishes two thousand senators and knights; Appiatt (de Bell. Civil,lib. 1. c. 95. torn. 2. p. 133. edit. Schweigteuser) more accurately computes fortyvictims of the senatorial! rank, and one thousand six hundred of the equestrian censusor order.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL.


quent pilgrimages to worship the Muses in their favour­ite temple on the banks of the Ilissus. The Latin con­querors respectfully listened to the instructions of theirsubjects and captives; the names of Cicero and Horacewere enrolled in the schools of Athens; and, after theperfect settlement of the Roman empire, the natives ofItaly, of Africa, and of Britain, conversed in the grovesof the academy with their fellow-students of the east.The studies of philosophy and eloquence are congenialto a popular state, which encourages the freedom ofinquiry, and submits only to the force of persuasion.In the republics of Greece and Rome, the art of speak­ing was the powerful engine of patriotism or ambition;and the schools of rhetoric poured forth a colony ofstatesmen and legislators. When the liberty of publicdebate was suppressed, the orator, in the honourableprofession of an advocate, might plead the cause of inno­cence and justice; he might abuse his talents in themore profitable trade of panegyric; and the same pre­cepts continued to dictate the fanciful declamations ofthe sophist, and the chaster beauties of historical compo­sition. The systems, which professed to unfold the na­ture of God, of man, and of the universe, entertainedthe curiosity of the philosophic student; and, accordingto the temper of his mind, he might doubt with thesceptics, or decide with the Stoics, sublimely speculatewith Plato, or severely argue with Aristotle. The prideof the adverse sects had fixed an unattainable term ofmoral happiness and perfection; but the race was glori­ous and salutary; the disciples of Zeno, and even thoseof Epicurus, were taught both to act and to suffer;and the death of Petronius was not less effectual thanthat of Seneca, to humble a tyrant by the discovery ofhis impotence. The light of science could not indeedbe confined within the walls of Athens. Her incompa­rable writers address themselves to the human race; theJiving masters emigrated to Italy and Asia; Berytus, in







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 283


in frequent embassies; he led an army into Italy, ac­quired a practical knowledge of the war, and the country;and presumed to strive with the genius of Belisarius.Twelve years after his return, the eunuch was chosen toachieve the conquest which had been left imperfect bythe first of the Roman generals. Instead of being daz­zled by vanity or emulation, he seriously declared, thatunless he were armed with an adequate force, he wouldnever consent to risk his own glory, and that of his sove­reign. Justinian granted to the favourite, what he mighthave denied to the hero: the Gothic war was rekindledfrom its ashes, and the preparations were not unworthyof the ancient majesty of the empire. The key of thepublic treasure was put into his hand, to collect maga­zines, to levy soldiers, to purchase arms and horses, todischarge the arrears of pay, and to tempt the fidelity ofthe fugitives and deserters. The troops of Germanuswere still in arms; they halted at Salona in the expec­tation of a new leader; and legions of subjects and al­lies were created by the well-known liberality of the eu­nuch Narses. The king of the Lombards11 satisfied orsurpassed the obligations of a treaty, by lending twothousand two hundred of his bravest warriors, who werefollowed by three thousand of their martial attendants.Three thousand Heruli fought on horseback under Phi-lemuth, their native chief; and the noble Aratus, whoadopted the manners and discipline of Rome, conducteda band of veterans of the same nation. Dagistheus wasreleased from prison to command the Huns; and Ko-bad," the grandson and nephew of the great king, wasconspicuous by the regal tiara at the head of his faithfulPersians, who had devoted themselves to the fortunesof their prince.' Absolute in the exercise of his autho-
the foolish prophecy of the Romans subsisted in fall vigour. (Procop. lib. 4. c. 21.)
h Paul Warnefrid, the Lombard, records with complacency the succour, service,and honourable dismission of his countrymen—reipnblicrc Romans adrersus semulosadjutores faerant. (lib. 2. c. 1. p. 774. edit. Grot.) I am surprised that Alboin, theirmartial king, did not lead his subjects in person.
'He was, if not an impostor, the son of the blind Zames, saved by compassion,


U 2







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 105


emperor as a new era of freedom and prosperity. Thedeputies of the pope and clergy, of the senate and people,invited the lieutenant of Justinian to accept their volun­tary allegiance, and to enter the city, whose gates wouldbe thrown open for his reception. As soon as Belisa-rius had fortified his new conquests, Naples and Cumse,he advanced about twenty miles to the banks of the Vul-turnus, contemplated the decayed grandeur of Capua,and halted at the separation of the Latin and Appianways. The work of the censor, after the incessant useof nine centuries, still preserved its primeval beauty, andnot a flaw could be discovered in the large polished stones,of which that solid, though narrow road, was so firmlycompacted/ Belisarius, however, preferred the Latinway, which, at a distance from the sea and marshes,skirted, in a space of one. hundred and twenty miles, alongthe foot of the mountains. His enemies had disappeared: Belisariuswhen he made his entrance through the Asinarian gate, r^,™the garrison departed without molestation along the Fla- ^J?'^6'ininian way; and the city, after sixty years servitude,was delivered from the yoke of the barbarians. Leuderisalone, from a motive of pride or discontent, refused toaccompany the fugitives; and the Gothic chief, himselfa trophy of the victory, was sent with the keys of Rometo the throne of the emperor Justinian." • . Siege of
The first days, which coincided with the old Saturna- Sloths,lia, were devoted to mutual congratulation and the public *ia^'h537'joy; and the Catholics prepared to celebrate, without arival, the approaching festival of the nativity of Christ.In the familiar conversation of a hero, the Romans ac­quired some notion of the virtues which history ascribedto their ancestors; they were edified by the apparent
d Bergier (Hist, des Grands Chemins des Romains, torn. 1. p. 221—228. 440—444.) examines the structure and materials, while d'Anville (Analyse d'ltalie, p. 200—"213.) defines the geographical line.
* Of the first recovery of Rome, the year (536) iscertain, from the series of events,rather than from the eorrupt, or interpolated, text of Procopins: the month (Decem­ber) is ascertained by Evagrius; (lib. 4. c. 19.) and the day (the tenth) may be admit­ted on the slight evidence of Nicephorns Callislhus. (lib. 17. c. 13.) For this accu­rate chronology, we are indebted to the diligence and judgment of Pagi. (torn. 2. p.550, 560.) ,







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL.


suspicion is propagated by the secret arts of his discipleAnthemius.' A citizen of Tralles in Asia had five sons,who were all distinguished in their respective professionsby merit and success. Olympius excelled in the know­ledge and practice of the Roman jurisprudence. Dios-corus and Alexander became learned physicians; butthe skill of the former was exercised for the benefit ofhis fellow-citizens, while his more ambitious brothers ac­quired wealth and reputation at Rome. The fame ofMetrodorus the grammarian, and of Anthemius the ma­thematician and architect, reached the ears of the em­peror Justinian, who invited them to Constantinople;and while the one instructed the rising generation in theschools of eloquence, the other filled the capital and pro­vinces with more lasting monuments of his art. In atrifling dispute, relative to the walls or windows of theircontiguous houses, he had been vanquished by the elo­quence of his neighbour Zeno; but the orator was de­feated in his turn by the master of mechanics, whosemalicious, though harmless, stratagems, are darkly re­presented by the ignorance of Agathias. In a lowerroom, Anthemius arranged several vessels, or cauldrons,of water, each of them covered by the wide bottom of aleathern tube, which rose to a narrow top, and was arti­ficially conveyed among the joists and rafters of the adja­cent building. A fire was kindled beneath the cauldron;the steam of the boiling water ascended through thetubes; the house was shaken by the efforts of imprison­ed air, and its trembling inhabitants might wonder thatthe city was unconscious of the earthquake, which theyhad felt. At another time, the friends of Zeno, as theysat at table, were dazzled by the intolerable light whichflashed in their eyes from the reflecting mirrors of An­themius; they were astonished by the noise which heproduced from a collision of certain minute and sono-
1 Agathias lib. 5. p. 149—Ib'i. The merit of Antbemina a» an architect i>loudly praised bj Piocopius (de lidif. lib. 1. c. 1.) and Paulus Sileuliarius, (pari1.134,&c.)







OCR Output








400 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLV.


The um- When a public quarrel is envenomed by private iniu-
hards and . , . f • , , • • . i •
Avars <ie- nes,a blow that is not mortal or decisive can be productivek'ngViId onty of a short truce, which allows the unsuccessful com-ki*gdom batant to sharpen his arms for a new encounter. The
of the Ge- r
A dD 5C6 strenStn o^ Alboin had been found unequal to the grati-'fication of his love, ambition, and revenge: he conde­scended to implore the formidable aid of the chagan;and the arguments that he employed are expressive of theart and policy of the barbarians. In the attack of theGepidas, he had been prompted by the just desire of ex­tirpating a people, whom their alliance with the Romanempire had rendered the common enemies of the nations,and the personal adversaries of the chagan. If the forcesof the Avars and the Lombards should unite in thisglorious quarrel, the victory was secure, and the rewardinestimable: the Danube, the Hebrus, Italy, and Con­stantinople, would be exposed, without a barrier, to theirinvincible arms. But if they hesitated or delayed to pre­vent the malice of the Romans, the same spirit whichhad insulted, would pursue the Avars to the extremityof the earth. These specious reasons were heard by thechagan with coldness and disdain: he detained the Lom­bard ambassadors in his camp, protracted the negotiation,and by turns alleged his want of inclination, or his wantof ability, to undertake this important enterprise. Atlength he signified the ultimate price of his alliance, thatthe Lombards should immediately present him with thetithe of their cattle; that the spoils and captives shouldbe equally divided; but that the lands of the Gepidaeshould become the sole patrimony of the Avars. Suchhard conditions were eagerly accepted by the passions ofAlboin; and as the Romans were dissatisfied with theingratitude and perfidy of the Gepidae, Justin abandonedthat incorrigible people to their fate, and remained thetranquil spectator of this unequal conflict. The despairof Cunimund was active and dangerous. He was inform­ed that the Avars had entered his confines; but on the







OCR Output








88 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL,


admitted into the new edifice; and the choice of the ma­terials was applied to the strength, the lightness, or thesplendour of the respective parts. The solid piles, whichsustained the cupola, were composed of huge blocks offreestone, hewn into squares and triangles, fortified bycircles of iron, and firmly cemented by the infusion oflead and quick lime: but the weight of the cupola wasdiminished by the levity of its substance, which consistseither of pumice-stone, that floats in the water, or ofbricks from the isle of Rhodes, five times less ponderousthan the ordinary sort. The whole frame of the edificewas constructed of brick; but those base materials wereconcealed by a crust of marble; and the inside of St. So­phia, the cupola, the two larger, and thesix smaller,semi-domes, the walls, the hundred columns, and thepavement, delight even the eyes of barbarians with aMarbles, rich and variegated picture. A poet," who beheld theprimitive lustre of St. Sophia, enumerates the colours,the shades, and the spots of ten or twelve marbles, jas­pers, and porphyries, which nature had profusely diver­sified, and which were blended and contrasted as it wereby a skilful painter. The triumph of Christ was adornedwith the last spoils of Paganism ; but the greater part ofthese costly stones was extracted from the quarries ofAsia Minor, the isles and continent of Greece, Egypt,Africa, and Gaul. Eight columns of porphyry, whichAurelian had placed in the temple of the sun, were of­fered by the piety of a Roman matron ; eight others ofgreen marble were presented by the ambitious zeal ofthe magistrates of Ephesus: both are admirable by theirsize and beauty ; but every order of architecture disclaims
• Paul Silentiarius, in dark and poetic language, describes the various stones andmarbles that were employed in the edifioe of St. Sophia .(P. 2. p. 129. 133, &c.&io.) 1. The Carystian—pale, with iron veins. 2. The Phrygian—of two aorta,both of a rosy hne; the one with a white shade, the other purple, with silver flowers.3. The Porphyry of Egypt—with small stars. 4. The green marble of Laconia.5. The Corian—from Mount lassis, with oblique veins, white and red. 6. The Ly-dian—pale, with a red flower. 7. The African or Mauritaman—of a gold or saf­fron hue. 8. The Celtic—black, with white veins. 9. The Botplurric—white, withblack edges. Besides the Proconn«iaii, which formed the pavement; the ThessalianMolossiun, &c. which are lets distinctly painted.







OCR Output








." DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP Xhl.


cowardly desertion of the Christian Arabs; the Huns, aveteran band of eight hundred warriors, were oppressedby superior numbers; the flight of the Isaurians wasintercepted; but the Roman infantry stood firm on theleft, for Belisarius himself, dismounting from his horse,shewed them that intrepid despair Was their only safety.They turned their backs to the Euphrates, and their facesto the enemy; innumerable arrows glanced without effectfrom the compact and shelving order of their bucklers;an impenetrable line of pikes was exposed to the repeat­ed assaults of the Persian cavalry ; and, after a resistanceof many hours, the remaining troops were skilfully em-1barked under the shadow of the night- The Persiancommander retired with disorder and disgrace, to answera strict account of the lives of so many soldiers which hehad consumed in a barren victory. But the fame of Be­lisarius was not sullied by a defeat, in which alone he hadsaved his army from the consequences of their own rash­ness: the approach of peace relieved him from the guardof the eastern frontier, and his conduct in the sedition ofConstantinople amply discharged his obligations to theemperor. When the African war became the topic ofpopular discourse and secret deliberation, each of theRoman generals was apprehensive, rather than ambi­tious, of the dangerous honour; but as soon as Justi­nian had declared his preference of superior merit, theirenvy was rekindled by the unanimous applause whichwas given to the choice of Belisarius. The temper ofthe Byzantine court may encourage a suspicion, that thehero was darkly assisted by the intrigues of his wife, thefair and subtle Antonina,who alternately enjoyed the con­fidence, and incurred the hatred, of the empress Theordora. The birth of Antonina was ignoble; she descend7ed from .a family of charioteers; and her chastity hasbeen stained with the foulest reproach. Yet she reignedwith long and absolute power over the mind of her illus­trious husband; and if Antonina disdained the merit of







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 18J


guilt of Constantine was no longer remembered; thedespair and death of that valiant officer were secretly im­puted to the revenge of Antonina; and each of his col­leagues, conscious of the same rapine, was apprehensiveof the same fate. The fear of a common enemy sus­pended the effects of their envy and discontent: but inthe confidence of approaching victory, they instigated apowerful rival to oppose the conqueror of Rome andAfrica. From the domestic service of the palace, and The eunuchthe administration of the private revenue, Narses the eu­nuch was suddenly exalted to the head of an army; andthe spirit of a hero, who afterward equalled the meritand glory of Belisarius, served only to perplex the oper­ations of the Gothic war. To his prudent counsels, therelief of Rimini was ascribed by the leaders of the discon­tented faction, who exhorted Narses to assume an inde­pendent and separate command. The epistle of Justi- .nian had indeed enjoined his obedience to the general;but the dangerous exception, " as far as may be advan­tageous to the public service," reserved some freedom ofjudgment to the discreet favourite,' who had so lately de­parted from the sacred and familiar conversation of hissovereign. In the exercise of this doubtful right, theeunuch perpetually dissented from the opinions of Beli­sarius; and, after yielding with reluctance to the siege ofUrbino, he deserted his colleague in the night, andmarched away to the conquest of the iEmilian province.The fierce and formidable bands of the Heruli were at­tached to the person of Narses ;d ten thousand Romansand confederates were persuaded to march under hisbanners; every malecontent embraced the fair opportu­nity of revenging his private or imaginary wrongs; and
or caution; in the Anecdotes, (c. 7.) with malevolence or freedom; but Marcellinus,or rather his continuator, (in Chron.) casts a shade of premeditated assassination overthe death of Constantine. He had performed good service at Rome and Spoleto;(Prooop. Gotb. lib. 1. o. 7. 14.) but Alemannus confounds him with a Constantianuscomes stabuli.
* They refused to serve after his departure; sold their captives and cattle to theGoths; and swore never to fight against them. Procopitis introduces a curious di­gression on the manners and adventures of this wandering nation, a part of whomfinally emigrated to Thtile or Scandinavia. (Goth. lib. 2. e. 14, IS.)-'







OCR Output








DF.CLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLVI.


march of Heraclius, till he beheld with a sigh the onceloved mansions of Dastagerd. Both his friends and ene­mies were persuaded, that it was the intention of Chosroestobury himself under the ruins of the city and palace: andas both might have been equally adverse to his night, themonarch of Asia, with Sira, and three concubines, escapedthrough a hole in the wall nine days before the arrivalof the Romans. The slow and stately procession inwhich he shewed himself to the prostrate crowd, waschanged to a rapid and secret journey; and the firstevening he lodged in the cottage of a peasant, whosehumble door would scarcely give admittance to the greatking." His superstition was subdued by fear: on thethird day, he entered with joy the fortifications of Ctesi-phon; yet he still doubted of his safety till he had op­posed the river Tigris to the pursuit of the Romans.The discovery of his flight agitated with terror and tu­mult the palace, the city, and the camp, of Dastagerd:the satraps hesitated whether they had most to fear fromtheir sovereign or the enemy; and the females of theharam were astonished and pleased by the sight of man­kind, till the jealous husband of three thousand wivesagain confined them to a more distant castle. At hiscommand, the'army of Dastagerd retreated to a newcamp: the front was covered by the Arba, and a lineof two hundred elephants; the troops of the more dis­tant provinces successively arrived, and the vilest domes­tics of the king and satraps were enrolled for the last de­fence of the throne. It was still in the power of Chos­roes to obtain a reasonable peace; and he was repeatedlypressed by the messengers of Heraclius, to spare theblood of his subjects, and to relieve a humane conquerorfrom the painful duty of carrying fire and sword throughthe fairest countries of Asia. But the pride of the Per­sian had not yet sunk to the level of his fortune; he de­rived a momentary confidence from the retreat of the
n The words of Theophanes are remarkable: Na-nXfli Xoff-po»]; «i; oixov ytaifyev pn&a-fuiw jueu'su, ou x^fi^K ev n rovrcu fluja, h iSxv ta^a-nv 'HfonXiuc iBa^acri, (p. ^69.)Young princes who discover a propensity tb war should repeatedly transcribe andtranslate such salutary tcits.







OCR Output








374 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIV.


and answer. Do you promise to pay me one hundredpieces of gold? was the solemn interrogation of Seius.I do promise—was the reply of Sempronius. The friendsof Sempronius, who answered for his ability and inclina­tion, might be separately sued at the option of Seius: andthe benefit of partition, or order of reciprocal actions,insensibly deviated from the strict theory of stipulation.The most cautious and deliberate consent was-justly re­quired to sustain the validity of a gratuitous promise;and the citizen who might have obtained a legal security,incurred the suspicion of fraud, and paid the forfeit ofhis neglect. But the ingenuity of the civilians success­fully laboured to convert simple engagements into theform of solemn stipulations. The praetors, as the guar­dians of social faith, admitted every rational evidence ofa voluntary and deliberate act, which in their tribunalproduced an equitable obligation, and for which theygave an action and a remedy/Benefits, 2. The obligations of the second class, as they werecontracted by the delivery of a thing, are marked by thecivilians with the epithet of real.2 A grateful return isdue to the author of a benefit; and whoever is intrustedwith the property of another, has bound himself to thesacred duty of restitution. In the case of a friendly loan,the merit of generosity is on the side of the lender only;in a deposit, on the side of the receiver: but in a pledge,and the rest of the selfish commerce of ordinary life, thebenefit is compensated by an equivalent, and the obliga­tion to restore is variously modified by the nature of thetransaction. The Latin language very happily expressesthe fundamental difference between the commodaiumand the mutuum, which our poverty is reduced to con-
J The Jus Pratorium de Pactis et Transactinnibus is a separate and satisfactorytreatise of Gerard Noodt. (Opp. tom. 1. p. 483—564.) And 1 will here observethat the universities of Holland and Brandenburgl], in the beginning of the presentcentury, appear to have studied the civil law on the most jnst and liberal principles.
1 The nice and various subject of contracts by consent is spread over four books(17—20.) of the Pandects, and is one of the parts best deserving of the attention ofan English student.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIV.


the slaves of Britain, or the gems and gold of Asiatic-kingdoms. In the language of ancient jurisprudence,which was corrupted and forgotten before the age of Jus­tinian, these spoils were distinguished by the name ofrnanceps or mancipium, taken with the hand; and when­ever they were sold or emancipated, the purchaser requir­ed some assurance that they had been the property of anenemy, and not of a fellow-citizen." A citizen couldonly forfeit his rights by apparent dereliction, and suchdereliction of a valuable interest could not easily be pre­sumed. Yet, according to the twelve tables, a prescrip­tion of one year for moveables, and of two years for im­moveables, abolished the claim of the ancient mas­ter, if the actual possessor had acquired them by a fairtransaction from the person whom he believed to be thelawful proprietor.b Such conscientious injustice, with­out any mixture of fraud or force, could seldom injurethe members of a small republic: but the various pe­riods of three, often, or of twenty years, determined byJustinian, are more suitable to the latitude of a greatempire. It is only in the term of prescription that thedistinction of real and personal fortune has been remark­ed by the civilians, and their general idea of property isthat of simple, uniform, and absolute dominion. Thesubordinate exceptions of me, of usufruct,* of servitudes?imposed for the benefit of a neighbour on lands andhouses, are abundantly explained by the professors of ju-
• The res mancipe is explained from faint and remote ltghts by Ulpian (Fragment.tit. 18. p. 618, 619.) and Bynkershock. (Opp. tom. 1. p. 306—315.) The definitionis somewhat arhitrary; and as none except myself hare assigned a reason, I am dif­fident of my own.
b From this short prescription, Hame (Essays, vol. 1. p. 423.) infers that therecould not then be more order and settlement in Italy than now amongst the Tartars.By the civilian of his adversary Wallace, he is reproached, and not without reason,for overlooking the conditions. (Institnt. lib. 2. tit. 6.)
« See the Institutes, (lib. 1. tit. 4, 5.) and the Pandects, (lib. 7.) Noodt hascomposed a learned and distinct treatise de Usufructo. (Opp. tom. 1. p. 387—478.) .
* The questions de Servitutibus are discussed in the Institutes, (lib. 2. tit. 3.) andPandects, (lib. 8.) Cicero, (pro Murena, c. 9. and Lactantius, (Institut. Divin.lib. 1. c. 1.) affect to laugh at the insignificant doctrine, de aquapluvia arcenda, &c.Yet it might be of frequent use among litigious neighbours, both in town andcountry.







OCR Output








362 'DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIV.


Oriental queens. A concubine, in the strict sense of thecivilians, was a woman of servile or plebeian extraction,the sole and faithful companion of a Roman citizen, whocontinued in a state of celibacy. Her modest stationbelow the honours of a wife, above the infamy of a pros­titute, was acknowledged and approved by the laws:from the age of Augustus to the tenth century, the useof this secondary marriage prevailed both in the westand east, and the humble virtues of a concubine wereoften preferred to the pomp and insolence of a noblematron. In this connexion, the two Antonines, thebest of princes and of men, enjoyed the comforts of do­mestic love; the example was imitated by many citizensimpatient of celibacy, but regardful of their families. Ifat any time they desired to legitimate their natural chil­dren, the conversion was instantly performed by the cele­bration of their nuptials with a partner whose fruitfulnessand fidelity they had already tried. By this epithet of natu­ral, the offspring of the concubine were distinguishedfromthe spurious blood of adultery, prostitution, and incest, towhom Justinian reluctantly grants the necessary alimentsof life; and these natural children alone were capable ofsucceeding to a^ixth part of the inheritance of their re­puted father. According to the rigour of law, bastardswere entitled only to the name and condition of theirmother, from whom they might derive the character ofa slave, a stranger, or a citizen. The outcasts of everyfamily were adopted without reproach as the children ofthe state."
Guardians The relation of guardian and ward, or, in Romanand wards. wor(jg> of iuior and pupil, which covers so many titles ofthe Institutes and Pandects/ is of a very simple and uni-
» Thte hnmble hat legal rights of concuhines and natural children, are stated in theInstitutes, (lib. 1. tit. 10.)' the Pandects, (lib. 1. tit. 7.) the Code, (lib. 5. tit. 25.)and the Novels, (lib.'74. 89.) The researches of Hei Decems and Giannone (ail Le­gem Juliam et Papiam-Poppneam, c.4. p, 164—175.0pere PostHume,p. 108—158.)illustrate this interesting and domcstio subject.
"See the article of guardians and wards in the Institutes, (lib. 1. tit. 13—26.) thePandects, (lib. 26, 27.) and the Code, (lib. 5. tit. 28—70.)







OCR Output








25§ DECLINE AND tfALL [CHAP. XLIIJ;


mans; and our wonder is reasonably excited that theyshould presume to enlarge an empire, whose ancient li­mits they were incapable of defending. But the wars,the conquests, and the triumphs, of Justinian, are thefeeble and pernicious efforts of old age, which exhaustthe remains of strength, and accelerate the decay of thepowers of life. He exulted in the glorious act of restor­ing Africa and Italy to the republic; but the calamitieswhich followed the departure of Belisarius betrayed the. impotence of the conqueror, and accomplished the ruinof those unfortunate countries. . '.":
The troo- From his new acquisitions, Justinian expected that hisAfrica, avarice, as well as pride, should be richly gratified. A—545.535 rapacious minister of the finances closely pursued thefootsteps of Belisarius; and as the old registers of tributehad been burnt by the Vandals, he indulged his fancy ina liberal calculation and arbitrary assessment of thewealth of Africa." The increase of taxes, which weredrawn away by a distant sovereign, and a general re­sumption of the patrimony or crown lands, soon dispell­ed the intoxication of the public joy: but the emperorwas insensible to the modest complaints of the people,till he was awakened and alarmed by the clamours ofmilitary discontent. Many of the Roman soldiers hadmarried the widows and daughters of the Vandals. »Astheir own, by the double right of conquest and inherit­ance, they claimed the estates which Genseric had assign­ed to his victorious troops. They heard with disdain thecold and selfish representations of their officers, that the
Theophanes (in Chronograph, p. 144,145. 188, 189. 206, 207. who is full of strangeblunders); Poeock; (Specimen Hist. Arab. p. 62. 65.) d'Herbelot, (Biblrot. Orien-tale, p. 12. 477.) and Sale's Preliminary Discourse and Koran. (c. 105.) The re­volt of Abrahab is mentioned by Procopioj; and his fall, though clouded with mira­cles, is an historical fact. • - , ,' .
* For the troubles of Africa, I neither hare nor desire another gnide than Prono-pins, whose eye eontemplated the image, and whose ear collected the reports, of thememorable events of his own times. "In the second book of the Vandalic war he re­lates the revolt of Stozas, (e. 14—24.) the return of Belisarius, (c. 15.) the victoryof Germanus, (c. 16—18.) the second administration of Solomon, (e. 19—21.) thegoverument of Sergius, (c. 22, 23.) of Areoblndus, (c. 24.) the tyranny and death ofGontharis; (c. 25—28.) nor can I discern any symptoms of flattery or malevolencein his various, portraits. . ». >' . .' I)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


death to relieve or approach the victim; and Mebodeslanguished several days before his sentence was pro­nounced, by the inflexible pride and calm ingratitude ofthe son of Kobad. But the people, more especially inthe east, is disposed to forgive, and even to applaud, thecruelty which strikes at the loftiest heads; at the slavesof ambition, whose voluntary choice has exposed themto live in the smiles, and to perish by the frown, of a ca­pricious monarch, in the execution of the laws which hehad no temptation to violate; in the punishment ofcrimes which attacked his own dignity, as well as thehappiness of individuals; Nushirvan, or Chosroes, de­served the appellation of just. His government wasfirm, rigorous, and impartial. It was the first labour ofhis reign to abolish the dangerous theory of common orequal possessions: the lands and women which the sec­taries of Mazdak had usurped, were restored to theirlawful owners; .and the temperate chastisement of thefanatics or impostors confirmed the domestic rights of soiciety. Instead of listening with blind confidence to afavourite minister, he established four viziers over thefour great provinces of his empire, Assyria, Media, Per­sia, and Bactriana. In the choice of judges, prefects,-and counsellors, he strove to remove the mask which is' ■always worn in the presence of kings; he wished to sub­stitute the natural order of talents for the accidental dis­tinctions of birth and fortune ; he professed, in speciouslanguage, his intention to prefer those men who carried,the poor in their bosoms, and to banish corruption fromthe seat of justice, as dogs were excluded from the tem­ples of the Magi. The code of laws of the first Artax-erxes was revived and published as the rule of the magis­trates; but the assurance of speedy punishment was thebest security of their virtue. Their behaviour was in­spected by a thousand eyes, their words were overheard
the palace of Ispahan is, or was, the fatal scene of disgrace or death. (Chardin, Voy­age en Perse, torn. 4. p, 312, 313.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIIl.] OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 2QQ


dogs and vultures; a crowd of rustics, imploring foodand protection, increased the consternation of the city,and the tents of Zabergan were pitched at the distanceof twenty miles,q on the banks of a small river, whichencircles Melanthias, and afterward falls into the Pro-pontis/ Justinian trembled: and those who had onlyseen the emperor in his old age, were pleased to suppose,that he had lost the alacrity and vigour of his youth.By his command, the vessels of gold and silver were re­moved from the churches in the neighbourhood, andeven the suburbs of Constantinople: the ramparts werelined with trembling spectators: the golden gate was"crowded with useless generals and tribunes, and the se­nate shared the fatigues and the apprehensions of thepopulace.
But the eyes of the prince and people were directed to'Last »io- .a feeble veteran, who was compelled by the public dan-'BetLriu.ger to resume the armour in which he had entered Car­thage and defended Rome. The horses of the royalstables, of private citizens, and even of the circus, werehastily collected; the emulation of the old and youngwas roused by the name of Belisarius, and his first en­campment was in the presence of a victorious enemy. His!prudence, and the labour of the friendly peasants, se­cured, with a ditch and rampart, the repose of the night:innumerable fires, and clouds of dust, were artfully con­trived to magnify the opinion of his strength: his soldierssuddenly passed frOm despondency to presumption ; andwhile ten thousand voices demanded the battle, Belisariusdissembled his knowledge, that in the hour of trial hemust depend on the firmness of three hundred veterans.
1 The distance from Constantinople to Melanthias* Villa Caesariana, (Ammian.Marcellin. 30. 11.) is variously fixed at one hundred and two, or one hundred andforty stadia, (Suidas, torn. 2; p. 522, 523. Agathias, lib. 5. p. 158.) or eighteen ornineteen miles. (Itineraria, p. 138. 230. 323. 332. and Wesseling's Observations.),The first twelve miles, as far as Rhegium, were paved by Justinian, who built abridge over a morass or gullet between a lake and the sea. (Procop. de Edif. lib. 4.c. 8.)
r The Atyras. (Pompon. Mela, lib. 2. o. 2. p. 169. edit. Voss.) At the riverVmouth, a town or caMle of the same name was fortified by Justinian* (Procop. deEdif. lib. 4. c. 2. Itlnerar. p. 570. and Wesseling.)


X 1







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


artifice with which he reduced the size, without defacingthe figure, of the gold coin. Instead of expecting therestoration of peace and industry, he imposed a heavyassessment on the fortunes of the Italians. Yet his pre­sent or future demands were less odious than a prosecu­tion of arbitrary rigour against the persons and propertyof all those, who, under the Gothic kings, had been con­cerned in the receipt and expenditure of the public mo­ney. The subjects of Justinian who escaped these par­tial vexations, were oppressed by the irregular mainte­nance of the soldiers whom Alexander defrauded anddespised; and their hasty sallies, in quest of wealth orsubsistence, provoked the inhabitants of the countryto await or implore their deliverance from the virtuesof a Barbarian. Totilak was chaste and temperate; andnone were deceived, either friends or enemies, who de­pended on his faith or his clemency. To the husband­men of Italy the Gothic king issued a welcome procla­mation, enjoining them to pursue their important la­bours, and to rest assured, that, on the payment of theordinary taxes, they should be defended by his valour anddiscipline from the injuries of war. The strong townshe successively attacked; and as soon as they hadyielded to his arms, he demolished the fortifications ;' tosave the people from the calamities of a future siege, todeprive the Romans of the arts of defence, and to decidethe tedious quarrel of the two nations, by an equaland honourable conflict in the field of battle. TheRoman captives and deserters were tempted to inlist inthe service of a liberal and courteous adversary; theslaves were attracted by the firm and faithful promise,that they should never be delivered to their masters; andfrom the thousand warriors of Pa via, a new people,
either disgraced or despised,, the ink of the Anecdotes (c. 4, 5.18.) is, scarcelyblacker than that of the Gothic History, (lib. 3. c. 1. 3, 4. 9. 20, 21, &c.)
* Procopins (lib. 3. c. 2. 8. &c.) does ample and willing justice to the merit ofTotila. The Roman historians, from Sallust and Tacitus, were happy to forget thevices of their countrymen in the contemplation of harharic virtue.
VOL. V. T







OCR Output








DECLINfc AND FALL [ciiAt»: XLI*!1.'


uncle had imprudently bestowed the provincial govern­ments of Tripoli and Pentapolis. A Moorish tribe en­camped under the walls of Leptis, to renew their alii*ance, and receive from the governor the customary gifts;Fourscore of their deputies were introduced as friendsinto the city; but, on the dark suspicion of a conspi­racy, they were massacred at the table of Sergius; andthe clamour of arms and revenge was re-echoed throughthe valleys of mount Atlas, from both the Syrtes to theAtlantic ocean. A personal injury, the unjust execu­tion, or murder of his brother, rendered Antalus theenemy of the Romans. The defeat of the Vandals hadformerly signalized his valour; the rudiments of justiceand prudence were still more conspicuous in a Moor;and while he laid Adrumetum in ashes, he calmly admo­nished the emperor that the peace of Africa might besecured by the recall of Solomon and his unworthy ne­phews. The exarch led forth his troops from Carthage:but at the distance of six days' journey, in the neigh­bourhood of Tebeste,d he was astonished by the superiornumbers and fierce aspect of the barbarians. He pro­posed a treaty; solicited a reconciliation; and offeredto bind himself by the most solemn oaths. "By whatoaths can: he bind himself? (interrupted the indignantMoors.) Will he swear by the gospels, the divine booksof the Christians? It was on those books that the faithof his nephew Sergius was pledged to eighty of our inno­cent and unfortunate brethren. Before we trust them asecond time, let us try their efficacy in the chastisementof perjury, and the vindication of their own honou»"Their honour was vindicated in the field of Tebeste, bythe death of Solomon, and the total loss of his army.
* Now Tibesh, in the kingdom of Algiers. It is watered by a river, the Sujeras*,which falls into the Mejerda. (Bagradas.) Tibesh is still remarkable for its walls oflarge stones (like the Coliseum of Rome), a fountain and a grove of walnut-trees : thecountry is fruitful, and the neighbouring Bereberes are warlike. It appears from aninscription, that, under the reign of Adrian, the road from Carthage to Tebeste wasconstructed by the third legion. (Maraiol. Description de l'Afriquc, tota. 2. p. Hit;443. Shaw's Travels, p. 64—66.) • ■ .-■■'■■>







OCR Output








CHAP.XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


more essential duties. But his just confidence wasplaced in the veterans who had fought under his bannerin the Persian and African wars; and although that gal­lant band was reduced to five thousand men, he under­took, with such contemptible numbers, to defend a circleof twelve miles, against an army of one hundred and fiftythousand barbarians. In the walls of Rome, which Be-lisarius constructed or restored, the materials of ancientarchitecture may be discerned and the whole fortifica­tion was completed, except in a chasm still extant be­tween the Pincian and Flaminian gates, which the pre­judices of the Goths and Romans left under the effectualguard of St. Peter the apostle.1 The battlements or bas­tions were shaped in sharp angles; a ditch, broad anddeep, protected the foot of the rampart; and the archerson the rampart were assisted by military engines—thebalista, a powerful cross-bow, which darted short butmassy arrows; the onagri, or wild asses, which, on theprinciple of a sling, threw stones and bullets of an enor­mous size.m A chain was drawn across the Tiber; thearches of the aqueducts were made impervious, and themole or sepulchre of Hadrian" was converted, for.the firsttime, to the uses of a citadel. That venerable structure,which contained the ashes of the Antonines, was a circu­lar turret rising from a quadrangular basis: it was cover­ed with the white marble of Paros, and decorated by thestatues of gods and heroes; and the lover of the artsmust read with a sigh, that the works of Praxiteles orLysippus were torn from their lofty pedestals, and hurl-
k The accurate eye of Nardini (Roma Antica, lib. 1. c. 8. p. 31.) could distinguishthe tamnltuarie opera di Balisario.
1 The fissure and leaning in the upper part of the wall, which Procopius observed,(Goth.lib-. 1.e. 13.) is visible to the present hour. (Donat. Roma Vetus, lib. 1. c.17.p. 53, 54.)
* Lipsius (Opp. tom. 3. Poliorcet. lib. 3.) was ignorant of this clear and conspicu­ous passage of Procopius. (Goth. lib. 1. c. 21.) Theengine was named ova^o;, thewild ass, a calcitrando. (Hen. Steph. Thesaur. Linguae Graec. tom 2. p. 1340,1341.tom. 3. p. 877.) I have seen an ingenious model, oontrived and executed by generalMelville, which imitates or surpasses the art of antiquity.
"The description of this mausoleum, or mole, in Procopius, (lib. 1. c. 25.) is thifirst and best. The height above the walls u-^eSov c; Xiflou (JoXiv. On Pfolli's greatplan, the sides measure two hundred and sixty Hnglishfeet.
VOL. V. N







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.]' OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 439


of Yemen or Arabia0 Felix; the distant land of myrrhand frankincense, which had escaped, rather than op*posed, the conquerors of the east. After the defeat ofAbrahah under the walls of Mecca, the discord of hissons and brothers gave an easy entrance to the Persians:they chased the strangers of Abyssinia beyond the Redsea; and a native prince of the ancient Homerites wasrestored to the throne as the vassal or viceroy of the greatNushirvan.d But the nephew of Justinian declared hisresolution to avenge the injuries of his Christian ally theprince of Abyssinia, as they suggested a decent pretenceto discontinue the annual tribute, which was poorly dis­guised by the name of pension. The churches of Per*sarmenia were oppressed by the intolerant spirit of theMagi; they secretly invoked the protection of the Chris­tians, and after the pious murder of their satraps, the re­bels were avowed and supported as the brethren and sub­jects of the Roman emperor. The complaints of Nu-shirvan were disregarded by the Byzantine court; Justinyielded to the importunities of the Turks, who offeredan alliance against the common enemy; and the Persianmonarchy was threatened at the same instant by the unit­ed forces of Europe, of ^Ethiopia, and of Scythia. Atthe age of fourscore, the sovereign of the east wouldperhaps have chosen the peaceful enjoyment of his gloryand greatness: but as soon as war became inevitable, he His 'V?took the field with the alacrity of youth, whilst the ag- the r0-gressor trembled in the palace of Constantinople. Nush-1™! 573,irvan, or Chosroes, conducted in person the siege of Dara; &0'and although that important fortress had been left desti-
c The general independence of the Arabs, which cannot be admitted without manylimitations, is blindly asserted in a separate dissertation of the authors of the Univer­sal History, vol. 20. p. 196—250. A perpetual miracle is supposed to have guard­ed the prophecy in favour of the posterity of [shraael; and these learned bigots arenot afraid to risk the truth of Christianity on this frail and slippery foundation.'* D'Herbelot, Biblioth. Orient, p. 477. Pooock, Specimen Hist. Arabum, p. 6i,65. Father Pagi (Critioa, torn. 2. p. 646.) has proved, that after ten years peace,the Persian war, which coutiuued twenty year*), was renewed A. D.573. Mahometwas born A. D. 569, in the year of the elephant, or the defeat of Abrahah; (Gagnier,Viede Mahomet, torn. 1. p. 89, 90. 98.) and this account allows two years for theconquest of Yemen.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XXXIX*


after a dysentery which continued three days, he expiredin the palace of Ravenna, in the thirty-third, or, if wecompute from the invasion of Italy, in the thirty-seventhyear of his reign. Conscious of his approaching end,he divided his treasures and provinces between his twograndsons, and fixed the Rhone as their common boun­dary.1" Amalaric was restored to the throne of Spain.Italy, with all the conquests of the Ostrogoths, was be­queathed to Athalaric; whose age did not exceed tenyears, but who was cherished as the last male offspring ofthe line of Amali, by the short-lived marriage of his motherAmalasuntha with a royal fugitive of the same blood."In the presence of the dying monarch, the Gothic chiefsand Italian magistrates mutually engaged their faith andloyalty to the young prince, and to his guardian mother;and received, in the same awful moment, his last salutaryadvice, to maintain the laws, to love the senate and peo­ple of Rome, and to cultivate with decent reverence thefriendship of the emperor." The monument of Theo-doric was erected by his daughter Amalasuntha, in a con­spicuous situation, which commanded the city of Ra­venna, the harbour and the adjacent coast. A chapelof a circular form, thirty feet in diameter, is crowned bya dome of one entire piece of granite: from the centreof the dome four columns arose, which supported, in avase of porphyry, the remains of the Gothic king, sur­rounded by the brazen statues of the twelve apostles.pHis spirit, after some previous expiation, might have
received this curious anecdote from common report, or from the mouth of the royalpbysician. ,
m Procopins, Goth. lib. 1. c. 1. 2. 12, 13. This partition had been directed byTheodoric, though it was not executed till after his death. Regni hereditatem su-perstes reliquit. (Isidor. Chron. p. 721. edit. Grot.)
"Berimnnd, the third in descent from Hermauric, king of the Ostrogoths, hadretired into Spam, were he lived and died in obscurity. (Jornandes, c. 33. p. 202.edit. Murator.) See the discovery, nuptials, and death of his grandson Eutharic.(o. 58. p. 220.) His Roman games might render him popular; (Cassiodor. in Chron.)but Eutharic was asper in religione. (Anonym. Vales, p. 722, 723.)
° See the counsels of Theodoric, and the professions of his successor, in Procopius,(Goth. lib. 1. o. 1. 2.) Jornandes, (c. 59. p. 220, 221.) and Cassiodorius. (Var. 8.1—7.) These epistles are the triumph of his ministerial eloquence.
P Anonym. Vales, p. 742. Agnellus de Vitis Pont. Raven. in Muratori Script,Rerum Ital. tom. 2. p. 1. p. 67. Alberti Descrittione d'ltalia, p. 311.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLII.


exchanges were regulated; the Persian assumed theguard of the gates of Caucasus, and the demolition ofDara was suspended, on condition that it should neverbe made the residence of the general of the east. Thisinterval of repose had been solicited, and was diligentlyimproved, by the ambition of the emperor: his Africanconquests were the first-fruits of the Persian treaty; andthe avarice of Chosroes was soothed by a large portion ofthe spoils of Carthage, which his ambassadors requiredin a tone of pleasantry, and under the colour of friend­ship.™ But the trophies of Belisarius disturbed theslumbers of the great king; and he heard with astonish­ment, envy, and fear, that Sicily, Italy, and Rome itself,had been reduced, in three rapid campaigns, to the obe­dience of Justinian. Unpractised in the art of violatingtreaties, he secretly excited his bold and subtle vassalAlmondar. That prince of the Saracens, who resided atHira," had not been included in the general peace, andstill waged an obscure war against his rival Arethas, thechief of the tribe of Gassan,and confederate of the em­pire. The subject of their dispute was an extensivesheep-walk in the desert to the south of Palmyra. Animmemorial tribute for the license of pasture, appearedto attest the rights of Almondar, while the Gassanite ap­pealed to the Latin name of strata, a paved road, as anunquestionable evidence of the sovereignty and laboursof the Romans." The two monarchs supported the causeof their respective vassals; and the Persian Arab, with­out expecting the event of a slow and doubtful arbitra­tion, enriched his flying camp with the spoil and captivesof Syria. Instead of repelling the arms, Justinian at-
m Procopins, Persic. lib. I.e. 26.
11 Almondar, king of Hira. was deposed by Kohad, and restored by Nnshirran,His mother, from her beaoty, was sarnamed Celestial Water, an appellation whiobbecame hereditary, and was extended for a more noble cause (liberality in famiDe)to the Arab princes of Syria. (Pocock, Specimen Hist. Arab. p. 69, 70.)
° Procopins, Persic. lib. 2. c. 1. We are iguorant of the origin and objectof this strata, a paved road of ten days' journey from Auranitis to Babylonia,(see a Latin note in Delisle's Map Imp. Orient.) Wcsscling and d'Auvillo arcsilent.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


Berrhae or Aleppo, Apamea and Chalcis, were succes­sively besieged: they redeemed their safety by a ransomof gold or silver, proportioned to their respective strengthand opulence; and their new master enforced, withoutobserving, the terms of capitulation. Educated in thereligion of the Magi, he exercised without remorse thelucrative trade of sacrilege; and, after stripping of its goldand gems, a piece of the true cross, he generously restor­ed the naked relic to the devotion of the Christians ofApamea. No more than fourteen years had elapsed*since Antioch was ruined by an earthquake; but thequeen of the east, the new Theopolis, had been raisedfrom the ground by the liberality of Justinian: and theincreasing greatness of the buildings and the people al­ready erased the memory of this recent disaster. Onone side, the city was defended by the mountain, onthe other by the river Orontes; but the most accessiblepart was commanded by a superior eminence: the pro­per remedies were rejected, from the despicable fear ofdiscovering its weakness to the enemy; and Germanus,the emperor's nephew, refused to trust his person anddignity within the walls of a besieged city. The peopleof Antioch had inherited the vain and satirical genius oftheir ancestors; they were elated by a sudden reinforce­ment of six thousand soldiers; they disdained the offersof an easy capitulation; and their intemperate clamoursinsulted from the ramparts the majesty of the great king.Under his eye the Persian myriads mounted with scalingladders to the assault; the Roman mercenaries fledthrough the opposite gate of Daphne; and the gener­ous assistance of the youth of Antioch served only toaggravate the miseries of their country. As Chosroes,attended by the ambassadors of Justinian, was descend­ing from the mountain, he affected, in a plaintive voice,to deplore the obstinacy and ruin of that unhappy peo­ple; but the slaughter still raged with unrelenting fury;and the city, at the command of a barbarian, was deliver­







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVl.] OF TllE ROMAN EMPIRE. 4Q7


emperdr: he wept with impotent rage over the ruins ofhis Assyrian palaces, and disregarded too long the risingmurmurs of the nation, who complained that their livesand fortunes were sacrificed to the obstinacy of an oldman. That unhappy old man was himself tortured withthe sharpest pains both of mind and body; and, in theconsciousness of his approaching end, he resolved to fixthe tiara on the head of Merdaza, the most favoured ofhis sons. But the will of Chosroes was no longer reve­red, and Siroes, who gloried in the rank and merit ofhis mother Sira, had conspired with the malecontentsto assert and anticipate the rights of primogeniture."Twenty-two satraps, they styled themselves patriots,were tempted by the wealth and honours of a new reign:to the soldiers, the heir of Chosroes promised an increaseof pay: to the Christians, the free exercise of their re­ligion: to the captives, liberty and rewards; and to thenation, instant peace and the reduction of taxes. It wasdetermined by the conspirators that Siroes, with the en­signs of royalty, should appear in the camp; and if theenterprise should fail, his escape was contrived to the im­perial court. But the new monarch was saluted with una­nimous acclamations; the flight of Chosroes (yet where He;«de-could he have fled ?) was rudely arrested, eighteen sons a?d!'g28,were massacred before his face, and he was thrown into-^'J^.a dungeon, where he expired on the fifth day. Thedere<l b*
_ 1 J Ins son
Greeks and modern Persians minutely describe how siroes,Chosroes was insulted, and famished, and tortured, by Feb-28'the command of an inhuman son, who so far surpassedthe example of his father: but at the time of his death,what tongue would relate the story of the parricide ? whateye could penetrate into the tower of darkness? Accord­ing to the faith and mercy of his Christian enemies, hesunk without hope into a still deeper abyss ;p and it will
° The authentic narrative of llie fall of Chosroes is contained in the letters of He«raclins, (Cbron. Paschal, p. 398.) and the history of Theophanes, (p. 271.)
P On the first rumonr of the death of Chosroes, an Heracliad in two cantos wasinstantly pnblisbed at Constantinople by George of Pisidia, (p. 97—-105.) A priestand a poet might very properly exult in the damnation of the public enemy : (i/uawroytv 7rcgTapa>, v. 56.) but such mean revenge is unworthy of a king and a conqueror;and I am sorry to find so much black superstition (0£ofta^s; Xos-fcn; ssrf 7i xai nrrce[xct







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI.


and secretly firing the granaries" of a besieged city.pWhile he pressed the blockade of Ravenna, he wassurprised by the arrival of two ambassadors from Con­stantinople, with a treaty of peace, which Justinian hadimprudently signed, without deigning to consult theauthor of his victory. By this disgraceful and precariousagreement, Italy and the Gothic treasure were divided,and the provinces beyond the Po were left with the regaltitle to the successor of Theodoric. The ambassadorswere eager to accomplish their salutary commission ; thecaptive Vitiges accepted, with transport, the unexpectedoffer of a crown; honour was less prevalent among theGoths, than the want and appetite of food; and the Ro­man chiefs, who murmured at the continuance of thewar, professed implicit submission to the commands ofthe emperor. If Belisarius had possessed only the cou­rage of a soldier, the laurel would have been snatchedfrom his hand by timid and envious counsels; but, inthis decisive moment, he resolved, with the magnanimityof a statesman, to sustain alone the danger and merit ofgenerous disobedience. Each of his officers gave a writ­ten opinion, that the siege of Ravenna was impracticableand hopeless: the general then rejected the treaty ofpartition, and declared his own resolution of leading Vi­tiges in chains to the feet of Justinian. The Goths re­tired with doubt and dismay: this peremptory refusal de­prived them of the only signature which they could trust,and filled their minds with a just apprehension, that asagacious enemy had discovered the full extent of their
derns aygssrof. Yet both words are used as synonymous in Galen, Dioscorides, andLocian. (Hen. Steph. Thesaur. Ling. Graec. torn. 3. p. 748.)
° The Goths suspected Mathasuintha as an accomplice in the mischief, which per­haps was occasioned by accidental lightning.
P In strict philosophy, a limitation of the rights of war seems to imply nonsenseand contradiction. Grotius himself is lost in an idle distinction between the jas' na­turae and the jus gentium, between poison and infection. He balances in one scale thepassages of Homer, (Otlyss. A. 259, &c.) and Florus; (lib. 2. c. 20. no. 7. alt.) andin the other, the examples of Solon (Pausanias, lib. 10. c. 37.) and Belisarius. See hisgreat work De Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. 3. c. 4. s. 15—17. and in Barbeyrac's version,torn. 2. p. 257, &c. Yet I can understand the benefit and validity of an agreement,tacit or express, mutually to abstain from certain modes of hostility. See the Aiu-phictyouio oath in Kschincs, de Falsa Legatione.







OCR Output








280 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIII.


of the earth, and of an infinite number of horses, sheep,and oxen. Sardinia and Corsica obeyed the fortune ofItaly; and the sea-coast of Greece was visited by a fleetof three hundred galleys." The Goths were landed inCorcyra and the ancient continent of Epirus; they ad­vanced as far as Nicopolis, the trophy of Augustus, and.Dodona,b once famous by the oracle of Jove. In everystep of his victories the wise Barbarian repeated to Justi­nian his desire of peace, applauded the concord of theirpredecessors, and offered to employ the Gothic arms inthe service of the empire.Prepare- Justinian was deaf to the voice of peace; but he neg-jusUnlaii lected the prosecution of war; and the indolence of histwo war*"' temPer disappointed, in some degree, the obstinacy ofa.d^549 his passions. From this salutary slumber the emperorwas awakened by the pope Vigilius and the patrician Ce-thegus, who appeared before his throne, and abjured him,in the name of God and the people, to resume the con­quest and deliverance of Italy. In the choice of the ge­nerals, caprice, as well as judgment was shewn. A fleetand army sailed for the relief of Sicily under the conductof Liberius; but his youth and want of experience wereafterward discovered, and before he touched the shoresof the island, he was overtaken by his successor. In theplace of Liberius, the conspirator Artaban was raisedfrom a prison to military honours; in the pious presump­tion, that gratitude would animate his valour and fortifyhis allegiance. Belisarius reposed in the shade of hislaurels, but the command of the principal army was re­served for Germanus,0 the emperor's nephew, whose
» In these seas, Procopius searched without success for the isle of Calypso. Hewas shewn at Phaeacia or Corcyra, the petrified ship of Ulysses ; (Odyss. 13. 163.)but he found it a recent fabric of many stones, dedicated by a merchant to JupiterCassius. (lib. 4. c. 22.) Eustathius had supposed it to be the fanciful likeness of arock.
» M. d'Anville (Memoires de I'Acad. tom. 32. p. 513—528.) illustrates the gulf ofAmbracia; hat be cannot ascertain the situation of Dodona. A country in sight ofItaly is less known than the wilds of America.
e See the acts of Germanus in the public (Vandal, lib. 2. c. 16—18. Goth. lib. 3.c. 31, 32.) and private history, (Anecdot. c. 5.) and those of his son Justin, inAgathias. (lib. 4. c. 130, 131.) Notwithstanding an amhiguous expression ofjor­







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 4QI


the capital was assaulted by the Avars, who had madesome progress in the science of attack; they advanced tosap or batter the wall, under the cover of the impenetra­ble tortoise; their engines discharged a perpetual volleyof stones and darts; and twelve lofty towers of wood ex­alted the combatants to the height of the neighbouringramparts. But the senate and people were animated bythe spirit df Heraclius, who had detached to their relief a.body of twelve thousand cuirassiers; the powers of fireand mechanics were used with superior art and success inthe defence of Constantinople; and the galleys, with twoand three ranks of oars, commanded the Bosphorus, andrendered the Persians the idle spectators of the defeat oftheir allies. The Avars were repulsed; a fleet of Scla-vonian canoes was destroyed in the harbour; the vassalsof the chagan threatened to desert, his provisions wereexhausted, and after burning his engines, he gave thesignal of a slow and formidable retreat. The devotionof the Romans ascribed this signal deliverance to theVirgin Mary; but the mother of Christ would surelyhave condemned their inhuman murder of the Persianenvoys, who were entitled to the rights of humanity, ifthey were not protected by the laws of nations.": After the division of his army, Heraclius -prudently re- Alliancestired to the banks of the Phasis, from whence he main-and I°"",
* quests ot
tained a defensive war against the fifty thousand gold Herac,iafcspears of Persia. His anxiety was relieved by the deli­verance of Constantinople; his hopes were confirmedby a victory of his brother Theodorus; and to the hos­tile league of Chosroes with the Avars, the Roman em­peror opposed the useful and honourable alliance of theTurks. At his liberal invitation, the horde of Chozarsf
Yet I maoh question whether the senate and people of Constantinople laughed at thismessage of the chagan. ■ ■
e The Paschal Chronicle (p. 392—397.) gives a minnte and authentic narrative ofthe siege and deliverance of Constantinople. Theophanes (p. 264.) adds some cir­cumstances; and a faint light may be obtained from the smoke of George of Pisidia,who has composed a poem (de Bello Abarico, p. 45—54.) to commemorate this aus­picious event.
'The power of the Chozars prevailed in the seventh, eighth, and ninth centuries.They were known to the Greeks, the Arabs, and, under the name of Kosa, to theChinese themselves. De Guignes, Hist. des Huns, tom. 2. part 2. p. 507—509.


1 K 2







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [cHAP. XLI.


ror. His departure was secret; but as soon as the Van­dals discovered that their king had deserted them, theyhastily dispersed, anxious only for their personal safety,and careless of every object that is dear or valuable tomankind. The Romans entered the camp without re­sistance; and the wildest scenes of disorder were veiledin the darkness and confusion of the night. Every bar­barian who met their swords was inhumanly massacred;their widows and daughters, as rich heirs, or beautifulconcubines, were embraced by the licentious soldiers;and avarice itself was almost satiated with the treasuresof gold and silver, the accumulated fruits of conquest oreconomy in a long period of prosperity and peace. Inthis frantic search, the troops, even of Belisarius, forgottheir caution and respect. Intoxicated with lust and ra­pine, they explored in small parties, or alone, the adja­cent fields, the woods, the rocks, and the caverns, thatmight possibly conceal any desirable prize: laden withbooty, they deserted their ranks, and wandered, withouta guide, on the high road to Carthage ; and if the flyingenemies had dared to return, very few of the conquerorswould have escaped. Deeply sensible of the disgraceand danger, Belisarius passed an apprehensive night inthe field of victory: at the dawn of day, he planted hisstandard on a hill, recalled his guards and veterans, andgradually restored the modesty and obedience of thecamp. It was equally the concern of the Roman general tosubdue the hostile, and to save the prostrate barbarian;and the suppliant Vandals, who could be found only inchurches, were protected by his authority, disarmed, andseparately confined, that they might neither disturb thepublic peace, nor become the victims of popular revenge.After dispatching a light detachment to tread the foot­steps of Gelimer, he advanced with his whole army,about ten days' march, as far as Hippo Regius, which nolonger possessed the relics of St. Augustin/ The season,
* The relics nf St. Aognttin were carried by the African hishops to their Sardinianexile; (A. D. 500.) and it was believed in the eighth century, that Liutprand, king







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.] OF THE KOMAN EMPIRE. 367


risprudence. The claims of property, as far as they arealtered, by the mixture, the division, or the transforma­tion of substances, are investigated with metaphysicalsubtlety by the same civilians. '',
The personal title of the first proprietor must be de- orinherit-termined by his death: but the possession, without any suooessfon.appearance of change, is peaceably continued in his chil­dren, the associates of his toil and the partners of hiswealth. This natural inheritance has been protected bythe legislators of every climate and age, and the fatheris encouraged to persevere in slow and distant improve­ments, by the tender hope, that a long posterity will en­joy the fruits of his labour. The principle of hereditarysuccession is universal, but the order has been variouslyestablished by convenience oV caprice, by the spirit ofnational institutions, or by some partial example, whichwas originally decided by fraud or violence. The juris­prudence of the Romans appears to have deviated fromthe equality of nature, much less than the Jewish,* theAthenian,' or the English institutions.8 On the, deathof a citizen, all his descendants, unless they were alreadyfreed from his paternal power, were called to the inherit­ance of his possessions. The insolent prerogative ofprimogeniture was unknown : the two sexes were placedon a just level; all the sons and daughters were entitledto an equal portion of the patrimonial estate ; and if anyof the sons had been intercepted by a premature death,his person was represented, and his share was divided byhis surviving children. On the failure of the direct line,the right of succession must diverge to the collateral
e Among the patriarchs, the first-born enjoyed a mystic and spiritual primogeni­ture. (Genesis, 25.31.) In the land of Canaan be was entitled to a double portion ofinheritance. (Deuteronomy, 41, 17. with La Clerc's judicious Commentary.)
'At Athens the sons were equal, but the poor daughters were endowed at the dis­cretion of their brothers. See the KMipixoi pleadings of Isssns (in the seventh volumeof the Greek Orators), illustrated by the version and comment of sir William Jones,a scholar, a lawyer, and a man of genius.
I In England, the eldest son alone inherits all the land; a law, says the orthodoxjudge Blackstone, (Commentaries on the Laws of England, vol. 2. p. 215.) unjust onlyin the opinion of younger brothers. It may be of some political use in sharpeningtheir industry.







OCR Output








~i!HAP. XLII.j OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 247


of these valiant men deserves to be more distinctly no­ticed. Seven hundred had perished in the siege, twothousand three hundred survived to defend the breach.One thousand and seventy were destroyed with fire andsword in the last assault; and if seven hundred and thirtywere made prisoners, only eighteen among them werefound without the marks of honourable wounds. Theremaining five hundred escaped into the citadel, whichthey maintained without any hopes of relief, rejectingthe fairest terms of capitulation and service, till theywere lost in the flames. They died in obedience to thecommands of their prince; and such examples of loyaltyand valour might excite their countrymen to deeds ofequal despair and more prosperous event. The instantdemolition of the works of Petra confessed the astonish­ment and apprehension of the conqueror.
A Spartan would have praised and pitied the virtue of The 01-these heroic slaves; but the tedious warfare and alter- Lazic warnate success of the Roman and Persian arms cannot de- tl^*9tain the attention of posterity at the foot of mount Cau­casus. The advantages obtained by the troops of Jus­tinian were more frequent and splendid; but the forcesof the great king were continually supplied, till theyamounted to eight elephants and seventy thousand men,including twelve thousand Scythian allies, and abovethree thousand Dilemites, who descended by their freechoice from the hills of Hyrcania, and were equally for­midable in close or in distant combat. The siege ofArchaeopolis, a name imposed or corrupted by theGreeks, was raised with some loss and precipitation; butthe Persians occupied the passes of Iberia: Colchos wasenslaved by their forts and garrisons; they devoured thescanty sustenance of the people; and the prince of theLazi fled into the mountains. In the Roman camp faithand discipline were unknown; and the independentleaders, who were invested with equal power, disputedwith each other the pre-eminence of vice and corruption.







OCR Output








CHAP. XXXIX.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


Roman senators still retired in the winter season to thewarm sun and salubrious springs of Baiae; and their vil­las, which advanced on solid moles into the bay of Naples,commanded the various prospect of the sky, the earth,and the water. On the eastern side of the Hadriatic, anew Campania was formed in the fair and fruitful pro­vince of Istria, which communicated with the palace ofRavenna by an easy navigation of one hundred miles.The rich productions of Lucania and the adjacent pro­vinces were exchanged at the Marcilian fountain, in apopulous fair annually dedicated to trade, intemperanceand superstition. In the solitude of Comum, which hadonce been animated by the mild genius of Pliny, a trans­parent basin, above sixty miles in length, still reflectedthe rural seats which encompassed the margin of theLarian lake; and the gradual ascent of the hills was co­vered by a triple plantation of olives, of vines, and ofchesnut trees.1 Agriculture revived under the shadowof peace, and the number of husbandmen was multipliedby the redemption of captives.4 The iron mines of Dal-matia, a gold mine in Bruttium, were carefully explored,and the Pomptine marshes, as well as those of Spoleto,were drained and cultivated by private undertakers, whosedistant reward must depend on the continuance of thepublic prosperity." Whenever the seasons were lesspropitious, the doubtful precautions of forming maga­zines of corn, fixing the price, and prohibiting the ex­portation, attested at least the benevolence of the state;but such was the extraordinary plenty, which an indus­trious people produced from a grateful soil, that a gallon
c The villas, climate, and landscape, of Baiae, (Var. 9. 6. See Cluver Italia Antiq.lib. 4. o. 2. p. 1119, &o.) Istria (Var. 12. 22. 26.) and Comum, (Var. 11.14. comparewith Pliny's two villas, 9. 7.) are agreeably painted in the Epistles, of Cassiodorins.
d In Liguria numerosa agricolarum progenies. (Bnnodins, p. 1678—1680.) St.Epiphanius of Pavia redeemed by prayer or ransom six thousand captives from theBurgundians of Lyons and Savoy. Such deeds are the best of miracles.
* The political economy of Theodoric (see Anonym. Vales, p. 721. and Cassio­dorins, in Chron.) may be distinctly traced under the following heads: iron mine,(Var. 3. 23.) gold mine, (9. 3.) Pomptine marshes, (2. 32, 33.) Spoleto, (2. 21.) corn,(1. 34. 10. 27, 28. 11. 11, 12.) trade, (6,7. 9. 23.) fair of Leucothoe or St. Cyprianin Lucania, (8. 33.) plenty, (12. 4.) the cursus, or public post, (1. 29. 2. 31. 4. 47.5. 5. 6. 6. 7. 33.) the Flaminian way. (12. 18.)
VOL. V. D'







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


jects had traversed the frozen rivers of Scythia, and whonow covered the banks of the Danube with innumerabletents. The late emperor had cultivated, with annual andcostly gifts, the friendship of a grateful monarch, and theenemies of Rome had respected the allies of the Avars,The same prudence would instruct the nephew of Justi­nian to imitate the liberality of his uncle, and to purchasethe blessings of peace from an invincible people, who de­lighted and excelled in the exercise of war. The replyof the emperor was delivered in the same strain of haugh­ty defiance, and he derived his confidence from the Godof the Christians, the ancient glory of Rome, and the re­cent triumphs of Justinian. "The empire (said he)abounds with men and horses, and arms sufficient to de­fend our frontiers, and to chastise the barbarians. Youoffer aid, you threaten hostilities: we despise your enmi­ty and your aid. The conquerors of the Avars solicitour alliance; shall we dread their fugitives and exiles?The bounty of our uncle was granted to your misery, toyour humble prayers. From us you shall receive a moreimportant obligation, the knowledge of your own weak­ness. Retire from our presence; the lives of ambassa­dors are safe; and if you return to implore our pardon,perhaps you will taste of our benevolence."f On the re­port of his ambassadors, the chagan was awed by the ap­parent firmness of a Roman emperor, of whose characterand resources he was ignorant. Instead of executinghis threats against the eastern empire, he marched into
e Corippus, lib. 3. 390. The unquestionable sense relates to tho Turks, the con­querors of the .Avars; but the word scultor has no apparent meaning, and the soleMS. of Corippus, from whence the first edition (1581, apnd Plantin) was printed, isno longer visible. The last editor, Feggini of Rome, has inserted the conjecturalemendation of soldan: but the proofs of Ducange (Joinville, Dissert. 16. p. 238—2-10.) for the early use of this title among the Turks and Persians, are weak or amhi­guous:' And I must inclipe to the authority of d'Herbelot, (liibliotheque Orient.p. 8'25.) who ascribes the word to the Arahic and Chaldean tongues, and the date tothe beginning of the eleventh century, when it was bestowed by the khalif of Bagdadon Mahmud prince of Gazna, and conqueror of India.
f For these characteristic speeches, compare the verse of Corippus, (lib. 8. 251—401.) with the prose of Menander, (Excerpt. Legation. p. 102, 103.) Their diver­sity proves that they did not copy each other; their resemblance, that they drciyfrom a common original..







OCR Output








446 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLVf.


to choose whether they would pass the river themselves,or allow a free passage to the arms of the great king.The lieutenant of the emperor Maurice preferred thesafer alternative, and this local circumstance, whichwould have enhanced the victory of the Persians, render­ed their defeat more bloody, and their escape more diffi­cult. But the loss of his subjects, and the danger of hiskingdom, were overbalanced in the mind of Hormouzbythe disgrace of his personal enemy; and no sooner hadBahram collected and reviewed his forces, than he re­ceived from a royal messenger the insulting gift of a dis­taff, a spinning-wheel, and a complete suit of female ap­parel. Obedient to the will of his sovereign, he shewedhimself to the soldiers in this unworthy disguise: theyresented his ignominy and their own; a shout of rebel­lion ran through the ranks, and the general acceptedHis rebel- their oaths of fidelity and vows of revenge. A secondlon" messenger, who had been commanded to bring the re­bel in chains, was trampled under the feet of an elephant,and manifestos were diligently circulated, exhorting thePersians to assert their freedom against an odious andcontemptible tyrant. The defection was rapid and uni­versal: his loyal slaves were sacrificed to the public fury;the troops deserted to the standard of Bahram; and theprovinces again saluted the deliverer of his country.Hormoni As the passes were faithfully guarded, Hormouz could•ndtapri- oruy compute the number of his enemies by the testi-•oned. rnony of a guilty conscience, and the daily defection ofthose who, in the hour of his distress, avenged theirwrongs, or forgot their obligations. He proudly display­ed the ensigns of royalty; but the city and palace ofModain had already escaped from the hand of the ty­rant. Among the victims of his cruelty, Bindoes, a Sas-Sanian prince, had been cast into a dungeon: his fettersWere broken by the zeal and courage of a brother; andhe stood before the king at the head of those trustyguards who had been chosen as the ministers of his con­







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 301


About two years after the last victory of Belisarius, the His dis-
r mi • • nit grace and
emperor returned from a Thracian journey of health, or death,business, or devotion. Justinian was afflicted by a pain A.D"561'in his head; and his private entry countenanced therumour of his death. Before the third hour of the day,the baker's shops were plundered of their bread, thehouses were shut up, and every citizen, with hope orterror, prepared for the impending tumult. The sena­tors themselves, fearful and suspicious, were convened atthe ninth hour; and the prefect received their com­mands to visit every quarter of the city, and proclaim ageneral illumination for the recovery of the emperor'shealth. The ferment subsided; but every accident be­trayed the impotence of the government and the factioustemper of the people: the guards were disposed to mu­tiny as often as their quarters were changed or their paywas withheld: the frequent calamities of fires and earth­quakes afforded the opportunities of disorder; the dis­putes of the blues and greens, of the orthodox and here­tics, degenerated into bloody battles; and in the pre­sence of the Persian ambassador, Justinian blushed forhimself and for his subjects. Capricious pardon andarbitrary punishment embittered the irksomeness anddiscontent of a long reign: a conspiracy was formed inthe palace; and, unless we are deceived by the names ofMarcellus and Sergius, the most virtuous and the mostprofligate of the courtiers were associated in the same de­signs. They had fixed the time of the execution; theirrank gave them access to the royal banquet; and theirblack slaves' were stationed in the vestibule and porticos,to announce the death of the tyrant, and to excite a se-.dition in the capital. But the indiscretion of an accom­plice saved the poor remnant of the days of Justinian.
ed in the prolix declamation of Agathias, (lib. 5. p. 154—174.) and the dry chronicleof Theophanes. (p. 197, 198.)
1 iv5ou;. They could scarcely be real Indians; and the Ethiopians, sometimesknown by that name, were never used by the ancients as guards or followers: theywere the trifling, though costly, objects of female and royal luxury. (Terent Eu­nuch, act 1. scene 2. Sueton. in August. v. 83. with a good note of Caiaubun, in Ca­ligula, c. 57.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLII.] OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


computed by millions; one of their effective armies comsisted of four hundred thousand soldiers, and in less thanfifty years they were connected in peace and war withthe Romans, the Persians, and the Chinese. In theirnorthern limits, some vestige may be discovered of theform and situation of Kamtchatka, of a people of hunt­ers and fishermen, whose sledges were drawn by dogs,and whose habitations were buried in the earth. TheTurks were ignorant of astronomy; but the observationtaken by some learned Chinese, with a gnomon of eightfeet, fixes the royal camp in the latitude of forty-ninedegrees, and marks their extreme progress within three,or at least ten degrees, of the polar circle.d Amongtheir southern conquests, the most splendid was that ofthe Nepthalites or White Huns, a polite and warlike peo­ple, who possessed the commercial cities of Bochara andSamarcand, who had vanquished the Persian monarch,and carried their victorious arms along the banks, andperhaps to the mouth, of the Indus. On the side ofthe west, the Turkish cavalry advanced to the lake Msd-otis. They passed that lake on the ice. The khan,who dwelt at the foot of mount Altai, issued his com­mands for the siege of Bosphorus,0 a city, the voluntarysubject of Rome, and whose princes had formerly beenthe friends of Athens/ To the east, the Turks invadedChina, as often as the vigour of the government was re­laxed: and I am taught to read in the history of thetimes, that they mowed down their patient enemies likehemp or grass; and that the mandarins applauded thewisdom of an emperor who repulsed these barbarianswith golden lances. This extent of savage empire com-
'd Visdelou, p. 141. 151. The fact, though it strictly belongs to a subordinate andsuccessive tribe, may be introduced here.
e Procopios, Persic, lib. 1. c. 12. lib. 2. c.3. Peyssonnel (Observations sur lesPeoples Barbares, p. 99, 100.) defines the distance between Catt'a and the old Bos­phorus at sixteen long Tartar leagues.
'f See, in a Memoir of M. <le Boze, (Mem. de 1'Academie des Inscriptions, torn. G.p. 549—565.) the ancient kings and medals of the Cimmerian Bosphorus ; and thegratitude of Alliens, in the Oration of Demosthenes" against Iicptines. (in llei-ke.Orator. Grsc. torn. 1. p. 466* 467.)







OCR Output








•CttAP. XL.] THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


of Tiberius, by the gravest of the Romans; and Pliny,in affected though forcible language, has condemned thethirst of gain, which explored the last confines of theearth, for the pernicious purpose of exposing to the pub­lic eye naked draperies and transparent matrons/ Adress, which shewed the turn of the limbs, and colour ofthe skin, might gratify vanity, or provoke desire; thesilks, which had been closely woven in China, were some­times unravelled by the Phoenician women, and'the preci­ous materials were multiplied by a looser texture, and theintermixture of linen threads.5 Two hundred years afterthe age of Pliny, the use of pure or even of mixed silkswas confined to the female sex, till the opulent citizensof Rome and the provinces were insensibly familiarizedwith the example of Elagabalus, the first who, by thiseffeminate habit, had sullied the dignity of an emperorand a man. Aurelian complained, that a pound of silkwas sold at Rome for twelve ounces of gold; but the sup­ply increased with the demand, and the price diminishedwith the supply. If accident or monopoly sometimesraised the value even above the standard of Aurelian,the manufacturers of Tyre and Berytus were sometimescompelled, by the operation of the same causes, to contentthemselves with a ninth part of that extravagant rate.'A law was thought necessary to discriminate the dress ofcomedians from that of senators; and of the silk export­ed from its native country, the far greater part was con.-sumed by the subjects of Justinian. They were stillmore intimately acquainted with a shell-fish of the Me­diterranean, surnamed the silk-worm of the sea; the
r Tam longinquo orhe petitur, at in publico matron* translnceat nt de-
nndet foeminas vestis. (Plin. 6. 20. 11. 21.) Varro and Publius Syrus had alreadyplayed on the Toga ventres, ventus texilis, and nebula linea. (Horat. Sermon. 1, 2.101. with the noles of Torrentius and Dacier.)
1 On the texture, colours, names, and use of the silk, half silk, and linen garment!of antiquity, see the profound, diffuse, and obscure researches of the great Salmasius,(in Hist. August. p. 127. 309. 310. 339. 341,342. 344. 388—391. 39p. 513.) whowas ignorant of the most common trades of Dijon or Leyden.
1 Flavins Vupiscus in Aurelian. c. 45. in Hist. August. p. 224. See Salmasiusad Hist. Aug. p. 392. and Plinian' Exercitat. in Solinum, p. 694, 695. TheAneo-dotes of Procopius (c. 25.) state a partial and imperfect rate of the price of silk inthe time of Justinian.







OCR Output








176 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIir,


ful fidelity of mankind. A letter was intercepted, whichassured the king of the Goths, that the Asinarian,gate,adjoining to the Lateran church, should be secretlyExile of opened to his troops. On the proof of suspicion of trea-»erins^' son, several senators were banished, and the pope Sylve-Mol! "us vvas summoned to attend the representative of hissovereign, at his head-quarters in the Pincian palace."The ecclesiastics who followed their bishop, were de­tained in the first or second apartment," and he alonewas admitted to the presence of Belisarius. The con­queror of Rome and Carthage was modestly seated atthe feet of Antonina, who reclined on a stately couch:the general was silent, but the voice of reproach and me­nace issued from the mouth of his imperious wife. Ac-:cused by credible witnesses, and the evidence of his ownsubscription, the successor of St. Peter was despoiled ofhis pontifical ornaments, clad in the mean habit of amonk, and embarked, without delay, for a distant exilein the east. At the emperor's command, the clergy ofRome proceeded to the choice of a new bishop ; and aftera solemn invocation of the Holy Ghost, elected the dea­con Vigilius, who had purchased the papal throne by abribe of two hundred pounds of gold. The profit, andconsequently the guilt, of this simony, was imputed toBelisarius: but the hero obeyed the orders of his wife:Antonina served the passions of the empress ; and The­odora lavished her treasures, in the vain hope of obtaininga pontiff hostile or indifferent to the council of Chal­cedony
» The name of the palace, the hill, anil the adjoining gate, were all derived fromthe senator Pincias. Some recent vestiges of temples and churches are now smooth­ed in the garden of the Jlinims of the Trinita del Monte. (Nardini, lib. 4. c. 7. p.,196. Eschinard.p. 209, 210. theold plan of Buflalino, and the great plan ofNolli.)Belisarius bad fixed his station between the Pineian and Salarian gntes. (Procop.Goth. lib. 1.e. 15.)
x From the mention of the primum et secundum velum, it should seem that Beli­sarius, even in a siege, represented the emperor, and maintained the proud ceremonialof the Byzantine palace.
y Of this act of sacrilege, Procoplus (Goth. lib. 1. c. 25.) is a dry and reluctant-wituess. The narratives of Liberatus, (Breviarium, c. 22.) and Anastasius, (deVit. Pont. p. 39.) are characteristic, but passionate. Hear the execrations of cardi­nal Baronius: (A. D. 536. no. 123. A. D. 538. no. 1—20.) portcntmn, facinns oimii•xccratiune dignum.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIII.


tioned near the Po, under the conduct of Fulcaris, abold Herulian, who rashly conceived, that personalbravery was the sole duty and merit of a commander.As he marched without order or precaution along thevEmilian way, an ambuscade of Franks suddenly arosefrom the amphitheatre of Parma: his troops were sur­prised and routed; but their leader refused to fly, de­claring to the last moment that death was less terriblethan the angry countenance of Narses. The death ofFulcaris, and the retreat of the surviving chiefs, decidedthe fluctuating and rebellious temper of the Goths; theyflew to the standard of their deliverers, and admittedthem into the cities which still resisted the arms of theRoman general. The conqueror of Italy opened a freepassage to the irresistible torrent of barbarians. Theypassed under the walls of Cesena, and answered by threatsand reproaches the advice of Aligern, that the Gothictreasures could no longer repay the labour of an inva­sion. Two thousand Franks were destroyed by the skilland valour of Narses himself, who sallied from Riminiat the head of three hundred horse, to chastise the li­centious rapine of their march. On the confines ofSamnium, the two brothers divided their forces. Withthe right wing, Buccelin assumed the spoil of Campania,Lucania, and Bruttium : with the left, Lothaire acceptedthe plunder of Apulia and Calabria. They followed thecoast of the Mediterranean and the Hadriatic, as far asRhegium and Otranto, and the extreme lands of Italywere the term of their destructive progress. The Franks,who were Christians and Catholics, contented them­selves with simple pillage and occasional murder. Butthe churches, which their piety had spared, were strippedby the sacrilegious hands of the Alemanni, who sacri­ficed horses' heads to their native deities of the woodsand rivers :c they melted or profaned the consecratedvessels, and the ruins of shrines and altars were stained
* Agathias notice! their superstition in a philosophic tone (lib. 1. p. 18.) At Zag,







OCR Output








330 DECLINE.A=Nl> FALL [CHAP. XLIVi


the idiom and manners of the Romans, rendered thestyle of the twelve tables less familiar to each rising ge-ineration, and the doubtful passages were imperfectly ex­plained by the study of legal antiquarians. ' To define theambiguities, to circumscribe the latitude, to apply theprinciples, to extend the consequences, to reconcile thereal or apparent contradictions, was a much nobler andmore important task; and the province of legislationwas silently invaded by the expounders of aneient sta­tutes. Their subtle interpretations concurred with theequity of the prastor, to reform the tyranny of the darkerages: however strange or intricate the means, it was theaim of artificial jurisprudence to restore the simple die-"tates of nature and reason, and the skill of private citizenswas usefully employed to undermine the public instiiu-ftions of their country. The revolution of almost onethousand years, from the twelve tables to the reign ofJustinian, may be divided into three periods almost equalin duration, and distinguished from each other by themode of instruction and the character of the civilians.8Pride and ignorance contributed, during the first period,to confine within narrow limits the science of the RomanThe first law. On the public days of market or assembly, thea^ilc. masters of the art were seen walking in the Forum, ready303—648. tG impart the needful advice to the meanest of their fehlow-citizens, from whose votes, on a future occasion, theymight solicit a grateful return. As their years and ho-;nours increased, they seated themselves at home on achair or throne, to expect with patient gravity the visits
B The series of the civil lawyers is deduced by Pomponins. (de Origine Juris Pan^dect. lib. 1. tit. 2.) The moderns have discussed, with learning and criticism, thisbranch of literary history; and among these I have chiefly been guided by Gravina,(p. 41—79.) and Hoineccius. (Hist. J. R. no. 113—351.) Cicero, more especiallyin his books de Oratore, de Claris Oratoribus, de Legibus, and the Clavis Ciceroniannaof-Ernesti, (under the names of Mucius, &c.) afford much genuine and pleasing-In­formation. Horace often alludes to the morning labours of the civilians. (Serm. 1. 1.'10. Epist. 2. 4. 103, &c.
Agricolam landat juris legumque peritus «Sub galli cautum, consultor uhi ostia pulsat.
Roman dulce diu fuit et solemne, reelo'sa •'
Mane domo vigilare, clienti promere jura. •'







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL JCHAP. XLI.


or jealous emperor celebrated the divine goodness, andednfessed, in silence, the merit of his successful general.8Impatient to abolish the temporal and spiritual tyrannyof the Vandals, he proceeded, without delay, to the fullestablishment of the Catholic church. Her jurisdiction,wealth, and immunities, perhaps the most essential partof episcopal religion, were restored and amplified with aliberal hand; the Arian worship was suppressed; theDonatist meetings were proscribed ;b and the synod ofCarthage, by the voice of two hundred and seventeenbishops/ applauded the just measure of pious retaliation.On such an occasion, it may not be presumed, that manyorthodox prelates were absent; but the comparativesmallness of their number, which in ancient councilshad been twice or even thrice multiplied, most clearlyindicates the decay both of the church and state. WhileJustinian approved himself the defender of the faith, heentertained an ambitious hope, that his victorious lieute­nant would speedily enlarge the narrow limits of his do­minion to the space which they occupied before the in­vasion of the Moors and Vandals; and Belisarius wasinstructed to establish five dukes or commanders in theconvenient stations of Tripoli, Leptis, Cirta, Caesarea,and Sardinia, and to compute the military force of pala­tines Or borderers that might be sufficient for the defenceof Africa. The kingdom of the Vandals was not un­worthy of the presence of a praetorian prefect; and fourconsulars^ three presidents, were appointed to administerthe seven provinces under his civil jurisdiction. Thenumber of their Subordinate officers, clerks, messengers,or assistants, was minutely expressed; three hundred
1 See ihc second and third preambles to the Digest, or Pandects, promulgatedA. D.533, December lb". To the titles of Vantlalicus and Africanus, Justinian, orrather Belisarius, had acquired a jnst claim: Gothicus was premature, and Franci*cu* false, and offensive to a great nation.
, b See the original acts in Baronius. (A. D. 535, no. 21—54.) The emperor ap­plauds his own clemency to the heretics, cum sufliciat eis vivere.
* Diipin (Geogfaph. Sacra Africans, p. 59. ad Optat. Milev.) observes and bewailsthis episcopal decay. In the more prosperous age of the church, he had noticed sixhundred and ninety hishopricks; but however minute were the diocesses, it is notprohable that they all existed at the same time.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 280.


citing an audience, as the slaves or freedmen of the Ro­man senate !5
The Gothic war was yet alive. The bravest of the Defeat andnation retired beyond the Po; and Teias was unani- T^lbemously chosen to succeed and revenge their departed j^^jg ofhero. The new king immediately sent ambassadors toimplore, or rather to purchase, the aid of the Franks,and nobly lavished, for the public safety, the richeswhich had been deposited in the palace of Pavia. The *■ 1^553.residue of the royal treasure was guarded by his brother'Aligern at Cumae in Campania; but the strong castlewhich Totila had forfeited, was closely besieged by thearms of Narses. From the Alps to the foot of mountVesuvius, the Gothic king, by rapid and secret marches,advanced to the relief of his brother, eluded the vigilanceof the Roman chiefs, and pitched his camp on the banksoftheSarnus or Draco* which flows from Nuceria intothe bay of Naples. The river separated the two armies:sixty days were consumed in distant and fruitless com­bats, and Teias maintained this important post, till hewas deserted by his fleet and the hope of subsistence.With reluctant steps he ascended the Lactarian mount,where the physicians of Rome, since the time of Galen,had sent their patients for the benefit of the air and themilk." But the Goths soon embraced a more generousresolution: to descend the hill, to dismiss their horses,and to die in arms, and in the possession of freedom.The king marched at their head, bearing in his righthand a lance, and an ample buckler in his left: with the
• See, in the example of Prusias, as it is delivered in the fragments of Polynias'(Excerpt. Legat. 97. p. 927, 928.) a curions picture of a royal slave.
'The Apa*a» of Procopins (Goth. lib. 4. c. 35.) is evidently the Sarnas. Tiae textis accused or altered by the rash violence of Clnverius: (lib. 4. e. 3. p. 1156.) butCamillo Pellegrini of Naples (Discorsi sopra la Campania Felice, p. 330, 331.) hasproved from old records, that as early as tho year 822 that river was called the Dra-contio, or Draconcello.
» Galen (de Method. Medendi, lib. 5. apnd Clnver. lib. 4. o. 3. p. 1159, 1160.)describes the lofty site, pure air, and rich milk of mount Lactarins, whose medicinalbenefits were equally known and sought in the time of Sytumachus, (lib. 6. epist. 18.)and Cassiodorius, (Var. 11. 10.) Nothing is now left except the name of the townof Lei tere.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND Fa£l [CHAP. XLVI.


the prelude of a fierce and general persecution. By theoppressive laws of Justinian, the adversaries of the churchwere made the enemies of the state; the alliance of theJews, Nestorians, and Jacobites, had contributed to thesuccess of Chosroes, and his partial favour to the secta­ries provoked the hatred and fears of the Catholic clergy.Conscious of their fear and hatred, the Persian conque­ror governed his new subjects wiith an iron sceptre ; andas if he 6uspected the stability of his dominion, he ex­hausted their wealth by exorbitant tributes and licentiousrapine, despoiled or demolished the temples of the east,and transported to his hereditary realms the gold, thesilver, the precious marbles, the arts, and the artists ofthe Asiatic cities. In the obscure picture of the cala­mities of the empire,9 it is not easy to discern the figureof Chosroes himself, to separte his actions from thoseof his lieutenants, or to ascertain his personal merit inthe general blaze of glory and magnificence. He en­joyed with ostentation the fruits of victory,, and fre­quently retired from the hardships of war to the luxuryof the palace. But in the space of twenty-four years,he was deterred by superstition or resentment from ap­proaching the gates of Ctesiphon: and his favouriteresidence of Artemita, or Dastagerd, was situate beyondthe Tigris, about sixty miles to the north of the capital.'The adjacent pastures were covered with flocks andherds: the paradise or park was replenished with phea­sants, peacocks, ostriches, roebucks, and wild boars, andthe noble game of lions and tigers was sometimes turnedloose for the bolder pleasures of the chase. Nine hun­dred and sixty elephants were maintained for the use orsplendour of the great king: his tents and baggages werecarried into the field by twelve thousand great camels and
(Lives of the Saints, vol. 1. p. 242—248.) have taken their accounts. The holymartyr deserted from the Persian to the Roman army, became a monk at Jerusalem,and insulted the worship of the Magi, which was then established at Cscsarea iuPalestine.
* Abulpharagins, Dynast. p. 99. Elmacin, Hist. Saracen. p. 14.
'D'Aaville, Mem. de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. 32. p. 568—571.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLlV.j OF THE SOMAN EMPIRE. $73


But as the new practice of trusts degenerated into some-abuse, the trustee was enabled, by the Trebellian andPegasian decrees, to reserve one-fourth of the estate, orto transfer on the head of the real heir all the debts andactions of the succession. The interpretation of testa­ments was strict and literal; but the language of trustsand codicils was delivered from the minute and technicalaccuracy of the civilians.'
III. The general duties of mankind are imposed by in. ortheir public and private relations: but their specific obli­gations to each other can only be the effect of, 1. a pro­mise, 2. a benefit, or, 3. an injury: and when theseobligations are ratified by law, the interested party maycompel the performance by a judicial action. On thisprinciple the civilians of every country have erected a si­milar jurisprudence, the fair conclusion of universal rea­son and justice."
I. The goddess of faith (of human and social faith)was worshipped, not only in her temples, but in the livesof the Romans; and if that nation was deficient in themore amiable qualities of benevolence and generosity,they astonished the Greeks by their sincere and simpleperformance of the most burdensome engagements.1Yet among the same people, according to the rigid max­ims of the patricians and decemvirs, a naked pact, a pro­mise, or even an oath, did not create any civil obligation,unless it was confirmed by the legal form of a stipulation.Whatever might be the etymology of the Latin word,it conveyed the idea of a firm and irrevocable contract,which was always expressed in the mode of a question
'Of tlie civil jurisprudence of successions, testaments, codicils, legacies, andtrusts, the principles are ascertained in the Institutes of Caius, (lib. 2. tit 2—9.p. 91—144.) Justinian, (lib. 2. tit. 10—25.)and Theophilus, (p. 328—514.) and I hoimmense detail occupies twelve books (28—39.) of the Pandects.- " The Institutes of Cains, (lib. 2. tit. 9,10. p. 144—214.) of Justinian, (Kb. 3. tit.14—30. lib. 4. tit. 1—C.) and of Theophilus, (p. 616—837.) distinguish foursorts of obligations—aut re, aut verbis, aut Uteris, aut consensu; but 1 confess my­self partial to my own division.
* How mnch is the cool, rational evidence of Polybius (lib. 6. p. 693. lib. 31.p. 1459,1460.) superior to vague, indiscriminate applause—omnium niaxime et pras-cipue fidem coluit. (A. Gellius, tQ. 1.)







OCR Output








2\1 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLU.


Cal mucks,0 which nourish the largest sheep and oxen inthe world. The soil is fruitful, and the climate mildand temperate: the happy region was ignorant of earth­quake and pestilence; the emperor's throne was turnedtowards the east, and a golden wolf on the top of a spear,seemed to guard the entrance of his tent. One of thesuccessors of Bertezena was tempted by the luxury andsuperstition of China; but his design of building citiesand temples was defeated by the simple wisdom of abarbarian counsellor. "The Turks (he said) are notequal in number to one-hundredth part of the inhabitantsof China. If we balance their power, and elude theirarmies, it is because we wander without any fixed habita­tions, in the exercise of war and hunting. Are we strong?we advance and conquer: are we feeble? we retire andare concealed. Should the Turks confine themselveswithin the walls of cities, the loss of a battle would bethe destruction of their empire. The Bonzes preachonly patience, humility, and the renunciation of theworld. Such, O king! is not the religion of heroes."They entertained with less reluctance the doctrines of
■ Zoroaster; but the greatest part of the nation acquiesced,without inquiry, in the opinions, or rather in the prac­tice, of their ancestors. The honours of sacrifice werereserved for the supreme Deity; they acknowledged, in
■rude hymns, their obligations to the air, the fire, thewater, and the earth ; and their priests derived some pro­fit from the art of divination. Their unwritten lawswere rigorous and impartial: theft was punished by a
"tenfold restitution: adultery, treason, and murder, with.
[ death: and no chastisement could be inflicted too severefor the rare and inexpiable guilt of cowardice. As thesubject nations marched under the standard of theTurks, their cavalry, both men and horses, were proudly
c The country of the Turks, now of the Calmucks, is well described in the Gene­alogical History, p. 521—562. The curious notes of the French translator are en­larged and digested in the second volume of the lioglish version.







OCR Output








25a DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLII.


Negotu. In peace, the king of Persia continually sought thetaSto* pretences of a rupture; but no sooner had he takenbetween up arms, than he expressed his desire of a safe and ho-
Jnstinian 1 , i-* » if i • 1
and cho«- nourable treaty. During the fiercest hostilities, the twoITd. 540 monarchs entertained a deceitful negotiation; and such—541. was tne superiority of Chosroes, that whilst he treatedthe Roman ministers with insolence and contempt, heobtained the most unprecedented honours for his ownambassadors at the imperial court. The successor ofCyrus assumed the majesty of the eastern sun, and gra­ciously permitted his younger brother Justinian to reignover the west, with the pale and reflected splendour ofthe moon. This gigantic style was supported by thepomp and eloquence of Isdigune, one of the royal cham­berlains. His wife and daughters, with a train of eu­nuchs and camels, attended the march of the ambassa­dor: two satraps with golden diadems were numberedamong his followers: he was guarded by five hundredhorse, the most valiant of the Persians; and the Romangovernor of Dara wisely refused to admit more thantwenty of this martial and hostile caravan. When Isdi­gune had saluted the emperor, and delivered his presents,he passed ten months at Constantinople without discuss­ing any serious affairs. Instead of being confined to hispalace, and receiving food and water from the hands ofhis keepers, the Persian ambassador, without spies orguards, was allowed to visit the capital; and the free­dom of conversation and trade enjoyed by his domesticsoffended the prejudices of an age, which rigorously prac­tised the law of nations, without confidence or courtesy."By an unexampled indulgence, his interpreter, a servantbelow the notice of a Roman magistrate, was seated, at
Tishes eighteen or twenty pages of false and florid rhetoric. His ignorance or care­lessness overlooks the strongest argument against the king of Lazica—his formerrevolt.
"Procopias represents the practice of the Gothic court of Ravenna; (Goth. lib.1. c. 7.) and foreign amhassadors have been treated with the same jealousy and ri­gour in Turkey, (Busbequius, epist. 3. p. 149. 843, &c.) Russia (Voyage d'Olea-rius), and China. (Narrative of M. de Lange, in Bell's Travels, vol. 2. p. 189—311.)







OCR Output








448 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLVI.


with indignation when he dared to vilify the character ofChosroes; and by the indiscreet offer of resigning thesceptre to the second of his sons, he subscribed his owncondemnation, and sacrificed the life of his innocent fa­vourite. The mangled bodies of the boy and his mo­ther were exposed to the people; the eyes of Hormouzwere pierced with a hot needle; and the punishment ofthe father was succeeded by the coronation of his eldestElevation son. Chosroes had ascended the throne without guilt,chosroes? an^ ^is piety strove to alleviate the misery of the abdi­cated monarch: from the dungeon he removed Hor­mouz to an apartment of the palace, supplied with libe­rality the consolations of sensual enjoyment, and patient­ly endured the furious sallies of his resentment and de­spair. He might despise the resentment of a blind andunpopular tyrant, but the tiara was trembling on hishead, till he could subvert the power, or acquire thefriendship, of the great Bahram, who sternly denied thejustice of a revolution, in which himself and his soldiers,the true representatives of Persia, had never been con­sulted. The offer of a general amnesty, and of the se­cond rank in his kingdom, was answered by an epistlefrom Bahram, friend of the gods, conqueror of men, andenemy of tyrants, the satrap of satraps, general of thePersian armies, and a prince adorned with the title ofeleven virtues.° He commands Chosroes, the son ofHormouz, to shun the example and fate of his father, toconfine the traitors who had been released from theirchains, to deposit in some holy place the diadem whichhe had usurped, and to accept from his gracious bene­factor the pardon of his faults and the government of aprovince. The rebel might not be proud, and the kingmost assuredly was. not humble; but the one was con­scious of his strength, and the other was sensible qf his
o See the-words of Theophylact, lib. 4. c. 7. Bo;<t/u <fiXo; rut Hi'it, «xnra« mf«ij;»rujavnav tyift, «r{aTnic peyta-raim, rn; nifeim; *tX.m ti"*f'-(i &e. In this answer,Qhosross styles himself td vdxti xaflK°Pan off*ar* • • • • » toi/; Af«W{ (the genii)(uir&sujutrot. This is genuine oriental bomhast,







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


tion of Anastasi, the secret, though lawful, wife of theemperor Tiberius. Whatever could alleviate the disap­pointment of Sophia, imperial honours, a stately palace,a numerous household, was liberally bestowed by thepiety of her adopted son; on solemn occasions he at­tended and consulted the widow of his benefactor: buther ambition disdained the vain semblance of royalty, andthe respectful appellation of mother served to exasperate,rather than appease, the rage of an injured woman.While she accepted, and repaid with a courtly smile, thefair expressions of regard and confidence, a secret alli­ance was concluded between the dowager empress andher ancient enemies; and Justinian, the son of Germa-nus, was employed as the instrument of her revenge.The pride of the reigning house supported, with reluct­ance, the dominion of a stranger: the youth was deserv­edly popular; his name, after the death of Justin, hadbeen mentioned by a tumultuous faction; and his ownsubmissive offer of his head, with a treasure of sixtythousand pounds, might be interpreted as an evidence ofguilt, or at least of fear. Justinian received a free par­don, and the command of the eastern army. The Persianmonarch fled before his arms; and the acclamationswhich accompanied his triumph declared him worthy ofthe purple. His artful patroness had chosen the month ofthe vintage, while the emperor, in a rural solitude, waspermitted to enjoy the pleasures of a subject. On the firstintelligence of her designs he returned to Constantino­ple, and the conspiracy was suppressed by his presenceand firmness. From the pomp and honours which shehad abused, Sophia was reduced to a modest allowance:Tiberius dismissed her train, intercepted her correspon­dence, and committed to a faithful guard the custody ofher person. But the services of Justinian were not con­sidered by that excellent prince as an aggravation of hisoffences; after a mild reproof, his treason and ingratitude\yere forgiven; and it was commonly believed, that the







OCR Output








4.12 DECLINE AND FALL [cHAF. XLV.


diadem: be thou wise and modest; remember what youhave been, remember what you are. You see around usyour slaves and your children; with the authority, as­sume the tenderness, of a parent. Love your peoplelike yourself; cultivate the affections, maintain the dis­cipline, of the army: protect the fortunes of the rich,relieve the necessities of the poor."J The assembly, insilence, and in tears, applauded the counsels, and sympa­thized with the repentance, of their prince: the patri­arch rehearsed the prayers of the church; Tiberius re­ceived the diadem on his knees, and Justin, who in hisabdication appeared most worthy to reign, addressed thenew monarch in the following words.—" If you consent,I live; if you command, I die: may the God of heavenand earth infuse into your heart whatever I have neglect-Death of ed or forgotten." The four last years of the emperora" d. 578, Justin were passed in tranquil obscurity: his conscienceOctober a. weg nQ jonger tormented by the remembrance of thoseduties which he was incapable of discharging: and hischoice was justified by the filial reverence and gratitudeof Tiberius.
Tiber";™ Among the virtues of Tiberius/ his beauty (he wasn. one of the tallest and most comely of the Romans) mightSept. 26— introduce him to the favour of Sophia; and the widow ofAbe. 14?*' Justin was persuaded that she should preserve her stationand influence under the reign of a second and moreyouthful husband. But if the ambitious candidate hadbeen tempted to flatter and dissemble, it was no longerin his power to fulfil her expectations, or his own pro­mise. The factions of the hippodrome demanded, withsome impatience, the name of their new empress; boththe people and Sophia were astonished by the proclama-
d Tbeophylact Simocatta (lib. 3. c. 11.) declares, that he shall give to posterity thespeech of Justin as it was pronounced, without attempting to correct the imperfectionsof language or rhetoric. Perhaps the vain sophist would have been incapable of pro­ducing such sentiments.
• For the character and reign of Tiberius, see Evagrius, lib. 5. c. 13 ; Theophylact,lib. 3. c. 12, &c. Theophanes, in Chron. p. 210—213 ;Zonoras, torn. 2. lib. 14. p. 72;Cedrenus, p. 392 ; Paul Warnefrid, de Geslis Langobard. lib. 3. c. 11,12. The dea­con of Forum Julii appears to have possessed some curious and authentic facts.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. l63


Restore the children to their parents, the wives to theirhusbands; and shew them, by your generosi ty, of whatfriends they have obstinately deprived themselves." Thecity was saved by the virtue and authority of its conque­ror/ and when the Neapolitans returned to their houses,they found some consolation in the secret enjoyment oftheir hidden treasures. The barbarian garrison enlistedin the service of the emperor; Apulia and Calabria, de­livered from the odious presence of the Goths, acknow­ledged his dominion; and the tusks of the Calydonianboar, which were still shewn at Beneventum, are cu­riously described by the historian of Belisarius."
The faithful soldiers and citizens of Naples had ex- vnigw.pected their deliverance from a prince, who remained nX,the inactive and almost indifferent spectator of their A^ff6'ruin. Theodatus secured his person within the walls of A- D-5*LRome, while his cavalry advanced forty miles on the Ap-pian way, and encamped in the Pomptine marshes;which, by a canal of nineteen miles in length, had beenrecently drained and converted into excellent pastures.bBut the principal forces of the Goths were dispersed inDalmatia, Venetia, and Gaul; and the feeble mind oftheir king was confounded by the unsuccessful event ofa divination, which seemed to presage the downfall ofhis empire.0 The most abject slaves have arraigned theguilt, or weakness, of an unfortunate master. The cha­racter of Theodatus was rigorously scrutinized by a free
1 Belisarius was reproved by pope Sylverius for the massacre. . He repeopledNaples, and imported colonies of African captives into Sicily, Calabria,'and Apulia(Hist. Miscell. lib, 16. in Muratori, torn. 1. p. 106,107). ■ „.
* Beneventum was built by Diomede, the nephew of Meleager. (Ciuver. torn. 2.p. 1193, H96.) Tho Calydonian hunt is a picture of savage life. (Ovid. Metainorph.lib. 8.) Thirty or forty heroes were leagued against a hog: the brutes (not thohog) quarrelled with a lady for the head.
b The Veceur.&viitm is strangely confounded by Cluverius (torn. 2. p. 1007.) withthe river Ufens. It was in truth a canal of nineteen miles, from Forum Appii toTer-raciua, ou which Horace embarked in the night. The Decennovium, which is men- *tioHed by Lucan, Dion Cassius and Cassiodorius, has been sufficiently ruined, re­stored, and obliterated. (d'Anville, Analyse de I'ltalie, p. 185, &c.)
c A Jew gratified his contempt and hatred for all the Christians, by inclosing threebands, each often hogs, and discriminated by the names of Goths, Greeks, and Ho- 1mans. Of the first, almost all were found dead—almost all the second were alive—of the third, half dead, and the rest lost their bristles. No unsuitable emblem of theevent.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 305


forfeited the esteem and affection of the Romans. Thedesign of the African and Italian wars was boldly conceiv­ed and executed: and his penetration discovered the ta­lents of Belisarius in the camp, of Narses in the palace.But the name of the emperor is eclipsed by the names ofhis victorious generals; and Belisarius still lives, to up­braid the envy and ingratitude of his sovereign. Thepartial favour of mankind applauds the genius of a con­queror, who leads and directs his subjects in the exerciseof arms. The characters of Philip II. and of Justinianare distinguished by the cold ambition which delights inwar, and declines the dangers of the field. Yet a colos­sal statue of bronze represented the emperor on horse­back, preparing to march against the Persians in the ha­bit and armour of Achilles. In the great square beforethe church of St. Sophia, this monument was raised on abrass column and a stone pedestal of seven steps; andthe pillar of Theodosius, which weighed seven thousandfour hundred pounds of silver, was removed from thesame place by the avarice and vanity of Justinian. Fu­ture princes were more just or indulgent to his memory;the elder Andronicus, in the beginning of the fourteenthcentury, repaired and beautified his equestrian statue:since the fall of the empire, it has been melted into can­non by the victorious Turks,4
I shall conclude this chapter with the comets, the Come ts,earthquakes, and the plague, which astonished or afflict- tlas^Jied the age of Justinian.
I. In the fifth year of his reign, and in the month ofSeptember, a comet" was seen during twenty days in thewestern quarter of the heavens, and which shot its raysinto the north. Eight years afterward, while the sun
t See in the C. P. Christiana of Ducange, (lib. 1. c. 24. no. 1.) a chain of originaltestimonies, from Prooopius in the sixth, to Gyllius in the sixteenth, century.
e The first comet is mentioned by John Malata, (tom. 2. p. 190. 219.) and Theo-phanes; (p. 151.) the seoond by Procopius. (Persic. lib. 2. c. 4.) Yet I stronglysuspect their identity. The paleness of the sun (Vandal, lib. 2. C. 14.) is suppliedby Theopuines (pv 158.) to a different year.







OCR Output








224 DECLINE AND FALL [cHAP. XLIIi


by a thousand ears, the secret or public agents of thethrone; and the provinces, from the Indian to the Ara­bian confines, were enlightened by the frequent visits ofa sovereign, who affected to emulate his celestial brotherin his rapid and salutary career. Education and agri­culture he viewed as the two objects most deserving ofhis care. In every city of Persia, orphans and the chil­dren of the poor were maintained and instructed at thepublic expense; the daughters were given in marriage tothe richest citizens of their own rank ; and the sons, ac­cording to their different talents, were employed in me­chanic trades, or promoted to more honourable service.The deserted villages were relieved by his bounty; to thepeasants and farmers, who were found incapable of culti­vating their lands, he distributed cattle, seed, and the in­struments of husbandry; and the rare and inestimabletreasure of fresh water was parsimoniously managed andskilfully dispersed over the arid territory of Persia.* Theprosperity of that kingdom was the effect and the evi­dence of his virtues: his vices are those of oriental des­potism ( but in the long competition between Chosroesand Justinian, the advantage both of merit and fortune isalmost always on the side of the barbarian/ . ':
His love of To the praise of justice, Nushirvan united the reputa-lenrnmg. ^ knowledge; and the seven Greek philosophers,who visited this court, were invited and deceived by thestrange assurance, that a disciple of Plato was seated onthe Persian throne. Did they expect that a prince,strenuously exercised in the toils of war and government,should agitate, with dexterity like their own, the ab-
* In Persia, the prince of the waters is an officer of state. The number of wellsand subterraneous channels is much diminished, and with it the fertility of the soil;four hundred wells have been recently lost near Tauris, and fortyrtwo thousand wereonce reckoned in the province of Kborasan. (Chardin. tom. 3. p. 99,100. Tavernier,tom. 1. p. 466.)
J The character and goverument of Nushirvan is represented sometimes in thewords of d'Herbelot, (Bibliot. Orient. p. 680, &e. from Khondemir) Eutychius(Annal, tom. 2. p, 179, 180—very rich), Abulpharagins (Dynast. 7. p. 94, 95,^-very poor), Tarikh Schikard, (p. 144—150.) Texeira, (in Stevens, lib. 1, c. 35.) As*seman, (Bibliot. Orient, tom. 3. p. 404—410.) and the abbe Fourmont, (Hist. del'Acad. des Inscriptions, tom. 7. p. 325—334.) who has translated a spurious or ge?nuiue testament of Nushirvan.







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 100.


sons of Epicurus so strangely scandalized the pious earsof the Athenians, that by his exile, and that of his anta­gonists, they silenced all vain disputes concerning thenature of the gods. But, in the ensuing year, theyrecalled the hasty decree, restored the liberty of theschools, and were convinced, by the experience of ages,that the moral character of philosophers is not affectedby the diversity of their theological speculations.™
The Gothic arms were less fatal to the schools ofT1,ey«reAthens than the establishment of a new religion, whose by justi-ministers superseded the exercise of reason, resolved maD'every question by an article of faith, and condemned theinfidel or sceptic to eternal flames. In many a volumeof laborious controversy, they exposed the weakness ofthe understanding and the corruption of the heart, in- . ■suited human nature in the sages of antiquity, and pro­scribed the spirit of philosophical inquiry, so repugnant ■to the doctrine, or at least to the temper, of an humblebeliever. The surviving sect of the Platonists, whomPlato would have blushed to acknowledge, extravagantlymingled a sublime theory with the practice of supersti­tion and magic; and, as they remained alone in the midstof a Christian world, they indulged a secret rancouragainst the government of the church and state; whoseseverity was still suspended over their heads. About acentury after the reign of Julian," Proclus0 was permitted Proclus.to teach in the philosophic chair of the academy; andsuch was his industry that he frequently, in the same day,
m The birth of Epicurus is fixed to the year 342 before Christ, (Bayle), Olympi­ad 109. 3. and he opened his school at Athens, Olymp. 118. 3. three hundred and sixyears before the same era. This intolerant law (Athenosus, lib. 13. p. 610. Diogen.Laertins, lib. 5. s. 38. p. 290. Julias Pollux, 9. 5.) was enacted in the same, or thesucceeding year. (Sigonins, Opp. torn. 5. p. 62.Menagius, ad Diogen. Laert. p. 204.Corsini Fasti Attici, torn. ir. p. 67,68.) Theoplirastns, chief of the Peripatetics, anddisciple of Aristotle, was involved in the same exile.
u This is no fanciful era; the Pagans reckoned their calamities from the reign oftbeir hero. Proclus, whose nativity is marked by his horoscope, (A. D. 412, Febru­ary 8, at C. P. died one hundred and twenty-four years tcm IotAfarov 0ae-i\toett A. D.485. (Marin, in Vita Procli, c. 36.) . .
0 The life of Proclus, by Marinus, was published by Fabricius. (Hamburgh, 1700.ct ad calcem Bibliot. Latin. Lond. 1703.) See Snidas (torn. 3. p. 185, 186.); Fa-bricius(Bibliot. Grttc lib. 5. c. 26. p. 449—552.), and Brucker. (Hist. Crit. Pliilo-»oph. torn. 2. p. 319—326.) •• ."/







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XXXIX'


and the diligence of Proclus and his disciples. The rea­son and piety of their Roman pupil were fortunately savedfrom the contagion of mystery and magic, which pollutedthe groves of the academy; but he imbibed the spiritand imitated the method, of his dead and living masters,who attempted to reconcile the strong and subtle senseof Aristotle with the devout contemplation and sublimefancy of Plato. After his return to Rome, and his mar­riage with the daughter of his friend, the patrician Sym-machus, Boethius still continued, in a palace of ivory andmarble, to prosecute the same studies/ The church wasedified by his profound defence of the orthodox creedagainst the Arian, the Eutychian, and the Nestorian he­resies; and the Catholic unity was explained or exposedin a formal treatise by the indifference of three distinctthough consubstantial persons. For the benefit of hisLatin readers, his genius submitted to teach the first ele­ments of the arts and sciences of Greece, The geome­try of Euclid, the music of Pythagoras, the arithmetic ofNicomachus, the mechanics of Archimedes, the astro­nomy of Ptolemy, the theology of Plato, and the logicof Aristotle, with the commentary of Porphyry, weretranslated and illustrated by the indefatigable pen of theRoman senator. And he alone was esteemed capable ofdescribing the wonders of art, a sun-dial, a water-clock,or a sphere which represented the motions of the planets.From these abstruse speculations, Boethius stooped, or,to speak more truly, he rose to the social duties of publicand private life; the indigent were relieved by his liber­ality; and his eloquence, which flattery might compareto the voice of Demosthenes or Cicero, was uniformly
less too long: bqt the simple Tact of a visit to Athens is justified by mnch internalevidence, (Bruker, Hist. Crit. Philosoph. tom. 3. p. 524—527.) and by an expression{though vagae and amhiguous) of his friend Cassiodorius, (Var. 1. 45.) "longe positasAthenas, introisti."
'Bibliothecae comptos ebore ac vitro parietes, &c. (Consol. Phil. lib. 1. pros. 5.p. 74.) The Epistles of Ennodios (6. 6, 7.13. 8. 1. 31. 37. 40.) and CassiodoriustVar. 1. 39. 4. 6. 9. 21.) afford many proofs of the high reputation which he enjoyedin his own times. It is true that the hishop of Pavia wanted to purchase of him anold house at Milan, and praise might be tendered and aceepted in part of payment.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


Theodoric and his immediate successors, but every deedwas rescinded and abolished, which force had extorted,or fear had subscribed, under the usurpation of Totila.A moderate theory was framed to reconcile the rights ofproperty with the safety of prescription, the claims of thestate with the poverty of the people, and the pardon ofoffences with the interest of virtue and order of society.Under the exarchs of Ravenna, Rome was degraded tothe second rank. Yet the senators were gratified by thepermission of visiting their estates in Italy, and of ap­proaching without obstacle the throne of Constantinople;the regulation of weights and measures was delegated tothe pope and senate; and the salaries of lawyers andphysicians, of orators and grammarians, were destined topreserve or rekindle the light of science in the ancientcapital. Justinian might dictate benevolent edicts,1 andNarses might second his wishes by the restoration ofcities, and more especially of churches. But the powerof kings is most effectual to destroy: and the twentyyears of the Gothic war had consummated the distressand depopulation of Italy. As early as the fourth cam­paign, under the discipline of Belisarius himself, fiftythousand labourers died of hunger"1 in the narrow regionof Picenum and a strict interpretation of the evidenceof Procopius would swell the loss of Italy above the to­tal sum of her present inhabitants.0 - "j
1 Tlie Pragmatic Sanction of Justinian, which restores and regulates the civilstate of Italy, consists of twenty-seven articles: it is dated August 15, A. D. 554;is addressed to .Narses, V. J, Propositus Sacri Cubicnli, and to Antiochus, Pras-fectus Prcetorio Italia?; and has been preserved by Julian Antecessor, and in theCorpus Juris Civilis, after the novels and edicts of Justinian, Justin, , and Tibe­rius.
m A still greater number was consumed by famine in the southern provinces, with­out (wrof) the Ionian gulf. Acorns were used iu the place of bread. Procopiushad seen a deserted orphan suckled by a sbe-goat. Seventeen passengers werelodged, murdered, and eaten by two women, who were detected and slain by theeighteenth, &c. >
"Quinta regio Piceni est; quondam uberrima; muUitudinis, ccclx millia Picentiumin fidein P. R. venere. (Plin. Hist. Nalur. 3.18.) In the time'of Vespasian, this an­cient population was already diminished.
° Perhaps fifteen or sixteen millions. Procopius (Anecdot. c. 18) computes thatAfrica lost lire millions, that Italy was thrice as extensive, and that the depopulationwas in a larger proportion. But his reckoning is inflamed by passion, aud cloudedwilb uncertainty.
VOL. V. X







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLXt*


forces which had wintered in the Pontic regions; andfrom the mouth of the Phasis to the Caspian sea, encou­raged his subjects and allies to march with the successorsof Constantine under the faithful and victorious bannerof the cross. When the legions of Lucullus and Pom-pey first passed the Euphrates, they blushed at their easy-victory over the natives of Armenia. But the long ex­perience of war had hardened the minds and bodies ofthat effeminate people; their zeal and bravery were ap­proved in the service of a declining empire; they abhor­red and feared the usurpation of the house ofSassin, andthe memory of persecution envenomed their pious hatredof the enemies of Christ. The limits of Armenia, as ithad been ceded to the emperor Maurice, extended as faras the Araxes; the river submitted to the dignity of abridge ;r and Heraclius, in the footsteps of Mark Antony,advanced towards the city of Tauris or Gandzaca,* theancient and modern capital of one of the provinces ofMedia. At the head of forty thousand men, Chosroeshimself had returned from some distant expedition tooppose the progress of the Roman arms; but he retreat­ed on the approach of Heraclius, declining the generous'alternative of peace or battle. Instead of half a millionof inhabitants, which have been ascribed to Tauris underthe reign of the Sophys, the city contained no more thanthree thousand houses: but the value of the royal trea­sures was enhanced by a tradition, that they were thespoils of Croesus, which had been transported by Cyrus,from the citadel of Sardes. The rapid conquests of He­raclius were suspended only by the winter season ; a mo-
r Et pontem indignatus Araxes. Virgil, JEae'id, 8. 728.The river Araxes is noisy, rapid, vehement, and, with the melting of the snows, ir­resistible; the strongest and most massy bridges are swept away by the current; andits indignation is attested by the ruins of many arches near the old town of Zulfa.Voyages de Chardin, tom. 1. p. 252. .
« Chardin, tom. l.p. 255—259. With the orientals, (d'Herbelot, Biblioth. Orient.p. 834.) he ascribes the foundation of Tauris, or Tebris, to Zobeide, the wife of thefamous khalif Haruun Alrashid ; but it appears to have been more ancient ; and thenames of Gandzaca, Gazaca, Gaza, are expressive of the royal treasure. The uum-beroffive hundred and fifty thousand inhahitants is reduced by Chardin from onemillion one hundred thousand the popular estimate.







OCR Output








150 DECLINE AND PALL [CHAP. XLI.


epistle was subscribed by the reluctant hand of the cap­tive queen: but the confession of the Roman senators,who were sent to Constantinople, revealed the truth ofher deplorable situation; and Justinian, by the voice ofa new ambassador, most powerfully interceded for herlife and liberty. Yet the secret instructions of the sameminister were adapted to serve the cruel jealousy of The­odora, who dreaded the presence and superior charms ofa rival: he prompted, with artful and ambiguous hints,the execution of a crime so useful to the Romans ;k re­ceived the intelligence of her death with grief and indig­nation, and denounced, in his master's name, immortalwar against the perfidious assassin. In Italy, as well asin Africa, the guilt of an usurper appeared to justify thearms of Justinian; but the forces which he prepared,were insufficient for the subversion of a mighty king­dom, if their feeble numbers had not been multiplied bythe name, the spirit, and the conduct of a hero. Achosen troop of guards, who served on horseback, andwere armed with lances and bucklers, attended the personof Belisarius: his cavalry was composed of two hundredHuns, three hundred Moors, and four thousand confe­derates, and the infantry consisted only of three thou­sand Isaurians. Steering the same course as in his for­mer expedition, the Roman consul cast anchor beforeCatana in Sicily, to survey the strength of the island, andto decide whether he should attempt the conquest, orpeaceably pursue his voyage for the African coast. Hefound a fruitful land and a friendly people. Notwith­standing: the decay of agriculture, Sicily still suppliedthe granaries of Rome; the farmers were graciously ex­empted from the oppression of their military quarters;and the Goths, who trusted the defence of the island tothe inhabitants, had some reason to complain, that their
* Yet Procopius discredits his own evidence (Anecdot. c. 16.) by'confessinsr,that in his public history he had not spoken the truth. See the .'epistles from queenGundelina to the empress Theodora,(Var. 10. 20, 21. 23. and observe a suspiciousword, de persona, &c). with the elaborate Commentary of Boat. (torn. 10. n.







OCR Output








CHAF. XLH.] OP THE ROMAN EMWRE. 033


struse and profound questions which amused the leisureof the schools of Athens? Could they hope that theprecepts of philosophy should direct the life, and con-troul the passions, of a despot, whose infancy had beentaught to consider his absolute and fluctuating will as theonly rule of moral obligation r* The studies of Chos-roes were ostentatious and superficial: but his exampleawakened the curiosity of an ingenious people, and thelight of science was diffused over the dominions of Per­sia." At Gondi Sapor, in the neighbourhood of theroyal city of Susa, an academy of physic was founded,which insensibly became a liberal school of poetry, phi­losophy, and rhetoric.b The annals of the monarchy0were composed; and while recent and authentic historymight afford some useful lessons both to the prince andpeople, the darkness of the first ages was embellished bythe giants, the dragons, and the fabulous heroes of ori­ental romance.*1 Every learned or confident strangerWas enriched by the bounty, and flattered by the con­versation, of the monarch: he nobly rewarded a Greekphysician,' by the deliverance of three thousand captives;and the Sophists, who contended for his favour, were ex­asperated by the wealth and insolence of Uranius, theirmore successful rival. Nushirvan believed, or at least
*A thousand years before bis birth, the judges of Persia had given a solemn opinion—T<» Bcto-tXEuom Tlsfcrtan E^Eivat irtmia to ay Boi/Xstcu. (Herodot. lib. 3. c. 31. p. 210.edit. Wesseling.) Nor had this constitutional maxim been neglected as an uselessand barren theory. » « • • '*
■ On the literary stale of Persia, the Greek versions, philosophers, sophists, thelearning or ignorance of Chosroes, Agathias (lib. 2. c. 66—71.) displays much infor­mation and strong prejudices.
b Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, torn. 4. p. 745—747.
c The Sbah Nameh, or book of Kings, is perhaps the original record of historywhich was translated into Greek by the interpreter Sergins, (Agathias, lib. 5. p. 141.)preserved after the Mahometan conquest, and versified in the year 994, by the na­tional poet Ferdoussi. See d'Anquetil, (Mem. de l'Academie, torn. 51. p. 379.)andSir William Jones. (Hist, of Nader Sbah, p. 161.)
* In the fifth century, the name of Restom or Rostam, a hero who equalled thestrength of twelve elephants, was familiar to the Armenians. (Moses Choronensis,Hist. Armen. lib. 2. c. 7. p. 96. edit. Whiston.) In the beginning of the seventh,the Persian Romance of Rostam and Isfendiar was applauded at Mecca. (Sale'sKoran, c. 31. p. 335.) Yet this exposition of lodicrum novae historiss, is not given byMaracci. (Refutat. Alcoran, p. 544—548.)
6 Procop. Goth. lib. 4. c. 10. Kobad had a favonrite Greek physician, Stephen ofKdessa. (Persic lib. 2. e. 26.) The practice was ancient; and Herodotus relatesthe adventures of JJemocedes of Crotona. (lib. 3. c. 125—137.)







OCR Output








394 . DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP XLV.


forms and delays are necessary to guard the person andproperty of the citizen; that the discretion of the judge isthe first engine of tyranny, and that the laws of a freepeople should foresee and determine every question thatmay probably arise in the exercise of power and the trans­actions of industry. But the government of Justinianunited the evils of liberty and servitude: and the Romanswere oppressed at the same time by the multiplicity oftheir laws and the arbitrary will of their master.


CHAP. XLV.
Reign of the younger Justin.—Emhassy of the Avars.—Their settlement on the Da­nube.—Conquest of Italy by the Lomhards.—Adoption and reign of Tiberius.—Of Maurice.—State of Italy under the Lomhards and exarebs.—Of Ravenna—Distress of Rome.—Character and pontificate of Gregory I.
Death of During the last years of Justinian, his infirm mind was de-A.SDn. 565, voted to heavenly contemplation, and he neglected the bu-Nov. 14. siness of the lower world. His subjects were impatient ofthe long continuance of his life and reign: yet all whowerecapableof reflection, apprehended the moment of hisdeath,which might involve the capital in tumult, and theempire in civil war. Seven nephews" of the childish mo­narch, the sons or grandsons of his brother and sister,had been educated in the splendour of a princely for­tune; they had been shewn in high commands to theprovinces and armies; their characters were known,their followers were zealous, and as the jealousy of agepostponed the declaration of a successor, they might ex­pect with equal hopes the inheritance of their uncle. Heexpired in his palace after a reign of thirty-eight years;and the decisive opportunity was embraced by the friendsof Justin the son of Vigilantia.b At the hour of mid-
1 See the family of Justin and Justinian in the Families Byzantinae of Ducange.p. 89—101. The devout civilians, Ludewig (in Vit. Justinian. p. 131.) and Heinec-cius, (Hist. Juris. Roman. p. 374.) have since illustrated the genealogy of their fa­vourite prince.
b In the histoty of Justin's elevation I have translated into simple and conciseprose, the eight hundred verses of the two first books of Corippus, De Laudibus Jus-■tini. Appendix Hist. Byzant. p. 401—416, Rome, 1777.







OCR Output








40 . DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL.


among the guards of the emperor Leo. Under the twosucceeding reigns, the fortunate peasant emerged towealth and honours; arid his escape from some dangerswhich threatened his life, was afterward ascribed to theguardian angel who watches over the fate of kings. Hislong and laudable service in the Isaurian and Persianwars, would not have preserved from oblivion the nameof Justin; yet they might warrant the military pro­motion, which hi the course of fifty years he graduallyobtained; the rank of tribune, of count, and of general,the dignity of senator, and the command of the guards,who obeyed him as their chief, at the important crisiswhen the emperor Anastasius was removed from theworld. The powerful kinsmen, whom he had raised andenriched, were excluded from the throne; and the eu­nuch Amantius, who reigned in the palace, had secretlyresolved to fix the diadem on the head of the most ob­sequious of his creatures. A liberal donative, to conci­liate the suffrage of the guards, was intrusted for thatpurpose in the hands of their commander. But theseweighty arguments were treacherously employed by Jus-Eieration tin in his own favour; and as no competitor presumed"fwYuDcieto aPPear> the Dacian peasant was invested with thea^d" m8 P^rP^e' Dy tne unanimous consent of the soldiers, whojoiy 10. 'knew him to be brave and gentle; of the clergy andApril i, or people, who believed him to be orthodox, and of theAug. l. provincials, who yielded a blind and implicit submissionto the will of the capital. The elder Justin, as he isdistinguished from another emperor of the same familyand name, ascended the Byzantine throne at the age ofsixty-eight years; and, had he been left to his own guid­ance, every moment of a nine years' reign must haveexposed to his subjects the impropriety of their choice.His ignorance was similar to that of Theodoric; and, itis remarkable, that in an age not destitute of learning,two contemporary monarchs had never been instructedin the knowledge of the alphabet. But the genius of







OCR Output








352 bECLiNE AND FALL [cHAP. XLIV.


scendants were included in the family of their commonancestor; and the claims of adoption were not less sa­cred or less rigorous than those of nature. Withoutfear, though not without danger of abuse, the Romanlegislators had reposed an unbounded confidence in thesentiments of paternal love; and the oppression wastempered by the assurance, that each generation mustsucceed in its turn to the awful dignity of parent andmaster.
slnj'ofthe' ^e ^rs^ limitation of paternal power is ascribed to•uthorHy Just'ce and humanity of Numa : and the maid, who,with his father's consent, had espoused a freeman, wasprotected from the disgrace of becoming the wife of aslave. In the first ages, when the city was pressed, andoften famished by her Latin and Tuscan neighbours,the sale of children might be a frequent practice; but asa Roman could not legally purchase the liberty of hisfellow-citizen, the market must gradually fail, and thetrade would be destroyed by the conquests of the repub­lic. An imperfect right of property was at length com­municated to sons; and the three-fold distinction oipro-fectitious, adventitious, and professional, was ascertainedby the jurisprudence of the Code and Pandects.11 Of allthat proceeded from the father, he imparted only the use,and reserved the absolute dominion; yet if his goodswere sold, the 'filial portion was excepted, by a favourableinterpretation, from the demands of the creditors. Inwhatever accrued by marriage, gift, or collateral succes­sion, the property was secured to the son ; but the father, ^•unless he had been specially excluded, enjoyed the usu­fruct during his life. As a just and prudent reward ofmilitary virtue, the,spoils of the enemy were acquired,
.Noctes Atticap, 1. 2.) The lessons of the philosopher Taurus were justified by theold and memorable example of Fahius; and we may contemplate the same story inthe style of Livy, (24. 34.) and the homely idiom of Claudius Quadrigarius the an­nalist. 'i. . ' .
4 See the'gradual enlargement and security of tlie filial peculinm in the Institutes,<lib.2. tit. 9.) the Pandects, (lib. 15u tit. 1. lib. 41. tit. 1.) and the Code. (lib. 4; tit.26, 97.)







OCR Output








114 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI.


CHAP. XLI.
Conquest of Justinian in the west.—Character and first campaigns of Belisarius.—He
invades and subdues the Vandal kingdom of Africa.— His triumph The Gothic
war.—He recovers Sicily, Naples, and Rome.—Siege of Rome by the Goths.—Their retreat and losses.—Surrender of Ravenna.—Glory of Belisarius.—His do­mestic shame and misfortunes.
Justinian When Justinian ascended the throne, about fifty yearsfends"t0 after the fall of the western empire, the kingdoms of the*frpa,533 Goths and Vandals had obtained a solid, and, as it mightseem, a legal establishment both in Europe and Africa.The titles which Roman victory had inscribed, wereerased with equal justice by the sword of the barbarians;and their successful rapine derived a more venerable sanc­tion from time, from treaties, and from the oaths of fide­lity, already repeated by a second or third generation ofobedient subjects. Experience and Christianity had re­futed the superstitious hope, that Rome was founded bythe gods to reign for ever over the nations of the earth.But the proud claim of perpetual and indefeasible domi­nion, which her soldiers could no longer maintain, wasfirmly asserted by her statesmen and lawyers, whose opi­nions have been sometimes revived and propagated inthe modern schools of jurisprudence. After Rome her­self had been stripped of the imperial purple, the princesof Constantinople assumed the sole and sacred sceptre ofthe monarchy; demanded, as their rightful inheritance,the provinces which had been subdued by the consuls,or possessed by the Caesars; and feebly aspired to deli­ver their faithful subjects of the west from the usurpa­tion of heretics and barbarians. The execution of thissplendid design was in some degree reserved for Justi­nian. During the five first years of his reign, he reluc­tantly waged a costly and unprofitable war against thePersians; till his pride submitted to his ambition, andhe purchased, at the price of 440,000/. sterling, thebenefit of a precarious truce, which, in the language ofboth nations, was dignified with the appellation of the







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 485


pealed their tactics in a field of battle,1" and the event ofthe day declared to the world, that the Persians were notinvincible, and that a hero was invested with the purple.,Strong in victory and fame, Heraclius boldly ascendedthe heights of mount Taurus, directed his march throughthe plains of Cappadocia, and established his troops for thewinter season in safe and plentiful quarters on the banksof the river Halys." His soul was superior to the vani­ty of entertaining Constantinople with an imperfect tri­umph: but the presence of the emperor was indispensa­bly required to soothe the restless and rapacious spirit ofthe Avars.
Since the days of Scipio and Hannibal, no bolder en- His secondterprise has been attempted than that which Heraclius ^a'Sachieved for the deliverance of the empire." He permit- 624,625-ted the Persians to oppress for a while the provinces, andto insult with impunity the capital of the east; while theRoman emperor explored his perilous way through theBlack sea,p and the mountains of Armenia, penetratedinto the heart of Persia,q and recalled the armies of thegreat king to the defence of their bleeding country;With a select band of five thousand soldiers, Heracliussailed from Constantinople to Trebizond; assembled his
m Foggini (Annotat. p. 31.) suspects that the Persians were deceived by the <f>x\-ovj mnfXnyi^m of jElian, (Tactic, c. 48.) an intricate spiral motion of the army. Heobserved, (p. 28.) that the military descriptions of George of Pisidia are transcribedinto the Tactics of the Emperor .Leo.
"George of Pisidia, an eye-witness, (Acroas. 2. 122, &c.) described in threeacroaseis or cantos, the first expedition of Heraclius. The poem has been lately(1777) published at Rome; but such vague and declamatory praise is far from cor­responding with the sanguine hopes of Pagi, D'Anville, &c.
0 Theophanes (p. 256.) carries Heraclius swiftly (jiara ra^of) into Armenia. Ni-cephorus, (p. 11.) though he confounds the two expeditions, defines the province ofLazica. Eutychias (Annal. torn. ii. p. 231.) has given the five thousand men, withthe more probable station of Trebizond.
P From Constantinople to Trebizond, with a fair wind, four or live days; fromthence to Erzerom, five; to Erivan, twelve ; to Tauris, ten; in all, thirty-two. Suchis the Itinerary of Tavernier, (Voyages, torn. 1. p. 12—56.) who was perfectly con­versant with the roads of Asia. Tournefort, who travelled with a pasha, spent tenor twelve days between Trebizond and Erzerom ; (Voyage du Levant, torn. 3. lettre18.) and Chardin (Voyages, torn. 1. p. 249—254.) gives the more correct distanceof fifty-three parasangs, each of five thousand paces, (what paces ?) between Erivanand Tauris.
1 The expedition of Heraclius into Persia is finely illustrated by M. d'Anville.(Memoires de 1'Academie des Inscriptions, torn. 28. p. 559—573.) He discoversthe situation of Gandzaca, Thebnrma, Dastagerd, &c. with admirable skill and learn­ing; bat the obscure campaign of 624 he passes over in silence.







OCR Output








132 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLTr.


ed to the flames. The cathedral of Antioch was in«-deed preserved by the avarice, not the pity, of the con­queror: a more honourable exemption was granted tothe church of St. Julian, and the quarter of the townwhere the ambassadors resided; some distant streetswere saved by the shifting of the wind, and the walls stillsubsisted to protect, and soon to betray, their new in­habitants. Fanaticism had defaced the ornaments ofDaphne, but Chosroes breathed a purer air amidst hergroves and fountains; and some idolaters in his trainmight sacrifice with impunity to the nymphs of that ele­gant retreat. Eighteen miles below Antioch, the riverOrontes falls into the Mediterranean. The haughtyPersian visited the term of his conquests: and, after bath­ing alone in the sea, he offered a solemn sacrifice ofthanksgiving to the sun, or rather to the Creator of thesun, whom the Magi adored. If this act of superstitionoffended the prejudices of the Syrians, they were pleas­ed by the courteous and even eager attention with whichhe assisted at the games of the circus; and as Chos­roes had heard that the blue faction was espoused by theemperor, his peremptory command secured the victoryof the green charioteer. From the discipline of his campthe people derived more solid consolation; and they in­terceded in vain for the life of a soldier who had toofaithfully copied the rapine of the just Nushirvan. Atlength, fatigued, though unsatiated, with the spoil of Sy­ria, he slowly moved to the Euphrates, formed a tempo­rary bridge in the neighbourhood of Barbalissus, and de­fined the space of three days for the entire passage ofhis numerous host. After his return, he founded at thedistance of one day's journey from the palace of Ctesirphon, a new city, which perpetuated the joint names ofChosroes and of Antioch. The Syrian captives recog­nised the form and situation of their native abodes.:baths and a stately circus were constructed for their use;and a colony of musicians and charioteers revived in







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIII.


one he struck dead the foremost of the assailants; withthe other he received the weapons which every hand wasambitious to aim against his life. After a combat ofmany hours, his left arm was fatigued by the weight oftwelve javelins which hung from his shield. Withoutmoving from his ground, or suspending his blows, thehero called aloud on his attendants for a fresh buckler,but in the moment, while his side was uncovered, it waspierced by a mortal dart. He fell: and his head, exalt­ed on a spear, proclaimed to the nations, that the Gothic -kingdom was no more. But the example of his deathserved only to animate the companions who had swornto perish with their leader. They fought till darknessdescended on the earth. They reposed on their arms.The combat was renewed with the return of light, andmaintained with unabated vigour till the evening of thesecond day. The repose of a second night, the want of,water, and the loss of their bravest champions, deter­mined the surviving Goths to accept the fair capitulationwhich the prudence of Narses was inclined to propose.They embraced the alternative of residing in Italy as thesubjects and soldiers of Justinian, or departing with aportion of their private wealth, in search of some inde­pendent country/ Yet the oath of fidelity or exile wasalike rejected by one thousand Goths, who broke awaybefore the treaty was signed, and boldly effected theirretreat to the walls of Pavia. The spirit, as well as thesituation, of Aligern, prompted him to imitate ratherthan to bewail his brother; a strong and dexterous ar­cher, he transpierced with a single arrow the armour andbreast of his antagonist; and his military conduct de­fended CumasJ above a year against the forces of the
* Buat (torn. 11. p. 2, &c.) conveys to his favourite Bavaria this remnant of Goths,who by others are buried in the mountains of Uri, or restored to their native isle ofGothland. (Mascoo, Annot. 21.).
y I leave Scaliger (Aniiuadvers. in Euseb. p. 59.) and Salmasins, (Exercilat.,Plinian. p. 5.1, 52.) to quarrel about the origin of Curnac, the oldest of the Greek colo­nics in Italy, (Strab. lib. 5. p. 372. Velleius Paterculus, lib. 1. c. 4.) already vacantin Juvenal's time, (Satir. 3.) and now in ruins,'







OCR Output








CHAP. XLII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


of gold. A third pavilion was supported by columns ofgilt wood; a bed of pure and massy gold was raised onfour peacocks of the same metal; and before the entranceof the tent, dishes, basins, and statues of solid silver, andadmirable art, were ostentatiously piled in waggons, themonuments of valour rather than of industry. WhenDisabul led his armies against the frontiers of Persia, hisRoman allies followed many days the march of the Turk­ish camp, nor were they dismissed till they had enjoyedtheir precedency over the envoy of the great king, whoseloud and intemperate clamours interrupted the silence ofthe royal banquet. The power and ambition of Chos-roes cemented the union of the Turks and Romans, whotouched his dominions on either side: but those distantnations, regardless of each other, consulted the dictatesof interest, without recollecting the obligations of oathsand treaties. While the successor of Disabul celebratedhis father's obsequies, he was saluted by the ambassadorsof the emperor Tiberius, who proposed an invasion of Per­sia, and sustained with firmness, the angry, and perhapsthe just, reproaches of that haughty barbarian. "Yousee my ten fingers (said the great khan, and he appliedthem to his mouth). You Romans speak with as manytongues, but they are tongues of deceit and perjury;To me you hold one language, to my subjects another:and the nations are successively deluded by your perfi­dious eloquence. You precipitate your allies into war.and danger, you enjoy their labours, and you neglectyour benefactors. Hasten your return, inform yourmaster that a Turk is incapable of uttering or forgivingfalsehood, and that he shall speedily meet the punish­ment which he deserves. While he solicits my friend­ship with flattering and hollow words, he is sunk to aconfederate of my fugitive Varchonites. If I condescendto march against those contemptible slaves, they willtremble at the sound of our whips; they will be tram­pled, like a nest of ants, under the feet of my innum"-


q 2







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV1.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 483


have been to advance into the provinces of Asia, leavingtheir innumerable cavalry to intercept his convoys, andcontinually to hang on the lassitude and disorder of hisrear. But the Greeks were still masters of the sea; afleet of galleys, transports, and store-ships, was assem­bled in the harbour; the barbarians consented toembark;a steady wind carried them through the Hellespont; thewestern and southern coast of Asia Minor lay on theirleft hand; the spirit of their chief was first displayed ina storm; and even the eunuchs of his train were excitedto suffer and to work by the example of their master.He landed his troops on the confines of Syria and Cili-cia, in the gulf of Scanderoon, where the coast sudden­ly turns to the south ;k and his discernment was express­ed in the choice of this important post.1 From all sides,the scattered garrisons of the maritime cities and themountains might repair with speed and safety to his im­perial standard. The natural fortifications of Cilicia pro­tected, and even concealed the camp of Heraclius, whichwas pitched near Issus, on the same ground where Alex­ander had vanquished the host of Darius. The anglewhich the emperor occupied, was deeply indented into avast semicircle of the Asiatic, Armenian, and Syrian pro­vinces; and to whatsoever point of the circumferencehe should direct his attack, it was easy for him to dis­semble his own motions, and to prevent those of theenemy. In the camp of Issus, the Roman general re­formed the sloth and disorder of the veterans, and edu-
* George of Pisidia (Acroas. 2. 10. p. 8.) has fixed this important point of the Sy­rian and Cilioian gates. They are elegantly described by Xenophon, who marchedthrough them a thousand years before. A narrow pass of three stadia between steephigh rocks (w«rgai nM$etrat) and the Mediterranean was closed at each end by stronggates, impregnable to the land, (uiapixSfjv qvKw Biet), accessible by sea' (Anahasis,jib 1.. p. 35, 36. with Hutchinson's Geographical Dissertation, p. 6.) The gateswere thirty-fire parasangs, or leagues from Tarsus, (Anahasis, lib. 1. p. 33, 34.) andeight or ten from Antioch. (Compare Itinerar. Wesseling. p. 580—581. Scbitltens,Judex Geograph. ad calcem Vit. Saladin. p. 9. Voyage cu Turquie et en Perse, parM. Otter, tom. 1. p. 78, 79.)
1 Heraclius might write to a friend in the modest words of Cicero.—" Castra ha-buimus ea ipsa quae contra Darium habuerat apud Issum Alexander, imperator bandpaulo melior quam ant tu aut ego." Ad Atticum, 5. 20. Isaus, a rich and flourish­ing city in the time of Xenophon, was ruined by tbs prosperity of Alexandria, of(Scandaroon, on the oiher aids of the hay.







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 97


which was sanctified, for the first time, by the presenceof a fighting bishop. Their disorderly numbers werevanquished in the plains of Phrygia by the valour anddiscipline of the Goths; but a war of six years almostexhausted the courage of the emperor.11 The Isaurians A- d.49«
° r 498.
retired to their mountains; their fortresses were succes­sively besieged and ruined; their communication withthe sea was intercepted; the bravest of their leaders diedin arms; the surviving chiefs, before their execution,were dragged in chains through the Hippodrome; a co­lony of their youth was transplanted into Thrace, andthe remnant of the people submitted to the Roman go­vernment. Yet some generations elapsed before theirminds were reduced to the level of slavery. The popu­lous villages of mount Taurus were filled with horsemenand archers; they resisted the imposition of tributes,but they recruited the armies of Justinian; and his civilmagistrates, the proconsul of Cappadocia, the count ofIsauria, and the praetors of Lycaonia and Pisidia, wereinvested with military power to restrain the licentiouspractice of rapes and assassinations.'
If we extend our view from the tropic to the mouth of Fortifica-the Tanais, we may observe on one hand, the precautions emp5ref th°of Justinian to curb the savages of ^Ethiopia,11 and on g°mint£etothe other, the long walls which he constructed in Cri-,|ie Persianmaea for the protection of his friendly Goths, a colonyof three thousand shepherds and warriors.1 From that
h The Isaurian war and the triumph of Anastasius are briefly and darkly repre­sented by John Matala; (tom. 2. p. 106, 107.) Evagrius; (lib. 3. o. 35.) Theophanes(p. 118—120.) and the Chronicle of Marcellinus.
1 Fortes ea regio (says Justinian) viroshabet, neo in nllo differt ab Isauria, thoughProcopius (Persic. lib. 1. c. 13.) marks an essential difference between their militarycharacter ; yet in former times the Lycaonians and Pisidians had defended their li­berty against the great king. (Xenophon. Anahasis, lib. 3. c. 2.) Justinian introducessome false and ridiculous erndition of the ancient empire of the Pisidians, and Ly-caon, who, after visiting Rome (long before jJEneas), gave a name and people to Ly­caonia. (Novell. 24, 25. 27. 30.)
* See Procopius, Persio. lib. 1.e. 19. The altar of national concord, of annualsacrifice and oaths, which Diocletian had erected in the isle of Elephantine, was de­molished by Justinian with less policy than zeal. .'
1 Procopius de Edificiis, lib. 3. c. 7. Hist. lib. 8. c. 3, 4. These unamhitiousGoths had refused to follow the standard of Theodoric. As late as the fifteenth andsixteenth century, the name and nation might be discovered between Cafla and thestraits of Azoph, (d'Anville Memoiret) do ('Academic, toiu. 30. p. 240.) They well







OCR Output








CHAP. XXXIX.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 20,


terward by the restitution, of the estates which he hadunjustly extorted from his Tuscan neighbours. Twohundred thousand barbarians, formidable even to theirmaster, were seated in the heart of Italy; they indig­nantly supported the restraints of peace and discipline;the disorders, of their march were always felt, and some­times compensated; and where it was dangerous to pu­nish, it might be prudent to dissemble, the sallies of theirnative fierceness. When the indulgence of Theodorichad remitted two-thirds of the Ligurian tribute, he con­descended to explain the difficulties of his situation, andto lament the heavy though inevitable burdens which heimposed on his subjects for their own defence/1 Theseungrateful subjects could never be cordially reconciledto the origin, the religion, or even the virtues of theGothic conqueror; past calamities were forgotten, andthe sense or suspicion of injuries was rendered still moreexquisite by the present felicity of the times.Even the religious toleration, which Theodoric had the He'»«>ro-
vukcd to
glory of introducing into the Christian world, was painful persecuteand offensive to the orthodox zeal of the Italians. They n*,. *respected the armed heresy of the Goths; but their piousrage was safely pointed against the rich and defencelessJews, who had formed their establishments at Naples,Rome, Ravenna, Milan, and Genoa, for the benefit oftrade, and under the sanction of the laws/ Their per­sons were insulted, their effects were pillaged, and theirsynagogues were burnt by the mad populace of Ravennaand Rome, inflamed, as it should seem, by the most fri­volous or extravagant pretences. The government whichcould neglect, would have deserved, such an outrage. Alegal inquiry was instantly directed; and as the authorsof the tumult had escaped in the crowd, the whole com­munity was condemned to repair the damage; and the
i immauiam expensarum pondus . . . pro ipsoram salute, &c. yet these are nomore than words.
r The Jews were settled at Naples, (Prncopiiis, Goth. lib. 1. c. 8.) at Genoa, (Var.2. 28! 4. 53.) Milai>, (5..3?.) Rome, (4. 43.) See likewise Basnagc, Hist, des Jait's,-ton. 8. c. 7. p. 2o4l''' . , , .'







OCR Output








454 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLVI.


•Mw^f eas*'' *ne ProsPec*; of Europe is less pleasing and lessthe ehagan glorious. By the departure of the Lombards, and theArars, ruin of the Gepida?, the balance of power was destroyed^©oof&L on tne Danube; and the Avars spread their permanentdominion from the foot of the Alps to the sea-coast ofthe Euxine. The reign of Baian is the brightest era oftheir monarchy; their chagan, who occupied the rusticpalace of Attila, appears to have imitated his characterand policy ;z but as the same scenes were repeated in asmaller circle, a minute representation of the copy wouldbe devoid of the greatness and novelty of the original.The pride of the second Justin, of Tiberius, and Mau­rice, was humbled by a proud barbarian, more prompt toinflict, than exposed to suffer the injuries of war; and asoften as Asia was threatened by the Persian arms, Eu­rope was oppressed by the dangerous inroads, or costlyfriendship of the Avars. When the Roman envoys ap­proached the presence of the chagan, they were com<.manded to wait at the door of his tent, till, at the endperhaps of ten or twelve days, he condescended to admitthem. If the substance or the style of their message wasoffensive to his ear, he insulted, with a real or affectedfury, their own dignity, and that of their prince; theirbaggage was plundered, and their lives were only savedby the promise of a richer present and a more respectfuladdress. But his sacred ambassadors enjoyed and abusedan unbounded licence in the midst of Constantinople:they urged, with importunate clamours, the increase oftribute, or the restitution of captives and deserters; andthe majesty of the empire was almost equally degradedby a base compliance, or by the false and fearful excuses*with which they eluded such insolent demands. The
* A general idea of the pride and power of the chagan may be taken from Menan -der (Excerpt. Legat. p. 117, &c') and Theopbylact, (lib. 1. c. 3. lib. 7. c. 15.) whoseeight books are much more honourable to the Avar than to the Roman prince. Thepredecessors of Baian had tasted the liberality of Rome, and he survived the reign,of Maurice. (Bua, Hist. des Peuples Barbares, tom. 11. p. 545.) The chagan whoinvaded Italy A. D, 611. (Muratori, Annali, tom. 5. p. 305.) was then juvenili aetataflorentcm, (Paul Warnefrid, de Gest. Langohard, lib. 5. 0. 38.) the son, perhaps, orthe grandson of Baian.







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


were actors, the Romans were merely spectators. TheOlympic stadium was open to wealth, merit, and ambi­tion; and if the candidates could depend on their per­sonal skill and activity, they might pursue the footstepsof Diomede and Menelaus, and conduct their own horsesin the rapid career.3 Ten, twenty, forty chariots wereallowed to start at the same instant; a crown of leaveswas the reward of the victor: and his fame, with that ofhis family and country, was chanted in lyric strains moredurable than monuments of brass and marble. But a se­nator, or even acitizen, conscious of his dignity, wouldhave blushed to expose his person or his horses in the cir­cus of Rome. The games were exhibited at the expense ofthe republic, the magistrates, or the emperors: but thereins were abandoned to servile hands; and if the profitsof a favourite charioteer sometimes exceeded those ofan advocate, they must be considered as the effects ofpopular extravagance, and the high wages of a disgracefulprofession. The race, in its first institution, was a simplecontest of two chariots, whose drivers were distinguishedby white and red liveries; two additional colours, a lightgreen, and a cerulean blue, were afterward introduced;and as the races were repeated twenty-five times, onehundred chariots contributed in the same day to thepomp of the circus. The four factions soon acquired alegal establishment, and a mysterious origin, and theirfanciful colours were derived from the various appear­ances of nature in the four seasons of the year; the reddog-star of summer, the snows of winter, the deep shadesof autumn, and the cheerful verdure of the spring.' An­other interpretation preferred the elements to the seasons,
• Read and feel the twenty-third book of the Iliad, a living picture of manners,passions, and the whole form and spirit of the chariot-race. West's Dissertation onthe Olympic Games (sect. 12—17.) affords much curious ami authentic information.
I The four colours, albati,russuti, jirasini, veneli, represent the four seasons, accord­ing to Cassiodorius, (Var. 3. 51.) who lavishes much wit and eloquence on thistheatrical mystery. Of these colours, the three first may be fairly translated, white,red, and green. Venetus is explained by cacruleut a word various and vague: it isproperly the sky reflected in the sea; but custom and convenience may allow blue asau equivalent. (Robert. Slephau, sub voce. Spence's l'olywclis, p. 228.) «







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 403


the more stubborn barbarians sacrificed a she-goat, or per­haps a captive, to the gods of their fathers.° The Lom­bards, and their confederates, were united by their com­mon attachment to a chief, who excelled in all the vir­tues and vices of a savage hero; and the vigilance of Al-boin provided an ample magazine of offensive and de­fensive arms for the use of the expedition. The portablewealth of the Lombards attended the march ; their landsthey cheerfully relinquished to the Avars, on the solemnpromise, which was made and accepted without a smile,that if they failed in the conquest of Italy, these voluntaryexiles should be reinstated in their former possessions.
They might have failed, if Narses had been the anta- pisaffec-gonist of the Lombards; and the veteran warriors, the death ofassociates of his Gothic victory, would have encountered Nar*es-with reluctance an enemy whom they dreaded and es­teemed. But the weakness of the Byzantine court wassubservient to the barbarian cause; and it was for theruin of Italy, that the emperor once listened to the com­plaints of his subjects. The virtues of Narses werestained with avarice; and in his provincial reign of fif­teen years he accumulated a treasure of gold and silverwhich surpassed the modesty of a private fortune. Hisgovernment was oppressive or unpopular, and the gene­ral discontent was expressed with freedom by the depu­ties of Rome. Before the throne of Justin they boldlydeclared, that their Gothic servitude had been more to­lerable than the despotism of a Greek, eunuch ; and that,unless their tyrant were instantly removed, they wouldconsult their own happiness in the choice of a master.The apprehension of a revolt was urged by the voice ofenvy and detraction, which had so recently triumphedover the merits of Belisarius. A new exarch, Longinus,was appointed to supersede the conqueror of Italy; andthe base motives of his recall were revealed in the in-
* Gregory the Roman (Dialog, lib. 3. c. 27,28. apud Baron. Annal. Ecoles. A. D.579. no. 10.) supposes that they likewise adored this she-goat. I know butbf onereligion in which the god and the victim are the same.







OCR Output













OCR Output








284 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIII.


rity, more absolute in the affection of his troops, Narsesled a numerous and gallant army from Philippopolis to-Salona, from whence he coasted the eastern side of theHadriatie as far as the confines of Italy. His progresswas checked. The east could not supply vessels capableof transporting such multitudes of men and horses.The Franks, who, in the general confusion, had usurpred the greater part of the Venetian province, refused afree passage to the friends of the Lombards. The stationof Verona was occupied by Teias, with the flower of the^Gothic forces; and that skilful commander had over­spread the adjacent country with the fall of woods andthe inundation of waters.1 In this perplexity, an officerof experience proposed a measure, secure by the appear­ance of rashness; that the Roman -army should cau­tiously advance along the sea-shore, while the fleet pre­ceded their march, and successively cast a bridge of boats•over the mouths of the rivers, the Timavus, the Brenta,the Adige, and the Po, that fall into the Hadriatic to thenorth of Ravenna. Nine days he reposed in the city,collected the fragments of the Italian army, and marchedtowards Rimini to meet the defiance of an insultingenemy.
Defeat and The prudence of Narses impelled him to speedy andTo'iia,9 decisive action. His powers were the last effort of thejoiy!'552' state: the cost of each day accumulated the enormousaccount; and the nations, untrained to discipline or fa­tigue, might be rashly provoked to turn their arms againsteach other, or against their benefactor. The same con­siderations might have tempered the ardour of Totila.But he was conscious, that the clergy and people of Italyaspired to a second revolution: he felt or suspected the
and educated in the Byzantine court by the various motives of policy, pride, andgenerosity. (Procop. Persic. lib. 1. c. 23.)
k In the time of Augustus, and in the middle ages, the whole waste from Aqoileiato Ravenna was covered with woods, lakes, and morasses. Man has sabdncd nature,and the land has been cultivated, since the waters are confmed and emhanked.See the learned researches of Muratori, (Antiquitat. Italic medii AZii, tom. 1. dis­sert. 21. p. 253, 354.) from Vitruvius, Strabo, Heiodian, old charters, and looalknowledge.







OCR Output








182 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI.


ment and despair, the Goths abandoned the siege ofRimini, their tents, their standards, and their leaders;and Vitiges, who gave or followed the example of flight,Retire to never halted till he found a shelter within the walls and
Ravenna. c -n
morasses or Kavenna.Jealonsy of To these walls, and to some fortresses destitute ofgralnis*" any mutual support, the Gothic monarchy was now re-a. d. 538. duced. The provinces of Italy had embraced the partyof the emperor; and his army, gradually recruited tothe number of twenty thousand men, must have achievedan easy and rapid conquest, if their invincible powershad not been weakened by the discord of the Romanchiefs. Before the end of the siege, an act of blood,ambiguous and indiscreet, sullied the fair fame of Beli-sarius. Presidius, a loyal Italian, as he fled from Ra­venna to Rome, was rudely stopped by Constantine, themilitary governor of Spoleto, and despoiled, even in achurch, of two daggers richly inlaid with gold and pre­cious stones. As soon as the public danger had sub­sided, Presidius complained of the loss and injury: hiscomplaint was heard, but the order of restitution wasdisobeyed by the pride and avarice of the offender. Ex­asperated by the delay, Presidius boldly arrested thegeneral's horse as he passed through the Forum; and,with the spirit of a citizen, demanded the common bene­fit of the Roman laws. The honour of Belisarius wasengaged; he summoned a council; claimed the obedi­ence of his subordinate officer; and was provoked, by aninsolent reply, to call hastily for the presence of hisguards. Constantine, viewing their entrance as thesignal of death, drew his sword, and rushed on the ge­neral, who nimbly eluded the stroke, and was protectedby his friends; while the desperate assassin was disarm­ed, dragged into a neighbouring chamber, and executed,or rather murdered, by the guards, at the arbitrary corn-Death of mand of Belisarius.c In this hasty act of violence, the
Constan­tine. « This transaction is related in the public history (Goth. lib. 2. o. 8.) with candour







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV,] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 36Q


petuate in each family a just and virtuous mediocrity;till female blandishments insensibly triumphed; andevery salutary restraint was lost in the dissolute great­ness of the republic. The rigour of the decemvirs wastempered by the equity of the praetors. Their edictsrestored emancipated and posthumous children to therights of nature: and upon the failure of the agnats,they preferred the blood of the cognats to the name ofthe Gentiles, whose title and character were insensiblycovered with oblivion. The reciprocal inheritance ofmothers and sons was established in the Tertullian andOrphitian decrees by the humanity of the senate. Anew and more impartial order was introduced by thenovels of Justinian, who affected to revive the jurispru­dence of the twelve tables. The lines of masculine andfemale kindred were confounded: the descending, as­cending, and collateral series, was accurately defined;and each degree, according to the proximity of bloodand affection, succeeded to the vacant possessions of aRoman citizen.1
The order of succession is regulated by nature, or at tntrodoo-least by the general and permanent reason of the law- ln.erty <>rgiver; but this order is frequently violated by the arbi-trary and partial wills which prolong the dominion of thetestator beyond the grave.™ In the simple state of so­ciety, this last use or abuse of the right of property isseldom indulged: it was introduced at Athens by the lawsof Solon; and the private testaments of the father of afamily are authorized by the twelve tables. Before thetime of the decemvirs," a Roman citizen exposed his
sixty-five years of age) suassisscm, says old Cato. (de Senectute, c. 5.) Aulas Gel-Gas (7. 13/17. 6.) has saved some passages.
1 See the law of succession in the Institutes of Caius, (lib. 2. tit. 8. p. 130—144.)and Justinian, (lib. 3. tit. 1—6. with the Greek version of Theophilus, p. 515—575.588-r600.) the Pandects, (lib. 38. tit. 6—17.) the Code, (lib. 6. tit. 55—60.) andthe Novels..(118.)
■ That succession was the rule, testament the exception, is proved by Taylor,(Elements of Civil Law, p. 519—527.) a learned, rambling, spirited writer. In thesecond and third books the method of the Institutes is doubtless preposterous; andthe chancellor Duquesseau (CEuvres, tom. 1. p. 275.) wishes his countrymen Domatin the place of Ti-ibooian. Yet covenants before successions is not surely the naturalorder of the oivil laws. ...'
« Prior examples of testaments are peihaps fabulous. At Athens a childless fa-







OCR Output








CHAP. XXXIX.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 7


destroy the Goths by each other's swords? Are you in­sensible that the victor in this unnatural contest will beexposed, and justly exposed, to their implacable revenge?Where are those warriors, ray kinsmen, and thy own,whose widows now lament that their lives were sacrificedto thy rash ambition? Where is the wealth which thysoldiers possessed when they were first allured from theirnative homes to enlist under thy standard? Each of themwas then master of three or four horses; they now fol­low thee on foot like slaves, through the deserts ofThrace; those men who were tempted by the hope ofmeasuring gold with a bushel, those brave men who areas free and as noble as thyself." A language so wellsuited to the temper of the Goths, excited clamour anddiscontent; and the son of Theodemir apprehensive ofbeing left alone, was compelled to embrace his brethren,and to imitate the example of Roman perfidy.™
In every state of his fortune, the prudence and firm- He under-ness of Theodoric were equally conspicuous; whether he conquestthreatened Constantinople at the head of the confederate a. a 489.Goths, or retreated with a faithful band to the mountains'and sea-coast of Epirus. At length the accidental death'of the son of Triarius" destroyed the balance which theRomans had been so anxious to preserve; the whole na­tion acknowledged the supremacy of the Amali, and theByzantine court subscribed an ignominious and oppres­sive treaty." The senate had already declared, that itwas necessary to choose a party among the Goths, sincethe public was unequal to the support of their unitedforces; a subsidy of two thousand pounds of gold, with
m Jornandes (c. 56, 57. p. 696.) displays the services of Theodoric, confesseshis rewards, bat dissembles his revolt, of which such curious details have been pre­served by Malchus. (Excerpt. Legat, p. 78—97.) Marcellinas, a domestic of Jus­tinian, under whose fourth consulship (A. D. 534.) he composed his Chronicle, (Sea-liger, Thesaurus Temporum, p. 2. p. 34—57.) betrays Ills prejudice and passion : inGraeciam dehacchantem . . ■ Zenonis munificentia pene pacatus . . . beneficiis nun-quam satiatus, &c.
n As he was riding in his own camp, an uuruly horse threw him against the pointof a spear which hung before a tent, or was fixed ou a waggon. (Marcellus, in Chron.Evagrias, lib. 3. c. 25.) ■
• See Malchus (p. 91.) and Evagrius, (lib. c. 35.)







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [eHAP. XXXIX.


the throne of his son, humbly received, as a gift, the se­cond rank in the empire, and soon excited the publicsuspicion on the sudden and premature death of hisyoung colleague, whose life could no longer promote thesuccess of his ambition. But the palace of Constanti­nople was ruled by female influence, and agitated by fe­male passions: and Verina, the widow of Leo, claiminghis empire as her own, pronounced a sentence of deposi­tion against the worthless and ungrateful servant onwhom she alone had bestowed the sceptre of the east.'As soon as she sounded a revolt in the ears of Zeno, hefled with precipitation into the mountains of Isauria,and her brother Basiliscus, already infamous by his Afri­can expedition,* was unanimously proclaimed by the ser­vile senate. But the reign of the usurper was short andturbulent. Basiliscus presumed to assassinate the loverof his sister; he dared to offend the lover of his wife,the vain and insolent Harmatius, who, in the midst ofAsiatic luxury, affected the dress, the demeanour, and thesurname, of Achilles.11 By the conspiracy of the male-contents, Zeno was recalled from exile; the armies, thecapital, the person, of Basiliscus, were betrayed; and hiswhole family was condemned to the long agony of coldand hunger by the inhuman conqueror, who wantedcourage to encounter or to forgive his enemies. Thehaughty spirit of Verina was still incapable of submissionor repose. She provoked the enmity of afavourite general,embraced his cause as soon as he was disgraced, createda new emperor in Syria and Egypt, raised an army of se­venty thousand men, and persisted to the last momentof her life in a fruitless rebellion, which, according to thefashion of the age, had been predicted by Christian her­mits and Pagan magicians. While the east was afflictedby the passions of Verina, her daughter Ariadne was
'Thenphanes (p. 111.) inserts a copy of her tarred letters to the provinces: nf
in (Zeta-iXtuv njuErfgw tn • . . xiti oti vr^o^ti^ia-jtfxtBa. £acriXEe t Tgae-itaXMraKV, &C. Suchfemale pretensions would have astonished the slaves of the JirU Caesars.* Vol. 4. c. 36.
k Suidas, tom. 1. p. 333, 333. edit. Kuster. . .







OCR Output








CHAP. XLII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


huts within a wooden fence; the fortresses are seated inthe depths of forests; the princely town of Cyta, or CotatiSj consists of two hundred houses, and a stone-edificeappertains only to the magnificence of kings. Twelveships from Constantinople, and about sixty barks, ladenwith the fruits of industry, annually cast anchor on thecoast; and the list of Colchian exports is much increas­ed, since the natives had only slaves and hides to offer inexchange for the corn and salt which they purchasedfrom the subjects of Justinian. Not a vestige can befound of the art, the knowledge, or the navigation, of theancient Colchians: few Greeks desired or dared to pur­sue the footsteps of the Argonauts ; and even the marksof an Egyptian colony are lost on a nearer approach.The rite of circumcision is practised only by the Maho-^metans of the Euxine; and the curled hair and swarthycomplexion of Africa no longer disfigure the most per­fect of the human race. It is in the adjacent climates ofGeorgia, Mingrelia, and Circassia, that nature has placed,at least to our eyes, the model of beauty, in the shapeof the limbs, the colour of the skin, the symmetry of thefeatures, and the expression of the countenance.11 Ac­cording to the destination of the two sexes, the menseemed formed for action, the women for love; and theperpetual supply of females from mount Caucasus haspurified the blood, and improved the breed, of thesouthern nations of Asia. The proper district of Min­grelia, a portion only of the ancient Colchos, has longsustained an exportation of twelve thousand slaves. Thenumber of prisoners and criminals would be inadequateto the annual demand; but the common people are ina state of servitude to their lords, the exercise of fraudor rapine is unpunished in a lawless community; andthe market is continually replenished by the abuse of
d Bufion (Hist. Nat. torn. 3. p. 433—437.) collects the unanimous suffrage of natu­ralists and travellers. If, in the time of Herodotus, they were iu truth ftsKay^fOEsand oiAotji^e; (and be had observed them with care), this precious fact is an exampleof the influence of climate on a foreign colony.







OCR Output








376 DECLIKE AND PALL ' [cHAP. XLIV.


improvements could be expected from a farmer, who,interest of at ea°h moment, might be ejected by the sale of the es-money. tate." Usury,b the inveterate grievance of the city, hadbeen discouraged by the twelve tables,' and abolished bythe clamours of the people. It was revived by their wantsand idleness, tolerated by the discretion of the praetors,, . and finally determined by the code of Justinian. Personsof illustrious rank were confined to the moderate profitof four per cent.; six was pronounced to be the ordinaryand legal standard of interest; eight was allowed for theconvenience of manufacturers and merchants; twelve wasgranted to nautical insurance, which the wiser ancientshad not attempted to define; but except in this perilousadventure, the practice of exorbitant usury was severelyrestrained.*1 The most simple interest was condemned bythe clergy of the east and west:' but the sense of mutualbenefit, which had triumphed over the laws of the re­public, have resisted with equal firmness the decrees ofthe church, and even the prejudices of mankind/
a The covenants of rent are defined in the Pandects (lib;' 19.) and the Code, (lib.4. tit. 65 ) The qainquenniam, or term of five years, appears to have been a custom,rather than a law; hat in France all leases of land were determined in nine years.This limitation was removed only in the year 1775, (Encyclopedic Methodique, tom.1. do la Jurisprudence, p. 668, 669.) and I am sorry to observe that it yet prevailsin the beauteous and happy country where 1 am permitted to reside.
b I might implicitly acquiesce in the sense and learning of the three books ofG. Noodt, de fcenore et usuris.(Opp. tom. 1. p. 175—268.) The interpretation of theasses or centesimae nsurie at twelve, the unciariae at one per cent. is maintained bythe best critics and civilians; Noodt, (lib. 2. e. X. p. "207.) Gravina, (Opp. p. 405,&C. 210.) Heineccius, (Antiquitat. ad Institut. lib. 3. tit. 15.) Montesquieu, (Espritdes Loix, lib. 22. c. 22. tom. 1. p. 36. Defense de I'Esprit des Loix, tom. 3. p. 478,&c.) and above all John Frederic Grunovius, (de Pecunia Veteri, lib. 3. c. 13. p.213—227.) and his three Antexegeses, (p. 455—655.) the founder, or at least thechampion, of this prohable opinion; which is however perplexed with some diffi­culties.
c Primo daodecim tabulis sanoitum est ne quis unciario foenore amplius exerceret.(Tacit. Annal. 6.16.) Pour peu(says Montesquieu,Esprit des Loix, lib. 22. c. 22.)qu'on soit verse dans l'histoire de Rome, on Terra qu'une pareille loi ne devoit pasetre 1'ouvragc des decemvirs. Was Tacitus ignorant—or stupid? But the wiserand more virtuous patricians might sacrifice their avarice to their amhition, and mightattempt to check the odious practice by such interest as no lender would accept,audsuch penalties as no debtor would incur.
d Justinian has not condescended to give usury a place in his Institutes; but thenecessary rules and restrictions are inserted in the Pandects (lib. 22. tit. 1, 2.) andthe Code. (lib. 4. tit. 32, 33.)
e The fathers are unanimous, (Barbeyrao, Morale des Peres, p.-144, &c.)Cyprian,Lactantins, Basil, Chrysostom, (see his frivolous arguments in Noodt, lib. 1. ■e. 7.p. 188.) Gregory of Nyssa, Ambrose, Jerome, Augustin, and a host of councils andcasuists.
'Cato, Seneca, Plutarch, have loudly condemned the practice or abuse of usury.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLlV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 36l


The freedom of love and marriage was restrained I"^8con*among the Romans by natural and civil impediments, and bas-An instinct, almost innate and universal, appears to pro- Ur *'hibit the incestuous commerce1 of parents and childrenin the infinite series of ascending and descending gene­rations. Concerning the oblique and collateral branches,nature is indifferent, reason mute, and custom variousand arbitrary. In Egypt, the marriage of brothers andsisters was admitted without scruple or exception: aSpartan might espouse the daughter of his father; anAthenian that of his mother; and the nuptials of an un­cle with his niece were applauded at Athens as a happyunion of the dearest relations. The profane lawgiversof Rome were never tempted by interest or superstitionto multiply the forbidden degrees: but they inflexiblycondemned the marriage of sisters and brothers, hesi­tated whether first cousins should be touched by thesame interdict; revered the parental character of auntsand uncles, and treated affinity and adoption as a justimitation of the ties of blood. According to the' proudmaxims of the republic, a legal marriage could only becontracted by free citizens; an honourable, at least aningenuous, birth was required for the spouse of a sena­tor: but the blood of kings could never mingle in legi­timate nuptials with the blood of a Roman; and thename of Stranger degraded Cleopatra and Berenice,5 tolive the concubines of Mark Antony and Titus.' Thisappellation, indeed, so injurious to the majesty, cannotwithout indulgence be applied to the manners, of these
■ The principles of the Roman jurisprudence are exposed by Justinian, (Institut.lib. 1. tit. 10.) and the laws and manners of tile different nations of antiquity con­cerning forbidden degrees, &e. are copiously explained by Dr. Taylor in his Ele­ments of Civil Law, (p. 108. 314—339.) a work of amusing, though various, reading;but which cannot be praised for philosophical precision.
• When her father Agrippa died, (A. D. 44.) Berenice was sixteen years of age.(Joseph, torn. 1. Anfiquit. judaic, lib. 19. c. 9. p. 952. edit. Havercamp;) Shewas therefore above fifty years old when Titus (A. D. 79.) invitus invitara in-visit. This date would not have adorned the tragedy ur pastoral of the tenderRacine. ■ . *
• The .ffigyptiaconjunx of Virgil (iEneid.8.688.)seemsto be numbered among Hiemonsters who warred with Mark Antony against Augustus, Hie senate, and the godsof Italy.
VOL. V. 1 B







OCR Output








CHAP. XXXIX J OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. £


distinguished by the female virtues of mildness and fi­delity; she followed her husband in his exile, and afterhis restoration Bhe implored his clemency in favour ofher mother. On the decease of Zeno, Ariadne, thedaugh-ter, the mother, and the widow, of an emperor, gave her or Amuta-hand and the imperial title to Anastasius, an aged do- JSJl^isjmesticof the palace, who survived his elevation above f^"'twenty-seven years, and whose character is attested by"the acclamation of the people,—" Reign as you havelived J"1
Whatever fear or affection could bestow, was pro- service andfusely lavished by Zeno on the king of the Ostrogoths; TWom.the rank of patrician and consul, the command of the ^J^*75Palatine troops, an equestrian statue, a treasure in goldand silver of many thousand pounds, the name of son,and the promise of a rich and honourable wife. As longas Theodoric condescended to serve, he supported withcourage and fidelity the cause of his benefactor: his ra­pid march contributed to the restoration of Zeno; andin the second revolt, the fValamirs, as they were called,pursued and pressed the Asiatic rebels, till they left an easyvictory to the imperial troops.*1 But the faithful servantwas suddenly converted into a formidable enemy, whospread the flames of war from Constantinople to the.Adriatic; many flourishing cities were reduced to ashes,and the agriculture of Thrace was almost extirpated bythe wanton cruelty of the Goths, who deprived theircaptive peasants of the right hand that guided theplough.' On such occasions, Theodoric sustained the
1 The contemporary histories of Malchns and Candidas ate lost; bnt some ex­tracts or fragments have been saved by Fhotius, (78, 79. p. 100—102.) ConstantinoPorphyrogenitns, (Excerpt. Leg. p. 78—97.) and in various articles of the Lexiconof Suidas. The Chronicle of Marcellinns (Imago Historic) are originals for the*reigns of Zeno and Anastasins; and I most acknowledge, almost for the last time,my obligations to the large and accurate collections of Tillemont. (Hist, deS Emp.torn. 6. p. 472—652.)
* In ipsis congressionis luae foribns cessit invasor, cum prafugo per te sceptra red-deretttar de salute dubilanti. Ennodius then proceeds (p. 1596,1597. torn. 1. Sir-mond.) to transport his hero (on a flying dragon?) into ^Ethiopia, beyond the tropinof Cancer. The evidence of the Valesian Fragment, (p. 717.) Liberates, (Brev.Eolych. c. 25. p. 118.) and Theophanes, (p. 12.) it more sober and rational.
1 This ernel practice is specially imputed to the Triarian Goths, less barbarous,







OCR Output








282 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIII.


to act with energy and effect. The maritime towns, An-cona, Grotona, Centumcellas, resisted the assaults ofTotila. Sicily was reduced by the zeal of Artaban, andthe Gothic navy was defeated near the coast of the Ha-driatic. The two fleets were almost equal, forty-sevento fifty galleys: the victory was decided by the know­ledge and dexterity of the Greeks; but the ships were soclosely grappled, that only twelve of the Goths escapedfrom this unfortunate conflict. They affected to depre­ciate an element in which they were unskilled, but theirown experience confirmed the truth of a maxim, that themaster of the sea will always acquire the dominion ofthe land.' .:Character After the loss of Germanus, the nations were provok-d"tionXof ed to smile, by the strange intelligence, that the com-^*r*°snnBh mand of the Roman armies was given to a eunuch. Buta. d. 552. the eunuch Narsesf is ranked among the few who haverescued that unhappy name from the contempt and ha­tred of mankind. A feeble diminutive body concealedthe soul of a statesman and a warrior. His youth hadbeen employed in the management of the loom and dis­taff, in the cares of the household, and the service offemale luxury; but while his hands were busy, he se­cretly exercised the faculties of a vigorous and discerningmind. A stranger to the schools and the camp, hestudied in the palace to dissemble, to flatter, and to per­suade; and as soon as he approached the person of theemperor, Justinian listened with surprise and pleasure tothe manly counsels of his chamberlain and private trea­surer .* The talents of Narses were tried and improved
e The third book of Procopius is terminated by the death of Germanus. (Add. lib.4. c. 23—26.)
f Procopius relates the whole series of this second Gothic war and the victory ofNarses. (lib. 4. c. 21. 26—35.) A splendid scene! Among the six subjects of epicpoetry which Tasso revolved in his mind, he hesitated between the conquests of Italyby Belisarius and by Narses. (Hayley's Works, vol. 4. p. 70.) ■
? The country of Narses is unknown, since he must not be confounded with thePersarmenian. Procopius styles him (Gotli. lib. 2. c. 13.) fiaa-tktiteqr fypfiumit TWfM*C3Paul Warnefrid (lib. 2. c. 3. p. 776.) Charlularius: Maroellinus adds the name ofCubicularius. In an inscription on the Salarian bridge he is entitled fix-consul, Ex-prteposilus, Cubiculi Patricius. (Maseou, Hist, of the Germans, lib. 13. c. 25.) The'law of Theodosiua against euuucbs was obsolete or abolished; (Annotation 20.) but







OCR Output








288 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIII.


the wide circumference, Narses assigned to himself, andto each of his lieutenants, a real or a feigned attack,while he silently marked the place of easy and unguard­ed entrance. Neither the fortifications of Hadrian'smole, nor of the port, could long delay the progress ofthe conqueror; and Justinian once more received thekeys of Rome, which, under his reign, had been fivetimes taken and recovered.'' But the deliverance ofRome was the last calamity of the Roman people. Thebarbarian allies of Narses too frequently confounded theprivileges of peace and war: the despair of the flyingGoths found some consolation in sanguinary revenge:and three hundred youths of the noblest families, whohad been sent as hostages beyond the Po, were inhu­manly slain by the successor of Totila. The fate of thesenate suggests an awful lesson of the vicissitude of hu­man affairs. Of the senators whom Totila had banishedfrom their country, some were rescued by an officer ofBelisarius, and transported from Campania to Sicily;while others were too guilty to confide in the clemencyof Justinian, or too poor to provide horses for their es­cape to the sea-shore. Their brethren languished fiveyears in a state of indigence and exile: the victory of1 Narses revived their hopes; but their premature re­turn to the metropolis was prevented by the furiousGoths; and all the fortresses of Campania werestained with patricianr blood. After a period of thir­teen centuries, the institution of Romulus expired; andif the nobles of Rome still assumed the title of sena­tors, few subsequent traces can be discovered of a pub­lic council, or constitutional order. Ascend six hun­dred years, and contemplate the kings of the earth soli-
1 Em rcunv gac-iMiwroc to m/iirrm iaX». In the year 536 by Belisarius, in 546by Totila, in 547 by Belisarius, in 549 by Totila, and in 552 by Narses. Maltretnahad inadvertently translated sextum; a mistake which he afterward retracts : bnt themischief was done; and Cousin, with a train of French and Latin readers, hare falleninto the snare.
r Compare two passages of Procopios, (lib. 3. c. 26. lib. 4. c. 24.) which, withsome collateral hints from Marcellinus and Joruandes, illustrate the state of the ex­piring senate.







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








CHAP. XLII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


food. The incessant rapine of their neighbours compell­ed them to bury this treasure in the earth; but on theappearance of a stranger, it was freely imparted by a peo­ple, whose unfavourable character is qualified by the epi­thets of chaste, patient, and hospitable. As their supremegod, they adored an invisible master of the thunder.The rivers and the nymphs obtained their subordinatehonours, and the popular worship was expressed in vowsand sacrifice. The Sclavonians disdained to obey a des­pot, a prince, or even a magistrate; but their experiencewas too narrow, their passions too headstrong, to com­pose a system of equal law or general defence. Somevoluntary respect was yielded to age and valour* buteach tribe or village existed as a separate republic, andall must be persuaded where none could be compelled.They fought on foot, almost naked, and, except an un­wieldy shield, without any defensive armour: their wea­pons of offence were a bow, a quiver of small poisonedarrows, and a long rope, which they dexterously threwfrom a distance, and entangled their enemy in a runningnoose. In the field, the Sclavonian infantry was dan­gerous by their speed, agility, and hardiness: they swam,they dived, they remained under water, drawing theirbreath through a hollow cane; and a river or lake wasoften the scene of their unsuspected ambuscade. Butthese were the achievements of spies or stragglers; themilitary art was unknown to the Sclavonians; their namewas obscure, and their conquests were inglorious.p
I have marked the faint and general outline of the ™Sclavonians and Bulgarians, without attempting to de­fine their intermediate boundaries, which were not ac­curately known, or respected, by the barbarians them-
P For the name and nation, the situation and manners, of the Sclayonians, see theoriginal evidence of the sixth century, in Procopius, (Goth. lib. 2. e. 26. lib. 3. o. 14.)and the emperor Mauritius or Mamice. (Stratagemat. lib. 2. c. 5. apud Mascou, An-Dotat. 31.) The Stratagems of Maurice have been printed only, as 1 understand, at ,the end of Scheffer's edition of Arrian's Tactics, at Upsal, 1661, (Fabric. Bibliot.Graeo. lib. 4. c. 8. torn. 3. p. 278.) a scarce, and hitherto, to me, an inaccessiblebook.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 419


At the extreme point of Calabria, he touched with hisspear a column on the sea-shore of Rhegium,1 proclaimingthat ancient land mark to stand the immoveable boun­dary of his kingdom.11
During a period of two hundred years, Italy was un- J^6*"1"equally divided between the kingdom of the Lombards Ravenna,and the exarchate of Ravenna. The offices and profes­sions, which the jealousy of Constantine had separated,were united by the indulgence of Justinian; and eighteensuccessive exarchs were invested, in the decline of the em­pire, with the full remains of civil, of military, and evenof ecclesiastical power. Their immediate jurisdiction,which was afterward consecrated as the patrimony of St.Peter, extended over the modern Romagna, the marshesor valleys of Ferrara and Commachio,1 five maritime citiesfrom Rimini to Ancona, and a second, inland Pentapolis,between the Adriatic coast and the hills of the Apennine.Three subordinate provinces, of Rome, of Venice, and ofNaples, which were divided by hostile lands from the pa­lace of Ravenna, acknowledged, both in peace and war,the supremacy of the exarch. The dutchy of Rome ap­pears to have included the Tuscan, Sabine, and Latinconquests, of the first four hundred years of the city, andthe limits maybe distinctly traced along the coast, fromCivita Vecchia, to Terracina, and with the course of theTiber from Ameria and Narni to the port of Ostia. Thenumerous islands from Grado to Chiozza, composed theinfant dominion of Venice; but the more accessible
'The Columns Rhegina, in the narrowest port of the Faro of Messina, one hundred'stadia from Rhegium itself, is frequently mentioned in ancient geography, Cluver.Ital. Antiq. torn. 2. p. 1395. Lucas Holslein. Annolat. ad Cluver. p. 301. Wes-aeling, Itinerar. p. 106.
k The Greek historians afford some faint hints of the wars of Italy. (Menander, inExcerpt. Legat. p. 124.126. Theophylact, lib. 3. c. 4.) The Latins are more satisfac­tory ; and especially Paul Warnefrid, (lib.3.13—34.)who had read the more antienthistories of Secundus and Gregory of Tours. Baronius produces some letters of thepopes, &co. and the times are measured by the accurate scale of Pagi and Muratori.
1 The papal advocates,Zacagni and Fnntanini, might justly claim the Talleyor mo­rass of Commachio as a part of the exarchate. But the ambition of including Mo-dena, Reggio, Parma, and Placentia, has darkened a geographical question somewhatdoubtful and obscure. Even Muratori, as the servant of the house of Este, is notfree from partiality and prejudice.







OCR Output








482 DECLINE AND VALL [CHAP. XLVI.


employ in the service of religion and of the empire. Theclergy themselves appear to have sympathized with thepublic distress, and the discreet patriarch of Alexandria,without admitting the precedent of sacrilege, assisted hissovereign by the miraculous or seasonable revelation ofa secret treasure.* Of the soldiers who had conspiredwith Phocas, only two were found to have survived thestroke of time and of the barbarians ;h the loss, even ofthese seditious veterans, was imperfectly supplied by thenew levies of Heraclius, and the gold of the sanctuaryunited in the same camp, the names, and arms, and lan­guages, of the east and west. He would have been con­tent with the neutrality of the Avars; and his friendlyentreaty that the chagan would act, not as the enemy butas the guardian of the empire, was accompanied with amore persuasive donative of two hundred thousand piecesof gold. Two days after the festival of Easter, the em­peror, exchanging his purple for the simple garb of apenitent and warrior,' gave the signal of his departure.To the faith of the people Heraclius recommended hischildren; the civil and military powers were vested in themost deserving hands, and the discretion of the patri­arch and senate was authorised to save or surrender thecity, if they should be oppressed in his absence by the su­perior forces of the enemy.dit7on"fPe" ^e neighbouring heights of Chalcedon were coveredHeraciins with tents and arms: but if the new levies of HeracliusPersians, * had been rashly led to the attack, the victory of the Per­sians in the sight of Constantinople might have been thelast day of the Roman empire. As imprudent would it
B Baronius gravely relates this discovery, or rather transmutation, of harrels, notof honey, but of gold. (Annal. Eccles. A. D. 620. no. 3, &c.) Yet the loan was ar­hitrary, since it was collected by soldiers, who were ordered to leave the patriarchof Alexandria no more than one hundred pounds of gold. Nicephorus, (p. 11.) twohundred years afterward, speaks with ill humour of this contribution, which thechurch of Constantinoplo might still feel. J
h Theophylact, Simocatta, lib. 8. c. 12. This circumstance need not excite onrsurprise. The moster-roll of a regiment, even in time of peace, is renewed in lessthan twenty or twenty-five years.
1 He changed his purple, for black buskins, and died them red in the blood of tbsPersians. (Georj. Pisid. Acroas. 3. 118. 12 J , 122. See the Notes of Foggini, p. 35.)


A. D. 622.







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


seven fortresses were built in the most accessible passes,to exclude the ambition of the Persian monarch.p Theprinciple source of the Euphrates descends from theChalybian mountains, and seems to flow towards thewest and the Euxine; bending to the south-west, theriver passes under the walls of Satala and Melitene(which were restored by Justinian as the bulwarks ofthe Lesser Armenia), and gradually approaches the Me­diterranean sea; till at length repelled by mount Taurus,'1the Euphrates inclines his long and flexible course to thesouth-east and the gulph of Persia* Among the Romancities beyond the Euphrates, we distinguish two recentfoundations, which were named from Theodosius, andthe relics of the martyrs; and two capitals, Amida andEdessa, which are celebrated in the history of every age.Their strength was proportioned, by Justinian, to thedanger of their situation. A ditch and palisade mightbe sufficient to resist the artless force of the cavalry ofScythia; but more elaborate works were required to sus­tain a regular siege against the arms and treasures of thegreat king. His skilful engineers understood the me­thods of conducting deep mines, and of raising platformsXo the level of the rampart: he shook the strongest bat­tlements with his military engines, and sometimes ad­vanced to the assault with a line of moveable turrets onthe backs of elephants. In the great cities of the east,the disadvantage of space, perhaps of position, was com­pensated by the zeal of the people, who seconded thegarrison in the defence of their country and religion;and the fabulous promise of the Son of God, that Edes­sa should never be taken, filled the citizens with violentconfidence, and chilled the besiegers with doubt and dis­may/ The subordinate towns of Armenia and Meso-
P Procopius, Persic. lib. i. c. 15. De Edjfic. lib. 3. c. 6.
<l Ni Tanrus obstet in nostra maria Venturas, (Pomponias Mela, 3. 8.) Pliny, apoet as well as a naturalist, (v. 20.) personifies the river and monntain, and describestheir combat. See the coarse of the Tigris and Euphrates, in the excellent treatisedf d'Anville.
'Procopius (Persic, lib. 2. c. 12.) tells the story with the tone half sceptical, half







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLII.


the faithful dog and the rapacious wolf, was applied byan ambassador who received only verbal instructionsfrom the mouth of his illiterate prince.m The Bulga­rians, of whatsoever species, were equally attracted byRoman wealth: they assumed a vague dominion overthe Sclavonian name, and their rapid marches could onlybe stopped by the Baltic sea, or the extreme cold andpoverty of the north. But the same race of Sclavoniansappears to have maintained, in every age, the possessionof the same countries. Their numerous tribes, however■ distant or adverse, used one common language (it washarsh and irregular), and were "known by the resemblanceof their form, which deviated from the swarthy Tartar,and approached, without attaining, the lofty stature andfair complexion of the German. Four thousand sixhundred villages" were scattered over the provinces ofRussia and Poland, and their huts were hastily built ofrough timber, in a country deficient both in stone andiron. Erected, or rather concealed, in the depth offorests, on the banks of rivers, or the edge of morasses,we may not, perhaps, without flattery, compare them tothe architecture of the beaver; which they resembled in adouble issue, to the land and water, for the escape of thesavage inhabitants, an animal less cleanly, less diligent,and less social, than that marvellous quadruped. Thefertility of the soil, rather than the labour of the natives,supplied the rustic plenty of the Sclavonians. Theirsheep and horned cattle were large and numerous, andthe fields which they sowed with millet and panic," af­forded, in the place of bread, a coarse and less nutritive
111 Procopiu3. (Gotli. lib. 4. c. 19.) His verbal message (he owns himself an illi­terate barbarian) is delivered as an epistle. The style is savage, figurative, andoriginal.
11 This sum is the result of a particular list, in a curious MS. fragment of the year550, found in the library of Milan. The obscure geography of the times provokesand exercises the patience of the count de Boat. (torn. 11. p. 69—189.) The Frenchminister often loses himself in a wilderness which requires a Saxon and Polishguide. ,
"Panicum milium. See Columella, lib. 2. c. 9. p. 430. edit. Gesner. Plin. Hist.Nstur. 18. 84, 25. The Sarmatians made a pap of millet, mingled with mare's milkor blood. In tho wealth of modern husbandry, our millet feeds poultry, and not he-rues. See the dictionaries of ISowarc and Miller.







OCR Output








CHAP; XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 187


overthrown and slain1 by a wild bull,1" as he hunted in theBelgic or German forests.
As soon as Belisarius was delivered from his foreignand domestic enemies, he seriously applied his forces tothe final reduction of Italy. In the siege of Osimo, the Belisari«»general was nearly transpierced with an arrOW, if the Ravenna,mortal stroke had not been intercepted by one of hisguards, who lost, in that pious office, the use of his hand.The Goths of Osimo, four thousand warriors, with thoseof Fsesulze and the Cottian Alps, were among the lastwho maintained their independance; and their gallantresistance, which almost tired the patience, deservedthe esteem of the conqueror. His prudence refused tosubscribe the safe conduct which they asked, to jointheir brethren of Ravenna; but they saved, by an ho­nourable capitulation, one moiety at least of their wealth,with the free alternative of retiring peaceably to theirestates, or enlisting to serve the emperor in his Persianwars. The multitudes, which yet adhered to the standardof Vitiges, far surpassed the number of the Romantroops; but neither prayers, nor defiance, nor the ex­treme danger of his most faithful subjects, could temptthe Gothic king beyond the fortifications of Ravenna.These fortifications were, indeed, impregnable to the as­saults of art or violence; and when Belisarius investedthe capital, he was soon convinced that famine onlycould tame the stubborn spirit of the barbarians. The sea,the land, and the channels of the Po, were guarded by thevigilanceof the Roman general; and his morality extendedthe rights of war to the practice of poisoning the waters,"
1 The king pointed his spear—the bull overturned a tree on his head—he expiredthe same day. Such is the story of Agathias J bnt the original historians of France(torn. 2. p. 202. 403. 558. 667.) impute his death to a fever.
m Without losing myself in a labyrinth of species and names—the aurochs, urns,bisons, bubalus, bonasus, buffalo, &c. (Buffon, Hist. Nat. torn. 11. and Supplement,lora. 3. 6.) it is certain, that in the sixth century a large wild species of horned cattlewas hunted in the great forests of the Vosges in Lorraine, and the Ardennes. (Greg.Turon. torn. 2. lib. 10. c. 10. p. 369.)
n In the siege of Auximum, he first laboured to demolish an old aqueduct, andthen cast into the stream, I. dead bodies: 2. mischievous herbs: and, 3. quick lime,which is named (says Procopius, lib. 2. c. 29.) titcvoc by the ancients; by the rao-


o 2







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL.


place was safe or sacred from their depredations ; to gra­tify either avarice or revenge, they profusely spilt theblood of the innocent; churches and altars were pollutedby atrocious murders; and it was the boast of the assas­sins, that their dexterity could always inflict a mortalwound with a single stroke of their dagger. The disso­lute youth of Constantinople adopted the blue livery ofdisorder; the laws were silent, and the bonds of societywere relaxed; creditors were compelled to resign theirobligations; judges to reverse their sentence; mastersto enfranchise their slaves; fathers to supply the extra­vagance of their children; noble matrons were prosti­tuted to the lust of their servants; beautiful boys weretorn from the arms of their parents; and wives, unlessthey preferred a voluntary death, were ravished in thepresence of their husbands." The despair of the greens,who were persecuted by their enemies, and deserted bythe magistrate, assumed the privilege of defence, perhapsof retaliation: but those who survived the combat weredragged to execution, and the unhappy fugitives escapingto woods and caverns, preyed without mercy on the so­ciety from whence they were expelled. Those ministersof justice who had courage to punish the crimes, and tobrave the resentment of the blues, became the victims oftheir indiscreet zeal: a prefect of Constantinople fledfor refuge to the: holy sepulchre; a count of the east wasignominiously whipped, and a governor of Cilicia washanged, by the order of Theodora, on the tomb of twoassassins whom he had condemned for the murder of hisgroom, and a daring attack upon his own life.b An as­piring candidate may be tempted to build his greatnesson the public confusion, but it is the interest as well asduty of a sovereign to maintain the authority of the
* A wife (says Procopins), who was seized and almost ravished by a blue coat,threw herself into the Bosphorus. The hishops of the second Syria (Aleman. p. 26.)deplore a simitar saicide, the guilt or glory of female chastity, and name the heroine.
*> The doubtful credit of Procopias (Anecdot. c. 17.) is supported by the less par­tial Evagrius, who confirms the fact, and specifies the names. The tragic fate of theprefect of Constantinople is related by John Malala. (tom. H. p. 139.)







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL.


peninsula to Trebizond the eastern curve of the Euxinewas secured by forts, by alliance, or by religion: andthe possession of Lazica, the Colchos of ancient, theMingrelia of modern, geography, soon became the ob­ject of an important war. Trebizond, in after-times theseat of a romantic empire, was indebted to the liberalityof Justinian for a church, an aqueduct, and a castle,whose ditches are hewn in the solid rock. From thatmaritime city, a frontier-line of five hundred miles maybe drawn to the fortress of Circesium, the last Roman6tation on the Euphrates.™ Above Trebizond immedi­ately, and five days' journey to the south, the countryrises into dark forests and craggy mountains, as savage,though not so lofty, as the Alps and the Pyrenees. Inthis rigorous climate," where the snows seldom melt, thefruits are tardy and tasteless; even honey is poisonous;the most industrious tillage would be confined to somepleasant valleys; and the pastoral tribes obtained a scantysustenance from the flesh and milk of their cattle. TheChalybians0 derived their name and temper from the ironquality of the soil; and, since the days of Cyrus, theymight produce, under the various appellations of Chal­deans, and Zanians, an uninterrupted prescription of warand rapine. Under the reign of Justinian, they acknow­ledged the God and the emperor of the Romans, and
deserved the cariosity of Busbequius (p. 321—326.); hat seem to have vanished inthe more recent account of the Missions da Levant, (tom. 1.) Tott, Peyssonel, &o.
m For the geograpby and architecture of this Armenian border, see the PersianWars and Edifices (lib. 2. o.4—7. lib.3. c. 2—7.) of Procopius,
"The country is described by Togrnefort. (Voyage au Levant, tom. 3. lettre 17,18.) That skilful botanist soon discovered the plant that infects the honey. (Plin,21. 44, 45.) He observes, that the soldiers of Lucnllas might indeed be astonishedat the cold, since, even in the plain of Erzerum, snow sometimes falls in Jane, and theharvest is seldom finished before September. The hills of Armenia are below thefortieth degree of latitude; but in the mountainous country which I inhahit, it is wellknown that an ascent of some hours carries the traveller from the climate of Langae?doc to that of Norway, and a general theory has been introduced, that under the line,an elevation of two thousand four hundred toises is equivalent to the cold of the polarcircle. (Romond, Observations sur les Voyages de Coxe dans la Suisse, tom. 2.p. 104.)
• The identity or proximity of the Chalyhians, or Chaldeans, may be investigatedin Strabo, (lib. 12. p. 825, 826.) Cellarius, Geograph. Antiq. tom. 2. p. 202—204.)and Freret (Mem. de I'Academic, tom. 4. p. 594.) Xenophnn supposes, in his ro­mance, (Cyropaed. lib. 3.) the same harharians against whom he had fought iu his re­treat. (Anahasis, lib. iv.)







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP XLVI.


transported their tents from the plains of the Volga to'the mountains of Georgia; Heraclius received them itithe neighbourhood of Teflis, and the khan with his no­bles dismounted from their horses, if we may credit theGreeks, and fell prostrate on the ground, to adore thepurple of the Caesar. Such voluntary homage and im­portant aid were entitled to the warmest acknowledg­ments; and the emperor, talcing off his own diadem,placed it on the head of the Turkish prince, whom hesaluted with a tender embrace and the appellation of son.After a sumptuous banquet, he presented Ziebel with theplate and ornaments, the gold, the gems, and the silk,which had been used at the imperial table, and, withhis own hand, distributed rich jewels and ear-ringsto his new allies. In a secret interview, he produced theportrait of his daughter Eudocia,5 condescended to flat­ter the barbarian with the promise of a fair and augustbride, obtained an immediate succour of forty thousandhorse, and negotiated a strong diversion of the Turkisharms on the side of the Oxus.h The Persians, in theirturn, retreated with precipitation ; in thecampofEdessa,Heraclius reviewed an army of seventy thousand Romansand strangers; and some months were successfully em­ployed in the recovery of the cities of Syria, Mesopota­mia, and Armenia, whose fortifications had been imper­fectly restored. Sarbar still maintained the importantstation of Chalcedon; but the jealousy of Chosroes, orthe artifice of Heraclius, soon alienated the mind of thatpowerful satrap from the service of his king and country.A messenger was intercepted with a real or fictitious man­date to the cadarigan, or second in command, directinghim to send, without delay, to the throne, the head of a
B Epiphania, or Eudocia, the only daughter of Heraclius and his first wife Eudocia■was born at Constantinople on the ?th of July, A. D. 611. haptized the 15th of Au­gust, and crovrhed (in the oratory of St. Stephen in the palace) the 4th of Octobeiof the same year. At this time she was about fifteen. Eudoeia was afterward sentto her Turkish hushand, but the news of his death stopped her journey and preventedthe consummation. (Ducange, Familias Byzantin. p. 118.)
b Elmauin (Hist. Saraceu. p. 1S—16.) gives some curious and prohable facts: buthis numbers are rather too high—three hundred thousand Romans assembled a*Edessa—five hundred thousand Persians killed at Nineveh. The ahatement of acipher is scarcely enough to restore his sanity.







OCR Output













OCR Output








chap. xlit/J of the soman empire. 323


years, that the decrees of the senate obtained the fotcoand validity of laws. In the times of freedom, the re­solves of the people had often been dictated by the pas­sion or error of the moment: the Cornelian, Pompeian,and Julian laws, were adapted by a single hand to theprevailing disorders: but the senate, under the reign ofthe Caesars, was composed of magistrates and lawyers,and in questions of private jurisprudence, the integrityof their judgment was seldom perverted by fear or inte­rest.'
The silence or ambiguity of the laws was supplied by Edicts o«the occasional edicts of those magistrates who were ifr* P****"vested with the honours of the state." This ancient pre­rogative of the Roman kings was transferred, in their re­spective offices, to the consuls and dictators, the censorsand prastors; and a similar right was assumed by the tri*bunes of the people, the ediles, and the proconsuls; AtRome, and in the provinces, the duties of the subject,and the intentions of the governor, were proclaimed; andthe civil jurisprudence was reformed by the annual edictsof the supreme judge, the praetor of the city. As soonas he ascended his tribunal, he announced by the voice »of the crier, and afterward inscribed on a white wall, therules which he proposed to follow in the decision ofdoubtful cases, and the relief which his equity wouldafford from the precise rigour of ancient statutes. Aprinciple of discretion more congenial to monarchy Wasintroduced into the republic: the art of respecting thename, and eluding the efficacy, of the laws, was improv­ed by successive praetors; subtleties and fictions wereinvented to defeat the plainest meaning of the decemvirs,and where the end was salutary,tbe means were frequent-
1 Non amhigitur senatam jus facere posse, is the decision of Ulpian. (lib. 16. adEdict. in Pandect, lib. 1. tit. 3. leg. 9.) Pomponins taxes the comitia of the peopleas a tarha hominom. (Pandect, lib. i. tit. 2. leg. 9.)
k The jus honorarium of the praetors and other magistrates is striotly defmed inthe Latin text of the Institutes, (lib. 1. tit. 2. no. 7.) and more loosely explained inthe Greek paraphrase of Theophilos, (p. 33—38. edit. Keitz.) who drops the import­ant word honorarium.







OCR Output








488 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLVI.


the danger of his kingdom, the powers of Chosroes werealready recalled from the Nile and the Bosphorus, andthree formidable armies surrounded, in a distant andhostile land, the camp of the emperor. The Colchianallies prepared to desert his standard; and the fears ofthe bravest veterans were expressed, rather than conceal­ed, by their desponding silence. "Be not terrified (saidthe intrepid Heraclius) by the multitude of your foes.With the aid of heaven, one Roman may triumph overa thousand barbarians. But if we devote our lives for thesalvation of our brethren, we shall obtain the crown ofmartyrdom, and our immortal reward will be liberally paidby God and posterity." These magnanimous sentimentswere supported by the vigour of his actions. He repelledthe threefold attack of the Persians, improved the divi­sions of their chiefs, and by a well-concerted train ofmarches, retreats, and successful actions, finally chasedthem from the field into the fortified cities of Media andAssyria. In the severity of the winter season, Sabarazadeemed himself secure in the walls of Salban; he was sur­prised by the activity of Heraclius, who divided his troopsand performed a laborious march in the silence of thenight. The flat roofs of the houses were defended withuseless valour against the darts and torches of the Ro­mans: the satraps and nobles of Persia, with their wivesand children, and the flower of their martial youth, wereeither slain or made prisoners. The general escaped bya precipitate flight, but his golden armour was the prizeof the conqueror ; and the soldiers of Heraclius enjoyedthe wealth and repose which they had so nobly deserved.On the return of spring, the emperor traversed in sevendays the mountains of Curdistan, and passed without re­sistance the rapid stream of the Tigris. Oppressed by theweight of their spoils and captives, the Roman armyhalted under the walls of Amida; and Heraclius inform­ed the senate of Constantinople of his safety and success,which they had already felt by the retreat of the be-







OCR Output








. RECLINE AND PALI/ [eHAP. XMV.


de* to the father, who strangles, or starves* or abandonshis new-born infant;. or exposes him in a public place tofind the mercy which he himself had denied. But thQexposition of children was the prevailing and stubbornvice of antiquity; it was sometimes prescribed, oftenpermitted, almost always practised with impunity, bythe nations who never entertained the Roman ideas ofpaternal power; and the dramatic poets, who appeal tothe human heart, represent with indifference a popularcustom which was palliated by the motives of economyand compassion." If the father could subdue his own,feelings, he might escape,, though not the censure, a%feast the chastisement, of the laws : and the Roman emTpire was stained with the blood of infants, till such mur­ders were included, by Valentinian and his colleagues, inthe letter and spirit of the Cornelian law. The lessonsof jurisprudence1 and Christianity had been insufficientto eradicate this inhuman practice, till their gentle in- -fiuence was fortified by the terrors of capital punish­ment/ , . •
Experience has proved, that savages are the tyrants ofthe female sex, and that the condition of women is usuallysoftened by the refinements of social life. In the hopeof a robust progeny, Lycurgus had delayed the season ofmarriage; it was fixed by Numa at the tender age oftwelve years, that the Roman husband might educate tohis will a pure and obedient virgin.2 According to the
u When the Chremes of Terence' reproaches his wife for not obeying his ordersand exposing their infant, he speaks like a father and a master, and silences the scru­ples of a foolish woman. See Apaloius. (Metamorph. lib. 10. p. 337. edit. Delphin.)
* The opinion of tho lawyers, and the discretion of the magistrates, had intro­duced in the time of Tacitus some legal restraints, which might support his contrastof the boni mores of the Germans to the benie leges alibi—that is to say, at Rome,(de Moribus Cernianorsm, o. 19). Tertullian (ad Nationes, lib. 1. c. 15.) refuteshis own charges and those of his brethren, against the heathen jurisprudence.''
y The wise and humane sentence of the civilian Paul, (lib. 2. Sententiarum inPandect, lib. 25. tit. 3. leg. 4.) is represented as a mere moral precept by GerardNoodl, (Opp. torn. 1. in Julius Paullus, p. 567—588. and Arnica Responsio, p.591—606.) who maintains the opinion of Justus Lipsius, (Opp. torn. 2. p. 409. adBelgas, cent. 1. epist. 85.) and as a positive binding law by Bynkershoek, (de Juresccidendi Liberos, Opp. torn. 1. p. 318—340. Curse Secundse, p. 391—427.) Ins> learned but angry controversy the two friends deviated into the opposite extremes.i * Dionys. Hal. lib. 2. p. 92,93. Plutarch, in. Kumat p. 140^ 141. Tetrx^e. xat







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLVI.


the Persians had not been accustomed either to dreadthe rigour, or to despise the weakness, of their sovereign.The revolt of Bahram, and the conspiracy of the satraps,were impartially punished by the revenge or justice ofthe conqueror; the merits of Bindoes himself could notpurify his hand from the guilt of royal blood; and theson of Hormouz was desirous to assert his own inno­cence, and to vindicate the sanctity of kings. Duringthe vigour of the Roman power, several princes wereseated on the throne of Persia by the arms and the au­thority of the first Caesars. But their new subjects weresoon disgusted with the vices or virtues which they hadimbibed in a foreign land; the instability of their domi­nion gave birth to a vulgar observation, that the choiceof Rome was solicited and rejected with equal ardour bythe capricious levity of oriental slaves.5 But the gloryof Maurice was conspicuous in the long and fortunatereign of his son and his ally. A band of a thousand Ro­mans, who continued to guard the person of Chosroes,proclaimed its confidence in the fidelity of the strangers;his growing strength enabled him to dismiss his unpo­pular aid, but he steadily professed the same gratitudeand reverence to his adopted father; and till the death ofMaurice, the peace and alliance of the two empires werefaithfully maintained. Yet the mercenary friendship ofthe Roman prince had been purchased with costly andimportant gifts: the strong cities of Martyropolis andDara were restored, and the Persarmenians became thewilling subjects of an empire, whose eastern limit wasextended, beyond the example of her former times, asfar as the banks of the Araxes and the neighbourhood ofthe Caspian. A pious hope was indulged, that the church,as well as the state, might triumph in this revolution;but if Chosroes had sincerely listened to the Christian
■ Experimenlis cognitnm est barbaros malle Roma petere regei qaam habere.These experiments are admirably represented in the invitation and expulsion of Vo­lumes, (Annal. 2.1—3.) Tiridates, (Annal. 6.32—14.) and Meherdates, (Annal. 11.10. 12. 10—f4.) The ejo of Tacitus seems to have transpierced the camp of th*1'arlhians and the walls of the liaraiu.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI.


the baptism and auspicious name of the first soldier whoembarked; and the proselyte was adopted into the familyof his spiritual parents/ Belisarius and Antonina. Be­fore they touched the shores of Africa, this holy kindreddegenerated into sensual love; and as Antonina soonoverleaped the bounds of modesty and caution, the Ro­man general was alone ignorant of his own dishonour.During their residence at Carthage, he surprised the twolovers in a subterraneous chamber, solitary, warm, andalmost naked. Anger flashed from his eyes. "Withthe help of this young man (said the unblushing Anto­nina), I was secreting our most precious effects from theknowledge of Justinian." The youth resumed his gar­ments, and the pious husband consented to disbelieve theevidence of his own senses. From this pleasing andperhaps voluntary delusion, Belisarius was awakened atSyracuse, by the officious information of Macedonia:and that female atteridant, after requiring an oath for hersecurity, produced two chamberlains, who, like herself,had often beheld the adulteries of Antonina. A hastyflight into Asia saved Theodosius from the justice of aninjured husband, who had signified to one of his guardsthe order of his death; but the tears of Antonina, andher artful seduction, assured the credulous hero of herinnocence; and he stooped, against his faith and judg­ment, to abandon those imprudent friends who had pre­sumed to accuse or doubt the chastity of his wife. Therevenge of a guilty woman is implacable and bloody:the unfortunate Macedonia, with the two witnesses, weresecretly arrested by the minister of her cruelty: theirtongues were cut out, their bodies were hacked intosmall pieces, and their remains were cast into the sea ofSyracuse. A rash, though judicious saying of Constan-tine, "I would sooner have punished the adultress thanthe boy," was deeply remembered by Antonina: and
> Compare the Vandalio War (lib. i, c. 12.) with the Anecdotes, (c. 1.) and Ale-mauuus. (p. 2, 3.) This mode of haptismal adoption was revived by Leo the phi­losopher.







OCR Output








152 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI.


of Justinian and his lieutenant: but a spirit of discordand disaffection prevailed in Italy, and the Goths sup­ported, with reluctance, the indignity of a female reign.*Govern- The birth of Amalasontha, the regent and queen ofdMth"f Italy,' united the two most illustrious families of the bar-Amaiason- barians. Her mother, the sister of Clovis, was descended
tha, queen 7'
of Italy, from the lone;-haired kings of the Merovingian race ;8
A. D. 522
-534. and the regal succession of the Amali was illustrated inthe eleventh generation, by her father, the great Theo-doric, whose merit might have ennobled a plebeian origin.The sex of his daughter excluded her from the Gothicthrone; but his vigilant tenderness for his family andhis people discovered the last heir of the royal line,whose ancestors had taken refuge in Spain; and thefortunate Eutharic was suddenly exalted to the rank ofa consul and a prince. He enjoyed only a short timethe charms of Amalasontha, and the hopes of the suc­cession; and his widow, after the death of her husbandand father, was left the guardian of her son Athalaric,and the kingdom of Italy. At the age of about twenty-eight years, the endowments of her mind and personhad attained their perfect maturity. Her beauty, which,in the apprehension of Theodora herself, might havedisputed the conquest of an emperor, was animated bymanly sense, activity, and resolution. Education andexperience had cultivated her talents; her philosophicstudies were exempt from vanity; and, though she ex­pressed herself with equal elegance and ease in the Greek,the Latin, and the Gothic tongue, the daughter of The-odoric maintained in her counsels a discreet and im­penetrable silence. By a faithful imitation of the vir-
• Compare the different passages of Procopius. (Vandal, lib. 2. c. 5. Gothic. lib. 1.c. 3.)
f For the reign and character of Amalasontha, see Procopius (Gothic. lib. 1. c 8—4. and Anecdot. c. 16. with the notes of Alemannns); Cassiodorus, Var. 8—11'1.) and Jornandes. (de Rebus Geticis, c. 59. and De Successione Regnorum, in Mu-ratori.tom. 1. p. 241.)
s The marriage of Theodoric with Audefleda, the sister of Clovis, may be placedin the year 495, soon after the conquest of Italy, (de Buat, Hist, des Peoples, tom.9. p. 213.) The nuptials of Eutharic aud Amalasoutha were celebrated in 513. (Cas-siudor. in Chron. p. 453.)







OCR Output








132 . DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI.>


No sooner was Belisarius informed of their arrival, thanhe dispatched orders that the greatest part of the mari­ners should be immediately landed to join the triumph,and to swell the apparent numbers of the Romans.Before he allowed them to enter the gates of Carthage,he exhorted them, in a discourse worthy of himself and-the occasion, not to disgrace the glory of their arms;and to remember, that the Vandals had been the tyrants,-but that they were the deliverers of the Africans, whomust now be respected as the voluntary and affectionate,subjects of their common sovereign. The Romansmarched through the streets in close ranks, prepared forbattle if an enemy had appeared; the strict order main­tained by the general, imprinted on their minds the dutyof obedience; and in an age in which custom and impu­nity almost sanctified the abuse of conquest, the genius-of one man repressed the passions of a victorious army.The voice of menace and complaint was silent; thetrade of Carthage was not interrupted; while Africachanged her master and her government, the shops con­tinued open and busy; and the soldiers, after sufficientguards had been posted, modestly departed to the houseswhich were allotted for their reception. Belisarius fixedhis residence in the palace; seated himself on the throneof Genseric; accepted and distributed the barbaric spoil;granted their lives to the suppliant Vandals; and labour­ed to repair the damage which the suburb of Mandraciumhad sustained in the preceding night. At supper heentertained his* principal officers with the form andmagnificence of a royal banquet." The victor was re­spectfully served by the captive officers of the house-
almnst as much as the works of man. The isthmus, or neck, of the city, is now con­founded with the continent; the harbour is a dry plain; and the lake, or stagnntn,no more than a morass, with six or seven feet water in the inid-channel. See d'An-ville, (Geographie Ancienne, torn. 3. p. 82.) Shaw, (Travels, p. 77—84.) Mar-mol. (Description de l'Afrique, torn. 2. p. 465.) and Thuanus, (58. 12. torn. 3.p. 334.)
"From Delphi, the name of Delphicum was given, both in Greek and Latin, to a.tripod: mid, by an easy analogy, the same appellation was extended at Rome, Con­stantinople, and Carthage, to the royal banqueltingroom. (Procopius, Vandal, lib. X,c 21. Ducange, Gloss. Gr&c p. 277. Wtaiv, ad Alexiad. p. 412.) .







OCR Output








254 DECLINE A NO FALL [CHAV. XLII.


thousand yeara the sequestered region of myrrh andfrankincense. The conqueror immediately announcedthe victory of the gospel, requested an orthodox patri­arch, and so warmly professed his friendship to the Ro«man empire, that Justinian was flattered by the hope ofdiverting the silk-trade through the channel of Abyssi­nia, and of exciting the forces of Arabia against the Per-Their aft- sian king. Nonnosus, descended from a family of am-Justinian, bassadors, was named by the emperor to execute this im-a. d. 5S3. pliant commission. He wisely declined the shorter,but more dangerous, road through the sandy deserts ofNubia; ascended the Nile, embarked on the Red sea,and safely landed at the African port of Adulis. FromAdulis to the royal city of Axume is no more than fiftyleagues, in a direct line; but the winding passes of themountains detained the ambassador fifteen days; and ashe traversed the forests, he saw, and vaguely computed,about five thousand wild elephants. The capital, accord­ing to his report, was large and populous ; and the villageof Axume is still conspicuous by the regal coronations,by the ruins of a Christian temple, and by sixteen orseventeen obelisks inscribed with Grecian characters.*But the Negus gave audience in the open field, seated ona lofty chariot, which was drawn by four elephants su­perbly caparisoned, and surrounded by his nobles andmusicians. He was clad in a linen-garment and cap,holding in his hand two javelins and a light shield; and;although his nakedness was imperfectly covered, he dis­played the barbaric pomp of gold chains, collars, aadbracelets, richly adorned with pearls and precious stones.The ambassador of Justinian knelt; the Negus raisedhim from the ground, embraced Nonnosus, kissed theseal, perused the letter,accepted the Roman alliance, and,
S Alvarez (in Ramnsio, tom. 1. fol. £19 vers. 221 vera.) saw the Oourishing stateof Axume in the year 1520—iuogo molto buouo e graode. It was mined in tho samecentury by the Turkish invasion. No more than one hundred houses remain; butthe memory of its past greatuess is preserved by the regal coronation. (Ludolph. UisUet Comment, lib. 2. c, 11.)







OCR Output








468 DECLINE AND FALL [cHAP. XLVI,


were decently confined to a private house. But the spi­rit of the empress Constantina, still mindful of her fa­ther, her husband, and her sons, aspired to freedom andrevenge. At the dead of night, she escaped to the sanc­tuary of St. Sophia; but her tears, and the gold of herassociate Germanus, were insufficient to provoke an in­surrection. Her life was forfeited to revenge, and evento justice: but the patriarch obtained and pledged anoath for her safety; a monastery was allotted for herprison, and the widow of Maurice accepted and abusedthe lenity of his assassin. The discovery or the suspi­cion of a second conspiracy, dissolved the engagementsand rekindled the fury of Phocas. A matron who com­manded the respect and pity of mankind, the daughter,wife, and mother of emperors, was tortured like thevilest malefactor, to force a confession of her designs andand iyran- associates; and the empress Constantina with her threeinnocent daughters, was beheaded at Chalcedon, on thesame ground which had been stained with the blood ofher husband and five sons. After such an example, itwould be superfluous to enumerate the names and suf­ferings of meaner victims. Their condemnation wasseldom preceded by the forms of trial, and their punish­ment was embittered by the refinements of cruelty : theireyes were pierced, their tongues were torn from the root,the hands and feet were amputated; some expired un­der the lash, others in the flames, others again weretransfixed with arrows; and a simple speedy death wasmercy which they could rarely obtain. The hippodrome,the sacred asylum of the pleasures and the liberty ofthe Romans, was polluted with heads and limbs and man­gled bodies; and the companions of Phocas were themost sensible, that neither his favour, nor their services,could protect them from tyrant, the worthy rival of theCaligulas and Domitians of the first age of the empire.'
e Some of the cruelties of Phocas are marked by Tueoph;lact, lib. 8. c. 13—15.George of Pisidia, the poet of Ilcraclius, styles him (Bell. Avaricum, p. i6. Roma,







OCR Output








308 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIII.


that the comet, "from its horrid hair, shakes pestilenceand war."™ Its road in the heavens was observed withexquisite skill by Flamstead and Cassini; and the ma­thematical science of Bernoulli, Newton, and Halley,investigated the laws of its revolutions. At the eighthperiod, in the year 2255, their calculations may perhapsbe verified by the astronomers of some future capital inthe Siberian or American wilderness.B«ft- II. The near approach of a comet may injure or de-stroy the globe which we inhabit; but the changes onits surface have been hitherto produced by the action ofvolcanos and earthquakes." The nature of the soil mayindicate the countries most exposed to these formidableconcussions, since they are caused by subterraneous fires,and such fires are kindled by the union and fermenta­tion of iron and sulphur. But their times and effectsappear to lie beyond the reach of human curiosity, andthe philosopher will discreetly abstain from the predic­tion of earthquakes, till he has counted the drops of wa­ter that silently filtrate on the inflammable mineral, andmeasured the caverns which increase by resistance theexplosion of the imprisoned air. Without assigning thecause, history will distinguish the periods in which thesecalamitous events have been rare or frequent, and willobserve that this fever of the earth raged with uncom­mon violence during the reign of Justinian." Each yearis marked by the repetition of earthquakes, of such du­ration that Constantinople has been shaken above fortydays; of such extent that the shock has been communi-
ta Paradise Lost was published in the year 1667; and the famous lines (lib. 2.708, &c.) which startled the licenser, may allude to the recent comet of 1664, ob­served by Cassini at Rome in the presence of queen Christina. (Fontenelle, in bisElage, tom. 5. p. 338.) Had Charles II. betrayed any symptoms of cariosity or fear >
° For the cause of earthquakes, see Baffon, (tom. 1. p. 502—536. Supplement al'Hist. Naturelle, tom. 5. p. 382-—390. edition in 4to.) Valmont de Bomare (Dictio-naire d'Histoire Naturelle, Tremblemens de Terie, Pyrites) Watson; (Chemical Es­says, tom. 1. p. 181—209.)
° The earthquakes that shook the Roman world in the reign of Justinian, are de­scribed or mentioned by Procopius, (Goth. lib. 4. c. 25. Anecdot. c. 13.) Agathias,(Mb. 2, p. 52—54. lib. 5. p. 115—152.) John Mahila, (Chron. tom. 2. p. 140—146.176,177,183. 193.220.229.231. 233, 231.) and Thconhanes. (p. 151. 183. 189.191—196.)







OCR Output








102 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLi


drawn sword, compelled the Persians to vanquish; andbefore it was sheathed, fourscore thousand of the in­habitants had expiated the blood of their companions.After the siege of Amida, the war continued threeyears, and the unhappy frontier tasted the full mea­sure of its calamities. The gold of Anastasius wasoffered too late, the number of his troops was defeated bythe number of their generals; the country was strippedof its inhabitants, and both the living and the dead wereabandoned to the wild beasts of the desert. The re­sistance of Edessa, and the deficiency of spoil, inclinedthe mind of Cabades to peace; he sold his conquests foran exorbitant price: and the same line, though markedwith slaughter and devastation, still separated the twoempires. To avert the repetition of the same evils,Anastasius resolved to found a new colony, so strong,that it should defy the power of the Persian, so far ad­vanced toward Assyria, that its stationary troops mightdefend the province by the menace or operation of of-Foriiiica- fensive war, For this purpose, the town of Dara/ four-Data.0 teen miles from Nisibis, and four days' journey fromthe Tigris, was peopled and adorned; the hasty worksof Anastasius were improved by the perseverance of Jus­tinian; and without insisting on places less important,the fortifications of Dara may represent the military ar­chitecture of the age. The city was surrounded withtwo walls, and the interval between them of fifty paces,afforded a retreat to the cattle of the besieged. The in-iner wall was a monument of strength and beauty: itmeasured sixty feet from the ground, and the height ofthe towers was one hundred feet; the loop-holes fromwhence an enemy might be annoyed with missile wea­pons, were small but numerous: the soldiers were plantedalong the rampart, under the shelter of double galleries,
J The description of Dara is amply and correotlj given by Procopins. (Persic, lib.1. c. 10. lib. 2. c. 13. De Etlific. lib. 2. c. 1—3. lib. 3rc. 5.) See the situation ind'Anviile (l'Euphrate et le Tigre, u. 53—55.), though he seems to doable the inter-tal between Dara and Nisibis.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 241


It was the boast of the Colchians, that their ancestors coicUo*;had checked the victories ofSesostris; and the defeat of theEgyptian is less incredible than his successful progress,as far as the foot of mount Caucasus. They sunk, with­out any memorable effort, under the arms of Cyrus; nnder thefollowed in distant wars the standard of the great king, ^Jj^"*'and presented him every fifth year with one hundred chThx 500 »boys, and as many virgins, the fairest produce of theland.8 Yet he accepted this gift like the gold and ebo­ny of India, the frankincense of the Arabs, or the ne­groes and ivory of ^Ethiopia: the Colchians were notsubject to the dominion of a satrap, and they continuedto enjoy the name as well as substance of national inde-pendence.11 After the fall of the Persian empire, Mi­thridates, king of Pontus, added Colchos to the wide cir­cle of his dominions on the Euxine; and when the na­tives presumed to request that his son might reign over nnder thethem, he bound the ambitious youth in chains of gold,and delegated a servant in his place. In the pursuit of Christ 60.Mithridates, the Romans advanced to the banks of thePhasis, and their galleys ascended the river till theyreached the camp of Pompey and his legions.1 But thesenate, and afterward the emperors, disdained to reducethat distant and useless conquest into the form of a pro­vince. The family of a Greek rhetorician was permittedto reign in Colchos and the adjacent kingdoms, fromthe time of Mark Antony to that of Nero; and after therace of Polemo11 was extinct, the eastern Pontus, which
t Herodot.lib. 3. c. 97. See, in lib. 7. o. 79. their arms and service in the expe­dition of Xerxes against Greece.
. b Xenophon, who had encountered the Colchians in his retreat, (Anahasis, lib. 4.p. 320. 34-3. 348. edit. Hutchinson; and Foster's Dissertation, p. 53—58. in Spel-inan's English version, vol. 2.) styles them ainmjxm. Before the conquest of Mithri­dates, they are named by Appian e8vo? apEijuavs;. (do Bell. Mithridatico, c. 15. tom. 1.p. 661. of the last and best edition, by John Schweigtueuser, Lipsae, 1785, 3 vols,large octavo.) %
i The conquest of Colchos by Mithridates and Pompey, is marked by Appian (deBell. Mithridat.) and Plutarch, (in Vit. Pomp.)
k We may trace the rise and fall of the family of Polemo, in Strabo; (lib. 11. p.755. lib. 12. p. 867.) Dion Cassius or Xiphilin; (p. 588. 593. 601. 719. 754. 915.946. edit. Reimar.) Suetonius; (in Neron. c. 18. in Vespasian. c. 8.) Eutropius;(7. 14.) Josephus, (Antiq. Judaic. lib. 20. c. 7. p. 970. edit. Iiaveroamp), audEuse-hius. (Chrou. wiUi Scaliger, Anunadvers. p. 196.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLII.] Qf THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


of Gubazes sustained the most rigorous trials. He pa­tiently endured the hardships of a savage life, and rejectedwith disdain, the specious temptations of,;the Persiancourt. The king of the Lazi had been educated in theChristian religion; his mother was the daughter of a se­nator; during his youth, he had served ten years a silen-tiary of the Byzantine palace,5 and the arrears of an un­paid salary were a motive of attachment as well as ofcomplaint. But the. long continuance of his sufferingsextorted from him a naked representation of the truth;and truth was an unpardonable libel on the lieutenantsof Justinian, who, amidst the delays of a ruinous war,had spared his enemies, and trampled on his allies.Their malicious information persuaded the emperor, thathis faithless vassal already meditated a second defection:an order was issued to send him prisoner to Constanti­nople; a treacherous clause was inserted, that he mightbe lawfully killed in case of resistance; and Gubazes,without arms, or suspicion of danger, was stabbed in thesecurity of a friendly interview. In the first momentsof rage and despair, the Colchians would have sacrificedtheir country and religion to the gratification of revenge.But the authority and eloquence of the wiser few, ob­tained a salutary pause: the victory of the Phasis re­stored the terror of the Roman arms, and the emperorwas solicitous to absolve his own name from the imputa­tion of so foul a murder. A judge of senatorial rankwas commissioned to inquire into the conduct and deathof the king of the Lazi. He ascended a stately tribunal,encompassed by the ministers of justice and punishment:in the presence of both nations, this extraordinary causewas pleaded, according to the forms of civil jurisprudence,and some satisfaction was granted to an injured people,by the sentence and execution of the meaner criminals.'
. ' In the palace of Constantinople there were thirty silentiaries, who are styledhastati ante fores cuhiculi, *ris ftyns ima-rami, an honourable title, which conferredthe rank, without imposing the duties, of a senator. (Cod. Theodos. lib. 6. tit. 23.
Gothofred. Comment. tom. 2. p. 129.)
'On'these judicial orations, Agathias (lib. 3. p. 81—89. lib. 4. p. 108—119.) la-VOL. V. S







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [cHAP. XI/.


senators of blameless integrity. After this popular con­cession, Justinian proceeded to the hippodrome to con­fess his own errors, and to accept the repentance of hisgrateful subjects; but they distrusted his assurances,though solemnly pronounced in the presence of the holygospels; and the emperor, alarmed by their distrust, re­treated with precipitation to the strong fortress of thepalace. The obstinacy of the tumult was now imputedto a secret and ambitious conspiracy, and a suspicion wasentertained, that the insurgents, more especially thegreen faction, had been supplied with arms and moneyby Hypatius and Pompey, two patricians, who could nei­ther forget with honour, nor remember with safety, thatthey were the nephews of the emperor Anastasius.Capriciously trusted, disgraced, and pardoned, by thejealous levity of the monarch, they had appeared as loyalservants before the throne; and, during five days of thetumult, they were detained as important hostages; till atlength, the fears of Justinian prevailing over his pru­dence, he viewed the two brothers in the light of spies,perhaps of assassins, and sternly commanded them to de­part from the palace. After a fruitless representation,that obedience might lead to involuntary treason, theyretired to their houses, and in the morning of the sixthday, Hypatius was surrounded and seized by the people,who, regardless of his virtuous resistance, and the tearsof his wife, transported their favourite to the forum ofConstantine, and, instead of a diadem, placed a rich collaron his head. If the usurper, who afterward pleaded themerit of his delay, had complied with the advice of thesenate, and urged the fury of the multitude, their firstirresistible effort might have oppressed or expelled histrembling competitor. The Byzantine palace enjoyed afree communication with the sea; vessels lay ready at thegarden stairs; and a secret resolution was already formed,to convey the emperor with his family and treasures to asafe retreat, at some distance from the capital.







OCR Output








130 DECLINE AND FALL [CftAP. XLI.


mable moments in the discharge of a vain, though pious,duty to the dead. While his spirit was broken by thismournful office, he heard the trumpet of Belisarius, who,leaving Antonina and his infantry in the camp, pressedforwards with his guards and the remainder of the cavalryto rally his flying troops, and to restore the fortune ofthe day. Much room could not be found in this disor­derly battle for the talents of a general; but the kingfled before the hero; and the Vandals, accustomed onlyto a Moorish enemy, were incapable of withstanding thearms and discipline of the Romans. Gelimer retiredwith hasty steps towards the desert of Numidia; but hehad soon the consolation of learning, that his private or­ders for the execution of Hilderic and his captive friendshad been faithfully obeyed. The tyrant's revenge wasuseful only to his enemies. The death of a lawful princeexcited the compassion of his people; his life might haveperplexed the victorious Romans; and the lieutenant ofJustinian, by a crime of which he was innocent, was re­lieved from the painful alternative of forfeiting his ho­nour or relinquishing his conquests.Redaction As soon as the tumult had subsided, the several partsa. d' 533!' of the army informed each other of the accidents of theSept. 10. . ancj Be]isarjus pitched his camp on the field of vic­tory, to which the tenth mile-stone from Carthage hadapplied the Latin appellation of decimus. From a wisesuspicion of the stratagems and resources of the Vandals,he marched the next day in order of battle, halted in theevening before the gates of Carthage, and allowed anight of repose, that he might not, in darkness and dis­order, expose the city to the license of the soldiers, orthe soldiers themselves to the secret ambush of the city.But as the fears of Belisarius were the result of calm andintrepid reason, he was soon satisfied that he might con­fide, without danger, in the peaceful and friendly aspectof the capital. Carthage blazed with innumerabletorches, the signals of the public joy the chain was^re-







OCR Output








nO DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI1I


the Romans, by the vague reports of the fleets and ar­mies which were hastening to their relief from the extre­mities of the east. They derived more rational comfortfrom the assurance that Belisarius had landed at theport; and, without numbering his forces, they firmlyrelied on the humanity, the courage, and the skill oftheir great deliverer.Attempt of The foresight of Totila had raised obstacles worthyiu. q£ suci1 gn antagonist. Ninety furlongs below the city,in the narrowest part of the river, he joined the two banksby strong and solid timbers in the form of a bridge; onwhich he erected two lofty towers, manned by the bravestof his Goths, and profusely stored with missile weaponsand engines of offence. The approach of the bridge andtowers was covered by a strong and massy chain of iron;and the .chain, at either end, on the opposite side of theTiber, Was defended by a numerous and chosen detach­ment of archers. But the enterprise of forcing thesebarriers, and relieving the capital, displays a shining ex­ample of the boldness and conduct of Belisarius. Hiscavalry advanced from the port along the public road,to awe the motions and distract the attention of theenemy. His infantry and provisions were distributed intwo hundred large boats; and each boat was shielded bya high rampart of thick planks, pierced with many smallholes for the discharge of missile weapons. In the front,two large vessels were linked together to sustain a float­ing castle, which commanded the towers of the bridge,and contained a magazine of fire, sulphur, and bitumen.The whole fleet, which the general led in person, waslaboriously moved against the current of the river. Thechain yielded to their weight, and the enemies whoguarded the banks were either slain or scattered. Assoon as they touched the principal barrier, the fire-shipwas instantly grappled to the bridge; one of the towers,with two hundred Goths, was consumed by the flames;the assailants shouted the victory; and Rome was saved,







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








PREFACE.


Ottoman empire are fashioned by the practice of three hun­dred years; and we are pleased to blend the three Chinesemonosyllables, Con-ftt-tzee, in the respectable name of Con­fucius, or even to adopt the Portuguese corruption of Man­darin. But I would vary the use of Zoroaster and Zerdusht,as I drew my information from Greece or Persia: since ourconnexion with India, the genuine Timwr is restored to thethrone of Tamerlane: our most correct writers have re­trenched the Al, the superfluous article, from the Koran:and we escape an ambiguous termination, by adopting Mos­lem instead of Mussulman, in the plural number. In these,and in a thousand examples, the shades of distinction areoften minute; and I can feel, where I cannot explain, themotives of my choice.
•„* At the end of the History, the reader will find a general Index to the wholeWork, which has been drawn up by a person frequently employed in works ofthis nature.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 451


guilty and the suspected, served to irritate rather thansubdue the public discontent. No sooner did the grand­son of Nushirvan display his own and the Roman bannersbeyond the Tigris, than he was joined, each day, by theincreasing multitudes of the nobility and people; and ashe advanced, he received from every side the grateful of­ferings of the keys of his cities and the heads of his ene­mies. As soon as Modain was freed from the presenceof the usurper, the loyal inhabitants obeyed the firstsummons of Mebodes at the head of only two thousandhorse, and Chosroes accepted the sacred and precious or­naments of the palace as the pledge of their truth and apresage of his approaching success. After the junctionOf the imperial troops, which Bahram vainly struggled toprevent, the contest was decided by two battles on thebanks of the Zab, and the confines of Media. The Ro- a?d final
Tietorj.
mans, with the faithful subjects of Persia, amounted tosixty thousand, while the whole force of the usurper didnot exceed forty thousand men: the two generals signa­lized their valour and ability, but the victory was finallydetermined by the prevalence of numbers and discipline.With the remnant of a broken army, Bahram fled to­wards the eastern provinces of the Oxus: the enmity of Dea"> «fPersia reconciled him to the Turks; but his days wereshortened by poison, perhaps the most incurable of poi­sons; the stings of remorse and despair, and the bitterremembrance of lost glory. Yet the modern Persiansstill commemorate the exploits of Bahram; and someexcellent laws have prolonged the duration of his trou­bled and transitory reign.
The restoration of Chosroes was celebrated with feasts Restora-and executions ; and the music of the royal banquet was p","™often disturbed by the groans of dying or mutilated cri- ^h ^'"^minals. A general pardon might have diffused comfort —603.and tranquillity through a country which had been shakenby the the late revolutions; yet, before the sanguinarytemper of Chosroes is blamed, we should learn whether







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 467


traced the steps of a revolution so pleasing, in Gregory'sopinion, both to heaven and earth ; and Phocas does notappear less hateful in the exercise than in the acquisitionof power. The pencil of an impartial historian has de- Hiscba-lineated the portrait of a monster ;c his diminutive andrac r'deformed person, the closeness of his shaggy eye-brows,his red hair, his beardless chin, and his cheek, disfiguredand discoloured by a formidable scar. Ignorant of let­ters, of laws, and even of arms, he indulged in the su­preme rank a more ample privilege of lust and drunken­ness, and his brutal pleasures were either injurious to hissubjects or disgraceful to himself. Without assumingthe office of a prince, he renounced the profession of asoldier; and the reign of Phocas afflicted Europe withignominious peace, and Asia with desolating war. Hissavage temper was inflamed by passion, hardened by fear,exasperated by resistance or reproach. The flight- ofTheodosius to the Persian court had been intercepted bya rapid pursuit, Or a deceitful message: he was beheadedat Nice, and the last hours of the young prince weresoothed by the comforts of religion and the conscious­ness of innocence. Yet his phantom disturbed the re­pose of the usurper: a whisper was circulated throughthe east, that the son of Maurice was still alive: thepeople expected their avenger, and the widow and daugh­ters of the late emperor would have adopted as their sonand brother the vilest of mankind. In the massacre ofthe imperial family/ the mercy, or rather the discretion,of Phocas, had spared these unhappy females, and they
fastigiam perpenisse gaudemus. Ltetentur coeli et exultet terra, et de vestris benig-nia actibus universal reipublica? populas nunc usqae rehementsr afflictus bilarescat,&o. This base flattery, the topic of Protestant invectire, is justly censured by thephilosopher Bayle. (Dictionaire Critiqoe, Gregoire I. not. H. torn. 2. p. 597, 598.)Cardinal Baronius justifies the pope at the expense of the fallen emperor.
c The images of Phocas were destroyed; bat even the malioe of bia enemieswould suffer one copy of sach a portrait or caricatare (Cedrenus, p. 404.) to escapethe flames.
4 The family of Maurice is represented by Ducange : (Famiiias Byzaotinae, p. 106—108.) his eldest son Theodosius had been crowned emperor when he was no more <than four years and a half old, and he is always joined with bis father in the salu­tations of Gregory. With the Christian daughters, Auastasia and Theocteste, I amsurprised to find the Pagan name of Cleopatra.







OCR Output








CHAP.XtlV.] OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


custom of antiquity, he bought his bride of her parents,;and she fulfilled the coemption, by purchasing, with threepieces of copper, a just introduction to his house andhousehold deities. A sacrifice of fruits was offered bythe pontiffs in the presence of ten witnesses; the con­tracting parties were seated on the same sheepskin ; theytasted a salt cake offar or rice 5 and this confarreation?which denoted the ancient food of Italy, served as anemblem of their mystic union of mind and body. Butthis union on the side of the woman was rigorous andunequal; and she renounced the name and worship ofher father's house, to embrace a new servitude decoratedonly by the title of adoption. A fiction of the law, nei-.ther rational nor elegant, bestowed on the mother of afamilyb (her proper appellation) the strange characters ofsister to her own children, and of daughter to her hus­band or master, who was invested with the plenitude ofpaternal power. By his judgment or caprice her beha­viour was approved, or censured, or chastised; he exer-reised the jurisdiction of life and death; and it was ahlowed, that in cases of adultery or drunkenness," thesentence might be properly inflicted. She acquired andinherited for the sole profit of her lord; and so clearlywas woman defined, not as a person, but as a thing, thatif the original title were deficient, she might be claimed^like Other moveables, by the use and possession of an em-tire year. The inclination of the Roman husband dis*charged or withheld the conjugal debt, so scrupulouslyexacted by the Athenian and Jewish laws ;d but as poly*
a Among the winter frumenta, the triticum, or bearded wheat; the siligo, or theunbearded ; the far, adorea, oryza, whose description perfectly tallies with the riceOf Spain and Italy. I adopt this identity on the credit of M. Pancton in his nsefnlfcnd faborionS Metrologie, (p. 517—529.)
*> Aulas Gellius (Nootes Atticae, 18. 6.) gives a ridicalons definition of /Elins Me-lissirs, Matrona, quae semel, materfamilias quae saepius peperit, as porcetra andscro-pha in the now kind. He then adds the genuine meaning, quae in matrimonium vclin manam convenerat.. 1
c It Was enough to have tasted wine, or to have stolen the key of the cellar. (Plin.Hist. Nat. 14. 14.)
■ 11 Solon requires three payments per month. By the Misna, a daily debt was im-posed'on an idle, vigorous young hushand; twice a week on n citizen; once on apeasant; once in thirty days on a camel-driver; once in six months on a seaman.







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF tHE ROMAN EMPIRE. 85


rous particles; and the orator declared, in tragic styleto the senate, that a mere mortal must yield to the powerof an antagonist, who shook the earth with the trident ofNeptune, and imitated the thunder and lightning of Jovehimself. The genius of Anthemius and his colleague Isi­dore the Milesian, was excited and employed by a prince,whose taste for architecture had degenerated into a mis­chievous and costly passion. His favourite architectssubmitted their designs and difficulties to Justinian, anddiscreetly confessed how much their laborious medita­tions were surpassed by the intuitive knowledge or celes­tial inspiration of an emperor, whose views were alwaysdirected to the benefit of his people, the glory of hisreign, and the salvation of his soul.k
The principal church, which was dedicated by the Foundationfounder of Constantinople to St. Sophia, or the eternal church ofWisdom, had been twice destroyed by fire; after the exile St'Sopl"*-of John Chrysostom, and during the Niha of the blueand green factions. No sooner did the tumult subside,than the Christian populace deplored their sacrilegiousrashness ; but they might have rejoiced in the calamity,had they foreseen the glory of the new temple, which,at the end of forty days, was strenuously undertaken bythe piety of Justinian.1 The ruins were cleared away, a
* See Procopins (de Edificiis, lib. 1. c. 1, 2. lib. 2. o. S.) He relates a coinci­dence of dreams which supposes some frand in Justinian or his architect. Theyboth saw, in a vision, the same plan for stopping an inundation at Data. A stone-qaarry near Jerusalem was revealed to the emperor: (lib. 5. c. 6.) an angel wastricked into the perpetual custody of St. Sophia. (Anonjm. de Antiq. C. P. lib. 4.p. 70.)
'Among the crowd of ancients and moderns, who have celebrated the edifice of St.Sophia, I shall distinguish and follow,—1. Four original spectators and historians:Procopins (de Tidific. lib. 1. c. 1.) Agathias, (lib. v. p. 152,153.) Paul Silentiarins,(in a poem of one thousand and twenty-six hexameters, ad calcem Anns Comnem.Alexiad.) and Evagrius. (lib. 4. c. 31.) 2. Two legendary Greeks of a later period:George Codinus (de Origin. C. P. p. 64—74.) and the anonymous writer of Banduri,(Imp. Orient. tom. 1. lib. 4. p. 65—80.) 3. The great Bvzantine antiquarian, Da-cange (Comment, ad Paul Silentiar. p. 525—598. and C. P. Christ. lib. 3. p. 5—78.)4. Two French travellers—the one, Peter Gyllius(de Topograph. C. P. lib. c. 3, 4.)in the sixteenth; the other, Grelot: (Voyage de C. P. p. 95—164. Paris, 1680. in4to.) he has given plans, prospects, and inside-views of St. Sophia; and his plans,though on a smaller scale, appear more correct than those of Ducange. I have adoptedand reduced the measures of Grelot: but as no Christian can now ascend the dome,the height is borrowed from Evagrius compared with Gyllius, Greaves, and theOriental Geographer.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


empire can seldom be influenced by any personal consi-derations. Virtue, or even reason, will suggest to hisimpartial mind, that he is the guardian of peace andequity, and that the interest of society is inseparablyconnected with his own. Under the weakest and mostvicious reign, the seat of justice was filled by the wisdomand integrity of Papinian and Ulpian;" and the purestmaterials of the Code and Pandects are inscribed withthe names of Caracalla and his ministers." The tyrantof Rome was sometimes the benefactor of the provinces.A dagger terminated the crimes of Domitian; but theprudence of Nervaconfirmed his acts, which, in the joyof their deliverance, had been rescinded by an indignantsenate/ Yet in the rescripts? replies to the consultations.1of the magistrates, the wisest of princes might be deceiv­ed by a partial exposition of the case. And this abuse,which placed their hasty decisions on the same level withmature and deliberate acts of legislation, was ineffectu­ally condemned by the sense and example of Trajan.The rescripts of the emperor, his grants and decrees, hisedicts and pragmatic sanctions, were subscribed in pur­ple ink,» and transmitted to the provinces as general orspecial laws, which the magistrates were bound to exe­cute, and the people to obey. But as their numbercontinually multiplied, the rule of obedience becameeach day more doubtful and obscure, till the will ofthe sovereign was fixed and ascertained in the Grego-
u There is more envy than reason in the complaint of Macrinns, (Jul. Capitolin.e. 13.)—Nefas esse leges videri Coinmodi et Caracalke et hoininum imperitorunivoluntates. Comraodas was made a Divas by Severus. (Dodwell, Prelect. 8. p. 324,325.) Yet he occars only twice in the Pandects.
z Of Antonius Caracalla alone two hundred constitutions are extant in the Code, andwith his father one hnndred and sixty. These two princes are quoted fifty times inthe Pandects and eight in the Institutes. (Terasson, p. 265.)
> Plin Secund, Episiol. 10.66. Sueton. in Domitian. c. 23.
* It was a maxim of Constantino, contra jus rescripta non raleant, (Cod. Tlieodos.lib. 1. tit. 2. leg. 1.) The emperors reluctantly allow some scrutiny into the law andthe fact, some delay, petition, &o. *, but these iosnfficent remedies are too much in Iliadiscretion and at the peril of the judge.
a A compound of vermilion and cinnabar, which marks the imperial diplomas fromLeo I. (A.D.470.) to the fall of the Greek empire. (Bityliotheque Raisunnuede la Di­plomatique, lum. 1. p.509—514. Laini,de Eruditionc Apostoloruni, tow. 2. p.72Q







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLII.


The Persians followed without a murmur the commandsof a single chief, who implicitly obeyed the instructionsof their supreme lord. Their general was distinguishedamong the heroes of the east by his wisdom in council,and his valour in the field. The advanced age of Mer-meroes, and the lameness of both his feet, could not di­minish the activity of his mind, or even of his body; andwhilst he was carried in a litter in the front of battle,he inspired terror to the enemy, and a just confidenceto the troops, who, under his banners, were always suc­cessful. After his death, the command devolved to Na-coragan, a proud satrap, who, in conference with, theimperial chiefs, had presumed to declare that he disposedof victory as absolutely as of the ring on his finger.Such presumption was the natural cause and forerunnerof a shameful defeat. The Romans had been graduallyrepulsed to the edge of the sea-shore; and their lastcamp, on the ruins of the Grecian colony of Phasis, wa3defended on all sides by strong intrenchments, the river,the Euxine, and a fleet of galleys. Despair united theircouncils and invigorated their arms; they withstood theassaults of the Persians; and the flight of Nacoraganpreceded or followed the slaughter of ten thousand ofhis bravest soldiers. He escaped from the Romans tofall into the hands of an unforgiving master, who severelychastised the error of his own choice; the unfortunategeneral was flayed alive, and his skin, stuffed into thehuman form, was exposed on a mountain: a dreadfulwarning to those who might hereafter be intrusted withthe fame and fortune of Persia/ Yet the prudence ofChosroes insensibly relinquished the prosecution of theColchian war, in the just persuasion that it is impossibleto reduce, or at least to hold, a distant country againstthe wishes and efforts of its inhabitants. The fidelity
* The punishment of flaying alive could not be introduced into Persia by Sapor,(Brison da Regn. Pers. lib. 2. p. 578.) nor could it be copied from the foolish tale ofMarsyas the Phrygian piper, most foolishly quoted as a precedent by Agathias. (lib.4. p. 132, 133.)







OCR Output








CHAK .XLII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


report of an ancient emigration, and trie narrow intervalbetween the shores of the Red sea. Christianity-hadraised that nation above the level of African barbarism ;*their intercourse with Egypt, and the successors-of Con-stantine,b had communicated the rudiments of the artsand sciences; their vessels traded to the isle of Ceylon,0and seven kingdoms obeyed the Negus or supremeprince of Abyssinia. The independence of the Home-rites, who reigned in the rich and happy Arabia, was firstviolated by an ^Ethiopian conqueror; he drew his here­ditary claim from the queen of Sheba,d and his ambitionwas sanctified by religious zeal. The Jews, powerful andactive in exile, had seduced the mind of Dunaan, princeof the Homerites. They urged him to retaliate the per­secution inflicted by the imperial laws on their unfortu­nate brethren : some Roman merchants were injuriouslytreated; and several Christians of Negra0 were honouredwith the crown of martyrdom.' The churches of Ara­bia implored the protection of the Abyssinian monarch.The Negus passed the Red sea with a fleet and army, de­prived the Jewish proselyte of his kingdom and life, andextinguished a race of princes, who had ruled above two
* The Portuguese missionaries, Alvarez; (Ramusio, tom. 1. fol. 204. rect. 2.74.vers.) Berruudez; (Porchas's Pilgrims, vol. 2. lib. 5. c. 7. p. 1149—1188.) Lobo,(Relation, &c. par M. le Grand, with fifteen Dissertations ; Paris, 1728.) and Tellez,(Relations de Thevenot, part 4.) could only relate of modern Abyssinia what theyhad seen or invented. Th,e erudition of Lmlolphus, (HUt. jEthiopica, Francofurt.1681. Commentarius, 1691. Appendix, 1694.) in twenty-five languages, could addlittle concerning its ancient history. Yet the fame of Caled, qr EllistluEUs, the oo*tqueror of Yemen, is celebrated iu national songs and legends.
The negotiations of Justinian with the Axumites, or jEthiopians, are recorded
y Procopius, (Persic. lib. 1. c. 19, 20.) and John Malala. (tom. 2. p. 163—165.
93—196.) The historian of Antioch quotes the original narrative of the amhassa­dor Nonnosus, of which Photius (Bibliot, end. 3.) has preserved a. curious extract.'c The trade of the Axumites to the coast of India and Africa, and the isle of Ceylon,is curiously represented by Cosmas Indioopltustes. (Topograph. Christian. lib. 2. p.132. 138—140. lib. 11. p. 338, 339.)■) Ludolph. Hist. et Comment. jEthiop. lib. 2, cs 3.
e The city of Negra, or Nag'ran, iu Yemen, is surrounded with palm-trees, andstands in the high-road between Saana, the capital, and Mecca, from the former tenfrom the latter twenty, days' joarney of a caravan of camels. (Abulfeda, Descript.Arahia?, p. 52.)
r The martyrdom of St. Arethas prince of Negra, and his three hundred and forlycompanions, is emheltisrj'ed ln the legends of Metaphrastes andNicephorus Callistus',copied by Baronius, (A. D. 522. no. 22—66. A. D. 523. no; 16—29.) and refuted!•witto obscure diligence, by Basnagc, (Hist. des Juifs, tom. 12. lib. 8. c. 2. p. 333—348.) who investigates the state of the Jews in Arahia and ^Ethiopia.







OCR Output








418 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLV.


of a just retaliation, they renounced their feeble and dis­orderly independence: the advantages of regal govern­ment, union, secrecy, and vigour, were unanimously con-Amiiaris, fessed; and Autharis, the son of Clepho, had alreadythe8Lom- attained the strength and reputation of a warrior. Un-a"d.'584 ^er tne stanc'ard of their new king, the conquerors of—590. Italy withstood three successive invasions, one of whichwas led byChildebert himself, the last of the Merovin­gian race who descended from the Alps. The first expe­dition was defeated by the jealous animosity of the Franksand Alemanni. In the second they were vanquished ina bloody battle, with more loss and dishonour than theyhad sustained since the foundation of their monarchy.Impatient for revenge, they returned a third time withaccumulated force, and Autharis yielded to the fury ofthe torrent. The troops and treasures of the Lombardswere distributed in the walled towns between the Alpsand the Apennine. A nation, less sensible of danger,than of fatigue and delay, soon murmured against thefolly of their twenty commanders; and the hot vapoursof an Italian sun infected with disease those tramontanebodies which had already suffered the vicissitudes of in­temperance and famine. The powers that were inade­quate to the conquest, were more than sufficient for thedesolation of the country; nor could the trembling na­tives distinguish between their enemies and their deliver­ers. If the junction of the Merovingian and imperialforces had been effected in the neighbourhood of Milan,perhaps they might have subverted the throne of theLombards; but the Franks expected six days the signalof a flaming village, and the arms of the Greeks wereidly employed in the reduction of Modena and Parma,which were torn from them after the retreat of theirtransalpine allies. The victorious Autharis asserted hisclaim to the dominion of Italy. At the foot of the Rhae-tian Alps, he subdued the resistance, and rifled the hiddentreasures of a sequestered island in the lake of Comum.







OCR Output








CHAP. XXXIX.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 11


sister, and requested, that on a day, the most illustriousfestival of his life, they would adorn him with the richgarments which they had worked with their own hands."Ourglory (saidhe) is mutual and inseparable. Youare known to the world as the mother of Theodoric;and it becomes me to prove that I am the genuineoffspring of those heroes from whom I claim my de­scent." The wife or concubine of Theodemir was in­spired with the spirit of the German matrons, who es­teemed their sons' honour far above their safety; and itis reported, that in a desperate action, when Theodorichimself was hurried along by the torrent of a flyingcrowd, she boldly met them at the entrance of the camp,and, by her generous reproaches, drove them back onthe swords of the enemy."
From the Alps to the extremity of Calabria, Theodo- h;« c«P;tu-ric reigned by the right of conquest: the Vandal am- death,bassadors surrendered the island of Sicily, as a lawful ap- Ma°'h4593,pendage of his kingdom; and he was accepted as thedeliverer of Rome by the senate and people, who hadshut their gates against the flying usurper/ Ravennaalone, secure in the fortifications of art and nature, stillsustained a siege of almost three years; and the daringsallies of Odoacer carried slaughter and dismay into theGothic camp. At length, destitute of provisions, andhopeless of relief, that unfortunate monarch yielded tothe groans of his subjects and the clamours of his sol­diers. A treaty of peace was negotiated by the bishopof Ravenna; the Ostrogoths were admitted into the city,and the hostile kings consented, under the sanction ofan oath, to rule with equal and undivided authority theprovinces of Italy. The event of such an agreementmay be easily foreseen. After some days had been de­voted to the semblance of joy and friendship, Odoacer,
"This anecdote is related on the modem but respectable authority of Sigonins;(op. tom. 1. p. 580. De Occident. Imp. lib. 15.) his words are curious.—" Wouldyou return?" &o. She presented, and almost displayed, the original recess.
* Hist. Miscell. lib. 15. a Roman history from Jannsto tho ninth century, an Epi­tome of Butropius, Paulas Diaconus, andTheophanes, which Muratori has publishedfrom a MS. in the Ambiosian library. (Script. Rerum 1 talk-arum, tom. 1. p. 100.) ■


c 2







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI.


quisite misery of violating his promise and deserting hisfriend.
In the succeeding campaign, Belisarius was again sentagainst the Persians: he saved the east, but he offendedTheodora, and perhaps the emperor himself. The ma­lady of Justinian had countenanced the rumour of hisdeath: and the Roman general, on the supposition ofthat probable event, spoke the free language of a citizenand a soldier. His colleague Buzes, who concurred inthe same sentiments, lost his rank, his liberty, and hishealth, by the persecution of the empress: but the dis^grace of Belisarius was alleviated by the dignity of hisown character, and the influence of his wife, who mightwish to humble, but could not desire to ruin, the part­ner of her fortunes. Even this removal was coloured bythe assurance, that the sinking state of Italy would beretrieved by the single presence of the conqueror. Butno sooner had he returned, alone and defenceless, thana hostile commission was sent to the east, to seize histreasures and criminate his actions: the guards and ve­terans, who followed his private banner, were distributedamong the chiefs of the army, and even the eunuchspresumed to cast lots for the partition of his martial do­mestics. When he passed with a small and sordid reti­nue through the streets of Constantinople, his forlornappearance excited the amazement and compassion ofthe people. Justinian and Theodora received him withcold ingratitude; the servile crowd with insolence andcontempt; and in the evening he retired with tremblingsteps to his deserted palace. An indisposition, feignedor real, had confined Antonina to her apartment; andshe walked disdainfully silent in the adjacent portico,while Belisarius threw himself on his bed, and expected,in an agony of grief and terror, the death which he hadso often braved under the walls of Rome. Long aftersun-set a messenger was announced from the empress;he opened with anxious curiosity the letter which con-







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


suls tasted the misery which they had spurned or relieved,wandered in tattered garments through the streets of thecity, and begged their bread, perhaps without success,before the gates of their hereditary mansions. Theriches of Rusticiana, the daughter of Symmachus andwidow of Boethius, had been generously devoted -toalleviate the calamities of famine. But the Barbarianswere exasperated by the report, that she had promptedthe people to overthrow the statues of the great Theodo-ric; and the life of that venerable matron would havebeen sacrificed to his memory, if Totila had not respect­ed her birth, her virtues, and even the pious motive of,her revenge. The next day he pronounced two orations,to congratulate and admonish his victorious Goths, andto reproach the senate, as the vilest of slaves, with theirperjury,folly, and ingratitude; sternly declaring, that theirestates and honours were justly forfeited to the compa­nions of his-arms. Yet he consented to forgive theirrevolt, and the senators repaid his clemency by dispatch­ing circular letters to their tenants and vassals in theprovinces of Italy, strictly to enjoin them to desert thestandard of the Greeks, to cultivate their lands in peace,and to learn from their masters the duty of obedience toa Gothic sovereign. Against the cities which had solong delayed the course of his victories he appeared in­exorable: one-third of the walls, in different parts, weredemolished by his command ; fire and engines preparedto consume, or subvert, the most stately works of anti­quity: and the world was astonished by the fatal decree,that Rome should be changed into a pasture for cattle.The firm and temperate remonstrance of Belisarius sus­pended the execution; he warned the Barbarian not tosully his fame by the destruction of those monuments,which were the glory of the dead, and the delight of theliving; and Totila was persuaded, by the advice of anenemy,to preserve Rome as the ornament of hiskingdom,or the fairest pledge of peace and reconciliation. When







OCR Output








408 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLV.


enjoyed the queen of the Lombards, and that his owndeath, or the death of Alboin, must be the consequenceof such treasonable adultery. In this alternative, hechose rather to be the accomplice than the victim of Ro­samond," whose undaunted spirit was incapable of fear orremorse. She expected, and soon found, a favourablemoment, when the king, oppressed with wine, had re­tired from the table to his afternoon slumbers. His faith­less spouse was anxious for his health and repose: thegates of the palace were shut, the arms removed, the at­tendants dismissed, and Rosamond, after lulling him torest by her tender caresses, unbolted the chamber-door,and urged the reluctant conspirators to the instant execu­tion of the deed. On the first alarm, the warrior startedfrom his couch; his sword, which he attempted to draw,had been fastened to the scabbard by the hand of Rosa­mond; and a small stool, his only weapon, could notlong protect him from the spears of the assassins. Thedaughter of Cunimund smiled in his fall; his body wasburied under the staircase of the palace, and the gratefulposterity of the Lombards revered the tomb and the me­mory of their victorious leader,ud dath ambto°us Rosamond aspired to reign in the name
of her lover; the city and palace of Verona were awedby her power, and a faithful band of her native Gepidaiwas prepared to applaud the revenge, and to second thewishes, of their sovereign. But the Lombard chiefs, whofled in the first moments of consternation and disorder,had resumed their courage and collected their powers;and the nation, instead of submitting to her reign, de­manded with unanimous cries, that justice should be ex­ecuted on the guilty spouse and the murderers of theirking. She sought a refuge among the enemies of hercountry, and a criminal who deserved the abhorrence of
x The classical reader will recollect the wife and murder of Candaules, so agree­ably told in the first hook of Herodotus. The choice of Gyges, aipsrai avras trsoittvai,may serve as the excuse of Peredeus; and this soft insinuation of an odious idea hasbeen imitated by the best writers of antiquity. (Grnvius, ad Ciceron. Orat. pro Mi-lone, c. 10.) . ...







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL1.


son of Clovis dissembled his intentions, which he atlength declared, by assaulting, almost at the same instant,the hostile camps of the Romans and Goths. Instead ofuniting their arms, they fled with equal precipitation;and the fertile, though desolate, provinces of Liguria and./Emilia, were abandoned to a licentious host of barba­rians, whose rage was not mitigated by any thoughtsof settlement or conquest. Among the cities whichthey ruined, Genoa, not yet constructed of marble, isparticularly enumerated: and the deaths of thousands,according to the regular practice of war, appear to haveexcited less horror than some idolatrous sacrifices ofwomen and children, which were performed with impu­nity in the camp of the most Christian king. If it werenot a melancholy truth, that the first and most cruel suf­ferings must be the lot of the innocent and helpless, his­tory might exult in the misery of the conquerors, who,in the midst of riches, were left destitute of bread orwine, reduced to drink the waters of the Po, and to feedon the flesh of distempered cattle. The dysentery sweptaway one-third of their army; and the clamours of hissubjects, who were impatient to pass the Alps, disposedTheodebert to listen with respect to the mild exhorta­tions of Belisarius. The memory of this inglorious anddestructive warfare was perpetuated on the medals ofGaul: and Justinian, without unsheathing his sword,assumed the title of conqueror of the Franks. TheMerovingian prince was offended by the vanity of theemperor; he affected to pity the fallen fortunes of theGoths; and his insidious offer of a federal union wasfortified by the promise or menace of descending fromthe Alps at the head of five hundred thousand men. Hisplans of conquest were boundless, and perhaps chimerical.The king of Austrasia threatened to chastise Justinian,and to march to the gates of Constantinople :k he was
k Agathias, lib. 1. p. 14, 15. Could he have seduced or subdued the Gepidc orLombards of Pannonia, the Greek historian is confident that lie mast have been de­stroyed in Thrace.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 489


siegers. The bridges of the Euphrates were destroyedby the Persians; but as soon as the emperor had disco­vered a ford, they hastily retired to defend the banks ofthe Sarus/ in Cilicia. That river, an impetuous torrent,was about three hundred feet broad, the bridge was forti­fied with strong turrets, and the banks were lined with'barbarian archers. After a bloody conflict, which con­tinued till the evening, the Romans prevailed in the as­sault, and a Persian of gigantic size was slain and thrown ►into the Sarus by the hand of the emperor himself. Theenemies were dispersed and dismayed; Heraclius pur­sued his march to Sebaste in Cappadocia; and at the ex­piration of three years, the same coast of the Euxine ap­plauded his return from a long and victorious expedition."
Instead of skirmishing on the frontier, the two mon- Deiiver-archs who disputed the empire of the east, aimed their Coututi-desperate strokes at the heart of their rival. The mili- "h°epp£0,atary force of Persia was wasted by the marches and com- s.ians andbats of twenty years, and many of the veterans who had a.d. 626.survived the perils of the sword and the climate, were stilldetained in the fortresses of Egypt and Syria. But therevenge and ambition of Chosroes exhausted his king­dom; and the new levies of subjects, strangers, and slaves,were divided into three formidable bodies.b The firstarmy of fifty thousand men, illustrious by the ornamentand title of the golden spears, was destined to marchagainst Heraclius; the second was stationed to preventhis junction with the troops of his brother Theodorus;and the third was commanded to besiege Constantinople,and to second the operations of the chagan, with whomthe Persian king had ratified a treaty of alliance and par­tition. Sarbar, the general of the third army, penetratedthrough the provinces of Asia to the well-known campof Chalcedon, and amused himself with the destruction
1 At ten parasangs from Tarsus', the army of the younger Cyrus passed the Saruathree plethra in breadth : the Pyramus, a stadium in breadth, rati five parasangsfarther to the east. (Xenophon, Anabas. lib. 1. p. 33, 34.)
1 George of Pisidia (Bell. Abaricum, 246—265, p. 49.) celebrates with truth the'persevering courage of the three campaigns (t^si; tpspiSfo/LtOfc) against the Persians.
b Petavius(Annotationes ad Nicephorura, p. 62—64.) discriminates the names andactions of lire Persian generals who were successively sent against Heraclius.
VOL. V. 2 K







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 437


and to direct the operations, of the provincial troops.But the martial spirit of the pope was checked by thescruples of humanity and religion ; the imposition of tri­bute, though it was employed in the Italian war, he free­ly condemned as odious and oppressive; whilst he pro­tected against the imperial edicts, the pious cowardice ofthe soldiers who deserted a military for a monastic life.If we may credit his own declarations, it would have beeneasy for Gregory to exterminate the Lombards by theirdomestic factions, without leaving a king, a duke, or acount, to save that unfortunate nation from the ven­geance of their foes. As a Christian bishop, he prefer­red the salutary offices of peace; his mediations ap­peased the tumult of arms; but he was too conscious ofthe arts of the Greeks, and the passions of the Lombards,to engage his sacred promise for the observance of thetruce. Disappointed in the hope of a general and last­ing treaty, he presumed to save his country without theconsent of the emperor or the exarch. The sword ofthe enemy was suspended over Rome; it was averted bythe mild eloquence and seasonable gifts of the pontiffwho commanded the respect of heretics and barbarians.The merits of Gregory were treated by the Byzantine The Sa-court with reproach and insult; but in the attachment Rome,of a grateful people, he found the purest reward of a ci­tizen, and the best right of a sovereign/


CHAP. XLVI.
Revolutions of Persia after the death of Chosroes or Nnshirvan.—His son, Hormonz,t a tyrant, is deposed.—Usurpation of Baharam.—Flight and Restoration of Chos­roes II.—His gratitude to the Romans The cbagan of the Avars.—Revolt of
'the army against Maurice.—His death—Tyranny of Phocas.—Klevation of Hera­clius.-—The Persian war Chosroes subdues Syria, Egypt, and Asia Minor.—
Siege of Constantinople by the Persians and Avars.—Persian expeditions.—Victo­ries and triumph of Heraclius.
The conflict of Rome and Persia was prolonged from Contest of
i a Rome and
the death of Crassus to the reign of Heraclius. An ex- Persia.
'The temporal reign of Gregory I. is ably exposed by Sigonias in the first book,de Regno Italiae. See his works, tom. 2. p. 41—75.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI.


"I have seen a vision (cried an artful or fanatic bishopof the east). It is the will of Heaven, O emperor! thatyou should not abandon your holy enterprise for thedeliverance of the African church. The God of battleswill march before your standard, and disperse your ene­mies, who are the enemies of his Son." The emperormight be tempted, and his counsellors were constrained,to give credit to this seasonable revelation: but they de­rived more rational hope from the revolt, which the ad­herents of Hilderic or Athanasius had already excited onthe borders of the Vandal monarchy. Pudentius, anAfrican subject, had privately signified his loyal inten­tions, and a small military aid restored the province ofTripoli to the obedience of the Romans. The govern­ment of Sardinia had been intrusted to Godas, a valiantbarbarian; he suspended the payment of tribute, dis­claimed his allegiance to the usurper, and gave audienceto the emissaries of Justinian, who found him master ofthat fruitful island, at the head of his guards, and proud­ly invested with the ensigns of royalty. The forces ofthe Vandals were diminished by discord and suspicion;the Roman armies were animated by the spirit of Beli-sarius; one of those heroic names which are familiar toevery age and to every nation.
The Africanus of new Rome was born, and perhapseducated, among the Thracian peasants,' without any ofthose advantages which had formed the virtues of theelder and the younger Scipio; a noble origin, liberalstudies, and the emulation of a free state. The silence ofa loquacious secretary may be admitted, to prove thatthe youth of Belisarius could not afford any subject ofpraise: he served, most assuredly, with valour and repu­tation, among the private guards of Justinian; andwhen his patron became emperor, the domestic was pro-
e 'ilftiAijro &t a tyhia-a^tx: fx nffiuUH*;, % ©gaxwrs Ha.t IXXi/ptw fAsra^u xiirai. (Procop.Vandal, lib. 1.e. 11.) Aleman, (Not. ad Anecdot. p. 5.) an Italian, conld easily re­ject the German vanity of Giphanias and Velserus, who wished to claim the hero;but his Gerniania, a metropolis of Thrace, I cannot find in any civil or ecclesiasticallist of the provinces and cities.







OCR Output








■' ■ DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLV.


suiting mandate of the empress Sophia, " that he shouldleave to men the exercise of arms, and return to his pro­per station among the maidens of the palace, where adistaff should be again placed in the hand of the eunuch.""I will spin her such a thread, as she shall not easilyunravel!" is said to have been the reply which indigna­tion and conscious virtue extorted from the hero. In­stead of attending, a slave and a victim, at the gate ofthe Byzantine palace, he retired to Naples, from whence(if any credit is due to the belief of the times) Narses in­vited the Lombards to chastise the ingratitude of theprince and people.p But the passions of the people arefurious and changeable ; and the Romans soon recollect­ed the merits, or dreaded the resentment, of their victo­rious general. By the mediation of the pope, who un­dertook a special pilgrimage to Naples, their repentancewas accepted ; and Narses, assuming a milder aspect anda more dutiful language, consented to fix his residencein the Capitol. His death,q though in the extreme pe­riod of old age, was unseasonable and premature, sincehis genius alone could have repaired the last and fatalerror of his life. The reality, or the suspicion, of a con­spiracy disarmed and disunited the Italians. The soldiersresented the disgrace, and bewailed the loss, of theirgeneral. They were ignorant of their new exarch, andLonginus was himself ignorant of the state of the armyand the province. In the preceding years Italy had beendesolated by pestilence and famine; and disaffected peo­ple ascribed the calamities of nature to the guilt or follyof their rulers/
R Tbo charge of the deacon against Narses (lib. 2. c. 5.) may be groundless; butthe weak apology of the cardinal (Baron. Annal. Eccles. A. D. 567. no. 8—12.) is re­jected by the best critics—Eagi, (tom! 2, p. 639. 640.) Muratori, (Annali d' Italia,tom. 5. p. 160—163.) and the last editors, Horatins Blancus, (Script. Rerum Italic.■ tom. 1. p. 427, 428.) and Philip Argelatus, (Sigon. Opera, tom. 2. p. 11,12.) TheNarses who assisted at the coronation of Justin, (Corippus, lib. 3. 221.) is clearlyunderstood to be a different person.
1 The death of Narses is mentioned by Paal, lib, 2. c. 11. Anastus. in Vit. Johan.3. p. 43; Agneflus, Liber Pontifical. Raven. in Script. Rer. Italicarum, tom. 2. part1. p. 114. 124. Yet 1 cannot believe with Agnellusthat Narses was ninety-five yearsof age. Is it prohable that all his exploits were performed at fourscore?
'The designs of Narses and of the, Lombards for the invasion of Italy, arc exposed.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.} OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


master might alienate or destroy without being responsi­ble to any earthly tribunal. The hand which bestowedthe daily sustenance might resume the voluntary gift,and whatever was acquired by the labour or fortune ofthe son, was immediately lost in the property of the fa­ther. His stolen goods (his oxen or his children) mightbe recovered by the same action of theft ;m and if eitherhad been guilty of a trespass, it was in his own option tocompensate the damage, or resign to the injured partythe obnoxious animal. At the call of indigence or ava­rice, the master of a family could dispose of his childrenor his slaves. But the condition of the slave was farmore advantageous, since he regained by the first manutmission his alienated freedom: the son was again re­stored to his unnatural father; he might be condemned,to servitude a second and a third time, and it was nottill after the third sale and deliverance," that he was en>franchised from the domestic power which had been sorepeatedly abused. According to his discretion, a fathermight chastise the real or imaginary faults of his chil*dren, by stripes, by imprisonment, by exile, by sendingthem to the country to work in chains among the mean­est of his servants. The majesty of a parent was armedwith the power of life and death;° and the examples ofsuch bloody executions, which were sometimes praisedand never punished, may be traced in the annals of,Rom,e, beyond the times of Pompey and Augustus.Neither age, nor rank, nor the consular office, nor thehonours of a triumph, could exempt the most illustriouscitizen from the bonds of filial subjection :p his own de-
■» Pandect.-lib. il. tit. 2. leg. 14. no. 13. leg. 38. no. 1. Suoh was the decisionof Ulpian and Paul.'
< Th&trin'a mancipatio is most clearly defined bj Ulpian (Fragment. 10. p. 591,592. edit. Schulting), and best illustrated in the Antiquities of Heineccias.
9 By Justinian, the old law, the jns necis of the Roman father, (fnstltut. lib. 4.lit. 9. no. 7), is reported and reprohated. Some legal vestiges are left in the Pan­dects, (lib. 43. tit. 29. leg. 3. no. 4.) and the Collatio Leguni Romanaruni at Mosai-caram. (tit. 2. no. 3. p. 189.)
P Except on public occasions, and in the actual exercise of his office. Inpnblicislocis atqne muneribus, atque actionibus patrum, jura cam filiorum qui in magistrat asunt, potestatibus collata interqoiescere paululum et connivere, &c. (Aal.Gelliun,







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLV.


to the gates of Ravenna and Rome, the inland regions ofItaly became, without a battle or a siege, the lasting pa­trimony of the Lombards. The submission of the peo­ple invited the barbarian to assume the character of alawful sovereign, and the helpless exarch was confined tothe office of announcing to the emperor Justin, the ra­pid and irretrievable loss of his provinces and cities.' Onecity, which had been diligently fortified by the Goths,resisted the arms of a new invader; and while Italy wassubdued by the flying detachments of the Lombards, theroyal camp was fixed above three years before the west­ern gate of Ticinum, or Pavia. The same courage whichobtains the esteem of a civilized enemy, provokes thefury of a savage, and the impatient besieger had boundhimself by a tremendous oath, that age, and sex, anddignity, should be confounded in a general massacre.The aid of famine at length enabled him to execute hisbloody vow; but as Alboin entered the gate, his horsestumbled, fell, and could not be raised from the ground.One of his attendants was prompted by compassion, orpiety, to interpret this miraculous sign as the wrath of hea­ven : the conqueror paused and relented ; he sheathed hissword, and, peacefully reposing himself in the palace ofTheodoric, proclaimed to the trembling multitude, thatthey should live andobey. Delighted with the situation ofthe city, which was endeared to his pride by the difficultyof the purchase, the prince of the Lombards disdained theancient glories of Milan; and Pavia, during some ages,was respected as the capital of the kingdom of Italy."
The reign of the founder was splendid and transient;and before he could regulate his new conquests, Alboin'fell a sacrifice to domestic treason and female revenge. In
• Paul has given a description of Italy, as it was then divided, into eighteen re­gions, (lih. 2. c. 14—24.) The Dissertatio Chorographica de Italia Medii jEvi,by father Beretti, a Benedictine monk, and regius professor at Pavia, has been use­fully consulted.
» For the conquest of Italy, seethe original materials of Paul, (lib. 2. c. 7—10.12.14. 25—27.) the eloquent narrative ofSigonius, (tom. 2. de Regno Italian, lib. 1.p. 13—19.) and the correct and critical review of Muratoii. (Annali d'ltalia, tom. 5.
p. 164—180.)







OCR Output








46 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL.


in which the Roman Cyrus is degraded into an odiousand contemptible tyrant, in which both the emperor andhis consort Theodora are seriously represented as twodemons, who had assumed a human form for the de­struction of mankind.5 Such base inconsistency mustdoubtless sully the reputation, and detract from the cre­dit, of Procopius: yet, after the venom of his malignityhas been suffered to exhale, the residue of the anecdotes,even the most disgraceful facts, some of which had beentenderly hinted in his public history, are established bytheir internal evidence, or the authentic monuments ofthe times.' From these various materials, I shall nowproceed to describe the reign of Justinian, which willDivision of deserve and occupy an ample space. The present chap-JusUniiui.°' ter will explain the elevation and character of Theodora,the factions of the circus, and the peaceful administra­tion of the sovereign of the east. In the three succeed­ing chapters, I shall relate the wars of Justinian whichachieved the conquest of Africa and Italy; and I shallfollow the victories of Belisarius and Narses, withoutdisguising the vanity of their triumphs, or the hostilevirtue of the Persian and Gothic heroes. The series ofthis and the following volume will embrace the jurispru­dence and theology of the emperor; the controversiesand sects which still divide the oriental church; the re­formation of the Roman law, which is obeyed or respectedby the nations of modern Europe.Birtii and I. In the exercise of supreme power, the first act ofempressth<> Justinian was to divide it with the woman whom he
Theodora. °f Kragrios is a poor objection. Baronins (A. D. 548. no. 24.) regrets the loss ofthis secret history: it was then in the Vatican library, in his own custody, and wasfirst published sixteen years after his death, with the learned, but partial, notes ofNicholas Alemannus. (Ludg. 1623.)
5 Justinian an ass—the perfect likeness of Domitian—(Anecdot. c. 8.)—Theodora'slovers driven from her bed by rival demons—her marriage foretold with a great de­mon—a monk saw the prince of the demons, instead of Justinian, ou the throne—the• servants who watched, beheld a face without features, a body walking without abead, &o. &c Procopius declares his own and his friends belief in these diabolicalstories, (c. 12.)
1 Montesquieu (Considerations sur la Grandeur et la Decadence des Remains,c. 20.) gives credit to these anecdotes, as connected, 1. with the weakness of the empire jand, 2. with the instahility of Justinian's laws.







OCR Output








■41$ DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLV.


ter took refuge in the dominions of their ally; and themarriage was consummated in the palace of Verona. Atthe end of one year, it was dissolved by the death of Au-tharis: but the virtues of Theudelinda" had endeared herto the nation, and she was permitted to bestow, with herhand, the sceptre of the Italian kingdom,covern- From this fact, as well as from similar events,' it is eer-tain that the Lombards possessed freedom to elect theirsovereign, and sense to decline the frequent use of thatdangerous privilege. The public revenue arose fromthe produce of land, and the profits of justice. Whenthe independent dukes agreed that Autharis should as­cend the throne of his father, they endowed the regaloffice with a fair moiety of their respective domains. Theproudest nobles aspired to the honours of servitude nearthe person of their prince: he rewarded the fidelity of hisVassals by the precarious gift of pensions and benefices; andatoned for the injuries of war, by the rich foundation ofmonasteries and churches. In peace a j udge, a leader inWar, he never usurped the powers of a sole and absolutelegislator. The king of Italy convened the national as­semblies in the palace, or more probably in the fields ofPavia: his great council was composed of the personsmost eminent by their birth and dignities: but the valid­ity, as well as the execution, of their decrees, dependedon the approbation of the faithful people, the fortunatearmy of the Lombards. About fourscore years after theconquest of Italy, their traditional customs were trans­cribed in Teutonic Latin/ and ratified by the consenttaws, of the prince and people: some new regulations werea.j). 643, introduce^ m0re suitable to their present condition; theexample of Rotharis was imitated by the wisest of his
• Giannone (Istoria Civile de Napoli, tom. 1. p. 263.) baa justly censured the im­pertinence of Boccaccio, (Gio. 3. Novel. 2.) who, without right, or truth, or pretence,has given the pious queen Theudelinda to the■ arius of a muleteer.
'Paul, lib. 3. c 16. The first dissertations of Muratorj, and the first volume ofGianhone's history, may be consulted for the state of the kingdom of Italy.
* The most accurate edition of the laws of the Lomhards is to be found in theScriptores Rerum Italicarum, toni. 1. part. 2. p. 1—181. collated from the most an­cient MSS. and illustrated by the critical notes of Mnratori.







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


the neighbouring country, and the territory of Constan­tinople, a paradise of nature, was adorned with the lux­urious gardens and villas of the senators and opulent ci­tizens. But their wealth served only to attract the boldand rapacious barbarians; the noblest of the Romans,in the bosom of peaceful indolence, were led away intoScythian captivity, and their sovereign might view, fromhis palace, the hostile flames which were insolently spreadto the gates of the imperial city. At the distance only offorty miles, Anastasius was constrained to establish a lastfrontier; his long wall,of sixty miles from the Propontis tothe Euxine, proclaimed the impotence of his arms; andas the danger became more imminent, new fortificationswere added by the indefatigable prudence of Justinian.*
Asia Minor, after the submission of the Isaurians,dremained without enemies and without fortifications, security ofThose bold savages, who had disdained to be the sub- the"™-'jects of Galienus, persisted two hundred and thirty years J"*8'^in a life of independence and rapine. The most suc­cessful princes respected the strength of the mountainsand the despair of the natives; their fierce spirit wassometimes soothed with gifts, and sometimes restrainedby terror; and a military count, with three legions, fixedhis permanent and ignominious station in the heart ofthe Roman provinces." But no sooner was the vigilanceof power relaxed or diverted, than the light-armed squa­drons descended from the hills, and invaded the peacefulplenty of Asia. Although the Isaurians were not re­markable for stature or bravery, want rendered thembold, and experience made them skilful in the exercise ofpredatory war. They advanced with secrecy and speed
c See tjje long wall in Evagrius. (lib, 4. c. 38.) This whole article is drawn fromthe fourth book of the Edifices, except Anchialus. (lib. 3. c. 7.)
d Turn back to vol. 1. p. 330. In the coarse of this history, I have sometimesmentioned, and mnch oftener slighted, the hasty iuroads of the Isaurians, which werenot attended with any consequences.
'Trebellius Pollio in Hist. August, p. 107. who lived under Diocletian, or Con-stantine. Nee likewise Pancirolus ad Not. Imp. Orient. c. 115.141. See Cod.Theodos. lib. 9. tit. 35.1eg. 37. with a copious collective Annotation of Coilefroy,tom. 3. p. 2S6, 2a7.







OCR Output








GHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


experience and free conversation of a soldier, a statesman,and a traveller; his style continually aspires, and oftenattains, to the merit of strength and elegance; his re­flections, more especially in the speeches, which he toofrequently inserts, contain a rich fund of political know­ledge; and the historian, excited by the generous ambi­tion of pleasing and instructing posterity, appears to dis­dain the prejudices of the people, and the flattery ofcourts. The writings of Procopius° were read and ap­plauded by his contemporaries ;p but, although he re­spectfully laid them at the foot of the throne, the prideof Justinian must have been wounded by the praise of ahero, who perpetually eclipses the glory of his inactivesovereign. The conscious dignity of independence wassubdued by the hopes and fears of a slave; and the se­cretary of Belisarius laboured for pardon and reward inthe six books of the imperial edifices. He had dexter-*ously chosen a subject of apparent splendour, in whichhe could loudly celebrate the genius, the magnificence,and the piety of a prince, who, both as a conqueror andlegislator, had surpassed the puerile virtues of Themis-tocles and Cyrus.q Disappointment might urge theflatterer to secret revenge; and the first glance of favourmight again tempt him to suspend and suppress a libel;'
° The literary fate of Procopius has been somewhat unlucky. 1. His books <leBello Gothico were stolen by Leonard Aretin, and published (Folginii, 1470; Venet.1171, apud Jansnn; Mattaire, Annal. Typograph. tom. 1. edit, posterior, p. 290. 304.279. 299.) in his own name (See Vossius de Hist. Lat. lib. 3. o. 5. and the feebledefence of the Venice Giornale de Letterati, tom. 19. p. 207.) 2. His works weremutilated by the first Latin translators, Christopher Persona (Giornale, tom. 19.p. 340—348.) and Raphael de Volatena, (Huet de Claris. Interpretibus, p. 166.) whodid not even consult the MS. of the Vatican library, of which they were prefects.(Aleman. in Prafat. Anecdote.) 3. The Greek text was not printed till 1607, byHoeschelius of Augsburgh. (Dictionnaire de Bayle, tom. 2. p. 782.) 4. The Parisedition wasimperfectly executed by Claude Maltret, a Jesuit of Thoulouse, iu 1663,tar distant from the Louvre press and the Vatican MS. from which, however, he ob­tained some supplements. His promised commentaries, &c. have never appeared.The Agathias of Leydon (1594) has been wisely reprinted by the Paris editor, withthe Latin version of Bonaventura Vulcanius, a learned interpreter. (Huet, p. 176.)
P Agathias in Praefat. p. 7, 8. lib. 4. p. 137. Evagrius, lib. 4. c. 12. See likewisePhotius, cod. 63. p. 65.
1 Kupou uroiSsia (says he, Praefat. ad 1. de Edificiis wEpi Xria-ftnraiv) is no more thanKujou woiSut—a pun! Iu these five books, Procopius atlects a Christian, as well as acourtly style.
r Procopius discloses himself, (Prafat. ad Anccdot. c. 1. 2. 5.) and the anecdotesare reckoned** the ninth book by Suldas. (tom. 3. p. 186. edit. Kustcr.) The silence







OCR Output








222 DECLINE AND FALI, [CHAP. XLlf


eight years;1 and the Justick of Nushirvan is cele­brated as the theme of immortal praise by the nations ofthe east.
Reiga of But the justice of kings is understood by themselves,orUchos-an' and even by their subjects, with an ample indulgence forA.e a 531 tne gratification of passion and interest. The virtue of5?9- Chosroes was that of a conqueror, who, in the measuresof peace and war, is excited by ambition and restrained byprudence; who confounds the greatness with the hap­piness of a nation, and calmly devotes the lives of thou­sands to the fame, or even the amusement, of a singleman. In his domestic administration, the just Nushir-van would merit, in our feelings, the appellation of a ty­rant. His two elder brothers had been deprived of theirfair expectations of the diadem: their future life, be­tween the supreme rank and the condition of subjects,was anxious to themselves and formidable to their mas­ter; fear as well as revenge might tempt them to rebel;the slightest evidence of a conspiracy satisfied the authorof their wrongs; and the repose of Chosroes was securedby the death of these unhappy princes, with their fami­lies and adherents. One guiltless youth was saved anddismissed by the compassion of a veteran general; andthis act of humanity, which was revealed by his son,overbalanced the merit of reducing twelve nations tothe obedience of Persia. The zeal and prudence ofMebodes had fixed the diadem on the head of Chosroeshimself; but he delayed to attend the royal summons,till he had performed the duties of a military review: hewas instantly commanded to repair to the iron tripod,which stood before the gate of the palace," where it was
• From Procopius and Agathias, Pagi (tom. ?. p. 543. 626.) has proved that Chos­roes Nushirvan ascended the throne in the fifth year of Justinian. (A. D. 531. Aprilf. AiD. 532. April 1.) But the true chronology, which harmonizes with the Greeksand Orientals, is ascertained by John Malala. (tom. 2. 211.) Cahades, or Kohad,after a reign of forty-three years and two months, sickened the 8th, and died the13th of September, A, D. 531, aged eighty-two years. According to the annals ofEutychius, Nushirvan reigned forty-seven years and six moDths; and his death mustpousequently be placed in March, A. D. 579.
• Procopius, Persic. lib, 1. c, 23. Brissott de Regn. Pers. p. 491. The gate of







OCR Output








104 •"• DECLINE AND FALL [CHA?. XL.


the Volga. A fortress, designed by Alexander, perhaps,or one of his successors, tocommand that importantpass, had descended by right of conquest or inheritance toa prince of the Huns, who offered it for a moderate priceto the emperor: but while Anastasius paused, while hetimorously computed the cost and the distance, a morevigilant rival interposed, and Cabades forcibly occupiedthe straits of Caucasus. The Albanian and Iberian gatesexcluded the horsemen of Scythia from the shortest andmost practicable roads, and the whole front of the moun­tains was covered by the rampart of Gog and Magog,the long wall which has excited the curiosity of an Ara­bian caliphb and a Russian conqueror.0 According-to arecent description, huge stones, seven feet thick, twenty-one feet in length, or height, are artificially joined with­out iron or cement, to compose a wall, which runs abovethree hundred miles from the shores of Derbend, overthe hills and through the valleys of Daghestan andGeorgia. Without a vision, such a work might be un­dertaken by the policy of Cabades; without a miracle, itmight be accomplished by his son, so formidable to theRomans under the name of Chosroes; so dear to theOrientals, under the appellation of Nushirwan. ThePersian monarch held in his hand the keys both of peaceand war; but he stipulated in every treaty, that Justinian-should contribute to the expense of a common barrier,which equally protected the two empires from the inroadsof the Scythians.d • ' -
VII. Justinian suppressed the schools of Athens andthe consulship of Rome, which had given so many sages
b The imaginary rampart of Cog and Magog, which was seriously explored andbelieved by a caliph of the ninth century, appears to be derived from the gates ofMoant Caucasus, and a vague report of the wall of China. (Geograph. Nuhiunsis, p.267—270. Memoires de l'Academie, tom. 31. p. 210—219.)
1 See a learned dissertation of Baier, dsmuro Cuucaseo, in Comment. Acad. Petro-pol. anu. 1726. tom. 1. p. 425—463. but it is destitute of a map or plan. When theCzar Peter I. became master of Derbend in the year 1722, the measure of the wall wasfound to be three thousand two hundred and eighty-five Russian wgygie, or fathom*each of seven feet English ; in the whole somewhat more than four mites in length.- 0 See the forti6cations and treaties of Chosroes or Nushirwan, in Procopius, (Per­sic. lib. 1. c. 16. 22. lib. 2.) and d'Herbeiot. (p. 682.)







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLV


dialogues, are the work of a man who was second in eru­dition to none of his contemporaries:" his birth and abi­lities had raised him to the office of prefect of the city,and he enjoyed the merit of renouncing the pomp andvanities of this world. His. ample patrimony was dedi­cated to the foundation of seven monasteries/ one in■Home/ and six in Sicily : and it was the wish of Gregorythat he might be unknown in this life, and glorious onlyin the next. Yet his devotion, and it might be sincere,pursued the path which would have been chosen by acrafty and ambitious statesman. The talents of Gregory,and the splendour which accompanied his retreat, ren­dered him dear and useful to the church'; and implicit.obedience has been always inculcated as the first duty of''a^monk. As soon as he had received the character ofdeacon, Gregory was sent to reside at the Byzantinecourt, the nuncio or minister of the apostolic see; andhe boldly assumed, in the name of St. Peter, a tone ofindependent dignity, which would have been criminal.and dangerous in. the most illustrious layman of the em­pire. He returned to Rome with a just increase of repu­tation, and after a short exercise of the monastic virtues,-he was dragged from the cloister to the papal throne, bythe unanimous voice of the clergy, the senate, and thepeople. He alone resisted, or seemed to resist, his ownelevation; and his humble petition, that Maurice wouldbe pleased to reject the choice of the Romans, could only■serve to exalt his character in the eyes of the emperor.and the public. When the fatal mandate was proclaimed,
u Disciplines vero liberalibus, hoc est grammatica, rbetoricaj dialectica, ita a pue-ro est Institutus, ut quamvis eo tempore flbrerent adbac Romae studia literarum, fa­tten nulii in urbe ipsa secundus putaretur. Panl. Diaeon. in Vit. S. Gregor. c. 2.
1 The Benedictines (Vit. Greg. lib. 1. p. 205—208.) labour to reduce the monas­teries of Gregory within the rule of their own order; but as the questionis confessedto be doubtfulf it is clear that these powerful monks are in the wrong. See Butler'sLives of the Saints, vol. 3. p, 145. a work of merit; the sense and learning belong tothe author—his prejudices are those of his profession.
'J Monasterium Gregorianum in ejusdtm Beati Gregorii frdibus ad clivum Scauriprope ecclesiam S. S. Johnnnis et Pauli in honorem St. Andreae. (John in ViU Greg,lib. 1. c. 6. Greg. lib. 7. epist. 13.) This house and monastery were situate on theside of the Celian hill which fronts the Palatine; they are now occupied by the Ca-moldoli ; San Gregorio triumphs, and St. Andrew has retired to a small chapel. Nar­dit, Rema Antica, lib. 3. c. 6. p. 100. Descrizzione di Roma, tom 1. p. 442—446.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLVI.


cated the new recruits in the knowledge and practiceof military virtue. Unfolding the miraculous image ofChrist he urged them to revenge the holy altars whichhad been profaned by the worshippers of fire; address­ing them by the endearing appellations of sons and bre­thren, he deplored the public and private wrongs of therepublic. The subjects of a monarch were persuadedthat they fought in the cause of freedom; and a similarenthusiasm was communicated to the foreign mercena­ries who must have viewed with equal indifference theinterest of Rome and of Persia. Heraclius himself, withthe skill and patience of a centurion, inculcated the les­sons of the school of tactics, and the soldiers were assidu­ously trained in the use of their weapons, and the exer­cises and evolutions of the field. The cavalry and in­fantry in light or heavy armour were divided into twoparts; the trumpets were fixed in the centre, and theirsignals directed the march, the charge, the retreat, orpursuit; the direct or oblique order, the deep or extend­ed phalanx; to represent in fictitious combat the opera­tions of genuine war. Whatever hardship the emperorimposed on the troops, he inflicted with equal severityon himself; their labour, their diet, their sleep, weremeasured by the inflexible rules of discipline ; and, with­out despising the enemy, they were taught to repose animplicit confidence in their own valour and the wisdomof their leader. Cilicia was soon encompassed with thePersian arms; but their cavalry hesitated to enter thedefiles of mount Taurus, till they were circumvented bythe evolutions of Heraclius, who insensibly gained theirrear, whilst he appeared to present his front in order ofbattle. By a false motion which seemed to threaten Ar­menia, he drew them, against their wishes, to a generalaction. They were tempted by the artful disorder of hiscamp; but when they advanced to combat, the ground,the sun, and the expectation of both armies, were unpro-pitious to the barbarians; the Romans successfully re-







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


any certain account of his departure from the port ofCarthage. Such unsuspecting loyalty removed the ap­prehensions of Justinian: envy was silenced and inflamedby the public gratitude ; and the third Africanus obtainedthe honours of a triumph, a ceremony which the city ofConstantinople had never seen, and which ancient Rome,since the reign of Tiberius, had reserved for the auspi­cious arms of the Caesars.1 From the palace of Belisarrius, the procession was conducted through the principalstreets to the hippodrome; and this memorable dayseemed to avenge the injuries of Genseric, and to ex­piate the shame of the Romans. The wealth of nationswas displayed, the trophies of martial or effeminate lux­ury; rich armour, golden thrones, and the chariots ofstate which had been used by the Vandal queen; themassy furniture of the royal banquet, the splendour ofprecious stones, the elegant forms of statues and vases,the more substantial treasure of gold, and the holy ves­sels of the Jewish temple, which, after their long pere­grination, were respectfully deposited in the Christianchurch of Jerusalem. A long train of the noblest Van­dals reluctantly exposed their lofty stature and manlycountenance. Gelimer slowly advanced: he was cladin a purple robe, and still maintained the majesty of aking. Not a tear escaped from his eyes, not a sigh washeard; but his pride or piety derived some secret conso­lation from the words of Solomon,11 which he repeatedlypronounced, vanity ! vanity! all is vanity! In­stead of ascending a triumphal car drawn by four horsesor elephants, the modest conqueror marched on foot atthe head of his brave companions; his prudence might
'After the title of imperator had lost the old military sense, and the Roman aus­pices were abolished by Christianity,(see La Bleterie, Mem. de i'Academie, tom. 21.p. 302—332.) a triumph might be given with less inconsistency to a private general.
k If the Ecclesiastes be truly a work of Solomon, and not, like Prior's poem, apious and moral composition of more recent times, in his name, and on the subject ofhis repentance. The latter is the opinion of the learned and free-spirited Grotius ,(Opp. Theolog. tom. 1. p. 258.) and indeed the Ecclesiastes and Proverbs display alarger compass of thought and experience than seem to belong either to a Jew or aking.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP XLI.


and idle camp of barbarians, conscious of their privilegeand power: he was declared unworthy of his race, hisnation, and his throne; and their general Vitiges, whosevalour had been signalized in the Illyrian war, was rais­ed, with unanimous applause, on the bucklers of hiscompanions. On the first rumour, the abdicated mo­narch fled from the justice of his country; but he waspursued by private revenge. A Goth, whom he had in­jured in his love, overtook Theodatus on the Flaminianway, and, regardless of his unmanly cries, slaughteredhim, as he lay prostrate on the ground, like a victim(says the historian) at the foot of the altar. The choiceof the people is the best and purest title to reign overthem: yet such is the prejudice of every age, that Vi­tiges impatiently wished to return to Ravenna, where hemight seize, with the reluctant hand of the daughter ofAmalasontha, some faint shadow of hereditary right.A national council was immediately held, and the newmonarch reconciled the impatient spirit of the barbariansa measure of disgrace, which the misconduct of his pre­decessor rendered wise and indispensable. The Gothsconsented to retreat in the presence of a victorious ene­my; to delay till the next spring the operations of offenrsivewar; to summon their scattered forces; to relin­quish their distant possessions, and to trust even Romeitself to the faith of its inhabitants. Leuderis, an agedwarrior, was left in the capital with four thousand sol­diers; a feeble garrison, which might have seconded thezeal, though it was incapable of opposing the wishes, ofthe Romans. But a momentary enthusiasm of religionand patriotism was kindled in their minds. They fu­riously exclaimed, that the apostolic throne should nolonger be profaned by the triumph or toleration of Arian-ism; that the tombs of the Cassars should no longer betrampled by the savages of the north; and, without reTfleeting that Italy must sink into a province of Constan­tinople, they fondly hailed the restoration of a Roman







OCR Output








HISTORY
OF
THE DECLINE AND FALL


OF THE


ROMAN EMPIRE.


CHAP. XXXIX.
Zeno and Anastasios, emperors of the east.—Birth, education, and first exploits, ofTheodoric the Ostrogoth.—His invasion and conquest of Italy.—The Gothic king­dom of Italy.—State of the west.—Military andoivil government.—The senatorBoethins.—Last acts and death of Theodoric.
After the fall of the Roman empire in the west, an a.d. 476interval of fifty years, till the memorable reign of Justi- —nian, is faintly marked by the obscure names and im­perfect annals of Zeno, Anastasius, and Justin, whosuccessively ascended the throne of Constantinople.During the same period, Italy revived and flourishedunder the government of a Gothic king, who mighthave deserved a statue among the best and bravest ofthe ancient Romans.
Theodoric the Ostrogoth, the fourteenth in lineal Birth anddescent of the royal line of the Amali,1 was born in the of Theodo-neighbourhood of Vienna,b two years after the death of a?'d.455Attila. A recent victory had restored the independence ~47i-.
* Jornandes (de rebus Geticis, c. 13,14. p. 629, 630. edit. Grot.) has drawn thepedigree of Theodoric from Gapt, one of the Antes, or demigods, who lived aboutthe time of Domitian. Cassiodorius, the first who celebrates the royal race of theAmali, (Variar. 8. 5. 9. 25. 10. 2. 11. 1.) reckons the grandson of Theodoric as theseventeenth in descent. Peringsciold (the Swedish commentator of Cochloens, Vit.Theodoric, p. 871, &c. Stockholm, 1699) labours to connect this genealogy withthe legends or traditions of his native country.
b More correctly on the hanks of the lake Pelso (Niensiedler-see), near Carnon-tum, almost on the same spot where Marcus Antoninus composed his meditations(Jornandes, c. 52. p. 659. Severin. Pannonia Illustrata, p. 22, Cellarios, Geo-graph. Antiq. tom. 1. p. 350.)
VOL,, V. '' ■ B







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 317


observance of contracts and the punishment of crimes.The state, which he had inclined towards a democracy,was changed by the lastTarquin into lawless despotism;and when the kingly office was abolished, the patriciansengrossed the benefits of freedom. The royal laws be­came odious or obsolete; the mysterious deposit was si­lently preserved by the priests and nobles; and, at theend of sixty years, the citizens of Rome still complainedthat they were ruled by the arbitrary sentence of the ma­gistrates. Yet the positive institutions of the kings hadblended themselves with the public and private mannersof the city; some fragments of that venerable jurispru­dence11 were compiled by the diligence of antiquarians,'and above twenty texts still speak the rudeness of thePelasgic idiom of the Latins."
I shall not repeat the well-known story of the decern- The twelve
tables of
virs,1 who sullied by their actions the honour of inscrib- the do­ing on brass, or wood, or ivory, the twelve tables ofcemTI"'the Roman laws'.'" They were dictated by the rigid and
h The most ancient code or digest was styled Jus Papirianum, from the first com­piler, Papirios, who flourished somewhat before or after the Regifugium. (Pandect.lib. 1. tit. 2.) The best judicial critics, even Bynkersbuek, (tom. 1. p. 284, 285.)and Hcineccius, (Hist. J. C. R. lib. 1. o. 16,17. and Opp. tom. 3. sylloge 4. p. 1—8.)give credit to this tale of Postponins, without sufficiently adverting to the value andrarity of such a monument of the third century, of Ihe, illiterate city. I much suspectthat the Caius Papirius^ Ihe Pontifex Maximus, who revived the laws of Numa,(Dionys. Hal. lib. 3. p. 171.) left only an oral tradition ; and that the Jus Fapirianuo)of Granius Flaccus, (Pandect, lib. 50. tit. 16. leg. 144.) was not a commentary, butan originol work, compiled in the time of Caesar. (Censorin. de Die Natali, lib. 5.p. 13. Duker de Latinitate J. C. p. 157.)
* A pompous, though feeble, attempt to restore the original, is made in the His-toire de la Jurisprudence Romaine of Terasson, p. 22—72. Paris, 1750, in folio; awork of more promise than performance.
1 In the year 1444, seven or eight tables of brass were dng up between Cortonaand Gnhio. A part of these, for the rest is Etruscan, represents the primitive stateof the Pelasgic letters and language, which are ascribed by Herodotus to that districtof Italy, (lib. 1. c. 56—58.) though this difficult passage may be explained pf aCrestona in Thrace. (Notes de Larcher, tom. 1. p. 256—261.) The savage dialectof the Euguhine tables has exercised, and may still elude, the divination of criticism;but the root is undoubtedly Latin, of the same age and character as the Saliare Car­men, which, in the time of Horace, none could understand. The Roman idiom, byan infusion of Doric and jEolic Greek, was gradually ripened into the style of thetwelve tables, of the Duillian column, of Ennius, of Terence, and of Cicero. (Grnter,Inscript. tom. 1. p. 142. Soipion Maflfei, Istoria Diplomatics, p. 241—258. Biblio-theque Italique, tom. 3. p. 30—41. 174—205 ; tom. 14. p. 1—52.)
1 Compare Livy (lib. 3. o. 31—59.) with Dionysius Halicarnassensis. (lib. 10.p. 644; 11. p. 691.) How concise and animated is the Roman—how prolix and life­less is the Greek ? Yet he has admirably judged the masters, and defined the rules, ofhistorical composition.
P From the historians, Hcineccius (Hilt. J. R. lib. 1. no. 26.) maintains that (hi







OCR Output








318 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIV


jealous spirit of an aristocracy, which had yielded withreluctance to the just demands of the people. But thesubstance of the twelve tables was adapted to the state ofthe city ; and the Romans had emerged from barbarism,since they were capable of studying and embracing theinstitutions of their more enlightened neighbours. Awise Ephesian was driven by envy from his native coun­try; before he could reach the shores of Latium, he hadobserved the various forms of human nature and civilsociety; he imparted his knowledge to the legislators ofRome, and a statue was erected in the Forum to the per­petual memory of Hermodorus.n The names and divi­sions of the copper-money, the sole coin of the infantstate, were of Dorian origin :° the harvests of Campaniaand Sicily relieved the wants of a people whose agricul­ture was often interrupted by war and faction; and sincethe trade was established/ the deputies, who sailed fromthe Tiber, might return from the same harbours with amore precious cargo of political wisdom. The coloniesof Great Greece had transported and improved the artsof their mother-country. Guma? and Rhegium, Croto-na and Tarentum, Agrigentum and Syracuse, were inthe rank of the most flourishing cities. The disciplesof Pythagoras applied philosophy to the use of govern­ment; the unwritten laws of Charondas accepted theaid of poetry and music,q and Zaleucus framed the re­public of the Locrians, which stood without alterationabove two hundred years/ From a similar motive of na-
twelve tables were of brass—areas: in the text of Pomponins we read eboreas ; forwhich Scaliger has substituted roboreas. (Bynkershoek, p. 286.) Wood, brass,and ivory, might be successively employed.
"His exile is mentioned by Cicero, (Tusculanc Question. 5. 36.) his statue byPliny. (Hist. Nat. 34.11.) The letter, dream, and prophecy, of Heraclitus, are alikespurious. (Epistulcc Grcec. Divers, p. 337.)
° This intricate subject of the Sicilian and Roman money is ably discussed by Dr.Bentley, (Dissertation on the Epistles of Phalaris, p. 427—479.) whose powers inthis controversy were called forth by honour and resentment.
B The Romans, or their allies, sailed as far as the fair promontory of Africa. (Polyb.lib. 3'. p. 177. edit. Casaubon, in folio.) Their voyages to Camae, &o. are noticedLivy and Dionysius.
1 This circumstance would alone prove the antiquity of Charondas, the legislatorof Rhegium and Catana, who, by a strange error of Diodorus Siculus, (tom. 1. lib. 12.p. 485—492.) is celebrated long afterward as the author of the policy of Thurium.
'^Zaleucus, whose existence has been rashly attacked, had the merit a»d glory" of







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


my subject, if it were in my "power to delineate the pri­vate, life of the conquerors of Italy: and I shall relate withpleasure the adventurous gallantry of Autharis, whichbreathes the true spirit of chivalry and romance.d Afterthe loss of his promised bride, a Merovingian princess,he sought in marriage the daughter of the king of Bava­ria; and the Garibald accepted the alliance of the Italianmonarch. Impatient of the slow progress of negotiation;the ardent lover escaped from his palace, and visited thecourt of Bavaria in the train of'his own embassy. Atthe public audience, the unknown stranger advanced tothe throne, and informed Garibald, that the ambassadorwas indeed the minister of state, but that he alone wasthe friend of Autharis, who had trusted him with thedelicate commission of making a faithful report of thecharms of his spouse. Theudelinda was summoned toundergo this important examination; and after a pauseof silent rapture, he hailed her as the queen of Italy, andhumbly requested, that, according to the custom of thenation, she would present a cup of wine to the first of hernew subjects. By the command of her father, she Obey-,ed: Autharis received the cup in his turn, and, in restor­ing it to the princess, he secretly touched her hand, anddrew his own finger over his face and lips. In the even­ing, Theudelinda imparted to her nurse the indiscreetfamiliarity of the stranger, and was comforted by theassurance, that such boldness could proceed only from;the king her husband, who, by his beauty and courage,appeared worthy of her love. The ambassadors weredismissed: no soonendid they reach the confines of Itarly, than Autharis, raising himself on his horse, darted hisbattle-axe against a tree with incomparable strength anddexterity. "Such (said he to the astonished Bavarians),such are the strokes of the king of the Lombards." Onthe approach of a French army, Garibald and his daugh-
d The story of Autharis and Theudelinda is related by Paul, lib. 3. c. 29. 34. and ■any fragment of Bavarian antiquity excites the indefatigable diligence of the count deBuat. Hist. desPeuples de I'liurope, tom. It. p. 595—035. tom. 12. p.t—53.
VOL. V. 2 F







OCR Output








414 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLV.


emperor "entertained some thoughts of contracting adouble alliance with the rival of his throne. The voiceof an angel (such a fable was propagated) might reveal tothe emperor, that he should always triumph over his do­mestic foes; but Tiberius derived a firmer assurancefrom the innocence and generosity of his own mind.HisTirtaes. With the odious name of Tiberius, he assumed themore popular appellation of Constantine, and imitatedthe purer virtues of the Antonines. After recording thevice or folly of so many Roman princes, it is pleasant torepose, for a moment, on a character conspicuous by thequalities of humanity, justice, temperance, and fortitude;to contemplate a sovereign affable in his palace, pious inthe church, impartial on the seat of judgment, and victo­rious, at least by his generals, in the Persian war. Themost glorious trophy of his victory consisted in a multi­tude of captives whom Tiberius entertained, redeemed,and dismissed to their native homes with the charitablespirit of a Christian hero. The merit or misfortunes ofhis own subjects had a dearer claim to his beneficence,and he measured his bounty not so much by their expec­tations as by his own dignity. This maxim, howeverdangerous in a trustee of the public wealth, was balancedby a principle of humanity and justice, which taught himto abhor, as of the basest alloy, the gold that was extract­ed from the tears of the people. For their relief, asoften as they had suffered by natural or hostile calami­ties, he was impatient to remit the arrears of the past,or the demands of future taxes: he sternly rejected theservile offerings of his ministers, which were compensa­ted by tenfold oppression; and the wise and equitablelaws of Tiberius excited the praise and regret of succeed­ing times. Constantinople believed that the emperorhad discovered a treasure: but his genuine treasure con­sisted in the practice of liberal economy, and the con­tempt of all vain and superfluous expense. The Romansof the east would have been happy, if the best gift of hea­







OCR Output








PREFACE. V


truth and knowledge, I am not conscious of decay. To anactive mind, indolence is more painful than labour j and thefirst months of my liberty will be occupied and amused inthe excursions of curiosity and taste. By such temptations,I have been sometimes seduced from the rigid duty even ofa pleasing and voluntary task: but my time will now be myown; and in the use or abuse of independence, I shall nolonger fear my own reproaches or those of my friends. I amfairly entitled to a year of jubilee: next summer and the fol­lowing winter will rapidly pass away; and experience onlycan determine whether I shall stiH prefer the freedom andvariety of study to the design and composition of a regularwork, which animates, while it confines, the daily applica­tion of the author. Caprice and accident may influence mychoice; but the dexterity of self-love will contrive to applaudeither active industry, or philosophic repose.
Downing-Sthbit,May 1, 1788.


P. S. I shall embrace this opportunity of introducing twoverbal remarks, which have not conveniently offered them­selves to my notice. 1. As often as I use the definitions ofbeydnd the Alps, the Rhine, the Danube, 8cc. I generally sup­pose myself at Rome, and afterward at Constantinople;without observing whether this relative geography may agreewith the local, but variable, situation of the reader, or thehistorian. 2. In proper names of foreign, and especially oforiental origin, it should be always our aim to express in ourEnglish version, a faithful copy of the original. But thisrule, which is founded on a just regard to uniformity andtruth, must often be relaxed: and the exceptions will be li-y mited or enlarged by the custom of the language and thetaste of the interpreter. Our alphabets may be often defec­tive: a harsh sound, an uncouth spelling, might offend theear or the eye of our countrymen; and some words, notori­ously corrupt, are fixed, and, as it were, naturalized in thevulgar tongue. The prophet Mohammed can no longer bestripped of the famous, though improper, appellation of Ma­homet: the well-known cities of Aleppo, Damascus, andCairo, would almost be lost in the strange descriptions ofHaleb, Damashk, and Al Cahii a: the titles and offices of the







OCR Output








CHAP. XlIII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


wheat, was exchanged for seven pieces of gold; fiftypieces were given for an ox, a rare and accidental prize;the progress of famine enhanced this exorbitant, yal^e,and the mercenaries were tempted to deprive themselvesof the allowance, which was scarcely sufficient for thesupport of life. A tasteless and unwholesome mixture,in which the bran thrice exceeded the quantity of flour,appeased the hunger of the poor; they were gradually'reduced to feed on dead horses, dogs, cats, and mice,and eagerly to snatch the grass, and even the nettles,which grew among the ruins of the city. A crowd ofspectres, pale and emaciated, their bodies oppressed withdisease, and their minds with despair, surrounded thepalace of the governor, urged, with unavailing truth,that it was the duty of a master to maintain his slaves,and humbly requested that he would provide for their-subsistence, permit their flight, or Gommand their imme­diate execution. Bessas replied, with unfeeling tran­quillity, that it was impossible to feed, unsafe to dismiss,and unlawful to kill, the subjects of the emperor. Yetthe example of a private citizen might have shewn hiscountrymen, that a tyrant cannot withhold the privilegeof death. Pierced by the cries of five children, whovainly called on their father for bread, he ordered themto follow his steps, advanced with calm and silent despairto one of the bridges of the Tiber, and, covering his- face, threw himself headlong into the stream, in the pre­sence of his family and the Roman people. To the rich• and pusillanimous, Bessas"1 sold the permission of depar­ture; but the greatest part of the fugitives expired onthe public highways, or were intercepted by the flyingparties of Barbarians. In the meanwhile, the artful go­vernor soothed the discontent, and revived the hopes, of
m The avarice of Bessas is not dissembled by Prooopias. (lib. 3. c. 17. 20.) Heexpiated the loss of Rome by the glorious conquest of Petrsea: (Goth. lib. 4. c. 12.)'but the same vices followed him from the Tiber to the Phasis; (c. 13.) aud the his­torian is equally true to the merits and defects of his character. The chastisementwhich the author of the romance of Belisaire has inflicted on the oppressors of Romeis more agreeable to justice than to history.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI-


crown; and imperiously demanded, that the grandsonof Theodoric should be rescued from the dastardly dis­cipline of women and pedants, and educated, like avaliant Goth, in the society of his equals, and the glo­rious ignorance of his ancestors. To this rude clamour,importunately urged as the voice of the nation, Ama-lasontha was compelled to yield her reason, and thedearest wishes of her heart. The king of Italy wasabandoned to wine, to women, and to rustic sports;and the indiscreet contempt of the ungrateful youth,betrayed the mischievous designs of his favourites andher enemies. Encompassed with domestic foes, sheentered into a secret negotiation with the emperor Jus­tinian; obtained the assurance of a friendly reception,and had actually deposited at Dyrrachium in Epirus, atreasure of forty thousand pounds of gold. Happy wouldit have been for her fame and safety, if she had calmlyretired from barbarous faction, to the peace and splen­dour of Constantinople. But the mind of Amalasonthawas inflamed by ambition and revenge; and while herships lay at anchor in the port, she waited for the suc­cess of a crime, which her passions excused or applaudedas an act of justice. Three of the most dangerous male-contents had been separately removed, under the pre­tence of trust and command, to the frontiers of Italy:they were assassinated by her private emissaries; andthe blood of these noble Goths rendered the queen-mother absolute in the court of Ravenna, and justlyodious to a free people. But if she had lamented thedisorders of her son, she soon wept his irreparable loss;and the death of Athalaric, who, at the age of sixteen,was consumed by premature intemperance, left her des­titute of any firm support or legal authority. Insteadof submitting to the laws of her country, which held asa fundamental maxim, that the succession could neverpass from the lance to the distaff, the daughter of Theo­doric conceived the impracticable design of sharing with







OCR Output








424 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLV.


the boldest and most tractable falconsthey were tamedand educated by the roving inhabitants always on horse­back and in the field. This favourite amusement of ourancestors was introduced by the barbarians into the Ro­man provinces; and the laws of Italy esteem the swordand the hawk as of equal dignity and importance in thehand of a noble Lombard.bDress and So rapid was the influence of climate and example,niamage. ^g Lombards of the fourth generation surveyed
with curiosity and affright the portraits of their savageforefathers.0 Their heads were shaven behind, but theshaggy locks hung over their eyes and mouth, and a longbeard, represented the name and character of the nation.Their dress consisted of loose linen garments, after thefashion of the Anglo-Saxons, which were decorated, intheir opinion, with broad stripes of variegated colours.The legs and feet were clothed in long hose, and opensandals; and even in the security of peace a trusty swordwas constantly girt to their side. Yet this strange ap­parel, and horrid aspect, often concealed a gentle andgenerous disposition; and as soon as the rage of battlehad subsided, the captives and subjects were sometimessurprised by the humanity of the victor. The vices ofthe Lombards were the effect of passion, of ignorance,of intoxication; their virtues are the more laudable, asthey were not affected by the hypocrisy of social man­ners, nor imposed by the rigid constraint of laws and edu­cation. I should not be apprehensive of deviating from
* Particularly the gerfaut or gyrfalcon, of the size of a small eagle. See the ani­mated description of M. de Buftbn, Hist. Naturelle, tom. 16. p. 239, &c.
b Script. Rerum Italicaram, tom. 1. part 2. p. 129. This is the sixteenth law ofthe emperor Lewis the Pious. His father Charlemagne had falconers in his householdas well as huntsmen. (Memoires sur l'Ancienne Chevalerie, par M. de St. Palaye,tom. 3. p. 175.) I observe in the laws of Rotharis a more early mention of the ai t ofhawking, (no. 322.) and in Gaul, in the fifth century, it is celebrated by Sidonius Apol-linaris among the talents of Avitus. (202—207.)
c The epitaph of Droctulf (Paul, lib. 3. c 19.) may be applied to many of hiscountrymen:
Terrihilis visa facies, sed corda benignus'Longaque robusto pectore harhafuit.
The portraits of the old Lomhards might still be seen in the palace of Monza, twelvemiles from Milan, which had been founded or restore.: by queen Theudelinda. (lib.4. 22, 23.) See Muratori, tom. 1. dissertaz. 23. p. 500.







OCR Output








CHAP.XLIII.] OF THE RODMAN EMPIRE. 261


The arrival'of fresh troops and more skilful commanders,soon checked the insolence of the Moot's; seventeen oftheir princes were slain in the same battle; and thedoubtful and transient submission of their tribes was ce­lebrated with lavish applause by the people of Constanti­nople. Successive inroads had reduced the province ofAfrica to one-third of the measure of Italy; yet the Ro­man emperors continued to reign above a century overCarthage, and the fruitful coast of the Mediterranean.But the victories and the losses of Justinian were alikepernicious to mankind; and such was the desolation ofAfrica, that in many parts a stranger might wander wholedays without meeting the face either of a friend or anenemy. The nation of the Vandals had disappeared;they once amounted to a hundred and sixty thousand.warriors, without including the children, the women, orthe slaves. Their numbers were infinitely surpassed bythe number of the Moorish families extirpated in a re­lentless war; and the same destruction was retaliated onthe Romans^and their allies, who perished by the climate,.their mutual quarrels, and the rage of the barbarians.When Procopius first landed, he admired the populous-ness of the cities and country, strenuously exercised inthe labours of commerce and agriculture. In less thanjtwenty years, that busy scene was converted into a silentsolitude; the wealthy citizens escaped to Sicily and Con­stantinople; and the secret historian has confidentlyaffirmed, that five millions of Africans were consumedby the wars and government of the emperor Justinian.6
The jealousy of the Byzantine court had not permit- Revolt ofted Belisarius to achieve the conquest of Italy; and his a'.6^^abrupt departure revived the courage of the Goths/ who
* Procopias, Anecdot. c. 18. The series of Uie African history attests this melan­choly truth.
'In the second (c. 30.) and thicd books, (c. 1—40.) Procopias continues the his­tory of the Gothic war from the fiflh to the fifteenth year of Justinian. As the eventsare less interesting than in the former period, he allots only half the space t<> dou­ble the time. Jornandes and the Chronicle of Marcellinus, afford some collateralhints. Sigooius, Pagi, Muiaturi, Mascou, and De Bust, are useful, and have been •' •used. .; .. 1 ' . :• . m







OCR Output








276 DECLIN*E AND FALL [CHAP. SLIII.


Roman forces were dissipated by a storm. In the secondthey approached the shore; but they saw the hills co­vered with archers, the landing-place defended by a lineof spears, and the king of the Goths impatient for battle.The conqueror of Italy retired with a sigh, and continuedto languish, inglorious and inactive, till Antonina, whohad been sent to Constantinople to solicit succours, ob­tained, after the death of the empress, the permission ofhis return. ........-.
Final reod The five last campaigns of Belisarius mieht abate theriu», envy or his competitors, whose eyes had been dazzledsomber! anc^ wounded by the blaze of his former glory. Insteadof delivering Italy from the Goths, he had wanderedlike a fugitive along the coast, without daring to marchinto the country, or to accept the bold and repeatedchallenge of Totila. Yet in the judgment of the fewwho could discriminate counsels from events, and com­pare the instruments with the execution, he appeared amore consummate master of the art of war, than m theseason of his prosperity, when he presented two' captivekings before the throne of Justinian. The valour ofBelisarius was not chilled by age; his prudence was ma­tured by experience, but the moral virtues of humanityand justice seem to have yielded to the hard necessity ofthe times. The parsimony or poverty of the emperorcompelled him to deviate from the rule of conduct whichhad deserved the love and confidence of the Italians.The war was maintained by the oppression of Ravenna,Sicily, and all the faithful subjects of the empire; andthe rigorous prosecution of Herodian provoked that in­jured or guilty officer to deliver Spoleto into the handsof the enemy. The avarice of Antonina, which had beensometimes diverted by love, now reigned without a rivalin her breast. Belisarius himself had always understood,that riches, in a corrupt age, are the support and orna­ment of personal merit. And it cannot be presumed,that he should stain his honour for the public service,


«







OCR Output








PREFACE.


I now discharge my promise, and complete my design, ofwriting the History of the Decline and Fall of the RomanEmpire, both in the west and the east. The whole period ex­tends from the age of Trajan and the Antonines, to the takingof Constantinople by Mahomet II.; and includes a review ofthe crusades and the state of Rome during the middle ages.Since the publication of the first* volume, twelve years haveelapsed: twelve years, according to my wish, "of health, ofleisure, and of perseverance." I may now congratulate mydeliverance from a long and laborious service, and my satis­faction will be pure and perfect, if the public favour shouldbe extended to the conclusion of my work.
It was my first intention to have collected, under one view,the numerous authors, of every age and language, from whomI have derived the materials of this history; and I am stillconvinced that the apparent ostentation would be more thancompensated by real use. If I have renounced this idea; ifI have declined an undertaking which had obtained the ap­probation of a master-artist,f my excuse may be found inthe extreme difficulty of assigning a proper measure to sucha catalogue. A naked list of names and editions would notbe satisfactory either to myself or my readers ; the charactersof the principal authors of the Roman and Byzantine Historyhave been occasionally connected with the events which theydescribe; a more copious and critical inquiry might indeeddeserve, but it would demand, an elaborate volume, whichmight swell by degrees into a general library of historicalwriters. For the present I shall content myself with renew­ing my serious protestation, that I have always endeavouredto draw from the fountain-head; that my curiosity, as wellas a sense of duty, has always urged me to study the origi­nals; and that, if they have sometimes eluded my search, I
* Alluding to the tfaarto edition, in which size the work was originally published,t See Dr. Robertson's Preface to his History of America.VOL. v. b







OCR Output








278 DECLINE AND FALL [GHAP. XLIII.


his wife; but the servitude of habit and affection be­came less disgraceful when the death of Theodora hadremoved the baser influence of fear. Joannina theirdaughter, and the sole heiress of their fortunes, was be­trothed to Anastasius, the grandson, or rather nephew,of the empress/ whose kind interposition forwarded theconsummation of their youthful loves. But the powerof Theodora expired, the parents of Joannina returned,and her honour, perhaps her happiness, were sacrificedto the revenge of an unfeeling mother, who dissolved theimperfect nuptials before they had been ratified by theceremonies of the church.yRome Before the departure of Belisarius, Perusia was be-
again . . _ _ .
taken by sieged, and few cities were impregnable to the GothicA.eD.°549. arms. Ravenna, Ancona, and Crotona still resisted theBarbarians; and when Totila asked in marriage one ofthe daughters of France, he was stung by the just re­proach that the king of Italy was unworthy of his titletill it was acknowledged by the Roman people. Threethousand of the bravest soldiers had been left to defendthe capital. On the suspicion of a monopoly, they mas­sacred the governor, and announced to Justinian, by adeputation of the clergy, that unless their offence waspardoned, and their arrears were satisfied, they should in­stantly accept the tempting offers of Totila. But theofficer, who succeeded to the command (his name wasDiogenes), deserved their esteem and confidence; andthe Goths, instead of finding an easy conquest, encoun­tered a vigorous resistance from the soldiers and people,
x Alemannns, (ad Hist. Arcanam, p. 68.) Ducange, (Familiaj Byzant. p. 98.) andHeineccius, (Hist. Juris Civilis, p. 434.) all three represent Anastasius as the son ofthe daughter of Theodora; and their opinion firmly reposes on the unambiguous tes­timony of Procopius. (Anecdot. c. 4, 5—8uy«T{iS«i twice repeated.) And yet I willremark, 1. That in the year 547, Theodora could scarcely have a grandson of the ageof puberty: 2. That we are totally ignorant of this daughter and her husband; and,3. That Theodora concealed her bastards, and that her grandson by Justinian wouldhave been heir-apparent of the empire.
y The ajuttgrtjjUATa, or sins, of the hero of Italy and after his return, are manifestedamaga.xai.vttTx;, and most probably swelled, by the author of the Anecdotes, (o. 4,5.) The designs of Antonina were favoured by the fluctuating jurisprudence ofJnstinian. On the law of marriage and divorce, that emperor was trocho versa-lilior. (Heineccius. Element. Juris. Civil, ad Ordinem Pandect, p. 4. no. 233.)







OCR Output








-430 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLV.


the statues of the city; that by the command of the bar­barian, the Palatine library was reduced to ashes; andthat the history of Livy was the peculiar mark of his ab­surd and mischievous fanaticism. The writings of Gre­gory himself reveal his implacable aversion to the monu­ments of classic genius: and he points his severest cen­sure against the profane learning of a bishop, who taughtthe art of grammar, studied the Latin poets, and pro­nounced with the same voice the praises of Jupiter andthose of Christ. But the evidence of his destructive rageis doubtful and recent; the temple of peace, or the the­atre of Marcellus, have been demolished by the slow ope­ration of ages, and a formal proscription would havemultiplied the copies of Virgil and Livy in the countrieswhich were not subject to the ecclesiastical dictator.*The tombs Like Thebes, or Babylon, or Carthage, the name ofof the apo- Rome might have been erazed from the earth, if the city•ties. had not been animated by a vital principle, which againrestored her to honour and dominion. A vague tradi­tion was embraced, that two Jewish teachers, a tent-maker and a fisherman, had formerly been executed inthe circus of Nero, and at the end of five hundred yearstheir genuine or fictitious relics were adored as the Pal­ladium of Christian Rome. The pilgrims of the east andwest resorted to the holy threshold; but the shrines ofthe apostles were guarded by miracles and invisible ter­rors; and it was not without fear that the pious Catholicapproached the object of his worship. It was fatal totouch, it was dangerous to behold, the bodies of thesaints; and those who, from the purest motives, pre­sumed to disturb thereposeof the sanctuary, wereaffright-ed by visions, or punished with sudden death. The un­reasonable request of an empress, who wished to deprivethe Romans of their sacred treasure, the head of St. Paul,
i Bayle, (Dictionaire Critique, tom. 2. p. 598, 599.) in a very good article ofGregoire I. has qnoteil for the buildings and statues, Platina in Gregorio I. for tb«I'atatine library, John of Salisbury, (de Nugis Curialium, lib. 2. c. 26.) and for liivy,Antoninus of Florence; the oldest of the three lived in the twelfth century.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.J OF THE ROMAN E"MPIRE. 463


chagan. In the first fervour of indignation, an order was »"d rebel-signified to the army of the Danube, that they shouldspare the magazines of the province, and establish theirwinter-quarters in the hostile country of the Avars. Themeasure of their grievances was, full: they pronouncedMaurice unworthy to reign, expelled or slaughtered hisfaithful adherents, and, under the command of Phocas,a simple centurion, returned by hasty marches to theneighbourhood of Constantinople. After a long series ™of legal succession, the military disorders of the third a. d. coa,
6 • • i i i i r October.
century were again revived; yet such was the novelty otthe enterprise, that the insurgents were awed by their ownrashness. They hesitated to invest their favourite withthe vacant purple ; and while they rejected all treaty withMaurice himself, they held a friendly correspondencewith his son Theodosius, and with Germanus, the father-in-law of the royal youth. So obscure had been the for­mer condition of Phocas, that the emperor was ignorantof the name and character of his rival: but as soon as helearned, that the centurion, though bold in sedition, wastimid in the face of danger, "Alas! (cried the despond­ing prince) if he is a coward, he will surely be a mur­derer."
Yet if Constantinople had been firm and faithful, the c'n'unmurderer might have spent his fury against the walls; ,mo»1'-and the rebel army would have been gradually consumedor reconciled by the prudence of the emperor. In thegames of the circus, which he repeated with unusualpomp, Maurice disguised, with smiles of confidence,the anxiety of his heart, condescended to solicit the ap­plause of the factions, and flattered their pride by accept­ing from their respective tribunes a list of nine hundredblues and fifteen hundred greens, whom he affected toesteem as the solid pillars of his throne. Their treache­rous or languid support betrayed his weakness and hast­ened his fall; the green faction were the secret accom­plices of the rebels, and the blues recommended lenity


i
f







OCR Output








 


CHAP. XUII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 25Q


Carthage. The feeble Areobindus, unskilled in the af­fairs of peace and war, was raised by his marriage with theniece of Justinian to the office of exarch. He was sud­denly oppressed by a sedition of the guards, and his ab­ject supplications, which provoked the contempt, couldnot move the pity, of the inexorable tyrant. After afeign of thirty days, Gontharis himself was stabbed at abanquet, by the hand of Artaban; and it is singularenough, that an Armenian prince, of the royal family ofArsaces, should re-establish at Carthage the authority ofthe Roman empire. In the conspiracy which unsheathedthe dagger of Brutus against the life of Caesar, every cir­cumstance is curious and important to the eyes of poste­rity: but the guilt or merit of these loyal or rebelliousassassins could interest only the contemporaries of Pro-copius, who, by their hopes and fears, their friendship orresentment, were personally engaged in the revolutionsof Africa.b
That country was rapidly sinking into the state of bar- Rebellionbarism, from whence it had been raised by the Phoenician Jj **s>colonies and Roman laws: and every step of intestine A-Sj"8543discord was marked by some deplorable victory of savageman over civilized society. The Moors/ though igno­rant of justice, were impatient of oppression: their va­grant life and boundless wilderness disappointed thearms, and eluded the chains, of a conqueror; and expe­rience had shewn, that neither oaths nor obligationscould secure the fidelity of their attachment, The vic-rtory of mount Auras had awed them into momentarysubmission; but if they respected the character of Solo­mon, they hated and despised the pride and luxury ofhis two nephews, Cyrus and Sergius, on whom their
D YntI must not refuse him tlx merit of painting, in lively colours, the murder ofGontharis. One of the Msailing uttered a sentiment not unworthy of a Roman pa-triot.—" If I fail (said Artasires) in the first stroke, kill me on the spot, lest therack should extort a discovery of my accomplices."
c The Moorish'wars are occasionally introduced ioto the narrative of Procopius;(Vandal, lib. 2. c. 19—23. 2o. 27, 28. Gothic, lib. 4. c. 17.) and Tkeopkanes addssome prosperous and adverse events in the last years of Justinian.







OCR Output








3Q& decline and fall [chap. xlv.


own person the name and liberality of a Roman consul.The immediate discharge of his uncle's debts exhibiteda solid pledge of his faith and generosity; a train of por­ters laden with bags of gold advanced into the midst ofthe hippodrome, and the hopeless creditors of Justinianaccepted this equitable payment as a voluntary gift. Be­fore the end of three years his example was imitated andsurpassed by the empress Sophia, who delivered manyindigent citizens from the weight of debt and usury:an act of benevolence the best entitled to gratitude, sinceit relieves the most intolerable distress; but in whichthe bounty of a prince is the most liable to be abused bythe claims of prodigality and fraud.'1Emhassy On the seventh day of his reign, Justin gave audienceAvars, to the ambassadors of the Avars, and the scene was de-a. d. see. corate(j to impress the barbarians with astonishment, ve­neration, and terror. From the palace-gate, the spaciouscourts and long porticos were lined with the lofty crestsand gilt bucklers of the guards, who presented theirspears and axes with more confidence than they wouldhave shewn in a field of battle. The officers, who exer­cised the power, or attended the person, of the prince,were attired in their richest habits, and arranged accord­ing to the military and civil order of the hierarchy.When the veil of the sanctuary was withdrawn, the am­bassadors beheld the emperor of the east on his throne,beneath a canopy or dome, which was supported by fouri' columns, and crowned with a winged figure of victory.In the first emotions of surprise, they submitted to theservile adoration of the Byzantine court; but as soon asthey rose from the ground, Targetius, the chief of theembassy, expressed the freedom and pride of a barbarian.He extolled, by the tongue of his interpreter, the great­ness of the chagan, by whose clemency the kingdoms ofthe south were permitted to exist, whose victorious sub-
d Theophan. Chronograph, p. 205. Whenever Cedrenus or Zonaras are meretranscribers, it is supurHuous to allege their ttstimony. :• ■>







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.] OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 471


a daughter of the emperor. It was more difficult totrust the fidelity of Crispus, whose recent services wererecompensed by the command of the Cappadocian army.His arrogance soon provoked, and seemed to excuse theingratitude of his new sovereign. In the presence of thesenate, the son-in-law of Phocas was condemned to em­brace the monastic life; and the sentence was j ustified bythe weighty observation of Heraclius, that the man whohad betraved his father, could never be faith ful to his friend.h
Even after his death the republic was afflicted by the chosroescrimes of Phocas, which armed with a pious cause the the Romanmost formidable of her enemies. According to the AinDr.e603,friendly and equal forms of the Byzantine and Persian &c-courts, he announced his exaltation to the throne; andhis ambassador Lilius, who had presented him with theheads of Maurice and his sons, was the best qualified todescribe the circumstances of the tragic scene.' How­ever it might be varnished by fiction or sophistry, Chos­roes turned with horror from the assassin, imprisoned thepretended envoy, disclaimed the usurper, and declaredhimself the avenger of his father and benefactor. Thesentiments of grief and resentment which humanity wouldfeel, and honour would dictate, promoted, on this oc­casion, the interest of the Persian king; and his inte­rest was powerfully magnified by the national and re­ligious prejudices of the Magi and satraps. In astrain of artful adulation, which assumed the languageof freedom, they presumed to censure the excess ofhis gratitude and friendship for the Greeks; a nationwith, whom it was dangerous to conclude either peace oralliance ; whose superstition was devoid of truth and jus­tice, and who must be incapable of any virtue, since they
h See the tyranny of Phocas and the elevation of Heraclius, in Chron. Paschal,p. 380—383. Theophanes, p. 242—250. Nicephoros, p. 3—7. Cedrenns, p. 404—407. Zonaras, ton). 2. lib. 14. p. 80—82.
'Theiiph)lact, lib. 8. o. 15. The life of Manrice was composed about the year628, (lib. 8. c. 13.) by Theophylact Simocatta, ex-prefeol, a native of Egypt. Pho-tias, who gives an ample extract of the work, (Cod. 65. p. 81—100.) genlly re­proves the affectation and allegory of the style. His preface is a dialogue betweenPhilosophy and History; tbey seat themselves under a plane-tree, and the lattertouches her lyre.







OCR Output








436 .» DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLV.


bursements was kept above three hundred years in theLateran, as the model of Christian economy. On thefour great festivals, he divided their quarterly allowance«nd arms, to the clergy, to his domestics, to the monasteries, thechurches, the places of burial, the alms-houses, and thehospitals of Rome, and the rest of the diocess. On thefirst day of every month, he distributed to the poor,according to the season, their stated portion of corn,wine, cheese, vegetables, oil, fish, fresh provisions,■ clothes, and money; and his treasures were continuallysummoned to satisfy, in his name, the .extraordinary de­mands of indigence and merit. The instant distress ofthe sick and helpless, of strangers and pilgrims, was re­lieved by the bounty of each day, and of every hour:.nor would the pontiff indulge himself in a frugal repast,till he had sent the dishes from his own table to someobjects deserving of his compassion. The misery of thetimes had reduced the nobles and matrons of Rome toaccept, without a blush, the benevolence of the'church:.three thousand virgins received their food and raimentfrom the hand of their benefactor; and many bishopsof Italy escaped from the barbarians to the hospitablethreshold of the Vatican. Gregory might justly be styledthe father of his country; and such was the extreme sen­sibility of his conscience, that, for the death of a beggarwho had perished in the streets, he interdicted himselfduring several days from the exercise of sacerdotal func­tions. II. The misfortunes of Rome involved the apo­stolic pastor in the business of peace and war; .and itmight be doubtful to himself, whether piety or ambitionprompted him to supply the place of his absent sovereign.Gregory awakened the emperor from a long slumber,exposed the guilt or incapacity of the exarch and his in­ferior ministers, complained that the veterans were with­drawn from Rome for the defence of Spoleto, encourag­ed the Italians to guard their cities and altars; and con­descended, in the crisis of danger, to name the tribunes,







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 133


hold; and, in the moments of festivity, when the im­partial spectators applauded the fortune and merit ofBelisarius, his envious flatterers secretly shed their venomon every word and gesture which might alarm the sus­picions of a jealous monarch. One day was given tothese pompous scenes, which may not be despised as use­less if they attracted the popular veneration; but theactive mind of Belisarius, which in the pride of victorycould suppose a defeat, had already resolved, that the■Roman empire in Africa should not depend on thechance of arms, or the favour of the people. The for­tifications of Carthage had alone been exempted fromthe general proscription; but in the reign of ninety-fiveyears they were suffered to decay by the thoughtless andindolent Vandals. A wiser conqueror restored with in­credible dispatch the walls and ditches of the city. Hisliberality encouraged the workmen; the soldiers, the"mariners, and the citizens, vied with each other in thesalutary labour; and Gelimer, who had feared to trusthis person in an open town, beheld with astonishmentand despair the rising strength of an impregnable fortress.
That unfortunate monarch, after the loss of his capi- Final de-tal, applied himself to collect the remains of an army Geni°f


Jimer


scattered, rather than destroyed, by the preceding bat- ™* ^f,tie; and the hopes of pillage attracted some Moorish a. d. 533,bands to the standard of Gelimer. He encamped in thefields of Bulla, four days' journey from Carthage; in­sulted the capital, which he deprived of the use of anaqueduct; proposed a high reward for the head ofevery Roman; affected to spare the persons and pro­perty of his African subjects, and secretly negociatedwith the Arian sectaries and the confederate Huns. Un­der these circumstances, the conquest of Sardinia servedonly to aggravate his distress; he reflected with thedeepest anguish, that he had wasted, in that useless en­terprise, five thousand of his bravest troops; and heread, with grief and shame, the victorious letters of his







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


wife of Dardanus, was unable to support the ruin of hercountry; she abandoned the dances of her sister orbs,fled from the zodiac to the north pole, and obtained,from her dishevelled locks, the name of the comet. Thethird period expires in the year 618, a date that exactlyagrees with the tremendous comet of the Sibyll, and per­haps of Pliny, which arose in the west two generationsbefore the reign of Cyrus. The fourth apparition, forty-four years before the birth of Christ, is of all others themost splendid and important. After the death of Caesar,a long-haired star was conspicuous to Rome and to thenations, during the games which were exhibited by youngOctavian, in honour of Venus and his uncle. The vul­gar opinion, that it conveyed to heaven the divine soul ofthe dictator, was cherished and consecrated by the pietyof a statesman: while his secret superstition referred thecomet to the glory of his own times.k Thejifth visit hasalready been ascribed to the fifth year of Justinian, whichcoincides with the five hundred and thirty-first of theChristian era. And it may deserve notice, that in this,as in the preceding instance, the comet was followed,though at a longer interval, by a remarkable paleness ofthe sun. The sixth return, in the year 1100", is record-,ed by the chronicles of Europe and China; and in thefirst fervour of the Crusades, the Christians and the Ma->hometans might surmise, with equal reason, that it por->tended the destruction of the infidels. The seventhphenomenon of 1680 was presented to the eyes of anenlightened age.1 The philosophy of Bayle dispelled aprejudice which Milton's muse had so recently adorned,
* Pliny (Hist. Nat. 2. 23.) has transcribed the original memorial of Augustus,Mairan, in his most ingenious letters to the P. Parennin, missionary in China, re­moves the games and the comet of September, from the year 44 to the year 43, beforethe Christian era; hat I am not totally subdued by the criticism of the astronomer,(Opuscules, p. 275—351.)
1 This last comet was visible in the month of December, 1680. Bayle, who beganbis Peusies sur )e Comete in January, 1681, (CEnvres, tom. 3.) was forced to arguethat a supernatural comet would have confirmed the ancients in their idolatry. Ber­noulli (see his Elo^e, in Fontenelle, tom. 5. p. 99.) was forced to allow that the tail,though sot the bead, vras a sign of the wrath of Cod.







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 387


A new spirit of legislation, respectable even in its error, °farose in the empire with the religion of Constantine." tian em-The laws of Moses were received as the divine original Peror*•of justice, and the Christian princes adapted their penalstatutes to the degrees of moral and religious turpitude.Adultery was first declared to be a capital offence; thefrailty of the sexes was assimilated to poison or assassina­tion, to sorcery, or parricide; the same penalties were in­flicted on the passive and active guilt of paederasty; andall criminals of free or servile condition were either drown­ed or beheaded, or cast alive into the avenging flames.The adulterers were spared by the common sympathy ofmankind; but the lovers of their own sex were pursuedby general and pious indignation; the impure mannersof Greece still prevailed in the cities of Asia, and everyvice was fomented by the celibacy of the monks andclergy. Justinian relaxed the punishment at least of fe­male infidelity; the guilty spouse was only condemnedto solitude and penance, and at the end of two years shemight be recalled to the arms of a forgiving husband.But the same emperor declared himself the implacableenemy of unmanly lust, and the cruelty of his persecu­tion can scarcely be excused by the purity of his motives.0In defiance of every principle of justice, he stretched topast as well as future offences the operations of his edicts,with the previous allowance of a short respite for confes­sion and pardon. A painful death was inflicted by theamputation of the sinful instrument, or the insertion of!sharp reeds into the pores and tubes of most exquisitesensibility; and Justinian defended the propriety of theexecution, since the criminals would have lost theirhands had they been convicted of sacrilege. In this stateof disgrace and agony, two bishops, Isaiah of Rhodes,
» See the laws of Constantine and his successors against adultery, sodomy, &c. inthe Theodosian (lib. 9. tit. 7. leg. 7. lib. 11. tit. 36. leg. 1. 4.) and Justinian Codes.(Jib. 9. tit. 9. leg. 30,31.) These princes speak the language of passion as well asof justice, and fraudulently ascribe their own severity to the first Caesars.
° Justinian, Novel. 77. 134.141. Procopius, in Anecdot. o. 11. 16. with theNotes Alemannus. Theophanes, p, 151, Cedrenus, p. 368. Zouaras, lib, 14. p.64.







OCR Output








444 r DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP XLVI.


were invaded by the great khan, who passed the Oxus atthe head of three or four hundred thousand Turks. Theimprudent Hormouz accepted their perfidious and for­midable aid; the cities of Khorasan or Bactriana werecommanded to open their gates; the march of the bar­barians towards the mountains of Hyrcania revealed thecorrespondence of the Turkish and Roman arms; andtheir union must have subverted the throne of the houseof Sassan.
Bahrain °f I>ers'a had been lost by a king; it was saved by aa. d. 590. hero. After his revolt, Varanes or Bahram is stigma­tized by the son of Hormouz as an ungrateful slave : theproud and ambiguous reproach of despotism, since hewas truly descended from the ancient princes of Rei,kone of the seven families whose splendid, as well as sub­stantial prerogatives exalted them above the heads of thePersian nobility.' At the siege of Dara, the valour ofBahram was signalized under the eyes of Nushirvan,and both the father and son successively promoted himto the command of armies, the government of Media,and the superintendence of the palace. The popularprediction which marked him as the deliverer of Persia,might be inspired by his past victories and extraordinaryfigure: the epithet Giubin is expressive of the quality ofdry wood; he had the strength and stature of a giant,and his savage countenance was fancifully compared to
nufacture; but in the next thousand years, many others issued from the same work­shop.
k Ragae, or Rei, is mentioned in the apocryphal book of Tohitas already flourish­ing, seven hnndred years before Christ, under the Assyrian empire. Under the fo­reign names of Europus and Arsaeia, this city, five hundred stadia to the sonth ofthe Caspian gates, was successively embellished by the Macedonians and Parthiasis.(Strabo, lib. 11. p. 796.) Its grandeur and populonsness in the ninth century is ex­aggerated beyond the bounds of credihility ; but Rei has been since ruined by warsand the unwholesomeness of the air. Chardin, Voyage en Perse, tom. 1. p. 279,280. D'Herbelot, Biblioth. Oriental, p. 714.
1 Theophylact, lib. 3. 0, 18. The story of the seven Persians is told in the thirdbook of Herodotus; and their noble descendants are often mentioned, especially inthe fragments of Ctesias. Yet the independence of Otanes (Herodot. lib. 3. c. 83,84.) is hostile to the spirit of despotism, and it may not seem prohable that the sevenfamilies could survive the revolutions of eleven hundred years. They might, how­ever, be represented by the seven ministers ; (Brizzon, de Regno Persico, lib. 1.p. 190.) and some Persian nobles, like the kings of Pontus (Polyb. lib. 5. p. 540.)and Cappadocia, (Diodor. Sicul. lib. 31, tom. 2. p. 517.) might claim their descent■hom the bold companions of Darius. •■







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 101


their royal captive after he had submitted to adore themajesty of a barbarian; and the humiliation was poorlyevaded by the casuistical subtilty of the Magi, who in­structed Perozes to direct his attention to the rising sun.The indignant successor of Cyrus forgot his danger andhis gratitude; he renewed the attack with headstrongfury, and lost both his army and his life." The death ofPerozes abandoned Persia to her foreign and domesticenemies; and twelve years of confusion elapsed beforehis son Cabades or Kobad could embrace any designs ofambition or revenge. The unkind parsimony of Anas-tasius was the motive or pretence of a Roman warthe The Per-Huns and Arabs marched under the Persian standard, a.d. 502and the fortifications of Armenia and Mesopotamia were, —50;>-at that time, in a ruinous or imperfect condition. Theemperor returned his thanks to the governor and peopleof Martyropolis, for the prompt surrender of a city whichcould not be successfully defended, and the conflagra­tion of Theodosiopolis might justify the conduct of theirprudent neighbours. Amida sustained a long and des­tructive siege: at the end of three months the loss offifty thousand of the soldiers of Cabades was not balancedby any prospect of success, and it was in vain that theMagi deduced a flattering prediction from the indecencyof the women on the ramparts, who had revealed theirmost secret charms to the eyes of the assailants. Atlength, in a silent night, they ascended the most acces­sible tower, which was guarded only by some monks,oppressed after the duties of a festival, with sleep andwine. Scaling ladders were applied at the dawn of day;the presence of Cabades, his stern command, and his
11 See the fate of Phirouz or Perozes. and its consequence!:, in Procopius, (Persic.lib. 1. e. 3—6.) who may be compared with the fragments of oriental history. (d'Her-belot, Bibliot. Orient. p. 351. and Texeira, History of Persia, translated or abridgedhy Stevens, lib. t. 0.32. p. 132—138.) The chronology is ably ascertained by As-aeman. (Bibliot. Orient. tom. 3. p. 396—427.)
.1 x The Persian war, under the reigns of Anastasius and Justin, may be collectedfrom Procopius, (Persic. lib. I■e. 7—9.) Theophanes, (in Chronograph, p. 124—127.) Evagrius, (lib. 3. c. 37.) Marcellinas, (in Chron. p. 47.) anJ Josue Styhtes(apod Asseman. tom. i. p. 272—281.) .....'







OCR Output








CHAP. XUV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


forfeit of an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, a limbfor a limb, is rigorously exacted, unless the offender canredeem his pardon by a fine of three hundred pounds ofcopper. The decemvirs distributed with much liberalitythe slighter chastisements of flagellation and servitude;and nine crimes of a very different complexion are ad­judged worthy of death. 1. Any act of treason againstthe state, or of correspondence with the public enemy.The mode of execution was painful and ignominious;the head of the degenerate Roman was shrouded in aveil, his hands were tied behind his back, and, after hehad been scourged by the lictor, he was suspended inthe midst of the forum on a cross, or inauspicious tree.1. Nocturnal meetings in the city; whatever might bethe pretence, of pleasure, or religion, or the public good.3. The murder of a citizen; for which the commonfeelings of mankind demanded the blood of the mur­derer. Poison is still more odious than the sword ordagger; and we are surprised to discover, in two flagiti­ous events, how early such subtle wickedness had infect­ed the simplicity of the republic, and the chaste virtuesof the Roman matrons." The parricide who violatedthe duties of nature and gratitude, was cast into the riveror the sea, enclosed in a sack; and a cock, a viper, a dog,and a monkey, were successively added as the most suit­able companions." Italy produces no monkeys; butthe want could never be felt, till the middle of the sixthcentury first revealed the guilt of a parricide.p 4. The
■ Lrvy mentions two remarkable and flagitious eras, of three thousand persons ac­cused, and of one hundred and ninety noble matrons convicted, of the crime of poi­soning. (40. 43. 8. 18.) Mr. Hume discriminates the ages ofpublioand private vir­tue. (Essays, vol. 1. p. 22,23.) I would rather say that such ebullitions of mischief(as in France in the year 1680.) are accidents and prodigies which leave no marks onthe manners of a nation.
• The twelve tables and Cicero (pro Roscio Amerino, c. 25, 26.) are content withthe sack; Seneca (Excerpt. Controvers. 5. 4.) adorns it with serpents; Juvenalpities the guiltless monkey, (innoxia simia—Satir. 13.156.) Hadrian (apnd Dosi-theum Magistrum, lib. 3. c. 16. p. 874—876. with Schulting's Note), Modestinus,(Pandect. 48. tit. 9. leg. 9.) Constantino, (Cod. lib. 9. lit. 17.) and Justinian, (Insti-tnt lib. 4. tit. 18.) enumerate all the companions of the parricide. But this fancifulexecution was simplified in practice. Hodie tamen vivi exuruntur vel ad bestiasdan-tnr. (Paul. Sentenl. Recept. lib. 5. tit. 24. p. 512. edit. Schilling.)
* The 6rst parricide at Rome was L. Ostius, after the, second Punic war. (Pla ■


2 C 2







OCR Output













OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XXXIX.


he had enjoyed them without guilt; he might resignthem without a sigh, and calmly disdain the impotentmalice of his enemies, who had left him happiness, sincethey had left him virtue. From the earth, Boethiusascended to heaven in search of the supreme good; ex­plored the metaphysical labyrinth of chance and destiny,of prescience and free-will, of time and eternity; andgenerously attempted to reconcile the perfect attributesof the Deity, with the apparent disorders of his moraland physical government. Such topics of consolation,so obvious, so vague, or so abstruse, are ineffectual tosubdue the feelings of human nature. Yet the sense ofmisfortune may be diverted by the labour of thought;and the sage who could artfully combine, in the samework, the various riches of philosophy, poetry, and elo­quence, must already have possessed the intrepid calm­ness, which he affected to seek. Suspense, the worst ofevils, was at length determined by the ministers of death,who executed, and perhaps exceeded, the inhuman man­date of Theodoric. A strong cord was fastened roundthe head of Boethius, and forcibly tightened, till his eyesalmost started from their sockets; and some mercy maybe discovered in the milder torture of beating him withclubs till he expired/ But his genius survived to diffusea ray of knowledge over the darkest ages of the Latinworld; the writings of the philosopher were translatedby the most glorious of the English kings,8 and the thirdemperor of the name of Otho removed to a more ho­nourable tomb the bones of a Catholic saint, who, fromhis Arian persecutors, had acquired the honours of mar­tyrdom, and the fame of miracles.11 In the last hours of
f He was executed in Agro Calventiano (Calvenzanp, between Marignano andPavia), Anonym. Vales, p. 7J3, by order of Eusebius coont of Hcinnm or Pavia.The place of his confinement is styled the baptistery, an edifice and name peculiar tocathedrals. It is claimed by the perpetual tradition of the church of Pavia. Thetower of Boethius subsisted till the year 1584, and the draught is yet preserved.(Tiraboschi, torn. 3. p. 47. 48.) .
s See the Biographica Britanuioa, Alfred, torn. 1. p. 80. second edition. Thework is still more honourable, if performed under the learned eye of Alfred by hisforeign and domestic doctors. For the reputation of Boethius in the middle ages,consult Bruckerl. (Hist. Crit. Philosopb. torn. 3. p. 565, 566.)
* The inscription on bis new tomb was composed by the preceptor of Otho the







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


to ashes in the port of Syracuse by the burning-glassesof Archimedes ;0 and it is asserted, that a similar expe­dient was employed by Proclus to destroy the Gothicvessels in the harbour of Constantinople, and to protecthis benefactor Anastasius against the bold enterprise ofVitalian.d A machine was fixed on the walls of the city,consisting of an hexagon mirror of polished brass, withmany smaller and moveable polygons to receive and re­flect the rays of the meridian sun; and a consumingflame was darted, to the distance, perhaps, of two hun­dred feet.6 The truth of these two extraordinary factsis invalidated by the silence of the most authentic his­torians; and the use of burning-glasses was never adopt­ed in the attack or defence of places/ Yet the admir­able experiments of a French philosopher5 have demon­strated the possibility of such a mirror; and, since it ispossible, I am more disposed to attribute the art to thegreatest mathematicians of antiquity, than to give themerit of the fiction to the idle fancy of a monk or a so­phist. According to another story, Proclus applied sul­phur to the destruction of the Gothic fleet :h in amodern imagination, the name of sulphur is instantlyconnected with the suspicion of gunpowder, and that
c This conflagration is hinted by Lucian, (in Hippia, c. 2.) and Galen, (lib. S. detemperamentis, ton). 1. p. 81. edit. Bazil.) in the second century. A thousand yearsafterward, it is positively affirmed by Zonaras, (lib. 9. p. 424.) on the faith of DionCassias, by Tzetzes, (Chiliad 2. 119. &c.) Eustathius, (ad Iliad E. p. 338.) and thescholiast of Lucian. See Fabricins, (Bibliot. Oreo, lib. 3. o. 23. torn. 1. p. 551,553.)lo whom I am more or leas indebted for several of these quotations.
d Zonaras (lib. 14. p. 55.) affirms the fact, without quoting any evidence.
e Tzetzes describes the artifioe of these burning glasses, which he had read, per­haps with no learned eyes, in a mathematical treatise of Antheniius. That treatise,<stft •jrct^a.io^an fAu^avrtf^ATW, has been lately published, translated, and illustrated,by M. Dupuys, a scholar and a mathematician. (Memoirs de I'Academie des Inscrip­tions, torn. 42. p. 392—451.)
f In the siege of Syracuse, bythe silence ofPoIybius, Plntarch, Livy; in the siegeof Constantinople, by that of Marcellinus, and all the contemporaries of the sixthcentury.
t Without any previous knowledge of Tzetzes or Antheniius, the immortal Buttonimagined and executed a set of burning-glasses, with which he could inflame planksat the distance of two hundred feet. (Supplement a l'Hist. Naturelle, torn. 1. p.389—483. quarto edition.) What miracles would not his genius have performedfor the public service, with royal expense, and in the strong sun of Constantinopleor Syracuse!
k John Malala (torn. 3. p. 120—124.) relates the fact: but he seems to confuundthe names or persons of Proclu* and Marinus.







OCR Output








decline and fall [chap, xliii.


liberate cruelty; but in the conspiracies which attackedhis authority and person, a more candid judge will ap­prove ^he justice or admire the clemency of Justinian.He excelled in the private virtues of chastity and tempe­rance: but the impartial love of beauty would have beenless mischievous, than his conjugal tenderness for Theo­dora, and his abstemious diet was regulated, not by theprudence of a philosopher, but the superstition of a monk.His repasts were short and frugal: on solemn fasts, hecontented himself with water and vegetables; and suchwas his strength as well as fervour, that he frequentlypassed two days and as many nights without tasting anyfood. The measure of his sleep was not less rigorous:after the repose of a single hour, the body was awakenedby the soul, and, to the astonishment of his chamberlains,Justinian walked or studied till the morning light. Suchrestless application prolonged his time for the acquisitionof knowledge,0 and the dispatch of business: and he, might seriously deserve the reproach of confounding, b)'.minute and preposterous diligence, the general order ofhis administration. The emperor professed himself amusician and architect, a poet and philosopher, a lawyerand theologian: and if he failed in the enterprise of re­conciling the Christian sects, the review of the Romanjurisprudence is a noble monument of his spirit and in­dustry.- In the government of the empire, he was lesswise or less successful: the age was unfortunate; the peo­ple was oppressed and discontented; Theodora abusedher power; a succession of bad ministers disgraced hisjudgment; and Justinian was neither beloved in his life,nor regretted at his death. The love of fame was deep­ly implanted in his breast, but he condescended to thepoor ambition of titles, honours, and contemporarypraise; and while he laboured to fix the admiration, he
c The studies and soience of Justinian are attested by the confession, (Anecdot. c.8. 13.) still more than by the praises (Go.hie. lib. 3. c. 31. de'Edific. lib. 1. Proem,c. 7,} of Procopius. Consult the copious index uf Ali-mannus, and read the life ofJustinian by Ladewig. (p. 135—14'^.)







OCR Output








480 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLVI.


a safer conference with a more honourable foe, who, be­fore Heraclius descended from his galley, saluted with re-He solicits verence and pity the majesty of the purple. The friendlyoffer of Sain the Persian general, to conduct an embassytp the presence of the great king, was accepted with thewarmest gratitude, and the prayer for pardon and peacewas humbly presented by the praetorian prefect, the pre­fect of the city, and one of the first ecclesiastics of thepatriarchal church/ But the lieutenant of Chosroes hadfatally mistaken the intentions of his master. "It wasnot an embassy (said the tyrant of Asia), it was the per­son of Heraclius, bound in chains, that he should havebrought to the foot of my throne. I will never give peaceto the emperor of Rome till he has abjured his crucifiedGod, and embraced the worship of the sun." Sain wasflayed alive, according to the inhuman 'practice of hiscountry; and the separate and rigorous confinement ofthe ambassadors, violated the laws of nations and the faithof an express stipulation. Yet the experience of six yearsat length persuaded the Persian monarch to renouncethe conquest of Constantinople, and to specify the an­nual tribute or ransom of the Roman empire: a thou­sand talents of gold, a thousand talents of silver, a thou­sand silk robes, a thousand horses, and a thousand vir­gins. Heraclius subscribed these ignominious terms, butthe time and space which he obtained to collect suchtreasures from the poverty of the east, was industriouslyemployed in the preparations of a bold and desperateattack.
Hi» pre- Of the characters conspicuous in history, that of He-fo'w'ar"* raclius is one of the most extraordinary and inconsistent.a. d. 621. In £rgt an^ iast years Df a iong reign, the emperor
appears to be the slave of sloth, of pleasure, or of super­stition, the careless and impotent spectator of the publiccalamities. But the languid mists of the morning and
c Some original pieces, such as the speech or letter of the Roman amhassadors,(p. 386—388.) likewise constitute the merit of the Paschal, Chronicle, which wai>composed, perhaps at Alexandria, under the reign of Heracliut. - <







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIIIE.


Justin had invested his nephew with the purple, the pa­triarch of Constantinople placed the diadem on theheads of the emperor and empress of the east. But theusual honours which the severity of Roman manners hadallowed to the wives of princes, could not satisfy either theambition of Theodora or the fondness of Justinian. Heseated her on the throne as an equal and independentcolleague in the sovereignty of the empire, and an oathof allegiance was imposed on the governors of the pro­vinces in, the joint names of Justinian and Theodora/The eastern world fell prostrate before the genius andfortune of the daughter of Acacius. The prostitutewho, in ths presence of innumerable spectators had pol­luted the theatre of Constantinople, was adored as aqueen in the same city, by grave magistrates, orthodoxbishops, victorious generals, and captive monarchist
Those who believe that the female mind is totally de­praved by the loss of chastity, will eagerly listen to all theinvectives of private envy or popular resentment, whichhave dissembled the virtues of Theodora, exaggeratedher vices, and condemned with rigour the venal or vo­luntary sins of the youthful harlot. From a motive ofshame or contempt, she often declined the servile homageof the multitude, escaped from the odious light of thecapital, and passed the greatest part of the year in thepalaces and gardens which were pleasantly seated on thesea-coast of the Propontis and the Bosphorus. Her pri­vate hours were devoted to the prudent as well as grate­ful care of her beauty, the luxury of the bath and table,and the long slumber of the evening and the morning.Her secret apartments were occupied by the favourite
'I swear by the Father, &c. by Ihe Virgin Mary, by the four Gospels, quae in•usibiM teneo, and by the holy archangels Michael and Gabriel, puram conscieiitiamprnianumque servitium meservaturum, sacratissiniis DDNN. Justinianoet Theodorae•nnjugi ejus, (novel. 8. tit. 3.) Would the oath have been hinding in favour of thewidow J Communes tituli et triumph!, &c. (Alcman. p. 47, 48.)
S "Let greatuess own her, and she's mean no more," ficc.Without Warburton's critical telescope, I should never have seen, in the gcuuialpictuie of triumphant vice, any personal allusion to Theodora.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 287


they could only use their lances against an enemy equallyskilled in all the instruments of war. A generous emu-;lation inspired the Romans and their barbarian allies:and Narses, who calmly viewed and directed their efforts,.doubted to whom he should adjudge the prize of supe­rior bravery. The Gothic cavalry was astonished anddisordered, pressed and broken; and the line of infantry,instead of presenting their spears, or opening their inter­vals, were tram pled under the feet ofthe flying horse.Six thousand of the Goths were slaughtered, withoutmercy, in the field of Tagina. Their prince, with fiveattendants, was overtakes by Asbad, of the race of theGepidae. "Spare the king of Italy," cried a loyal voice,and Asbad struck his lance through the body of Totila.The blow was instantly revenged by the faithful Goths;they transported their dying monarch seven miles beyond,the scene of his disgrace; and his last moments werenot embittered by the presence of an enemy. Compas­sion afforded him the shelter of an obscure tomb; but theRomans were not satisfied of their victory, till they be­held the corpse of the Gothic king. His hat, enrich­ed with gems, and his bloody robe, were presented toJustinian by the messengers of triumph.° , . -
As soon as Narses had paid his devotions to the Au- conquestthor of victory, and the blessed Virgin, his peculiar pa- by N»r»ei.troness,p he praised, rewarded, and dismissed the Lom­bards. The villages had been reduced to ashes by thesevaliant savages; they ravished matrons and virgins onthe altar; their retreat was diligently watched by a strongdetachment of regular forces, who prevented a repeti­tion of the like disorders. The victorious eunuch pur­sued his march through Tuscany, accepted the submis­sion of the Goths, heard the acclamations, and often thecomplaints, of the Italians, and encompassed the walls ofRome with the remainder of his formidable host. Round
o Theopbtues, Chron. p. 193. Hi»t. Miscell. lib. 16. p. 103,P Evagrius, lib. 4. c. 24. The inspiration of the Virgin revealed to Nartei th*day, and tin word, of hattle. (Paal Diacon. lib. 2. 0. 3. g. 776.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 371


inofficious testament, to suppose that their father's un­derstanding was impaired by sickness or age; and respect­fully to appeal from his rigorous sentence to the delibe­rate wisdom of the magistrate. In the Roman jurispru- Legacies,dence, an essential distinction was admitted between theinheritance and the legacies. The heirs who succeeded tothe entire unity, or to any of the twelve fractions of thesubstance of the testator, represented his civil and reli­gious character, asserted his rights, fulfilled his obliga­tions, and discharged the gifts of friendship or liberalitywhich his last will had bequeathed under the name oflegacies. But as the imprudence or prodigality of a dy­ing man might exhaust the inheritance, and leave onlyrisk and labour to his successor, he Was empowered toretain the Falcidian portion; to deduct, before the pay­ment of the legacies, a clear fourth for his own emolu­ment. A reasonable time was allowed to examine' the
• proportion between the debts and the estate, to decidewhether he should accept or refuse the testament; andif he used the benefit of an inventory, the demands ofthe creditors could not exceed the valuation of the ef­fects. The last will of a citizen might be altered during
- his life, or rescinded after his death: the persons whomhe named might die before him, or reject the inherit­ance, or be exposed to some legal disqualification. Inthe contemplation of these events, he was permitted tosubstitute second and third heirs, to replace each otheraccording to the order of the testament; and the inca­pacity of a madman or an infant to bequeath his property,might be supplied by a similar substitution.q But thepower of the testator expired with the acceptance of thetestament: each Roman of mature age and discretionacquired the absolute dominion of his inheritance, and
1 The substitutions fidei commissaires of the modem civil law is a feudal ideagrafted on the Roman jurisprudence, and bears scarcely any resemblance to the an­cient fidei commissa. (Institutions do Droit Francois, tom. 1. p. 347—383. Denissart,Decisions dc Jurisprudence, tom. 4. p. 577—604.) They were stretched to the fourthdegree by au abuse of the hundred and fifty-ninth Novel; a partial, perplexed, decla­matory law.







OCR Output








398 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLV.


the poor and savage countries of Germany, which weresubject to the dominion of the Franks. After the twodoubtful battles, he consented to retire; and the Aus^trasian king relieved the distress of his camp with animmediate supply of corn and cattle.8 Such repeateddisappointments had chilled the spirit of the Avars; andtheir power would have dissolved away in the Sarmatiandesert, if the alliance of Alboin, king of the Lombards,had not given a new object to their arms, and a lastingsettlement to their wearied fortunes.Alboin While Alboin served under his father's standard, he
kmg of f
the Lom- encountered in battle, and transpierced with his lance,his valour, the rival prince of the Gepidae. The Lombards, whoreve'n»e.d applauded such early prowess, requested his father, withunanimous acclamations, that the heroic youth, who hadshared the dangers of the field, might be admitted to thefeast of victory. "You are not unmindful (replied theinflexible Audoin) of the wise customs of our ancestors.Whatever may be his merit, a prince is incapable of sit­ting at table with his father till he has received his armsfrom a foreign and royal hand." Alboin bowed with re­verence to the institutions of his country; selected fortycompanions, and boldly visited the court of Turisundking of the Gepidae, who embraced and entertained, ac­cording to the laws of hospitality, the murderer of hisson. At the banquet, whilst Alboin occupied the seatof the youth whom he had slain, a tender remembrancearose in the mind of Turisund. "How dear is that place—how hateful is that person—" were the words that es­caped, with a sigh, from the indignant father. His griefexasperated the national resentment of the Gepidae; andCunimund, his, surviving son, was provoked by wine, orfraternal affection, to the desire of vengeance. "TheLombards, (said the rude barbarian) resemble, in figureand in smell, the mares of our Sarmatian plains." And
e For the Austrasian war, see Menander, (Excerpt. Legat. p. 110.) Gregory ofTours, Hist. Franc. lib. 4. c. 29.) and Paul the deacou. (do Gest. Langohard. lib.2. c. 10.)







OCR Output








-DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XH.


period, the circumference of Naples* measured only twothousand three hundred and sixty-three paces :y the for­tifications were defended by precipices or the sea: whenthe aqueducts were intercepted, a supply of water mightbe drawn from wells and fountains; and the stock ofprovisions was sufficient to consume the patience of thebesiegers. At the end of twenty days, that of Belisariuswas almost exhausted, and he had reconciled himself tothe disgrace of abandoning the siege, that he mightmarch, before the winter season, against Rome and theGothic king. But his anxiety was relieved by the boldcuriosity of an Isaurian, who explored the dry channel ofan aqueduct, and secretly reported, that a passage mightbe perforated to introduce a file of armed soldiers intothe heart of the city. When the work had been silentlyexecuted, the humane general risked the discovery ofhis secret, by a last and fruitless admonition of the im­pending danger. In the darkness of the night, fourhundred Romans entered the aqueduct, raised them­selves by a rope, which they fastened to an olive tree,into the house or garden of a solitary matron, soundedtheir trumpets, surprised the sentinels, and gave ad­mittance to their companions, who, on all sides, scaledthe walls, and burst open the gates of the city. Everycrime which is punished by social justice, was practisedas the rights of war; the Huns were distinguished bycruelty and sacrilege, and Belisarius alone appeared inthe streets and churches of Naples, to moderate the ca­lamities which he predicted. "The gold and silver,"he repeatedly exclaimed, "are the just rewards of yourvalour. But spare the inhabitants, they are Christians,they are suppliants, they are now your fellow-subjects.
x This measure was taken by Roger I. after the conquest of Naples (A. 1) 1133),which he made the oapital of his new kingdom. (Giannone/lstoria Civile, tom.~2^p. 169.) That city, the third in Christian Europe, is now at least twelve miles incircumference, (JuI.Caesar. Capaccii Hist. Neopol. lib. 1. p. 47.) and contains moreinhahitants (three hundred and fifty thousand) in a given space, than any other spotin the known world.
v Not geometrical, but common, paces or steps, of twenty-two French inches:(d'Anville, Mesurcs Itineraires, p. 7, 8.) the two thousand three hundred and sixty-thiee do not make an English mile.







OCR Output








CHAP. XU.] OF THE ROWAN EMPIRE. J 79


his lieutenant, with a disdainful smile), in return for a giftwhich you no longer possess, he presents you with anancient province of the empire—he resigns to the Gothsthe sovereignty of the British island." Belisarius reject­ed with equal firmness and contempt the offer of a tri­bute; but he allowed the Gothic ambassadors to seektheir fate from the mouth of Justinian himself; and con­sented, with seeming reluctance, to a truce of threemonths, from the winter solstice to the equinox ofspring. Prudence might not safely trust either theoaths or hostages of the barbarians, but the conscioussuperiority of the Roman chief was expressed in the dis­tribution of his troops. As soon as fear or hunger com- Belisariuspelled the Goths to evacuate Alba, Porto, and Centumr many citiescellas, their place was instantly supplied; the garrisons of ltalj'of Narni, Spoleto, and Perusia, were reinforced, and theseven camps of the besiegers were gradually encompassedwith the calamities of a siege. The prayers and pilgrim­age of Datius, bishop of Milan, were not without effect;and he obtained one thousand Thracians and Isaurians,to assist the revolt of Liguria against her Arian tyrant.At the same time, John the Sanguinary,b the nephew ofVitalian, was detached with two thousand chosen horse,first to Alba on the Fucine lake, and afterward to thefrontiers of Picenum on the Hadriaticssea. "In thatprovince (said Belisarius), the Goths have deposited theirfamilies and treasures, without a guard or the suspicionof danger. Doubtless they will violate the truce; letthem feel your presence, before they hear of your mo­tions. Spare the Italians; suffer not any fortified placesto remain hostile in your rear; and faithfully reserve thespoil for an equal and common partition. It would notbe reasonable (he added, with a laugh), that whilst weare toiling to the destruction of the drones, our morefortunate brethren should rifle and enjoy the honey."


* Anastasios (p. 40.) has preserved this epithet of Sangninarius, which might dohonour to a tiger.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 115


endless peace. The safety of the east enabled the em­peror to employ his forces against the Vandals; andthe internal state of Africa afforded an honourablemotive, and promised a powerful support, to the Romanarms."
According to the testament of the founder, the Afri- state onh«can kingdom had lineally descended to Hilderic, the Hilderic'.eldest of the Vandal princes. A mild disposition in- ^^0biSclined the son of a tyrant, the grandson of a conqueror,to prefer the counsels of clemency and peace; and hisaccession was marked by the salutary edict, which re­stored two hundred bishops to their churches, and al­lowed free profession of the Athanasian creed .b Butthe Catholics accepted, with cold and transient gratitude,a favour so inadequate to their pretensions, and the vir­tues of Hilderic offended the prejudices of his country­men. The Arian clergy presumed to insinuate that hehad renounced the faith, and the soldiers more loudlycomplained that he had degenerated from the courageof his ancestors. His ambassadors were suspected of asecret and disgraceful negotiation in the Byzantinecourt: and his general, the Achilles/ as he was named,of the Vandals, lost a battle against the naked and dis­orderly Moors. The public discontent was exasperated Geliaer.by Gelimer, whose age, descent, and military fame, gave Mhim an apparent title to the succession: he assumed,with the consent of the nation, the reins of govern-
* The complete series of the Vandal war is related by Procopios in regular andelegant narrative ; (lib. 1. c. 9—25. lib. J. o. 1—13.) and happy would be my lot,could I always tread in the footsteps of such a guide. From the entire and diligentperusal of the Greek text, 1 have a right to pronounce, that the Latin and French ver­sions of Grotius and Cousin may not be implicitly trusted: yet the president Cousinhas been often praised, and Hugo Grotius was the first scholar of a learned age.
• See Ruinart, Hist. Persecut. Vandal, c. 12. p. 589. His best evidence is drawnfrom the Life of St. Fulgentius, composed by one of his disciples, transcribed in agreat measure in the annals of Baronius, and printed in several great collections. Ca­talog. Bibliot. Bunavisrnae, tom. 1. vol.2, p. 1258.)
c For what quality of the mind or body? For speed, or beauty, or valour?—Inwhat language did the Vandals read Homer?—Did be speak German?—The Latinshad four versions: (Fabric. tom. 1. lib. 2. c. 3. p. 297.) yet in spite of the praises ofSeneca, (Consol. c. 26.) they appear to have been more successful in imitating, thanin translating, the Greek poets. But the name of Achilles might be famous and pO-'pular, even among the il I iterate harharian;.







OCR Output








CHAP. XXXIX.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 33


exerted in the cause of innocence and humanity. Suchconspicuous merit was felt and rewarded by a discerningprince; the dignity of Boethius was adorned with thetitles of consul and patrician, and his talents were usefullyemployed in the important station of master of theoffices. Notwithstanding the equal claims of the eastand west, his two sons were created, in their tenderyouth, the consuls of the same year." On the me­morable day of their inauguration, they proceeded insolemn pomp from their palace to the Forum, amidst theapplause of the senate and people; and their joyful father,the true consul of Rome, after pronouncing an orationin the praise of his royal benefactor, distributed a tri­umphal largess in the games of the circus. Prosperousin his fame and fortunes, in his public honours and pri­vate alliances, in the cultivation of science and the con­sciousness of virtue, Bpethius might have been styledhappy, if that precarious epithet could be safely appliedbefore the last term of the life of man.
A philosopher, liberal of his wealth and parsimonious His P«tri-of his time, might be insensible to the common allure-° .ments of ambition—the thirst of gold and employment.And some credit may be due to the asseveration of Boe­thius, that he had reluctantly obeyed the divine Plato,who enjoins every virtuous citizen to rescue the statefrom the usurpation of vice and ignorance. For the in­tegrity of his public conduct, he appeals to the memoryof his country. His authority had restrained the prideand oppression of the royal officers, and his eloquencehad delivered Paulianus from the dogs of the palace. Hehad always pitied, and often relieved, the distress of theprovincials, whose fortunes were exhausted by publicand private rapine; and Boethius alone had courage tooppose the tyranny of the barbarians, elated by conquest,
1 Pigi, Maratori, &c. are agreed that Boethius himself was consul in the year510, his two sons in 522, and in 487, perhaps his father. A desire nf ascrihing thelast of these consulships to the philosopher, had perplexed the chronology of his life.In his honours, alliances, children, he celebrates his. own felicity—his past felicity,(p. 109; 110.)







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIII.


which precede the tumult of a battle. His skilful move­ments intercepted the subsistence of the barbarian, de­prived him of the advantage of the bridge and river, andin the choice of the ground and moment of action, re­duced him to comply with the inclination of his enemy.On the morning of the important day, when the rankswere already formed, a servant, for some trivial fault,was killed by his master, one of the leaders of the He-ruli. The justice or passion of Narses was awakened:he summoned the offender to his presence, and, withoutlistening to his excuses, gave the signal to the ministerof death. If the cruel master had not infringed the lawsof his nation, this arbitrary execution was not less unjust,than it appears to have been imprudent. The Herulifelt the indignity; they halted: but the Roman general,without soothing their rage, or expecting their resolution,called aloud, as the trumpets sounded, that unless they- hastened to occupy their place, they would lose the ho­nour of the victory. His troops were disposed" in a longfront, the cavalry on the wings; in the centre, the heavy-armed foot; the archers and slingers in the rear. TheGermans advanced in a sharp-pointed column, of theform of a triangle or solid wedge. They pierced thefeeble centre of Narses, who received them with a smileinto the fatal snare, and directed his wings of cavalry in­sensibly to wheel on their flanks and encompass the rear.The hosts of the Franks and Alemanni consisted of in­fantry: a sword and buckler hung by their side, and theyused, as their weapons of offence, a weighty hatchet,and hooked javelin, which were only formidable in closecombat, or at a short distance. The flower of the Ro­man archers, on horseback, and in complete armour,skirmished without peril round this immoveable phalanx;supplied by active speed the deficiency of number; and
1 • Pere Daniel (Hist. de la Milice Franchise, tom. 1. p. 17—21.) has exhihited afanciful representation of Ibis hattle, somewhat in the manner of the chevalier Fe-lard, the once famous editor of Polyhios, who fashioned to his own hahits and opinionsall the military operations of antiquity.







OCR Output








264 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIH.


were successively intercepted by the armed vessels sta-'"', tioned by Totila in the bay of Naples. The principalofficer of the Romans was dragged, with a rope roundhis neck, to the foot of the wall, from whence, with atrembling voice, he exhorted the citizens to implore, likehimself, the mercy of the conqueror. They requesteda truce, with a promise of surrendering the city, if no ef­fectual relief should appear at the end of thirty days. In­stead of one month, the audacious barbarian grantedtiiem three, in the just confidence that famine would an­ticipate the term of their capitulation. After the re­duction of Naples and Cumae, the provinces of Lucania,Apulia, and Calabria, submitted to the king of theGoths. Totila led his army to the gates of Rome,pitched his camp at Tibur, or Tivoli, within twentymiles of the capital, and calmly exhorted the senate andpeople to compare the tyranny of the Greeks with theblessings of the Gothic reign.Contrast of The rapid success of Totila may be partly ascribed to»!rtue"d *ne revolution which three years' experience had pro­duced in the sentiments of the Italians. At the command,or at least in the name, of a Catholic emperor, the pope,gtheir spiritual father, had been torn from the Romanchurch, and either starved or murdered on a desolateisland.*1 The virtues of Belisarius were replaced by thevarious or uniform vices of eleven chiefs, at Rome, Ra­venna, Florence, Perugia, Spoleto, &c. who abused theirauthority for the indulgence of lust or avarice. Theimprovement of the revenue was committed to Aiexan-der, a subtle scribe, long practised in the fraud and op­pression of the Byzantine schools; and whose name ofPsalliction, the scissors,' was drawn from the dexterous
K Sylrerins, hishop of Rome, was first transported to Patara, in Lycia, and atlength starred (sub eorum custodia inedia confeotas) in the isle of Palmaria, A. D.538, June 20. (Liberat. in Breviar. c. 22. Anastasius in Sylverio. Baronius, A. D.540. no. 2, 3. Pagi in Vit. Pont. tom. 1. p. 285, 286.) Procopius (Anecdut. o. 1.)accuses only the empress and Antonina.
b Palmaria, a small island, opposite to Tarracina and the coast of the Volsci. (Clu-ver. rtal. Antiq. lib. 3. c. 7. p. 1014.)
'As the Logothete Alexander, and most of his civil and military colleagues, were







OCR Output








12 DECLtNE AND TALL [CHAP. XXXIX.


in the midst of a solemn banquet, was stabbed by thehand, or at least by the command, of his rival. Se­cret and effectual orders had been previously dispatched;the faithless and rapacious mercenaries, at the same mo­ment, and without resistance, were universally massa­cred; and the royalty of Theodoric was proclaimed bythe Goths, with the tardy, reluctant, ambiguous consentof the emperor of the east. The design of a conspiracywas imputed, according to the usual forms, to the pros­trate tyrant; but his innocence, and the guilt of his con­queror/ are sufficiently proved by the advantageous treatywhich force would not sincerely have granted, nor weak­ness have rashly infringed. The jealousy of power, andthe mischiefs of discord, may suggest a more decentapology, and a sentence less rigorous may be pronouncedagainst a crime which was necessary to introduce intoReign of Italy a generation of public felicity. The living: authorting of of this felicity was audaciously praised in his own presencea?d. 493, hy sacred and profane orators ;z but history (in his timea'd'sk was mute anc* inglorious) has not left any just repre-Ang. 30. sentation of the events which displayed, or of the defectswhich clouded, the virtues of Theodoric* One recordof his fame, the volume of public epistles composed byCassiodorius in the royal name is still extant, and has ob­tained more implicit credit, than it seems to deserve.1"
y Procopius (Gothic. lib. 1. c. 1.) approves himself an impartial sceptic ; ■fajri . ..SoXefM rpowai utritfa. Cassiodorius' (in Chron.) and Ennodias (p. 1604.) are loyaland credulous; and the testimony of the Valesian Fragment (p. 718.) may justifytheir belief. Marcellinus spits the venom of a Greek subject—perjuriis illectas, in-terfectusque est. (in Chron.)
* The sonoroas and servile oration of Knnodius was pronounced at Milan or Ra-Tenua in the years 507 or 508. (Sirmond, tom. 1. p. 1615.) Two or three years after­ward, the orator was rewarded with the hishoprick of Pavia, which he held till hisdeath, in the year 521. (Dupin Bibliot. Eccles. tom. 5. p. 11—14. See SaxiiOnomasticon, tom. 2. p. 12.)
* Our best materials are occasional hints from Procopius and the Valesian Frag­ment, which was discovered by Sirmond, and is published at the end of AmmianusMarcellinus. The author's name is unknown, and-his style is harharous; but in hisvarious facts he exhihits the knowledge, without the passions, of a contemporary.The president Montesquieu had formed the plan of a history of Theodoric, which ata distance might appear a rich and interesting subject.
■ The best edition of the Variarumtibri 12. is that of Joh. Garretius ; (Rotomagi,1679. in Opp. Cassiodor. 2 vol. in fol.) but they deserved and required such aneditor as the Marquis Scipio Mafiei, who thought of publishing them at Verona.The Barhara Etegama (as it is ingeniously named by Tiraboschi) is never simple,and seldom perspicuous. . .







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 331


Secondperiod,A. V. C.648—988.


of their clients, who, at the dawn of day, from the town'and country, began to thunder at their door. The du­ties of social life, and the incidents of judicial proceed­ing, were the ordinary subject of these consultations, ahd'the verbal or written opinion of the jurisconsults wasframed according to the rules of prudence and law.The youths of their own order and family were permittedto listen; their children enjoyed the benefit of more private lessons, and the Mucian race was long renownedfor the hereditary knowledge of the civil law. The second period, the learned and splendid age of jurispru­dence, may be extended from the birth of Cicero to thereign of Severus Alexander. A system was •formed,schools were instituted, books were composed, and both'the living and the dead became subservient to the instruction of the student. The tripartite of jEHus Paetus, surnamed Catus, or the Cunning, was preserved asthe oldest work of jurisprudence. Cato the censor de­rived some additional fame from his legal studies, andthose of his son: the kindred appellation of MuciusScaevola was illustrated by three sages of the law; butthe perfection of the science was ascribed to ServiusSulpicius their disciple, and the friend of Tully; and thelong succession, which shone with equal lustre underthe republic and under the Caesars, is finally closed bythe respectable characters of Papinian, of Paul, and ofUlpian. Their names, and the various titles of theirproductions, have been minutely preserved, and the ex­ample of Labeo may suggest some idea of their diligenceand fecundity. That eminent lawyer of the Augustanage divided the year between the city and country, be­tween business and composition; and four hundredbooks are enumerated as the fruit of his retirement. Ofthe collections of his rival Capito, the two hundred andfifty-ninth book is expressly quoted; and few teacherscould deliver their opinions in less than a century of vo­lumes. In the third period, between the reigns of Alex­


z 2







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 133


visions for a voyage, perhaps, of three months. Theproud galleys, which in former ages swept the Mediterra­nean with so many hundred oars, had long since disap­peared; and the fleet of Justinian was escorted only byninety-two light brigantines, covered from the missileweapons of the enemy, and rowed by two thousand ofthe brave and robust youth of Constantinople. Twenty-two generals are named, most of whom were afterwarddistinguished in the wars of Africa and Italy: but thesupreme command, both by land and sea, was delegatedto Belisarius alone, with a boundless power of acting ac­cording to his discretion, as if the emperor himself werepresent. The separation of the naval and military pro­fessions is at once the effect and the cause of modernimprovements in the science of navigation and mari­time war.
In the seventh year of the reign of Justinian, and Departureabout the time of the summer solstice, the whole fleet a. d. 533,'of six hundred ships was ranged in martial pomp before June"the gardens of the palace. The patriarch pronouncedhis benediction, the emperor signified his last commands,the general's trumpet gave the signal of departure, andevery heart, according to its fears or wishes, exploredwith anxious curiosity the omens of misfortune and suc­cess. The first halt was made at Perinthus or Heraclea,where Belisarius waited five days to receive some Thra-cian horses, a military gift of his sovereign. From thencethe fleet pursued their course through the midst of thePropontis; but, as they struggled to pass the straits ofthe Hellespont, an unfavourable wind detained themfour days at Abydus, where the general exhibited a me­morable lesson of firmness and severity. Two of theHuns, who, in a drunken quarrel, had slain one of theirfellow-soldiers, were instantly shewn to the army sus­pended on a lofty gibbet. The national indignity wasresented by their countrymen, who disclaimed the ser­vile laws of the empire, and asserted the free privilege of


K 2







OCR Output








252 DECLINE AND PALL [CHAP. XLII.


quisitions; and of the.ten nations, vanquished by his in-. vincible arms, he esteems the Romans as the least foiv.midable."" According to the orientals, the empire ofNushirvan extended from Ferganah in Transoxiana toYemen or Arabia Felix. He subdued the rebels ofHyrcania, reduced the provinces of Cabul and Zablestanon the banks of the Indus, broke the power of the Eu^thalites, terminated by an honourable treaty the Turkish.war, and admitted the daughter of the great khan intothe number of his lawful wives. Victorious and respect­ed among the princes of Asia, he gave audience, in hispalace of Madain, or Ctesiphon, to the ambassadors of.the world. Their gifts or tributes, arms, rich garments,gems, slaves, or aromatics, were humbly presented at thefoot of his throne; and he condescended to accept from'the king of India, ten quintals of the wood of aloes,a maidseven cubits in height, and a carpet softer than silk, the.skin, as it was reported, of an extraordinary serpent/Conquest Justinian had been reproached for his alliance withthe Ethiopians, as if he attempted to introduce a peo­ple of savage negroes into the system of civilized society.But the friends of the Roman empire, the Axumites, orAbyssinians, maybe always distinguished from the ori­ginal natives of Africa.1 The hand pf nature has flat­tened the noses of the negroes, covered their heads withshaggy wool, and tinged their skin with inherent andindelible blackness. But the olive complexion of theAbyssinians, their hair, shape, and features, distinctlymark them as acolony of Arabs; and this descent is con­firmed by the resemblance of langaageand manners, the
I x The negotiations and 'treaties between Justinian and Cliosroes are copiouslyexplained by Prooopius; (Persic. lib. 2. c. 10. 13, 36—28. Gothic. lib. 2. c. 11.•iS-yAgathias, (lib. 4. p. 141, 142.) and Menandcr. (in Excerpt. Legat, p. 132—147.) Consult Barbeyrac, Hist, des Anciens Traites, torn. 2. p. 154. 181—184,'193—eoo.
- * P'fterbelot, Bibliot. Orient, p. 680, 681. 894, 295.
1 See Buifon, Hist. Naturellc, tom. 3. p. 449. Thia Arab cast of features andcomplexion, which has continued three thousand fear hundred years, (Ladolph.'Hist, et Comment. '/Ethiopia, lib. 1. e. 4.) in the colony of Abyssinia, will 'justify thesuspicion, that race, ns well as climate, must1ia»e contributed to form Uie negroes ofthe adjacent and similar regions. ,.v ,?
C 8


ofthoAbyssini­ans,
A. D. 522.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLII.] OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 305


was intrepid; yet such is the uncertainty of courage,that the two armies were suddenly struck with a panic:they fled from each other, and the rival kings remainedwith their guards in the midst of an empty plain. A shorttruce was obtained; but their mutual resentment againkindled; and the remembrance of their shame renderedthe next encounter more desperate and bloody. Fortythousand of the barbarians perished in the decisive battle,which broke the power of the Gepidae, transferred thefears and wishes of Justinian, and first displayed the cha­racter of Alboin, the youthful prince of the Lombards,and the future conqueror of Italy.1*
The wild people, who dwelt or wandered in the plains Th»Scla-of Russia, Lithuania, and Poland, might be reduced, inthe age of Justinian, under the two great families of theBulgarians' and the Sclavonians, According to theGreek writers, the former, who touched the Euxine andthe lake of Maeotis, derived from the Huns their nameor descent; and it is needless to renew the simple andwell-known picture of Tartar manners. They werebold and dexterous archers, who drank the milk, and feast­ed on the flesh, of their fleet and indefatigable horses;whose flocks and herds followed, or rather guided, themotions of their roving camps; to whose inroads nocountry was remote or impervious, and who were prac­tised in flight, though incapable of fear. The nationwas divided into two powerful and hostile tribes, whopursued each other with fraternal hatred. They eagerlydisputed the friendship or rather the gifts of the empe­ror; and the distinction which nature had fixed between
k I have used, without undertaking to reconcile, the facts in Procopins, (Goth. lib.3. c. 14. lib. 3. c. 33, 34. lib. 4. c. 18. 25.) Paul Diaconus, (de Gestis Langohard.lib. 1. c. 1—23. in Muratori, Script. Rerum Italicarum, toni. 1. p. 405'—419.) andJornandes. (de Success. Regnorum, p. 242.) The patient reader ma; draw somelight from Masoou (Hist, of the Germans, and Annptat. 23.) and de Boat. (Hist. desPeuples, &c. tom. 9—11.)
1 I adopt the appellation of Bulgarians, from Ennodius, (in Panegyr. Theodorici^Opp. Sirmohd, tom. \. p. 1598,1599.) Jornandes, (de Rebus Geticis, c. 5. p. 194. etde Regn. Successione, p. 242.) Theophanes, (p. 185.) and the Chronicles of Cassio-dorius and Marcellinus. The name of Hans is too vague; the tribes of the Cuttiir-'gurians and Utturguriaus are too minute aud too harsh,.







OCR Output








304 ,. bECLINE AND PALt fjOHAP. XLIV.


property.


bis acts till he accomplished the full period of twenty-five years. Women were condemned to the perpetualtutelage of parents, husbands, or guardians \ a sex createdto please and obey was never supposed to have attainedthe age of reason and experience. Such at least was thestern and haughty spirit of the ancient law, which hadbeen insensibly mollified before the time of Justinian,ti. op ;II. The original right of property can only be justifiedRight of by the accident or merit of prior occupancy; and onthis foundation it is wisely established by the philoso­phy of the civilians.7 The savage who hollows a tree,inserts a sharp stone into a wooden handle, or applies astring to an elastic branch, becomes in a state of naturethe just proprietor of the canoe, the bow, or the hatchet..The materials were common to all; the new form, theproduce of his time and simple industry, belongs solely tohimself. His hungry brethren cannot, without a senseof their own injustice, extort from the hunter the gameof the forest overtaken or slain by his personal strengthand dexterity. If his provident care preserves and mul­tiplies the tame animals, whose nature is tractable to thearts of education, he acquires a perpetual title to the useand service of their numerous progeny, which derives itsexistence from him alone. If he incloses and cultivatesa field for their sustenance and his own, a barren waste isconverted into a fertile soil; the seed, the manure, thelabour, create a new value, and the rewards of harvestare painfully earned by the fatigues of the revolving year.In the successive states of society, the hunter, the shep­herd, the husbandman, may defend their possessions bytwo reasons which forcibly appeal to the feelings of thehuman mind—that whatever they enjoy is the fruit oftheir own industry ; and that every man who envies theirfelicity, may purchase similar acquisitions by the exer-
J Institut. lib. 2. tit. 1, 2. Compare the pare and precise reasoning of Cain*and Heineccius (lib. 2. tit. 1. p. 69—91.) with the loose prolixity of Theophilm,(p. 207—265.)The opinions of Uipian are presorted in the Fandects. (lib. 1. tit. 8.leg. 41. no. I.)







OCR Output








3 DECLINE AND FALL. [CHAP. XXXIX.


the ample pay of thirteen thousand men, were requiredfor the least considerable of their armies;+ and the Isau-rians, who guarded not the empire, but the emperor, en­joyed, besides the privilege of rapine, an annual pension<pf five thousand pounds. The sagacious mind of Theo-doric soon perceived that he was odious to the Romans,and suspected by the barbarians; he understood the po­pular murmur, that his subjects were exposed in theirfrozen huts to intolerable hardships, while their kingwas dissolved in the luxury of Greece; and he preventedthe painful alternative of encountering the Goths, as thechampion, or of leading them to the field as the enemy,©f Zeno. Embracing an enterprise wor thy of his courageand ambition, Theodoric addressed the emperor in thefollowing words:—" Although your servant is main­tained in affluence by your liberality, graciously listen tothe wishes of my heart! Italy, the inheritance of yourpredecessors, and Rome itself, the head and mistress ofthe world, now fluctuate under the violence and oppres­sion of Odoacer the mercenary. Direct me, with mynational troops, to march against the tyrant. If I fall,you will be relieved from an expensive and troublesomefriend: if with the divine permission, I succeed, I shallgovern in, your name, and to your glory, the Roman se­nate, and the part of the republic delivered from slaveryby my victorious arms." The proposal of Theodoric wasaccepted, and perhaps had been suggested, by the Byzan­tine court But the forms of the commission, or grant,appear to have been expressed with a prudent ambiguity,which might be explained by the event; and it was leftdoubtful, whether the conqueror of Italy should reign asthe lieutenant, the vassal, or the ally, of the emperor ofthe east.q
Hit march. The reputation both of the leader and of the war dif-
P Malohas, p. 85. In a single action which was decided by the skill and disci­pline of Sabiman, Theodoric could lose live thousand men.'
1 Jornandes, (c. 57. p. 696, 697.) has abridged the great history of Cassiodorius.See, compare, and reconcile, Procopius, (Gothic, lib. 1. c. 1.) the Valesian Frag,meat, (p. 718.) Theophanes, (p. 113.) and Marcellinas,(in Chran.)







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [cHAP. XLII.


respected, the religion of the Magi; and some traces ofpersecution may be discovered in his reign/ Yet heallowed himself freely to compare the tenets of the vari­ous sects; and the theological disputes in which he fre­quently presided, diminished the authority of the priest,and enlightened the minds of the people. At his com­mand, the most celebrated writers of Greece and Indiawere translated into the Persian language; a smoothand elegant idiom, recommended by Mahomet to theuse of paradise; though it is branded with the epithets ofsavage and unmusical, by the ignorance and presumptionof Agathias.s Yet the Greek historian might reason­ably wonder, that it should be found possible to executean entire version of Plato and Aristotle in a foreign dia­lect, which had not been framed to express the spirit offreedom and the subtleties of philosophic disquisition.And, if the reason of the Stagyrite might be equallydark, or equally intelligible, in every tongue, the drama­tic art and verbal argumentation of the disciple of So­crates,11 appear to be indissolubly mingled with the graceand perfection of his Attic style. In the search of uni­versal knowledge, Nushirvan was informed, that the mo­ral and political fables of Pilpay, an ancient Brachman,were preserved with jealous reverence among the trea­sures of the kings of India. The physician Perozes wassecretly dispatched to the banks of the Ganges, with in­structions to procure, at any price, the communicationof this valuable work. His dexterity obtained a tran­script, his learned diligence accomplished the translation;and the fables of Pilpay1 were read and admired in the
1 See Pagi, torn. 2. p. 626. Ia one of Ihe treaties au honourable article was in­serted for the toleration and burial of the Catholics. (Menander, in Excerpt. Legat.p. 142.) Nnsbizad, a son of Nushirvan, was a Christian, a rebel, and—a martyr?(D'Herbelot, p. 681.)
K On the Persian language, and its three dialects, consult d'Anquetil (p. 339—343.) and Jones: (p. 153—185.) aypia. rm yXurrri xm a^woua-oTaTa', is the characterwhich Agathias (lib. 2. p. 66.) ascribes to an idiom renowned iu the east for poeticalsoftness.
h Agathias specifies the Gorgias, Pheedon, Parmenides, and Tima us. Renaudot(Fabricius, Bibliot. Grasc. torn. 12. p. 246—261.) does not mention this barbaric ver-. aion of Aristotle.
'Of these fables, I have seen three copies in three different languages.—1. In







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


confidence was ungratefully betrayed: instead of solicit­ing and expecting the aid of the king of Italy, theyyielded to the first summons a cheerful obedience: andthis province, the first fruits of the Punic wars, was again,1after a long separation, united to the Roman empire.1The Gothic garrison of Palermo, which alone attemptedto resist, was reduced, after a short siege, by a singular-stratagem. Belisarius introduced his ships into thedeepest recess of the harbour; their boats were labo­riously hoisted with ropes and pulleys to the topmasthead, and he filled them with archers, who, from thatsuperior station, commanded the ramparts of the city.After this easy, though successful campaign, the con­queror entered Syracuse in triumph, at the head of hisvictorious bands, distributing gold medals to the people,on the day which so gloriously terminated the year ofthe consulship. He passed the winter season in the pa­lace of ancient kings, amidst the ruins of a Grecian co­lony, which once extended to a circumference of two-and-twenty miles :m but in the spring, about the festivalof Easter, the prosecution of his designs was interruptedby a dangerous revolt of the African forces. Carthagewas saved by the presence of Belisarius, who suddenlylanded with a thousand guards. Two thousand soldiersof doubtful faith returned to the standard of their oldcommander: and he marched, without hesitation, abovefifty miles, to seek an enemy whom he affected to pityand despise. Eight thousand rebels trembled at his ap­proach; they were routed at the first onset, by the dexrterity of their master: and this ignoble victory wouldhave restored the peace of Africa, if the conqueror hadnot been hastily recalled to Sicily, to appease a sedition
'For the conquest of Sicily, compare tho narrative of Procopins with the com­plaints of Totila. (Gothic lib. 1. o. '5. lib.'S. o. 16.) The Gothic queen had latelyrelieved that thankless island. (Var. 9.10.11.)
m The ancient magnitude and. splendour of the five quarters of Syracuse, are deli­neated by Cicero (in Vcrrem, actio2. lib. 4. c. 52, 53)Strabo, (lib, 6. p. 415.,) anild'Orville Sicula. (tom. 2..p. 174—202.) The new city, restored by Augustus, shrunktowards the island.







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 30.


been permitted to mingle with the benefactors of man­kind, if an Italian hermit had not been witness in a visionto the damnation of Theodoric,q whose soul was plunged,by the ministers of divine vengeance, into the volcanoof Lipari, one of the flaming mouths of the infernalworld/ i


CHAP. XL.
Elevation of Jnstin the elder.—Reign of Justinian.—I. The Empress Theodora.—II.Factions of the circus,and sedition of Constantinople.—111. Trade and manufactureof silk.—IV. Finances and taxes.—V. Edifices of Justinian.—Church of St. Sophia.—Fortifications and frontiers of the eastern empire.—Abolition of the schools ofAthens, and the consulship of Rome.
The emperor Justinian was born* near the ruins of Birth of theSardica (the modern Sophia), of an obscure raceb of bar- JSun.barians,0 the inhabitants of a wild and desolate country,A- d-488-
. M»J 5, or
to which the names of Dardania, of Dacia, and of Bui- a. d 483,garia, have been successively applied. His elevation was M*3 l'prepared by the adventurous spirit of his uncle Justin,who, with two other peasants of the same village, de­serted, for the profession of arms, the more useful em­ployment of husbandmen or shepherds.*1 On foot, witha scanty provision of biscuit in their knapsacks, thethree youths followed the high road of Constantinople,and were soon enrolled, for their strength and stature,
1 This legend is related by Gregory I. (Dialog. 4. 36.) and approved by Baronius;(A. D. 526. no. 28.) and both the pope and cardinal are grave doctors, sufficient toestablish a probable opinion.
r Theodnric himself, or rather Cassiodorius, had described in tragic strains thevolcanps of Lipari (Clnver. Sicilia. p. 406—410.) and Vesuvius. (4. 50.)
a There is some difficulty in the date of his birth; (Ludewig in Vit. Justiniani,p. 125.)nbne in the place—the district Bederiana—the village Tauresium, which heafterward decorated with his name and splendour. (D'Anville, Hist, de l'Acad. &c.torn. 31. p. 287. 292.)
b The names of these Dardanian peasants are Gothic, and almost English: Justi­nian is a translation of Mjjraurfu (ujrright); his father Sebatius (in Grreco-barbaroualanguage stipes,) was styled in his village htock (Stock); his mother Bigleniza wasaoflened into Vigilantia.
c Ludewig (p. 127—135.) attempts to justify the Anician name of Justinian andTheodora, and to connect them with a family, from which the house of Austria hasbeen derived.
d See the anecdotes of Procopius, (c. 6.) with the notes of N. Alemannus. TheSjatirist would not have sunk, in the vaguo and decent appellation of yttcpyoc, the(JouzoXo; and <rv$t(So; of Zouaras. Yet why are those names disgraceful ?—and whatGerman baron would not be proud to descend from the Enmssns of the Odyssey?







OCR Output








34 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XXXIX.


excited by avarice, and, as he complains, encouraged byimpunity. In these honourable contests, his spirit soaredabove the consideration of danger, and perhaps of pru­dence; and we may learn, from the example of Cato,that a character of pure and inflexible virtue is the mostapt to be misled by prejudice, to be heated by enthusiasm,and to confound private enmities with public justice.The disciple of Plato might exaggerate the infirmities ofnature, and the imperfections of society; and the mild­est form of a Gothic kingdom, even the weight of alle­giance and gratitude, must be insupportable to the freespirit of a Roman patriot. But the favour and fidelityof Boethius declined in just proportion with the pubKchappiness; and an unworthy colleague was imposed, todivide and control the power of the master of the of­fices. In the last gloomy season of Theodoric, he indig­nantly felt that he was a slave; but as his master hadonly power over his life, he stood without arms andwithout fear against the face of an angry barbarian, whohad been provoked to believe that the safety of the se-Heisac- nate was incompatible with his own. The senator Al-treastpf binus was accused, and already convicted, on the pre­sumption of hoping, as it was said, the liberty of Rome."If Albinus be criminal (exclaimed the orator), the se­nate and myself are all guilty of the same crime. If weare innocent, Albinus is equally entitled to the protec­tion of the laws." These laws might not have punishedthe simple and barren wish of an unattainable blessing;but they would have shewn less indulgence to the rashconfession of Boethius, that, had he known of a conspi­racy, the tyrant never should.1" The advocate of Albinuswas soon involved in the danger, and perhaps the guilt,of his client; their signature (which they denied as aforgery) was affixed to the original address, inviting theemperor to deliver Italy from the Goths; and three wit-
b Si ego scissem tu nescisses. Boethius adopts this answer (lib. 1. pros. 4. p. 53.)of Julius Cuius, whose philosophic death is described bj Seneca. (De TranquillltateAnimi. c. 14.)







OCR Output








320 • DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIV.


Their eh*- Whatever might be the origin or the merit of theinfluence, twelve tables," they obtained among the Romans thatblind and partial reverence which the lawyers of everycountry delight to bestow on their municipal institu­tions. The study is recommended by Cicero" as equallypleasant and instructive. {< They amuse the mind bythe remembrance of old words and the portrait of an­cient manners; they inculcate the soundest principles ofgovernment and morals; and I am not afraid to affirm,that the brief composition of the decemvirs surpasses ingenuine value the libraries of Grecian philosophy. Howadmirable (says Tully, with honest or affected prejudice)is the wisdom of our ancestors! We alone are the mas­ters of civil prudence, and our superiority is the moreConspicuous, if we deign to cast our eyes on the rude andalmost ridiculous jurisprudence of Dracon, of Solon, andpf Lycurgus," The twelve tables were committed to thememory of the young, and the meditation of the old;they were transcribed and illustrated with learned dili­gence: they had escaped the flames of the Gauls, theysubsisted in the age of Justinian, and their subsequentloss has been imperfectly restored by the labours of mo­dern critics.7 But although these venerable monumentswere considered as the rule of right, and the fountain ofjustice," they were overwhelmed by the weight and va­riety of new laws, which, at the end of five centuries, be­came a grievance more intolerable than the vices of the•city." Three thousand brass plates, the acts of the se-
"Bjo^sm; xeti a«£irr«; is the praise of Diodoros, (tom. 1. lib. 12. p. 494.) whichmay be fairly translated by the eleganti atque absoluta breyitate verborum of Aulas1 Gellius. (Noct. Attic. 21.1.).- * Listen to Cicero, (de Legibus, 2. 23.) and his representative Crassus. (de Ora-1 tore, 1. 43, 44.)
y See Heineccius, (Hist. J. R. no. 29—33.) I have followed the restoration ofthe twelve tables by Gravina (Origines J. C. p. 280—307.) and Terasson. (Hist, dela Jurisprudence Romaine, p. 94-T-205.)
1 Finis aequi juris. (Tacit. Annal. 3. 27.) Fons omnia public! et privati juris. (T,[Liv. 3. 34.)
a De principiis juris, et quibus modis ad hanc multitadinem infimtam ac yarietatemlegam perventum sit altius disseram. (Tacit. Annal. 3. 25). This deep disquisition'fills only two pages, but they are the pages of Tacitus. With equal sense, but with'jess energy, Livy (3. 34.) had complained, in hac immeuso aliarmu super alias aceriyatarum Iegum cumulii, &c.







OCR Output








144 DECLINE AND FALL fcHAP. XLI,


decline an honour too conspicuous for a subject: andhis magnanimity might justly disdain what had been sooften sullied by the vilest of tyrants. The glorious pro­cession entered the gate of the hippodrome; was salutedby the acclamations of the senate and people; and haltedbefore the throne where Justinian and Theodora wereseated to receive the homage of the captive monarchand the victorious hero. They both performed the cus­tomary adoration; and, falling prostrate on the ground,respectfully touched the footstool of a prince who hadnot unsheathed his sword, and of a prostitute who haddanced on the theatre: some gentle violence was used tobend the stubborn spirit of the grandson of Genseric;and, however trained to servitude, the genius of Belisa-His »oie rius must have secretly rebelled. He was immediatelyaTd. ass,' declared consul for the ensuing year, and the day of hisJanuary i. inaUgUration resembled the pomp of a second triumph:his curule chair was borne aloft on the shoulders of cap­tive Vandals; and the spoils of war, gold cups, and richgirdles, were profusely scattered among the populace.Hmei°ande" ^ut tne Puresfc reward of Belisarius was in the faithfuliiie van- execution of a treaty, for which his honour had beenpledged to the king of the Vandals. The religious scru­ples of Gelimer, who adhered to the Arian heresy, wereincompatible with the dignity of senator or patrician:but he received from the emperor an ample estate in theprovince of Galatia, where the abdicated monarch retiredwith his family and friends, to a life of peace, of affluence,and perhaps of content.1 The daughters of Hildericwere entertained with the respectful tenderness due totheir age and misfortune; and Justinian and Theodoraaccepted the honour of educating and enriching the fe­male descendants of the great Theodosius. The bravestof the Vandal youth were distributed into five squadrons
1 In the Belisaire of Marmontel, the king and the conqueror of Africa meet, sop,and converse, without recollecting each other. It is surely a fault of that romance,that not only the hero, but all to whom he had been so conspicuously known, appearto have lost their eyes or their memory.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL.


were artfully incensed against him by the remembranceeven of his pious hostilities. The emperor and his ne­phew embraced him as the faithful and worthy championof the church and state; and gratefully adorned theirfavourite with the titles of consul and general; but inthe seventh month of his consulship,Vitalian was stabbedwith seventeen wounds at the royal banquet;8 and Jus­tinian, who inherited the spoil, was accused as the assas­sin of a spiritual brother, to whom he had recentlypledged his faith in the participation of the Christianmysteries.h After the fall of his rival, he was promoted,without any claim of military service, to the office ofmaster-general of the eastern armies, whom it was hisduty to lead into the field against the public enemy.But, in the pursuit of fame, Justinian might have lost hispresent dominion over the age and weakness of his uncle;and instead of acquiring by Scythian or Persian trophiesthe applause of his countrymen,1 the prudent warriorsolicited their favour in the churches, the circus, and thesenate of Constantinople. The Catholics were attachedto the nephew of Justin, who, between the Nestorianand Eutychian heresies, trod the narrow path of inflexi­ble and intolerant orthodoxy.11 In the first days of thenew reign, he prompted and gratified the popular enthu­siasm against the memory of the deceased emperor. Aftera schism of thirty-four years, he reconciled the proudand angry spirit of the Roman pontiff, and spread amongthe Latins a favourable report of his pious respect for theapostolic see. The thrones of the east were filled with
S His power, character, and intentions, are perfectly explained by the count deBoat. (tom. 9. p. 54—81.) He was great-grandson of Aspar, hereditary prince inthe Lesser Scythia, and count of the Gothic fitderati of Thrace. The Bessi, whomhe could influence, are the minor Goths of Jornandes. (c. 51.)
tl Justinian patricii factione dioitur interfectus fuisse. (Victor Tununensis, Chrnn.in Thesaur. Temp. Scaliger, p. 2. p. 7.) Procopius (Anecdot. c. 7.) styles him atyrant, but acknowledges the att\qmunU, which is well explained by Alemannus.
* In his earliest youth (plane adolescens) he had passed some time as a hostagewith Theodoric. For this curious fact, Alemannus (ad Procop. Anecdot. c. 9. p. 34.of the first edition) quotes a MS. history of Justinian, by his preceptor Theophilus.Ludewig (p. 143.) wishes to make him a soldier.
k The ecclesiastical history of Justinian will he shewn hereafter. See Baronins,A. D. 518—521. and the copious article Justinianus in the index to the seventh volumoof his Annals.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [.CHAP. XXXIX


Ipud and specious reproach of disloyalty, of ingratitude,and of insatiate avarice, which could be only excused bythe hard necessity of his situation. He reigned, not as;the monarch, but as the minister, of a ferocious people,whose spirit was unbroken by slavery, and impatient ofreal or imaginary insults. Their poverty was incurable;since the most liberal donatives were soon dissipated inwasteful luxury, as the most fertile estates became barrenin their hands; they despised, but they envied, the la­borious provincials; and when their subsistence hadfailed, the Ostrogoths embraced the familiar resources ofwar and rapine. It had been the wish of Theodoric (suchat least was his dejaration) to lead a peaceable, obscure,obedient life, on the confines of Scythia, till the Byzan­tine court, by splendid and fallacious promises, seducedhim to attack a confederate tribe of Goths, who had beenengaged in the party of Basilisqus. He marched fromhis station in Maesia, on the solemn assurance that be­fore he reached Adrianople, he should meet a plentifulconvoy of provisions, and a reinforcement of eight thou­sand horse, and thirty thousand foot, while the legionsof Asia were encamped at Heraclea to second his opera­tions. These measures were disappointed by mutualjealousy. As he advanced into Thrace, the son of Theo-demir found an inhospitable solitude, and his Gothicfollowers, with a heavy train of horses, of mules, andof waggons, were betrayed by their guides among therocks and precipices of mount Sondis, where he wasassaulted by the arms and invectives of Theodoric theson of Triarius. From a neighbouring height, his art­ful rival harangued the camp of the Walamirs, and brand­ed their leader with the opprobrious names of child, ofmadman, of perjured traitor, the enemy of his blood andnation. "Are you ignorant (exclaimed the son. ofTriarius) that it is the constant policy of the Romans to
as it should seem, than the Wulamirs: but the son of Theodemii is charged with th«ruin of many Roman cities. (Malchns Excerpt. Leg. p. 95.)







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLVI.


could perpetrate the most atrocious of crimes, the im­pious murder of their sovereign.11 For the crime of anambitious centurion, the nation which he oppressed waschastised with the calamities of war; and the same cala­mities, at the end of twenty years, were retaliated andredoubled on the heads of the Persians.1 The generalwho had restored Chosroes to the throne still commandedin the east: and the name of Narses was the formidablesound with which the Assyrian mothers were accustomedto terrify their infants. It is not improbable, that a-na­tive subject of Persia should encourage his master andhis friend to deliver and possess the provinces of Asia.It is still more probable, that Chosroes should animatehis troops by the assurance that the sword which thevdreaded the most would, remain in its scabbard, or bedrawn in their favour. The hero could not depend onthe faith of a tyrant; and the tyrant was conscious howlittle he deserved the obedience of a hero: Narses wasremoved from his military command; he reared an inde­pendent standard at Hierapolis in Syria: he was betrayedby fallacious promises, and burnt alive in the market­place of Constantinople. Deprived of the only chiefwhom they could fear or esteem, the bands which he hadled to victory were twice broken by the cavalry, tram­pled by the elephants, and pierced by the arrows of thebarbarians ; and a great number of the captives were be­headed on the field of battle by the sentence of the victor,who might justly condemn these seditious mercenariesas the authors of accomplices of the death of Maurice.Under the reign of Phocas, the fortifications of Merdin,Dara, Amida, and Edessa, were successively besieged, re-
k Chrislituiis nec pactum esse, nee (idem Dec foedus . . . .' quod si ulla illis fidesfnisset, regem suum non occidi'ssent. Eutych. Annales, torn. 2. p. 211. vers Pocock.
* We must now, for some ages, take our leave of contemporary historians, and de­scend, if it be a descent, from the affectation of rhetoric to the rude simplicity ofchronicles and abridgments. Those of Theophanes, Chronograph, p. 244—279.)andNicephorus, p. 316, supply a regular, but imperfect series of the Persian war; andfur any additional facts 1 quole my special authorities. Theophanes, a courlierwhobecame a monk, was born A. D. 748; Nicephorus, patriarch of Constantinople, whodied A. D. 829, was somewhat youuger: they both suffered in the cause of images.Hackius do Scriptoribus Byzantinis, p. 200—24C.







OCR Output








312 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. JCLlllw


less susceptible than the male; but every rank and pro­fession was attacked with indiscriminate rage, and manyof those who escaped were deprived of the use of their, speech, without being secure from a return of the disor­der/ The physicians of Constantinople were zealousand skilful: but their art was baffled by the varioussymptoms and pertinacious vehemence of the disease:the same remedies were productive of contrary effects,and the event capriciously disappointed their prognosticsof death or recovery. The order of funerals, and theright of sepulchres, were confounded; those who wereleft without friends or servants, lay unburied in theStreets, or in their desolate houses; and a magistratewas authorized to collect the promiscuous heaps of deadbodies, to transport them by land or water, and to interthem in deep pits beyond the precincts of the city. Theirown danger, and the prospects of public distress, awaken­ed some remorse in the minds of the most vicious of man­kind; the confidence of health again revived their pas­sions and habits; but philosophy must disdain the ob­servation of Procopius, that the lives of such men wereguarded by the peculiar favour of fortune or providence.He forgot, or perhaps he secretly recollected, that theplague had touched the person of Justinian himself; butthe abstemious diet of the emperor may suggest, as inthe case of Socrates, a more rational and honourablecause for his recovery.2 During his sickness, the publicconsternation was expressed in the habits of the citizens;and their idleness and despondence occasioned a generalscarcity in the capital of the east.Extent and Contagion is the inseparable symptom of the plague;
duration. * (
A. T). ft. 2 y Thacydides (c. 51.) affirms that the infection conld only be onoe taken j but594. Evagrius, who had family-experience of the plague, observes, that some persons, whohad escaped the first, sank under the second attack; and this repetition is confirmedby Fabius Paallintts. (p. 588.) I observe that on this head physicians are divided:and the nature and operation of the disease may not always be similar.
z It was thus that Socrates had been saved by his temperance, in the plague ofAthens. (Anl. Gellias, Noct. Attic. 2. 1.) Dr. Mead accounts for the peculiar sa­lubrity of religious houses, by the two advantages of seclusion and abstinence, (p.18, 19.)







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP, XL.


saints: most of these churches were decorated with mar­ble and gold; and their various situation was skilfullychosen in a populous square, or a pleasant grove; onthe margin of the sea-shore, or on some lofty eminencewhich overlooked the continents of Europe and Asia.The church of the holy apostles at Constantinople, andthat of St. John at Ephesus, appear to have been framedon the same model: their domes aspired to imitate thecupolas of St. Sophia; but the altar was more judiciouslyplaced under the centre of the dome, at the junction offour stately porticoes, which more accurately expressedthe figure of the Greek cross. The virgin of Jerusalemmight exult in the temple erected by her imperial votaryon a most ungrateful spot, which afforded neither groundnor materials to the architect. A level was formed, byraising part of a deep valley to the height of a mountain.The stones of a neighbouring quarry were hewn into re­gular forms; each block was fixed on a peculiar carriage,drawn by forty of the strongest oxen, and the roadswere widened for the passage of such enormous weights.Lebanon furnished her loftiest cedars for the timbers ofthe church; and the seasonable discovery of a vein ofyed marble, supplied its beautiful columns, two of which,the supporters of the exterior portico, were esteemed thelargest in the world. The pious munificence of the em­peror was diffused over the holy land; and if reasonshould condemn the monasteries of both sexes whichwere built or restored by Justinian, yet charity must ap­plaud the wells which he sunk, and the hospitals whichhe founded, for the relief of the weary pilgrims. Theschi'smatical temper of Egypt was ill intitled to the royalbounty; but in Syria and Africa some remedies were ap­plied to the disasters of wars and earthquakes, and bothCarthage and Antioch, emerging from their ruins, mightrevere the name of their gracious benefactor.p Almostevery saint in the calendar acquired the honours of a
P Justinian once gave forty-five centenaries of gold, (180,0001.) for the repaira ofAntinch after the earthquake, (John Maiala, tom, 2. p. 14ti—■ 149.)







OCR Output








68 DECLINE AND FALL f_CHAP. XLv


fine wool or hair by which the mother-of-pearl affixesitself to the rock, is now manufactured for curiosity ra­ther than use; and a robe obtained from the same sin­gular materials, was the gift of the Roman emperor tothe satraps of Armenia."importation A valuable merchandize of small bulk is capable of
from China - . . 1
by land and defraying the expense or land carnage; and the caravanstraversed the whole latitude of Asia in two hundred andforty-three days from the Chinese ocean to the sea-coast of Syria. Silk was immediately delivered to theRomans by the Persian merchants," who frequented thefairs of Armenia and Nisibis: but this trade, which inthe intervals of truce was oppressed by avarice and jea­lousy, was totally interrupted by the long wars of therival monarchies. The great king might proudly num­ber Sogdiana, and even Serica, among the provinces ofhis empire; but his real dominion was bounded by theOxus, and his useful intercourse with the Sogdoites,beyond the river, depended on the pleasure of their con­querors, the white Huns, and the Turks, who succes­sively reigned over that industrious people. Yet themost savage dominion has not extirpated the seeds ofagriculture and commerce, in a region which is cele­brated as one of the four gardens of Asia; the cities ofSamarcand and Bochara are advantageously seated forthe exchange of its various productions; and their mer­chants purchased from the Chinese3 the raw or rnanu-
« Procopius de Edif. lib. 3. o. 1. These pin;tes de mer are fonnd near Smyrna,Sicily, Corsica, and Minorca; and a pair of gloves of their silk was presented to popeBenedict XIV.
* Procopius Persic. lib. 1. o. 20. lib. 2. c. 25. Gothic. lib. iv. c. 17 . Menanderin Excerpt. Legat. p. 107. Of the Parthian or Persian empire, Isidore of Charax(in Stathmis Parthicis, p. 7, 8. in Hudson, Geograpb. Minor, tom. 2.) has markedthe roads, and Amniianus Marcellinas (lib. 23. c. 6. p. 400.) has enumerated theprovinces.
y The blind admiration of the Jesuits confounds the different periods of the Chi­nese history, They are more critically distinguished by M. de Guignes, (Hist. desHons, tom. 1. part 1. in the Tables, part 2. in the Geograpby; Memoires de I'Acade-mie des Inscriptions, tom. 32. 56. 42, 43.) who discovers the gradual progress ofthe truth of the annals, and the extent of the monarcby, till the Chiistian era. He hadsearched, with a curious eye, the connexions of the Chinese with the nations of thewest: but these conuoxions are slight, casual, and obscure; nor did the Romansentertain a suspicion that the Seres or Sina■ possessed an empire not inferior to their omii







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLII,


the alliance of the Turks; and the ratification of thetreaty was carried by a Roman minister to the foot ofmount Altai. Under the successors of Justinian, thefriendship of the two nations was cultivated by frequentand cordial intercourse; the most favoured vassals werepermitted to imitate the example of the great khan, andone hundred and six Turks, who, on various occasions,had visited Constantinople, departed at the same timefor their native country. The duration and length ofthe journey from the Byzantine court to mount Altai,are not specified: it might have been difficult to marka road through the nameless deserts, the mountains,rivers, and morasses of Tartary; but a curious accounthas been preserved of.the reception of the Roman am­bassadors at the royal camp. After they had been pu­rified with fire and incense, according to a rite still prac­tised under the sons of Zingis, they were introduced tothe presence of Disabul. In a valley of the GoldenMountain, they found the great khan in his tent, seated,in a chair with wheels, to which a horse might be oc­casionally harnessed. As soon as they had deliveredtheir presents, which were received by the proper offi­cers, they exposed, in a florid oration, the wishes of theRoman emperor, that victory might attend the arms ofthe Turks, that their reign might be long and prosper­ous, and that a strict alliance, without envy or deceit,might for ever be maintained between the two mostpowerful nations of the earth. The answer of Disa­bul corresponded with these friendly professions, andthe ambassadors were seated by his side, at a banquetwhich lasted the greatest part of the day: the tent wassurrounded with silk hangings, and a Tartar liquor wasserved on the table, which possessed at least the in­toxicating qualities of wine. The entertainment of thesucceeding day was more sumptuous; the silk hang­ings of the second tent were embroidered in various fi­gures; and the royal seat, the cups, and the vases, were







OCR Output








CHAP.XLII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 215


in the country of the Alanik and Circassians, where theyfirst heard of the splendour and weakness of the Romanempire. They humbly requested their confederate, theprince of the Alani, to lead them to this source of riches;and their ambassador, with the permission of the go­vernor of Lazica, was transported by the Euxine sea toConstantinople. The whole city was poured forth tobehold with curiosity and terror the aspect of a strangepeople; their long hair, which hung in tresses downtheir backs, was gracefully bound with ribbons, but therest of their habit appeared to imitate the fashion of theHuns. When they were admitted to the audience of Their em-Justinian, Candish, the first of the ambassadors, address- cXan-ed the Roman emperor in these terms.—" You see be- ^"°^lci58fore you, O mighty prince, the representatives of thestrongest and most populous of nations, the invincible,the irresistible Avars. We are willing to devote our­selves to your service: we are able to vanquish and de^-stroy all the enemies who now disturb your repose. Butwe expect, as the price of our alliance, as the reward ofour valour, precious gifts, annual subsidies, and fruitfulpossessions." At the time of this embassy, Justinian hadreigned above thirty, he had lived above seventy-fiveyears: his mind, as well as his body, was feeble andlanguid; and the conqueror of Africa and Italy, careless . ■of the permanent interest of his people, aspired only toend his days in the bosom even of inglorious peace. Ina studied oration, he imparted to the senate his resolutionto dissemble the insult, and to purchase the friendship,of the Avars; and the whole senate, like the mandarinsof China, applauded the incomparable wisdom and fore-:sight of their sovereign. The instruments of luxurywere immediately prepared to captivate the barbarians;silken garments, soft and splendid beds, and chains and
*'Tin'Alani are still found in l^ie Genealogical History of the Tartars, (p. 617.)and in d'Anville's maps. They opposed the march of (he generals of Zingis roundthe Caspian sea, and were overthrown in a great battle. (Hist, de Gengiscan, lib. 4.c 9. p. 447.)







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL.


voyages to the Persian Gulf, or the Cape of Good Hope:but their ancestors might equal the labours and successof the present race, and the sphere of their navigationmight extend from the isles of Japan to the straits ofMalacca, the pillars, if we may apply that name, of anOriental Hercules." Without losing sight of land, theymight sail along the coast to the extreme promontory ofAchin, which is annually visited by ten or twelve shipsladen with the productions, the manufactures, and eventhe artificers, of China ;' the island of Sumatra and theopposite peninsula, are faintly delineatedb as the regionsof gold and silver; and the trading cities named in thegeography of Ptolemy, may indicate, that this wealthwas not solely derived from the mines. The direct in­terval between Sumatra and Ceylon is about three hun­dred leagues; the Chinese and Indian navigators wereconducted by the flight of birds and periodical winds,and the ocean might be securely traversed in square-built ships, which, instead of iron, were sewed togetherwith the strong thread of the cocoa-nut. Ceylon, Se-rendib, or Taprobana, was divided between two hostile,princes;, one of whom possessed the mountains, theelephants, and the luminous carbuncle, and the otherenjoyed the more solid riches of domestic industry, fo­reign trade, and the capacious harbour of Trinquemale,which received and dismissed the fleets of the east andwest. In this hospitable isle, at an equal distance (as itwas computed) from their respective countries, the silkmerchants of China, who had collected in their voyages,aloes, cloves, nutmeg, andsantal wood, maintained a free
* For the Chinese navigation to Malacoa and Achin, perhaps to Ceylon, see Re-naudot, (on the two Mahometan Travellers, p. 8—11. 13—17. 141—1.57.) Dampier,(vol. 2. p. 136.) the Hist. Philosophique des deux Indes, (lom. 1. p. 98,) and theHist. Generates des Voyages, (tom. 6. p. 201.)
b The knowledge, or rather ignorance, of Strabo, Pliny, Ptolemy, Arrian, Marcian,&c. of the countries eastward of Cape Cnmorin, is finely illustrated by d'Anville(Antiquitd Geographique de I'lnde, especially p. 161—198.) Our geograpby ofIndia is improved by commerce and conquest ; and has been illustrated by the excel­lent maps and memoirs of Major Rennel. If he extends the sphere of his inquirieswith the same critical knowledge and sagacity, he will succeed, aud may surpass, thefirst of modern geographers.







OCR Output








242 ". DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLII.


preserved his name, extended no farther than the neigh­bourhood of Trebizond. Beyond these limits the forti­fications of Hyssus, of Apsarus, of the Phasis, of Dioscu-rias or Sebastopolis, and of Pity us, were guarded bysufficient detachments of horse and foot; and six princesof Colchos received their diadems from the lieutenants ofvisitor Caesar. One of these lieutenants, the eloquent and phi-A.D.I90. losophic Arrian, surveyed, and has described, the Euxinecoast, under the reign of Hadrian. The garrison whichhe reviewed at the mouth of the Phasis, consisted of fourhundred chosen legionaries; the brick-walls and towers,- the double ditch, and the military engines on the rampart,rendered this place inaccessible to the bkrbarians; butthe new suburbs, which had been built by the merchantsand veterans, required, in the opinion of Arrian, someexternal defence.1 As the strength of the empire wasgradually impaired, the Romans stationed on the Phasiswere either withdrawn or expelled; and the tribe of theLazi,™ whose posterity speak a foreign dialect, and inha­bit the sea-coast of Trebizond, imposed their name anddominion on the ancient kingdom of Colchos. Their in­dependence was soon invaded by a formidable neighbour,who had acquired, by arms and treaties, the sovereigntyof Iberia. The dependant king of Lazica received hissceptre at the hands of the Persian monarch and thesuccessors of Constantine acquiesced in this injuriousclaim, which was proudly urged as a right of immemorialconversion prescription. In the beginning of the sixth century,a?d! 522.' tneir influence was restored by the introduction ofChristianity, which the Mingrelians still profess with be­coming zeal, without understanding the doctrines, orobserving the precepts, of their religion. After the de-
1 Iu the time of Procopius, there were no Roman forts on the Phasis. Pytius andSehastopolis were evacuated on the romour of the Persians; (Goth. lib. 4. c. 4.) butthe latter was afterward restored by Justiniau. (de Edif. lib. 4. o. 7.)
■ In the time of Pliny, Arrian, and Ptolemy, the Lazi were a particular tribe onthe northern skirt of Colchos. (Cellarius, Geograph. Antiq. tom. 2. p. 222.) In theage of Justinian, they spread, or at least reigned, over the whole country. At pre-'sent they have migrated along the coast towards Trehizond, and compose a rude sea*faring people, with a peculiar language. (Chardin, p. 149. Peyssonoel, p. 64.)







OCR Output








78 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL.


imperial treasurer, a whole people, the manufacturers ofTyre arid Berytus, was reduced to extreme misery, andeither perished with hunger, or fled to the hostile domi­nions of Persia." A province might suffer by the decayof its manufactures; but in this example of silk, Proco-pius has partially overlooked the inestimable and lastingbenefit which the empire received from the curiosity ofJustinian. His addition of one-seventh to the ordinaryprice of copper-money may be interpreted with the samecandour; and the alteration, which might be wise, ap­pears to have been innocent; since he neither allayed thepurity, nor enhanced the value, of the gold coin,5 the legalVenality, measure of public and private payments. V. The amplejurisdiction, required by the farmers of the revenue toaccomplish their engagements, might be placed in anodious light, as if they had purchased from the emperorthe lives and fortunes of their fellow-citizens. And amore direct sale of honours and offices was transacted inthe palace, with the permission, or at least with the con­nivance, of Justiniah and Theodora. The claims ofmerit, even those of favour, were disregarded, and it wasalmost reasonable to expect, that the bold adventurer,who had undertaken the trade of a magistrate, shouldfind a rich compensation for infamy, labour, danger, thedebts which he had contracted, and the heavy interestwhich he paid. A sense of the disgrace and mischief ofthis venal practice, at length awakened the slumberingvirtue of Justinian; and he attempted, by the sanctionof oaths' and penalties, to guard the integrity of his go­vernment: but, at the end of a year of perjury, his rigo­rous edict was suspended, and corruption licentiously
'For an aureus, one-sixth of an ounce of gold, instead of two hundred and ten, hegave no more than one hundred and eighty folios, or ounces of copper. A dispropor­tion of the mint, below the market price,must have soon produced a scarcity of smallmoney. In England, twelve pence in copper would sell for no more than seven pence.(Smith's Inquiry into the Wealth of Nations, vol. 1. p. 49.) For Justinian's goldcoin, seo Evngrius. (lib. 4. c. 30.)
i The oath is conceived in the most formidable words. (Novell. 8. tit. 3.) Thedefaulters imprecate on themselves, quicquid habent teloram armamentaria cceli; thepart of Judas, Hie heprosy of Gehazi the tremor of Cain, &c. besides all temporaltrains.







OCR Output








CHAP. XXXIX.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 13


They exhibit the forms, rather than the substance, ofhis government; and we should vainly search for thepure and spontaneous sentiments of the barbarian amidstthe declamation and learning of a sophist, the wishes ofa Roman senator, the precedents of office, and the vagueprofessions, which in every court, and on every occasion,compose the language of discreet ministers. The repu­tation of Theodoric may repose with more confidenceon the visible peace and prosperity of a reign of thirty-three years; the unanimous esteem of his own times,and the memory of his wisdom and courage, his justiceand humanity, which was deeply impressed on the mindsof the Goths and Italians.
The partition of the lands of Italy, of which Theodo-ric assigned the third part to his soldiers, is honourablyarraigned as the sole injustice of his life. And even thisact may be fairly justified by the example of Odoacer,the rights of conquest, the true interest of the Italians,and the sacred duty of subsisting a whole people, who,on the faith of the promises, had transported themselvesinto a distant land.0 Under the reign of Theodoric, andin the happy climate of Italy, the Goths soon multipliedto a formidable host of two hundred thousand men,dand the whole amount of their families may be computedby the ordinary addition of women and children. Their,invasion of property, a part of which must have been al­ready vacant, was disguised by the generous but impro­per name of hospitality; these unwelcome guests wereirregularly dispersed over the face of Italy, and the lot ofeach barbarian was adequate to his birth and office, thenumber of his followers, and the rustic wealth which hepossessed in slaves and cattle. The distinctions of nobleand plebeian were acknowledged;* but the lands of every
c Procopias, Gothic.*lib. 1. c. 1. Variorum 2. Maffei (Verona Illastrat. p. i.p. 228.) exaggerates the injustice of the Goths, whom he hated as an Italian noble.The plebeian Muratori crouches under their oppression.
d Procopius, Goth. lib. 3. o. 4. 21. Ennodius describes (p. 1612,1613.) themilitary arts and increasing numbers of the Goths.
'When Theodoric gare his sister to the king of the Vandals, she sailed for Africawith a guard of one thousand noble Goths, each of « hom was attended by five armed







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 433


Gregory solicited the aid of some friendly merchants to•convey him in a basket beyond the gates of Rome, and■modestly concealed himself some days among the woods
and mountains, till his retreat was discovered, as it is said,
by a celestial light.
'. The pontificate of Gregory the Great, which lastedthirteen years six months and ten days, is one of the most the Great,-edifying periods of the history of the church. His vir­tues, and even his faults, a singular mixture of simplicityand cunning, of pride and humility, of sense and super- ™ o™^0stition, were happily suited to his station and to the tern- ^ep8g~per of the times. In his rival, the patriarch of Constan- March is.'tinople, he condemned the antichristian title of universalbishop, which the successor of St. Peter was too haughtyto concede, and too feeble to assume; and the ecclesias- j11^5^"tical jurisdiction of Gregory was confined to the triplecharacter of bishop of Rome, primate of Italy, and apo­stle of the west. He frequently ascended the pulpit, andkindled, by his rude, though pathetic eloquence, thecongenial passions of his audience: the language of theJewish prophets was interpreted and applied, and theminds of the people, depressed by their present calami­ties, were directed to the hopes and fears of the invisibleworld. His precepts and example defined the model ofthe Roman liturgy ;z the distribution of the parishes, thecalendar of festivals, the order of processions, the serviceof the priests and deacons, the variety and change of sa­cerdotal garments. Till the last days of his life, he offi­ciated in the canon of the mass, which continued abovethree hours; the Gregorian chant" has preserved the vo­cal and instrumental music of the theatre, and the rough
1 The Lord's prayer consists of half a dozen lines: the Sacramentarius and Anli-phonarius of Gregory fill eight hundred and eighty folio pages; (toin. 3. p. 1—880.)yet these only constitute a part of the Ordo Ronianus, which Mabillon has illustratedand Fleury has abridged. (Hist. Eccles. torn. 8. p. 139—152.)
a I learn from the abbe Dubos, (Reflections sur la Poesie et la Peinture, torn. 3.p. 174,175.) that the simplicity of the Ambrosinn chant was confined to four modes,while the more perfect harmony of the Gregorian comprised the eight modes or fif­teen chords of the ancient music. He observes (p. 332.) that the connoisseurs ad­mire the preface and many passages of the Gregorian oflicc. . ■.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV1.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 441


consumed the day in single combats, or ineffectual skir­mishes. The darkness of the night, and the separationof the Romans, afforded the Persian monarch an oppor­tunity of revenge; and one of their camps was sweptaway by a rapid and impetuous assault. But the reviewof his loss, and the consciousness of his danger, deter­mined Chosroes to a speedy retreat; he burnt, in hispassage, the vacant town of Melitene; and, without con­sulting the safety of his troops, boldly swam the Euphra­tes on the back of an elephant. After this unsuccessfulcampaign, the want of magazines, and perhaps some in­road of the Turks, obliged him to disband or divide hisforces; the Romans were left masters of the field, andtheir general Justinian, advancing to the relief of the Per-sarmenian rebels, erected his standard on the banks ofthe Araxes. The great Pompey had formerly haltedwithin three days' march of the Caspian :* that inland seawas explored for the first time, by a hostile fleet,' andseventy thousand captives were transplanted from Hyr-cania to the isle of Cyprus. On the return of spring,Justinian descended into the fertile plains of Assyria, theflames of war approached the residence of Nushirvan, theindignant monarch sunk into the grave, and his last edict His death,restrained his successors from exposing their person in abattle against the Romans. Yet the memory of thistransient affront was lost in the glories of a long reign;and his formidable enemies, after indulging their dreamof conquest, again solicited a short respite from the cala­mities of war.8
* Ha bad vanquished the Albanians, who brought into the field twelve thousandhorse and sixtj thousand foot; but he dreaded the multitude of venomous reptiles,whose existence may admit of some doubt, as well as that of the neighbouring Ama­zons. Plutarch, in Pompeio, torn. 2. p. 1165,1166.
'In the history of the world I can only receive two navies on the Caspian.—l.Ofthe Macedonians, when Patrocles, the admiral of the kings of Syria, Seleucus andAntiochus, descended most probably the river Oxus, from the confines of India. (Plin.Hist. Natnr. 6. 21.) 2. Of the Russians, when Peter I. conducted a fleet and armyfrom the neighbourhood of Mosoow to the coast of Persia. (Bell's Travels, vol. 2. p.325—352.) He justly observes, that such martial pomp had never been displayedon the Volga.
I For these Persian wars and treaties, see Menander, in Excerpt. Legal, p. 113—125. Theophanea Byzant. apud Photiura, eod. 64. p. 77. 80,81. Eragrius, lib. 5.c. 7—15. Theophylact, lib. 3. c. 9—16. Agathias, lib. 4. p. 140.VOL. V. 1 G







OCR Output








18 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XXXIX.


in the vicissitude of human affairs, had granted to oneof the descendants of Attila. Sabinian, a general illus­trious by his own and his father's merit, advanced at thehead of ten thousand Romans; and the provisions andarms, which filled a long train of waggons, were distri­buted to the fiercest of the Bulgarian tribes. But, in thefields of Margus, the eastern powers were defeated by theinferior forces of the Goths and Huns; the flower andeven the hope of the Roman armies was irretrievably de­stroyed; and such was the temperance with which Theo-doric had inspired his victorious troops, that as theirleader had not given the signal of pillage, the rich spoilsH!s nival of the enemy lay untouched at their feet/ Exasperated
armament. n • v i i
a. d.509. by this disgrace, the Byzantine court dispatched twohundred ships and eight thousand men to plunder thesea-coast of Calabria and Apulia; they assaulted the an­cient city of Tarentum, interrupted the trade and agri­culture of a happy country, and sailed back to the Hel­lespont, proud of their piratical victory over a peoplewhom they still presumed to consider as their Romanbrethren/ Their retreat was possibly hastened by theactivity of Theodoric; Italy was covered by a fleet of athousand light vessels," which he constructed with incre­dible dispatch; and his firm moderation was soon re­warded by a solid and honourable peace. He maintainedwith a powerful hand the balance of the west, till it wasat length overthrown by the ambition of Clbvis; andalthough unable to assist his rash and unfortunate kins­man the king of the Visigoths, he saved the remains of
y See the Gothic transactions on the Danube and in IUyricum, in Jornandes, (c. 58.p. 699.) Ennodins, (p. 1607—1610.) Marcellinus, (io Chron. p. 44. 47, 48.) and Cas-siodorius. (in Chrou. and Var. 3. 23. 50. 4. 13. 7. 4. 24. 8. 9—11. 21. 9. 8, 9.)
z I cannot forbear transcrihing the liberal and classic style of count Marceltinas.Romanus comes domesticoram, et Rusticas comes scholariorum cam centum armatisnavibus, totidemque dromonibus, octo milliamilitum armatorum secum ferentibus, addevastanda Italiae littora processerunt, et usque ad Tarentum antiquissiman civitatemaggressi sunt; reniensoque mari inhouestam victoriani quam piraticii ausu RomaniesRomanis rapuerunt, Anastasio Cfesari reportarunt. (in Chron. p. 48.) See Variar. 1.16. 2. 38.
1 See the royal orders and instructions. (Var. 4. 15. 5. 16—20.) These armedboats should be still smaller than the thousand vessels of Agamemnun at the siege ofTroy.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI.


Photius11 was exposed to her secret persecutions in thecamp beyond the Tigris. Enraged by his own wrongs,and by the dishonour of his blood, he cast away in histurn the sentiments of nature, and revealed to Belisariusthe turpitude of a woman who had violated all the dutiesof a mother and a wife. From the surprise and indig­nation of the Roman general, his former credulity ap­pears to have been sincere: he embraced the knees ofthe son of Antonina, adjured him to remember his ob­ligations rather than his birth, and confirmed at thealtar their holy vows of revenge and mutual defence.The dominion of Antonina was impaired by absence;and when she met her husband, on his return from thePersian confines, Belisarius, in his first and transientemotions, confined her person, and threatened her life.Photius was more resolved to punish, and less prompt topardon: he flew to Ephesus; extorted from a trustyeunuch of his mother the full confession of her guilt;arrested Theodosius and his treasures in the church ofSt. John the apostle, and concealed his captives, whoseexecution was only delayed, in a secure and sequesteredfortress of Cilicia. Such a daring outrage against publicjustice could not pass with impunity; and the cause ofAntonina was espoused by the empress, whose favourshe had deserved by the recent services of the disgraceof a prefect, and the exile and murder of a pope. At theend of the campaign, Belisarius was recalled; he com­plied, as usual, with the imperial mandate. His mindwas not prepared for rebellion; his obedience, howeveradverse to the dictates of honour, was consonant to thewishes of his heart; and when he embraced his wife, atthe command, and perhaps in the presence, of the em­press, the tender husband was disposed to forgive or tobe forgiven. The bounty of Theodora reserved for hercompanion a more precious favour. "I have found,(she said) my dearest patrician, a pearl of inestimable
a Theophanes (Chronograph, p. 204.) styles him Photinus, the son-in-law of Be-lisaf us; and lie is copied by the Hisloria Minella and Anaslasius.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 303


of bis eyes, and reduced by envy to beg his bread,"Give a penny to Belisarius the general!" is a fictionof later times,2 which has obtained credit, or ratherfavour, as a strange example of the vicissitude of for­tune.*
If the emperor could rejoice in the death of Belisarius, Death andhe enjoyed the base satisfaction only eight months, the of just?last period of a reign of thirty-eight, and a life of eighty- 56J.three years. It would be difficult to trace the character NoT-of a prince who is not the most conspicuous object ofhis own times: but the confessions of an enemy may bereceived as the safest evidence of his virtues. The re­semblance of Justinian to the bust of Domitian, is ma­liciously urged ;* with the acknowledgment, however, of• a well-proportioned figure, a ruddy complexion, and apleasing countenance. The emperor was easy of access,patient of hearing, courteous and affable in discourse, anda master of the angry passions, which rage with such de­structive violence in the breast of a despot. Procopiuspraises his temper to reproach him with calm and de­served in the fragment of John Malala, (torn. 2. p. 234—243.) and the exact Chroni­cle of Theophanes. (p. 194—204.) Cedrenus(Corapend. p. 387, 388.) and Zonaras,■(torn. 2.-Kb. 14. p. 69.) seem to hesitate between the obsolete troth and the growingfalsehood.
z The sonrce of this idle fable may be derived from a miscellaneous work of Uintwelfth century, the Chiliads of John Tzetzes, a monk. (Basil. 1546. ad calcem Lyco-phront, Colon. Allobrog. 1614. in Corp. Poet. Graec.) He relates the blindness andbeggary of Belisarius in ten ml gar or political verses, (Chiliad 3. no. 88. 339—348.in Corp. Poet. Graso. torn. 2. p. 311.)
EKTTWjLUt %v\tvot xpaTftiy i0M TO fjU\lM
BfAlropioa oj3oXov Sort Tee orga-nXa-TH
Ov tvvv (A/it l9e$t01i, affon/^Xoi 3* o $9«vo;.'This moral or romantic tale was imported into Italy with the language and manu­scripts of Greece; repeated before the end of the fifteenth century by Crinitus, Pon-tanus, and Volaterranus j attacked by Alciat, for the honour of tlis law; and defend­ed by Baronius (A. D. 461. no. 2, &c.) for the honour of the church. Yet Tzetzeshimself had read in other chronicles, that Belisarius did not lose his sight, and thathe recovered his fame and fortunes.
» The statue in the villa Borghese at Rome, in a silting posture, with an open hand,which is vulgarly given to Belisarius, may be ascribed with more dignity to Augustusin the act of propitiating Nemesis. (Winkeluian, Hist, de l'Art. torn. 3. p. 266.) Exnocturno visa etiam stipem, quotanois, die certo, emendicabat a populo, cavam sna>num asses porrigentibus pncbens. (Sueton. in August, c. 91. with an excellent noteof Casaubon.)
» The ritoor of Domitian is stigmatized, quaintly enough, by the pen of Tacitus;(in Vit. Agricol. c. 45.) and has been likewise noticed by the younger Pliny, (Pa-negyr. c. 48.) and Suetonius, (in Domitian. c. 18. and Casaubon ad looum.) Proco­pius (Anecdot. c. 8.) foolishly believes that only one bust of Domitian bad reachedthe sixth century,







OCR Output








66 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL,


which the Phoenicians extracted from a shell-fish, wasrestrained to the sacred person and palace of the empe­ror; and the penalties of treason were denounced againstthe ambitious subjects, who dared to usurp the preroga­tive of the throne."
«uk b^tue 'neef*not exP'a'n tnat SZ'^P *s originally spun from theRomans, bowels of a caterpillar, and that it composes the goldentomb from whence a worm emerges in the form of abutterfly. Till the reign of Justinian, the silk-worms,who feed on the leaves of the white mulberry-tree, wereconfined to China; those of the pine, the oak, and theash, were common in the forests both of Asia andEurope; but as their education is more difficult,' andtheir produce more uncertain, they were generally ne­glected, except in the little island of Ceos, near the coastof Attica. A thin gauze was procured from their webs;and Cean manufacture, the invention of a woman, forfemale use, was long admired both in the east and atRome. Whatever suspicions may be raised by the gar­ments of the Medes and Assyrians, Virgil is the mostancient writer, who expressly mentions the soft woolwhich was combed from the trees of the Seres or Chi­nese ;q and this natural error, less marvellous than thetruth, was slowly corrected by the knowledge of a valu­able insect, the first artificer "of the luxury of nations.That rare and elegant luxury was censured in the reign
and satisfy the reader. I doubt whether his book, especially in England, is as wellknown as it deserves to be.
° Historical proofs of this jealousy hare been occasionally introduced, and manymore might have been added; but the arhitrary acts of despotism were justified bythe sober and general declarations of law. (Codex. Theodosian. lib. 10. tit. 2t. leg. 3.Codex. Justiniau. lib. 11. Lit. 8. leg 5.) An inglorious permission, and necessaryrestriction, was applied to the mimiE, the female-dancers. (Cod. Theodos. lib. 15. tit. 7.leg. 11.)
P In the history of insects (far more wonderful than Ovid's Metamorphoses) thesilk-worm holds a conspicuous place. The bombyx of the isle of Ceos, as describedby Pliny (Hist. Natur. 11. 26, 27. with the notes of the two learned Jesuits, Har-duuin and Brotier), may be illustrated by a similar species in China (Memoires surles Chinois, tom. 2. p. 575—598.) ; but oor silk-worm, as well as the white mulberry-tree, were unknown to Theophrastus and Pliny.
1 Georgio. 2.121. Serica quando venerint in usum plauissime non scio : suspicortamen in Julii Caesaris aevo, nam ante non invenio, says Justus Lipsius. (Excursus 1.ad Tacit. Anual. 2. 32.) See Dion Cassius. (lib. -13. p. 358. edit.) Reiniar, andPausanias, (lib. 6. p. 519.) the first who describes, however strangely, the Serioinsect.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. Jl 1


Mountains, and the Girdle of the Earth. The sides ofthe hills were productive of minerals; and the iron forges,*for the purpose of war, were exercised by the Turks, themost despised portion of the slaves of the great khan ofthe Geougen. But their servitude could only last till aleader, bold and eloquent, should arise, to persuade hiscountrymen, that the same arms, which they forged fortheir masters, might become, in their own hands, theinstruments of freedom and victory. They sallied fromthe mountain ;b a sceptre was the reward of his advice;and the annual ceremony, in which a piece of iron washeated in the fire, and a smith's hammer was successivelyhandled by the prince and his nobles, recorded for agesthe humble profession and rational pride of the Turkishnation. Bertezena, their first leader, signalized theirvalour and his own in successful combats against theneighbouring tribes; but when he presumed to ask inmarriage the daughter of the great khan, the insolentdemand of a slave and a mechanic was contemptuouslyrejected. The disgrace was expiated by a more noblealliance with a princess of China % and the decisive battle,which almost extirpated the nation of the Geougen, es­tablished in Tartary the new and more powerful empireof the Turks. They reigned over the north; but theyconfessed the vanity of conquest, by their faithful attach­ment to the mountain of their fathers. The royal en­campment seldom lost sight of mount Altai, from whencethe river Irtish descends to water the rich pastures of the
The mountain is endowed with a sensitive action in its roots or nerves; and their vi­bration, at the command of God, is the cause of earthquakes. (D'H«rbelot, p. 230,231.)
a The Siberian iron is the best and most plentiful in the world ; and in the southernparts, above sixty mines are now worked by the industry of the Russians. (Strablen-berg, Hist, of Siberia, p. 342, 387. Voyage en Siberie, par l'Abbe Chappe d'Auter-oche, p. 603. 608. edit! in 12mo. Amsterdam, 1770.) The Turks offered iron forsate; yet the Roman amhassadors, wi#i strange obstinaoy, persisted in believing thatit was all a trick, and that their country produced none. (Menander in Excerpt. Leg.p. 152.)
b Of Irgana-kon. (Abulghazi Khan, Hist. Genealogique des Tartars, P. 2. 0. 5.p. 71—77. c. 15. p. 155.) The tradition of the Moguls, of the four hundred andfifty years which they passed in the mountains, agrees with the Chinese periods ofthe history of the Huns and Turks, (De Guignes, tom. 1. part 2. p. 376.) and thetwenty generations, from the restoration to Zingis.







OCR Output








CHAP. XXXIX.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 35


nesses of honourable rank, perhaps of infamous reputa­tion, attested the treasonable designs of the Roman pa­trician.0 Yet his innocence must be presumed, since hewas deprived by Theodoric of the means of justification,and rigorously confined in the tower of Pavia, while thesenate, at the distance of five hundred miles, pronounceda sentence of confiscation and death against the most il­lustrious of its members. At the command of the bar­barians, the occult science of a philosopher was stigma­tized with the names of sacrilege and magic.d A devoutand dutiful attachment to the senate was condemned ascriminal by the trembling voices of the senators them­selves; and their ingratitude deserved the wish or predic­tion of Boethius, that, after him, none should be foundguilty of the same offence/
While Boethius, oppressed with fetters, expected each His imPri-
, , soument
moment the sentence or the stroke of death, he com- »nd death,posed in the tower of Pavia the Consolation of Philosophy; A' '324'a golden volume, not unworthy of the leisure of Platoor Tully, but which claims incomparable merit from thebarbarism of the times, and the situation of the author.The celestial guide, whom he had so long invoked atRome and Athens, now condescended to illumine hisdungeon, to revive his courage, and to pour into hiswounds her salutary balm. She taught him to comparehis long prosperity and his recent distress, and to con­ceive new hopes from the inconstancy of fortune. Rea­son had informed him of the precarious condition of hergifts; experience had satisfied him of their real value;
0 The characters of his two delators, Basilius, (Var. 2. 10, 1 1. 4. 22.) and Opilio,(5. 41. 8. 16.) are illustrated, not much to their honour, in the Epistles of Cassio-dorins, which likewise mention Decoratus, (5. 31.) the worthless colleague of Boe­thius. (lib. 3. pros. 4. p. 193.)
d A severe inquiry was instituted into the crime of magic : (Var. 4. 22, 23. 9. 18.)and it wad believed that many necromancers had escaped by making their jailorsmad ; for mad, I should read drunk.
e Boethius had composed his own Apology, (p. 53.) perhaps more interesting thanhis Consolation. We must be content with the general view of his honours, prinei*.pies, persecution, &c. (lib. 1. pros. 4. p. 42—62.) which may be compared with theshort and weighty words of the Valesian Fragment, (p. 723.) An anonymous writer(Sinner, Catalog. MSS. Bibliot. Bern. tom. i. p. 287.) charges him home with ho­nourable and patriotic treason.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLII.


Petra was placed in the valour of fifteen hundred Per­sians, who resisted the assaults of the Romans, whilst ina softer vein of earth, a mine was secretly perforated.The wall, supported by slender and temporary props,hung tottering in the air; but Dagisteus delayed the at­tack till he had secured a specific recompence; and thetown was relieved before the return of his messengerfrom Constantinople. The Persian garrison was reducedto four hundred men, of whom no more than fifty wereexempt from sickness or wounds; yet such had beentheir inflexible perseverance, that they concealed theirlosses from the enemy, by enduring, without a murmur,the sight and putrifying stench of the dead bodies of theireleven hundred companions. After their deliverance,the breaches were hastily stopped with sand-bags; themine was replenished with earth; a new wall was erectedon a frame of substantial timber; and a fresh garrisonof three thousand men was stationed at Petra, to sustainthe labours of a second siege. The operations, both ofthe attack and defence, were conducted with skilful ob­stinacy; and each party derived useful lessons from theexperience of their past faults. A battering ram was in­vented, of light construction and powerful effect; it wastransported and worked by the hands of forty soldiers;and as the stones were loosened by its repeated strokes,they were torn with long iron hooks from the wall.From those walls, a shower of darts was incessantlypoured on the heads of the assailants, but they were mostdangerously annoyed by a fiery composition of sulphurand bitumen, which in Colchos might with some pro­priety be named the oil of Medea. Of six thousand Ro­mans who mounted the scaling-ladders, their general,Bessas, was the first, a gallant veteran of seventy yearsof age: the courage of their leader, his fall, and extremedanger, animated the irresistible effort of his troops; andtheir prevailing numbers oppressed the strength, withoutsubduing the spirit, of the Persian garrison. The fate







OCR Output








438 . DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLVL


perience of seven hundred years might convince the ri­val nations of the impossibility of maintaining their con­quests, beyond the.fatal limits of the Tigris and Eu­phrates. Yet the emulation of Trajan and Julian wasawakened by the trophies of Alexander, and the sove­reigns of Persia indulged the ambitious hope of restoringthe empire of Cyrus.a Such extraordinary efforts ofpower and courage will always command the attention ofposterity; but the events by which the fate of nations isnot materially changed, leave a faint impression on thepage of history, and the patience of the reader would beexhausted by the repetition of the same hostilities, un­dertaken without cause, prosecuted without glory, andterminated without effect. The arts of negotiation, un­known to the simple greatness of the senate and theCassars, were assiduously cultivated by the Byzantineprinces ; and the memorials of their perpetual embassies1"repeat, with the same uniform prolixity, the language offalsehood and declamation, the insolence of the barba­rians, and the servile temper of the tributary Greeks.Lamenting the barren superfluity of materials, I havestudied to compress the narrative of these uninterestingtransactions: but the just Nushirvan is still applaudedas the model of oriental kings, and the ambition of hisgrandson Chosroes prepared the revolution of the east,which was speedily accomplished by the arms and thereligion of the successors of Mahomet.Conquest In the useless altercations that precede and justify theby Ne™e" quarrels of princes, the Greeks and the barbarians ac-a'd'wo ^use^ eacn other of violating the peace which had been&c. concluded between the two empires about four years be­fore the death of Justinian. The sovereign of Persia andIndia aspired to reduce under his obedience the province
* Miss! qui. . . reposcerent. . . veteres Persarum ac Macedonum terminos, sequeinvasurum posscssa Cyro et post Alexandre, per vaniloquentiam ac minus jaciebat.Tacit. Annal. 6. 31. Such was the language of the Arsacidae; I have repeatedlymarked the lofty claims of the Sassanians.
h See the emhassies of Menander, extracted and preserved in the tenth century bythe order of Constautiae Porpbyrogcuitus.







OCR Output








decline and fall [chap. XL-


laws, and the legacies of the deceased friends, on thephilosophic chairs of Athens. Epicurus bequeathed tohis disciples the gardens which he had purchased foreighty minae, or two hundred and fifty pounds, with afund sufficient for their frugal subsistence and monthlyfestivals ;h and the patrimony of Plato afforded an annualrent, which, in eight centuries, was gradually increasedfrom three to One thousand pieces of gold.' The schoolsof Athens were protected by the wisest and most virtuousof the Roman princes. The library, which Hadrianfounded, was placed in a portico, adorned with pictures,statues, and a roof of alabaster, and supported by onehundred columns of Phrygian marble. The public sa­laries were assigned by the generous spirit of the Anto-nines; and each professor, of politics, of rhetoric, of thePlatonic, the Peripatetic, the Stoic, and the Epicureanphilosophy, received an annual stipend of ten thousanddrachmae, or more than three hundred pounds sterling.11After the death of Marcus, these liberal donations, and theprivileges attached to the thrones of science, were abo­lished and revived, diminished and enlarged: but somevestige of royal bounty may be found under the success­ors of Constantine; and their arbitrary choice of anunworthy candidate might tempt the philosophers ofAthens to regret the days of independence and poverty.1It is remarkable, that the impartial favour of the Anto-nines was bestowed on the four adverse sects of philoso­phy, which they considered as equally useful, or at leastas equally innocent. Socrates had formerly been theglory and the reproach of his country; and the first les-
b See the testament of Epicurus inDiogen. Laert. lib. 10. segm. 16—20. p. 611,612. A single epistle (ad Familiarcs, 13.1.) displays the injustice of the Areopagus,the fidelity of the Epicureans, the dexterous politeness of Cicero, and the mixture ofcontempt and esteem with which the Roman senators considered the philosopby andphilosophers of Greece.
1 Damascius, in Vit. Isidor. apud Photium, cod. 242. p. 1054.
k See Lncian (in Eunech. tom. 2. p. 350—359. edit. Reitz); Philostratus (in Vit.Sophist. lib. 2. c. 2.), and Dion Cassius, or Xiphilin, (lib. 71. p. 1195.) with theireditors Du Soul, Olearius, and Reimar, and, above all, Salmasius (ad Hist. August.p. 72.) A judicious philosopher, (Smith's Weallh of Nations, vol. 2. p. 340—374.)prefers the free-contributions of the students toa lixed stipend forlhe professor.
1 Brncker, Hist. Ciit. 1'hilosoph. tom. 2. p. 310, &c.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 227


assembly of Nushirvan and his nobles. The Indian ori­ginal, and the Persian copy, have long since disappeared:but this venerable monument has been saved by thecuriosity of the Arabian caliphs, revived in the modernPersic, the Turkish, the Syriac, the Hebrew, and theGreek idioms, and transfused through successive ver­sions into the modern languages'of Europe. In theii*present form, the peculiar character, the manners andreligion of the Hindoos, are completely obliterated ; andthe intrinsic merit of the fables of Pilpay is far inferior tothe concise elegance of Phaedrus and the native graces ofLa Fontaine. Fifteen moral and political sentences areillustrated in a series of apologues: but the compositionis intricate, the narrative prolix, and the precept obviousand barren. Yet the Brachman may assume the meritof inventing a pleasing fiction, which adorns the naked*ness of truth, and alleviates, perhaps, to a royal ear, theharshness of instruction. With a similar design, to ad­monish kings that they are strong only in the strengthof their subjects, the same Indians invented the game ofchess, which was likewise introduced into Persia underthe reign of Nushirvan.k
The son of Kobad found his kingdom involved in a Peace andwar with the successor of Constantine; and the anxiety ^"Ro­of his domestic situation inclined him to grant the sus- '™q'53S_pension of arms, which Justinian was impatient to pur-539-chase. Chosroes saw the Roman ambassadors at hisfeet. He accepted eleven thousand pounds of gold, asthe price of an endless or indefinite peacesome mutual
Greek, translated by Simeon Seth, (A. D. 1100.) from the Arabic, and published bySlarck, at Berlin, in 1697, in 12mo. 2. In Latin, a version from the Greek, SapientiaIndoram, inserted by pere Ponssin at the end of bis edition of Pachymer. (p. 547—620. edit. Roman.) 3. In French, from the Turkish, dedicated, in 1540, to sultanSoliman. Contes et Fables Indiennes de Bidpai et de Lokman, par M. M. Gallandet Cardonne, Paris, 1778, 3 vols, in 12mo. Mr. Wharton (History of English Poetry,toI. 1. p. 129—131.) takes a larger scope.
k See the Historia Shahilndi of Dr. Hyde. (Syntagm. Dissertat. loin. 2. p. 61—69.)
'The endless peace (Procopins, Persic, lib. 1. c. 21.) was concluded or ratified inthe sixth year, and third consnlship of Jnstinian. (A. O. 533, between January 1,and April 1. Pagi, torn. 2. p. 550.) Maroellinus, in his Chronicle, uses the style ofthe Medes and Persians.







OCR Output








234 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLII.


Syria affected to tremble for the safety of their defence­less cities. Yet this diversion had already succeeded inforcing Chosroes to return with loss and precipitation;and if the skill of Belisarius had been seconded by dis­cipline and valour, his success might have satisfied thesanguine wishes of the public, who required at his handsthe conquests of Ctesiphon and the deliverance of the
A. D.542. captives of Antioch. At the end of the campaign, hewas recalled to Constantinople by an ungrateful court,but the dangers of the ensuing spring restored his confi­dence and command; and the hero, almost alone, wasdispatched, with the speed of post-horses, to repel, byhis name and presence, the invasion of Syria. He found
'. / the Roman generals, among whom was a nephew ofJustinian, imprisoned by their fears in the fortificationsof Hierapolis. But instead of listening to their timidcounsels, Belisarius commanded them to follow him toEuropus, where he had resolved to collect his forces, andto execute whatever God should inspire him to achieveagainst the enemy. His firm attitude on the banks ofthe Euphrates restrained Chosroes from advancing to­wards Palestine; and he received with art and dignity,the ambassadors, or rather spies, of the Persian monarch.The plain between Hierapolis and the river was coveredwith the squadrons of cavalry, six thousand hunters talland robust, who pursued their game without the appre­hension of an enemy. On the opposite bank the am­bassadors descried a thousand Armenian horse, who ap­peared to guard the passage of the Euphrates. The tentof Belisarius was of the coarsest linen, the simple equi­page of a warrior, who disdained the luxury of the east.Around his tent, the nations who marched uuder his'standard were arranged with skilful confusion. TheThracians and Illyrians were posted in the front, theHeruli and Goths in the centre; the prospect was closedby the Moors and Vandals, and their loose array seemedto multiply their numbers. Their dress was light and


*







OCR Output








CHAP.XLVI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


evening are separated by the brightness of the meridiansun: the Arcadius of the palace arose the Caesar of thecamp; and the honour of Rome and Heraclius was glori­ously retrieved by the exploits and trophies of six adventur­ous campaigns. It was the duty of the Byzantine historiansto have revealed the causes of his slumber and vigilance.At this distance we can only conjecture, that he was en­dowed with more personal courage than political resolu­tion; that he was detained by the charms, and perhapsthe arts, of his niece Martina, with whom, after the deathof Eudocia, he contracted an incestuous marriage ;d andthat he yielded to the base advice of the counsellors, whourged as a fundamental law, that the life of the empe­ror should never be exposed in the field." Perhaps hewas awakened by the last insolent demand of the Per­sian conqueror: but at the moment when Heraclius as­sumed the spirit of a hero, the only hopes of the Romanswere drawn from the vicissitudes of fortune which mightthreaten the proud prosperity of Chosroes, and must befavourable to those who had attained the lowest period ofdepression.' To provide for the expenses of war, wasthe first care of the emperor; and for the purpose of coUlecting the tribute, he was allowed to solicit the benevo­lence of the eastern provinces. But the revenue no longerflowed in the usual channels; the credit of an arbitraryprince is annihilated by his power; and the courage ofHeraclius was first displayed in daring to borrow theconsecrated wealth of churches, under the solemn vow ofrestoring, with usury, whatever he had been compelled to
a Nicephorus, (p. 10, 11.) who brands this marriage with the names of nQta-potand aBejjurcy, is happy to observe, that of two sons, its incestuous fruit, the elderwas marked by Providence with a stiff neck, he younger with the loss of hearing.
« George of Pisidia, (Acroas. 1.112—125. p. 5.) who states the opinions, acquitsthe pusillanimous counsellors of any sinister views. Would he have excused theproud and contemptuous admonition of Crispus 1 EiriGxma^w m* ijw /WiMi ifarai
1 Eiraf tit axgov ijpfAfVrtf ius£ia?EffaXjUeva; \tyova-iv oux airtiKuriviTdSia-Qai to \ofjrov IV xaxoj; ta. fttja-iS&c
Avriff-rpj■fait Si, &c. George Pisid. Acroas. 1. 51, &c. p. 4.The orientals are not less fond of remarking this strange vicissitude: and I remember«om« story of Khosrow Parviz, not very unlike tho ring of Polyeratss of Samos.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.J OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


ing, and again crossing each other, inclosed within theirsolid and lofty arches a fortified space,5 where Vitigesestablished a camp of seven thousand Goths to interceptthe convoys of Sicily and Campania. The granaries ofRome were insensibly exhausted, the adjacent countryhad been wasted with fire and sword: such scanty sup­plies as might yet be obtained by hasty excursions, werethe reward of valour, and the purchase of wealth: theforage of the horses, and the bread of the soldiers, neverfailed; but in the last months of the siege, the peoplewere exposed to the miseries of scarcity, unwholesomefood,' and contagious disorders. Belisarius saw andpitied their sufferings; but he had foreseen, and hewatched the decay of their loyalty, and the progress oftheir discontent. Adversity had awakened the Romansfrom the dreams of grandeur and freedom, and taughtthem the humiliating lesson, that it was of small momentto their real happiness, whether the name of their mas­ter was derived from the Gothic or the Latin language.The lieutenant of Justinian listened to their just com­plaints, but he rejected with disdain the idea of flight orcapitulation; repressed their clamorous impatience forbattle; amused them with the prospect of sure andspeedy relief; and secured himself and the city from theeffects of their despair or treachery. Twice in eachmonth he changed the station of the officers to whomthe custody of the gates was committed: the variousprecautions, of patroles, watchwords, lights, and music,were repeatedly employed to discover whatever passed onthe ramparts; out-guards were posted beyond the ditch,and the trusty vigilance of dogs supplied the moredoubt-
« Prooopius (Goth. lib. 2. c. 3.) has forgot to name these aqueducts : nor can such adouble intersection, at such a distance from Rome, be clearly ascertained from thewritings of Froutinus Fabretti and Ksohinard, de Aquis and de Agro Romano, orfrom the local maps of Lometi and Cingolani. Seven or eight miles from the city,(fifty stadia) on the road to Alhano, between the Latin and Appian ways, I discernthe remains of an aqueduct (prohably the Septimian), a series (six hundred and thir­ty paces) of arches twenty-five feethigh. (u+bXm ia-ayav.)'
i They made sausages, iXXttra;, of mule's flesh: unwholesome, if the animal* haddied of the plague. Otherwise the famous Bologna sansages are said to be made of■Mi flesh. (Voyages de Lahat, tom. 2. p. 218.)







OCR Output








646 DECLINE AND FALL ([CHAP. XXIV.


Legal in- ft is the first care of a reformer to prevent any futureof Justi- reformation. To maintain the text of the Pandects, the,mt" Institutes, and the Code, the use of ciphers and abbrevia­tions was rigorously proscribed; and as Justinian recol­lected, that the perpetual edict had been buried under theweight of commentators, he denounced the punishmentof forgery against the rash civilians who should presumeto interpret or pervert the will of their sovereign. Thescholars of Accursius, of Bartolus, of Cujacius, shouldblush for their accumulated guilt, unless they dare to dis­pute his right of binding the authority of his successors,iand the native freedom of the mind. But ifee. emperorwas unable to fix his own inconstancy; and, while heboasted of renewing the exchange of Diomede, of trans*muting brass into gold,* he discovered the necessity ofSecond purifying his gold from the mixture of baser alloy, Si$the' Code! had not elapsed from the publication of the Code,
• ^^jg34' before he condemned the imperfect attempt, by a newand more accurate edition of the same work, which he•enriched with two hundred of his own laws, and fifty de­cisions of the darkest and more intricate points of jurisrprudence. Every year, or, according to Procopius, eachday of his long reign, was marked by some legal innova­tion. Many of his acts were rescinded by himself; ma­ny were rejected by his successors, many have been oblirteratedby time; but the number of sixteen edicts, andThe Novels1one hundred and sixty-eight note LS,b has been admittedinto the authentic body of the civil jurisprudence. Inthe opinion of a philosopher, superior to the prejudices,of his profession, these incessant, and for the most parttrifling, alterations, can be only explained by the venal
■a Xgwsa ^aXxEwv, EXirojujSot EVVEa0oK»v,apud Ifumeruni patrem omnis virtutis, (1st.Praifat. ad Pandect.) A line of 'Milton or Tasso would surprise us io au act of •par­liament. Quae omnia obtinere sanctmus in omne aevum. Of the first code, he says,.'(2d Pracfat.) in aeternum valiturum. Man and for evert
b Noveliae is a classic adjective, but a harharous substantive, (Ludewig. p. 245.)Justinian never collected them himself: the nine collations, the 'legal standard ofmodern tribunals, consists of ninety-eight novels; but the number was increased bythe diligence of Julian, Haloander, and Coutius. (Ludewig, p. 249. 258. Aleman.Not. in Anecdot. p. 98.)


a:
—565.


 







OCR Output








28 ~ DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XXXIX.


of his life, in a moment of jealousy and resentment, heprevented the choice of the Romans, by nominating apope in the palace of Ravenna. The danger and furiouscontests of a schism were mildly restrained, and the lastdecree of the senate was enacted to extinguish, if it werepossible, the scandalous venality of the papal elections.*vices of I have descanted with pleasure on the fortunate con-j»jorern jij.i^ of jta]y . kut our fancy must not hastily conceivethat the golden age of the poets, a race of men withoutvice or misery, was realised under the Gothic conquest.The fair prospect was sometimes overcast with clouds;the wisdom of Theodoric might be deceived, his powermight be resisted, and the declining age of the monarchwas sullied with popular hatred and patrician blood. Inthe first insolence of victory, he had been tempted to de­prive the whole party of Odoacer of the civil and eventhe natural rights of society ;° a tax unseasonably im­posed after the calamities of war, would have crushed therising agriculture of Liguria; a rigid pre-emption of corn,which was intended for the public relief, must have ag­gravated the distress of Campania. These dangerousprojects were defeated by the virtue and eloquence ofEpiphanius and Boethius, who, in the presence of Theo­doric himself, successfully pleaded the cause of the-peo-ple :p but if the royal ear was open to the voice of truth,a saint and a philosopher are not always to be found atthe ear of kings. The privileges of rank, or office, or fa­vour, were too frequently abused by Italian fraud andGothic violence, and the avarice of the king's nephewwas publicly exposed, at first by the usurpation, and af-
n See Cassiodorios, (Var. 8.15.9.15,16.) Anastasius, (in Symmaeho, p. 31.) andthe eighteenth Annotation of Mascon. Baronius, Pagi, and most of the Catholicdoctors, confess, with an angry growl, this Gothic usurpation.
° He disabled them—a licentia testandi; and all Italy mourned—lamentahili jus-'titio. I wish to believe, that these penalties were enacted against the rebels, whohad violated theiroathof allegiance ; bnt the testimony of Ennodius (p. 1675—1678.)is the more weighty, as be lived and died under the reign of Theodoric.
P Ennodias, in Vit. Epiphan, p. 1689,1690. Boethius de Consolatione Philosophise,lib. 1. pros. 4. p. 45—47. Respect, but weigh, the passions of the saint and thesenator; and fortify or alleviate thsir complaints by the various hints of Cassiodorioi.(2. 8. 4. 36. 8. 5.)







OCR Output








384 ,n . DECLINE AND FALL, [CHAIVXLIV.


a new system of criminal jurisprudence ;b and the empe­rors, from Augustus to Justinian, disguised their increasingrigour under the names of the original authors. But theinvention and frequent use of extraordinary pains, pro­ceeded from the desire to extend and conceal the progressof despotism. In the condemnation of illustrious Ro­mans, the senate was always prepared to confound, at thewill of their masters, the judicial and legislative powers.It was the duty of the governors to maintain the peaceof their province, by the arbitrary and rigid administra­tion of justice; the freedom of the city evaporated in theextent of empire, and the Spanish malefactor, who claim­ed the privilege of a Roman, was elevated by the com­mand of Galba on a fairer and more lofty cross.0 Occa­sional rescripts issued from the throne to decide the ques­tions, which, by their novelty or importance, appearedto surpass the authority and discernment of a proconsul.Transportation and beheading were reserved for honour­able persons; meaner criminals were either hanged orburnt, or buried in the mines, or exposed to the wildbeasts of the ampitheatre. Armed robbers were pursuedand extirpated as the enemies of society; the drivingaway horses or cattle was made a capital offence ;d butsimple theft was uniformly considered as a mere civil andprivate injury. The degrees of guilt, and the modes ofpunishment, were too often determined by the discretionof the rulers, and the subject was left in ignorance of thelegal danger which he might incur by every action ofhis life. .•:. .' , ..'
Me»»nr« A sin, a vice, a crime, are the objects of theology,
of guilt. b )jie penai |aw (Legen Cornelia-, Pompeiic, Juliae, of Sylla, Pompey, and the
Caesars), see the sentences of Panlus (lib. 4. tit. 18—30. p. 497—528. edit Schult-ing), the Gregorian Code (Fragment. lib. 19. p 705, 706. in Schulting), the CollatioLegum Mosa carom et Romanarum, (tit. 1. 15.) the Theodosian Code, (lib. 9.) theCode of Justinian, (lib. 9.) the Pandects, (48.) the Institutes, (lib. 4. tit. 18.) and theCreek version of Theophilus. (p. 917—926.)
e It was a guardian who had poisoned his ward. The crime was atrocious; yetthe punishment is reckoned by Suetonius (c. 9.) among the acts iu which Galhashewed himself acer vehemens, etin delictis coercendis immodicus.
d The ahactores or ahigeatores, who drove one horse, or two mares or oxen, orfive hngs, or ten gotts, were subject to capital punishment, (Paul. Sentent. Recept.lib 4. tit 18. p. 497, 498.) Hadrian (ad Coocil. Bosticaj), most severe where the







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


rank and merit had been long depressed by the jealousyof the court. Theodora had injured him in the rightsof a private citizen, the marriage of his children, and thetestament of his brother; and although his conduct waspure and blameless, Justinian was displeased that he shouldbe thought worthy of the confidence of the malecontents.The life of Germanus was a lesson of implicit obedience;he nobly refused to prostitute his name and character inthe factions of the circus: the gravity of his manners wastempered by innocent cheerfulness; and his riches werelent without interest to indigent or deserving friends.His valour had formerly triumphed over the Sclavoniansof the Danube and the rebels of Africa: the first reportof his promotion revived the hopes of the Italians: andhe was privately assured, that a crowd of Roman desert­ers would abandon, on his approach, the standard ofTotila. His second marriage with Malasontha, thegrand-daughter of Theodoric, endeared Germanus to theGoths themselves; and they marched with reluctanceagainst the father of a royal infant, the last offspring ofthe line of Amali.d A splendid allowance was assignedby the emperor : the general contributed his private for­tune ; his two sons were popular and active; and he sur­passed, in the promptitude and success of his levies, theexpectation of mankind. He was permitted to selectsome squadrons of Thracian cavalry: the veterans, aswell as the youth of Constantinople and Europe, engagedtheir voluntary service; and as far as the heart of Ger­many, his fame and liberality attracted the aid of the bar­barians. The Romans advanced to Sardica; an army ofSclavonians fled before their march; but within twodays of their final departure, the designs of Germanuswere terminated by his malady and death. Yet the im­pulse which he had given to the Italian war still continued
nancies, fratri sno, Alemannus has proved that he was the son of the emperor'sbrother.
d Conjuncta Aniciorum gent cam Amala stirpe spem ad boo utri usque generispromittit. (Jornandes, e. 60. p. 703.) He -wrote at Ravenna before the death ofTotila. '.' ..' .'-v . .'.. . i
VOL. V. U







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


3. Nature and society impose the strict obligation of Inirepairing an * injury; and the sufferer by private, injus­tice, acquires a personal right and a legitimate action.If the property of another be intrusted to our care, therequisite degree of care may rise and fall according to.the benefit which we derive from such temporary posses­sion; we are seldom made responsible for inevitable ac­cident, but the consequences of a voluntary fault mustalways be imputed to the author.8 A Roman pursued andrecovered his stolen goods by a civil action of theft; theymight pass through a succession of pure and innocenthands, but nothing less than a prescription of thirty yearscould extinguish his original claim. They were restoredby the sentence of the praetor, and the injury was com-,pensated by double, or threefold, or even quadruple da­mages, as the deed had been perpetrated by secret fraudor open rapine, as the robber had bean surprised in thefact, or detected by a subsequent research. The Aquilianlavvh defended the living property of a citizen, his slavesand cattle, from the stroke of malice or negligence: thehighest price was allowed that could be ascribed to thedomestic animal at any moment of the year precedinghis death, a similar latitude of thirty days was granted onthe destruction of any other valuable effects. A perso­nal inj ury is blunted or sharpened by the manners of thetimes and the sensibility of the individual: the pain qcthe disgrace of a word or blow cannot easily be appreci­ated by a pecuniary equivalent. The rude jurisprudenceof the decemvirs had confounded all hasty insults, whichdid not amount to the fracture of a limb, by condemningthe aggressor to the common penalty of twenty-five
According to the etymology of fcenus and -r»jtof, the principal is supposed to generatethe interest: a breed of barren metal, exclaims Shakespeare—and the stage ia theecho of the public voice.
s Sir William Jones has given an ingenions and rational Essay on the Law ofBailment. (London, 1781, p. 147. in 8vo.) He is perhaps the only lawyer equallyconversant with the year-books of Westminster, the Commentaries of Ulpian, theAttic pleadings of Isieas, and the sentences of Arabian and Persian cadhis.
h Noodt (Opp. torn. 1. p. 137—172.) has composed a separate treatise, ad LegemAquiliam. (Pandect, lib. 9. lit. 2.) , ^ '('
VOL. V. 2 C







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 271


if the wisdom of Belisarius had not been defeated by themisconduct of his officers. He had previously sent or­ders to Bessas to second his operations by a timely sallyfrom the town; and he had fixed his lieutenant, Isaac,by a peremptory command, to the station of the port.But avarice rendered Bessas immoveable; while theyouthful ardour of Isaac delivered him into the hands ofa superior enemy. The exaggerated rumour of his de­feat was hastily carried to the ears of Belisarius: hepaused; betrayed in that single moment of his life someemotions of surprise and perplexity; and reluctantlysounded a retreat to save his wife Antonina, his trea­sures, and the only harbour which he possessed on theTuscan coast. The vexation of his mind produced anardent and almost mortal fever; and Rome was left with­out protection to the mercy or indignation of Totila.The continuance of hostilities had embittered the na­tional hatred, the Arian clergy was ignominkmsly drivenfrom Rome; Pelagius, the archdeacon, returned with­out success from an embassy to the Gothic camp; anda Sicilian bishop, the envoy or nuncio of the pope, wasdeprived of both his hands, for daring to utter falsehoodsin the service of the church and state.
Famine had relaxed the strength and discipline of the Ra™
takeo by
garrison at Rome. They could derive no effectual ser- the Goths,vice from a dying people; and the inhuman avarice of Dee. iff6'the merchant at length absorbed the vigilance of the go­vernor. Four Isaurian sentinels, while their companionsslept, and their officers were absent, descended by a ropefrom the wall, and secretly proposed to the Gothic kingto introduce his troops into the city. The offer was en­tertained with coldness and suspicion; they returned insafety; they twice repeated their visit; the place wastwice examined; the conspiracy was known and disre­garded; and no sooner- had Totila consented to theattempt, than they unbarred the Asinarian gate, andgave admittance to the Goths. Till the dawn of day they







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL*


planted in Ceylon, and the missionaries pursued the foot­steps of commerce to the extremities of Asia." TwoPersian monks had long resided in China, perhaps in theroyal city of Nankin, the seat of a monarch addicted to-foreign superstitions, and who actually received an em­bassy from the Isle of Ceylon. Amidst their pious oc­cupations they viewed with a curious eye the commondress of the Chinese, the manufactures of silk, and themyriads of silkworms, whose education (either on treesor in houses) had once been considered as the labour ofqueens/ They soon discovered that it was impracticableto transport the short-lived insect, but that in the eggsa numerous progeny might be preserved and multipliedin a distant climate. Religion or interest had morepower over the Persian monks than the love of theircountry: after a long journey, they arrived at Constan­tinople, imparted their project to the emperor, and wereliberally encouraged by the gifts and promises of Justi­nian. To the historians of that prince, a campaign at thefoot of Mount Caucasus has seemed more deserving ofa minute relation, than the labours of these missionariesof commerce, who again entered China, deceived a jea­lous people by concealing the eggs of the silkworm in ahollow cane, and returned in triumph with the spoils ofthe east. Under their direction, the eggs were hatchedat the proper season by the artificial heat of dung; theworms were fed with mulberry leaves; they lived and la­boured in a foreign climate: a sufficient number of but­terflies was saved to propagate the race, and trees wereplanted to supply the nourishment of the rising genera­tions. Experience and reflection corrected the errors ofa new attempt, and the Sogdoite ambassadors acknow­ledged, in the succeeding reign, that the Romans werenot inferior to the natives of China in the education of
e See the Christian missions in India, in Cosmas, (lib. 3. p. 178, 179. lib. 11.p. 337.) and consult Aaseman. Bibliot. Orient. (tom. i. p. 413—548.)
f The invention, manufacture, and general use of silk in China, may be seen inDohalde. (Description Generale de la Chine, tom. 2. p. 165. 205—223.) The pro-vince of Chckian is the most renowned both for quantity and quality.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLII.


licited the friendship and aid of Chosroes. The saga­cious monarch instantly discerned the use and impor­tance of Colchos; and meditated a plan of conquest,which was renewed at the end of a thousand years byShah Abbas, the wisest and most powerful of his suc­cessors.1" His ambition was fired by the hope of launch­ing a Persian navy from the Phasis, of commandingthe trade and navigation of the Euxine sea, of deso­lating the coast of Pontus and Bithynia, of distressing,perhaps of attacking, Constantinople, and of persuadingthe barbarians of Europe to second his arms and coun­sels against the common enemy of mankind. Under thepretence of a Scythian war, he silently led his troops tothe frontiers of Iberia; the Colchian guides were pre­pared to conduct them through the woods and along theprecipices of mount Caucasus*; and a narrow path waslaboriously formed into a safe and spacious highway, forthe march of cavalry, and even of elephants. Gubazeslaid his person and diadem at the feet of the king of Per­sia; his Colchians imitated the submission of their prince:and after the walls of Petra had been shaken, the Romangarrison prevented, by a capitulation, the impending furyof the last assault. But the Lazi soon discovered, thattheir impatience had urged them to choose an evil moreintolerable than the calamities which they strove to es­cape. The monopoly of salt and corn was effectuallyremoved by the loss of those valuable commodities. Theauthority of a Roman legislator was succeeded by thepride of an oriental despot, who beheld with equal dis­dain, the slaves whom he had exalted, and the kingswhom he had humbled before the footstool of his throne.The adoration of fire was introduced into Colchos bythe zeal of the Magi: their intolerant spirit provokedthe fervour of a Christian people; and the prejudice of
V See the amusing letters of Pietro della Valle, the Roman traveller. (Viaggi, torn.2. p. 207. 209. 213. 216. 266. 286. 300. torn. 3. p. 54. 127.) In the years 1618,1G19, and 1620, he conversed with Shall Abbas, and strongly encouraged a designwhich might have united Persia and Europe agaiust their common enemy theTurk.







OCR Output








CHAP. XL,] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 50.


laws. The first edict of Justinian, which was often re­peated, and sometimes executed, announced his firm re­solution to support the innocent, and to chastise theguilty of every denomination and colour. Yet the ba­lance of justice was still inclined in favour of the bluefaction, by the secret affection, the habits, and the fearsof the emperor; his equity, after an apparent struggle,submitted, without reluctance, to the implacable passionsof Theodora, and the empress never forgot, or forgave,the injuries of the comedian. At the accession of theyounger Justin, the proclamation of equal and rigorousjustice indirectly condemned the partiality of the formerreigns. "Ye blues, Justinian is no more! ye greens,he is still alive !"c
A sedition, which almost laid Constantinople in ashes, Sedition ofwas excited by the mutual hatred and momentary recon- nopie^*'*'ciliation of the two factions. In the fifth year of his "'£*meareign, Justinian celebrated the festival of the ides of Ja-D 53?«nuary: the games were incessantly disturbed by the cla- a°n4 7morous discontent of the greens; till the twenty-secondrace, the emperor maintained his silent gravity ; at lengthyielding to his impatience, he condescended to hold, inabrupt sentences, and by the voice of a crier, the mostsingular dialogued that ever passed between a prince andhis subjects. Their first complaints were respectful andmodest; they accused the subordinate ministers of op­pression, and proclaimed their wishes for the long lifeand victory of the emperor. "Be patient and attentiveye insolent railers (exclaimed Justinian)! be mute, yeJews, Samaritans, and Manichasans!" The greens stillattempted to awaken his compassion. "We are poor,we are innocent, we are injured, we dare not pass through
c See John Malala. (torn. 2. p. 147); yet he owns that Justinian was attached tothe blues. The seeming discord of the emperor and Theodora, is perhaps viewedwith too much jealoosy and refinement by Procopius. (Anccdot. c. 10.) See Aleman.Praifat. p. 6.
d This dialogue, which Tlicophanes has preserved, exhibits the popular language,as well as the manners, of Constantinople in the seventh century. Their Greek ismingled with many strange and barbarous words, for which Ducange cannot alwaysfind a meaning or etymology.


F 2







OCR Output








44 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL.


ratified by the affection or the fears of his uncle. Aftersome time the langour of mind and body, to which hewas reduced by an incurable wound in his thigh, indis­pensably required the aid of a guardian. He summonedthe patriarch and senators; and in their presence so­lemnly placed the diadem on the head of his nephew,who was conducted from the palace to the circus, andsaluted by the loud and joyful applause of the people.The life of Justin was prolonged about four months,but from the instant of this ceremony, he was consideredas dead to the empire, which acknowledged Justinian,in the forty-fifth year of his age, for the lawful sovereignof the east.1 >The reign From his elevation to his death, Justinian governed
of Justinian, . °' ,
a. d. 527, the Roman empire thirty-eight years seven months andAf'iJ.565, thirteen days. The events of his reign, which excitenot. 14. our curious attention by their number, variety, and im­portance, are diligently related by the secretary of Beli-sarius, a rhetorician whom eloquence had promoted tothe rank of senator, and prefect of Constantinople. Ac­cording to the vicissitudes of courage or servitude, ofcharacter favour or disgrace, Procopiusm successively composed theries of Pro- history, the panegyric, and the satire, of his own times,oopias. The eight books of the persian, Vandalic, and Gothic
wars," which are continued in the five books of Agathais,deserve our esteem as a laborious and successful imita­tion of the Attic, or at least of the Asiatic writers of an­cient Greece. His facts are collected from the personal
1 The reign of the elder Justin may be found in the three Chronicles of Marcellinns,Victor, and John Malala, (torn. 2. p. 130—150.) the last of whom (in spite of Hody,Prolegom. no. 14.39. edit. Oxon.) lived soon after Justinian, (Jortin's Remarks,&c.vol. 4. p. 383.) in the Ecclesiastical History of Evagrius, (lib. 4. c. 1—3. 9.) andthe Excerpta of Theodorus, (Lector, no. 37.) and in Cedreuus, (p. 362—366.) andZonaras, (lib. 14. p. 58—61.) who may pass for an original.
m See the characters of Procopius and Agathias in La Mothe le Vayer, (torn. 8. p.144—174.) Vosias, (de Historicis Gracis, lib. 2. c. 22.) and Fabricius. ( Bibliot. Gcsec.lib. 5. c. 5. torn. 6. p. 248—278.) Their religion, an honourable problem, betraysoccasional conformity, with a secret attachment to Paganism and philosophy.
n In the seven first books, two Persic, two Vandalic, and three Gothic, Procopiushas borrowed from Appian the divisions of provinces and wars : the eighth hook, though:it bears the name of Gothic, is a miscellaneous and general supplement down to thespring of the year 553, from whence it is continued by Agathias till 559. (Pagi>Critica, A. D. 579. no, 5.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLVI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 4Q5


cities and palaces of Assyria were open for the first timeto the Romans. By a just gradation of magnificentscenes, they penetrated to the royal seat of Dastagerd,and though much of the treasure had been removed, andmuch had been expended, the remaining wealth appearsto have exceeded their hopes, and even to have satiatedtheir avarice* Whatever could not be easily transported,they consumed with fire, that Chosroes might feel theanguish of those wounds, which he had so often inflict-"ed on the provinces of the empire: and justice mightallow the excuse, if the desolation had been confined tothe works of regal luxury, if national hatred, military li­cence, and religious zeal, had not wasted with equal ragethe habitations and the temples of the guiltless subject.The recovery of three hundred Roman standards, andthe deliverance of the numerous captives of Edessa andAlexandria, reflect a purer glory on the arms of Hera-clius. From the palace of Dastagerd, he pursued hismarch within a few miles of Modain or Ctesiphon, tillhe was stopped on the banks of the Arba, by the diffi­culty of the passage, the rigour of the season, and per­haps the fame of an impregnable capital. The return ofthe emperor is marked by the modern name of the city ofSherhzour; he fortunately passed mount Zara, before thesnow, which fell incessantly thirty-four days, and the citi­zens of Gandzaca, or Tauris, were compelled to entertainhis soldiers and their horses with an hospitable reception.™
When the ambition of Chosroes was reduced to the Plight ofdefence of his hereditary kingdom, the love of glory, or a. D™6«f,even the sense of shame, should have urged him to meet Dec-29-his rival in the field. In the battle of Nineveh, his cou­rage might have taught the Persians to vanquish, or hemight have fallen with honour by the lance of a Romanemperor. The successor of Cyrus chose rather, at a se­cure distance, to expect the event, to assemble the relicsof the defeat, and to retire by measured steps before the
■ In descrihing this last expedition of Heraclius, the facts, the places, and th«dates, of Theophanes, (p. 265—271.) are so accurate and autheniio that he musthave followed the original letters of the emperor, of which the Paschal Chroniclehas preserved (p. 398—105.) a very carious specimen. . ,







OCR Output








64 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL.


In this narrow space, the disorderly and affrighted crowdwas incapable of resisting on either side a firm and regu­lar attack; the blues signalized the fury of their repent­ance; and it is computed, that above thirty thousandpersons were slain in the merciless and promiscuous car­nage of the day. Hypatius was dragged from his throne,and conducted with his brother Pompey to the feet ofthe emperor: they implored his clemency; but theircrime was manifest, their innocence uncertain, and Jus­tinian had been too much terrified to forgive. The nextmorning the two nephews of Anastasius, with eighteenillustrious accomplices, of patrician or consular rank, wereprivately executed by the soldiers; their bodies werethrown into the sea, their palaces razed, and their for­tunes confiscated. The hippodrome itself was condemn­ed during several years to a mournful silence: with therestoration of the games, the same disorders revived: andthe blue and green factions continued to afflict the reignof Justinian, and to disturb the tranquillity of the easternempire,8 , ■ . •Agriculture HI. That empire, after Rome was barbarous, still em-factures of braced the nations whom she had conquered beyond the*?*i£erD Hadriatic, and, as far as the frontiers of ^Ethiopia andPersia. Justinian reigned over sixty-four provinces, andnine hundred and thirty-five cities ;h his dominions wereblessed by nature with the advantages of soil, situation,and climate; and the improvements of human art hadbeen perpetually diffused along the coast of the Mediter­ranean and the banks of the Nile, from ancient Trov tothe ^Egyptian Thebes. Abraham1 had been relieved by
K Marcellinus says in generat terms, innumeris populis in circo trucidatis. Pro.copins numbers thirty thousand victims: and the thirty-five thousand of Theophanesare swelled to forty thousand by the more recent Zonaras. Such is the usual pro­gress of exaggeration,
b Hierocles, a contemporary of Justinian, composed his Juvh^uo;, (Itineraria,p. 631.) or review of the eastern provinces and cities, before the year 535. (Wesselingin Prafat. and Not. ad. p. 623, &c.)
■ See the book of Genesis, (12.10.) and the administration of Joseph. The annalsof the Greeks and Hebrews agree in the early arts and plenty of jEgypt: but thisantiquity supposes a long series of improvements: and Warhurton, who is almoststifled by the Hebrew, catls aloud for the Samaritan chronology. (Divine Legation,vol. 3. p. 29, Sec.)







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL.


mankind: perhaps she inflamed, at first by modest de­lays, and at last by sensual allurements, the desires of alover, who from nature or devotion was addicted to longvigils and abstemious diet. When his first transportshad subsided, she still maintained the same ascendantover his mind, by the more solid merit of temper andunderstanding. Justinian delighted to ennoble and en­rich the object of his affection; the treasures of the eastwere poured at her feet, and the nephew of Justin wasdetermined, perhaps by religious scruples, to bestow onhis concubine the sacred and legal character of a wife.But the laws of Rome expressly prohibited the marriageof a senator with any female who had been dishonouredby a servile origin or theatrical profession: the empressLupicina, or Euphemia, a barbarian of rustic manners,but of irreproachable virtue, refused to accept a prosti­tute for her niece: and even Vigilantia, the supersti­tious mother of Justinian, though she acknowledgedthe wit and beauty of Theodora, was seriously appre­hensive, lest the levity and arrogance of that artful para­mour might corrupt the piety and happiness of her so»>These obstacles were removed by the inflexible constancyof Justinian. He patiently expected the death of theempress; he despised the tears of his mother, who soonsunk under the weight of her affliction; and a law waspromulgated in the name of the emperor Justin, whichabolished the rigid jurisprudence of antiquity* A glo­rious repentance (the words of the edict) was left openfor the unhappy females who had prostituted their per­sons on the theatre, and they were permitted to contracta legal union with the most illustrious of the Romans.0This indulgence was speedily followed by the solemnnuptials of Justinian and Theodora; her dignity wasgradually exalted with that of her lover; and, as soon as
e See Ibe old law in Justinian's Code, (lib. 5. tit. 5. leg. 7. tit. lVJ. leg. 1.) under.the years 336 and 454. The new edict (about the year 5SJ1 or btt. Aloman. p. 38.•96.) very awkwardly repeals no more than the clause of mulicres scen'tcje, libtrtina?,Ubernariae. See the novels til) and 117, and a Creek rescript from Jusliniaii to thehishops. (Aleniau. p. 41.)







OCR Output








'DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIV.


condemned to support a gamester, a drunkard, or a li­bertine, unless he were guilty of homicide, poison, orsacrilege, in which cases the marriage, as it should seem,might have been dissolved by the hand of the execu­tioner. But the sacred right of the husband was inva­riably maintained to deliver his name and family fromthe disgrace of adultery: the list of mortal sins, eithermale or female, was curtailed and enlarged by successiveregulations, and the obstacles of incurable impotence,long absence, and monastic profession, were allowed torescind the matrimonial obligation. Whoever trans­gressed the permission of the law, was subject to variousand heavy penalties. The woman was stripped of herwealth and ornaments, without excepting the bodkin ofher hair: if the man introduced a new bride into hisbed, her fortune might be lawfully seized by the ven­geance of his exiled wife. Forfeiture was sometimescommuted to a fine; the fine was sometimes aggravatedby transportation to an island, or imprisonment in a mo­nastery: the injured parjty was released from the bondsof marriage; but the offender, during life or a termof years, was disabled from the repetition of nuptials.The successor of Justinian yielded to the prayers ofhis unhappy subjects, and restored the liberty ofdivorce by mutual consent: the civilians were unani­mous/ the theologians were divided,1 and the ambirguous word, which contains the precept of Christ, isflexible to any interpretation that the wisdom of a legis­lator can demand.
P The Institutes are silent, but we may consult the Code6 of Theodosias, (lib. S.tit. 16. with Godefroy's Commentary, tom 1. p. 310—315.) and Justinian, (lib. 5.tit. 17.) the Pandects, (lib. 24. tit. 2.) and the Novels. (22. 117. 127. 134. 140.Justinian fluctuated to the last between civil and ecclesiastical law.
1 In pure Greek, no^ija is not a common word ; nor can the proper meaning, for­nication, be strictly applied to matrimonial sin. In a figurative sense, how far, andto what offences, may it be extended? Did Christ speak the Rabhinical or Syriaotongue? Of what original word is wopveia the translation? How variously is thatGreek word translated in the versions ancient and modern! There are two (Markx. 11. Luke xvi. 18.) to one (Matthew xix. 9.)that such ground of divorce was notexcepted by Jesus. Some critics have presumed to think, by an evasive answers heavoided the giving oB'ence either to the school of Sammai or to that of Hillel. (Selden,Uxor Ebraica, lib. 3. c. 18—22. 28. 31.) - 'i







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIv] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 185


garrison. Datius, the orthodox bishop, who had se­duced his countrymen to rebellion' and ruin, escaped tothe luxury and honours of the Byzantine court ;s butthe clergy, perhaps the Arian clergy, were slaughteredat the foot of their own altars by the defenders of theCatholic faith. Three hundred thousand males werereported to be slain ;h the female sex, and the more pre­cious spoil, was resigned to the Burgundians; and thehouses, or at least the walls of Milan, were levelled withthe ground. The Goths, in their last moments, were Destructionrevenged by the destruction of a city, second only t0ofM,llu'-Rome in size and opulence, in the splendour of its build­ings, or the number of its inhabitants; and Belisariussympathized alone in the fate of his deserted and devotedfriends. Encouraged by this successful inroad, Theode-bert himself, in the ensuing spring, invaded the plainsof Italy with an army of one hundred thousand barba­rians.1 The king, and some chosen followers, weremounted on horseback, and armed with lances; the in­fantry, without bows or spears, were satisfied with ashield, a sword, and a double-edged battle-axe, which, intheir hands, became a deadly and unerring weapon.Italy trembled at the march of the Franks; and boththe Gothic prince and the Roman general, alike ignorantof their designs, solicited, with hope and terror, thefriendship of these dangerous allies. Till he had securedthe passage of the Po on the bridge of Pavia, the grand-
r Baronius applauds his treason, and justifies the Catholio bishops—qui ne sub he-retico principe degant omnem lapidem movent—an useful caution. The more rationalMuratori (Annali d' Italia, torn. 5. p, 54.) hints at the guilt of perjury, and blames atleast the imprudence of Datius.
K St. Datius was more successful against devils than against barbarians. He tra­velled with a numerous retinue, and occupied at Corinth a large house. (Baronius, A. •D. 538. no. 89. A. D. 539. no. 20.)
b MupiaSec Tjiaxwra. (compare Procopius, Goth. lib. 2.0. 7. 21.) Yet such popu­lation is incredible; and the second or third city of Italy need not repine if we onlydecimate the numbers of the present text. Both Milan and Genoa revived in lessthan thirty years. (Paul Diacon. de Gestis Langobard, lib. 2. c. 38.)
1 Besides Procopius, perhaps too Roman, see the Chronicles of Marius and Mar-cellinns, Jornandes, (in Success. Regn. in Muratori, torn. 1. p. 241.)and Gregory ofTours, (lib. 3. c. 32. in torn. 2. of the Historians of France.) Gregory supposes adefeat of Belisarius, who, in Aimoin, (de Gestis Franc, lib. 2. c. 23. in torn. 3. p. 59.)is slain by the Franks.
VOL. V. O







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI.


dazzled by glittering arms and regular evolutions; andthe menace of their female prophets was repeatedly ful­filled, that the Moors should be discomfited by a beard­less antagonist. The victorious eunuch advanced thir­teen days' journey from Carthage, to besiege mountAurasius/ the citadel, and at the same time the garden,of Numidia. The range of hills, a branch of the greatAtlas, contains, within a circumference of one hundredand twenty miles, a rare variety of soil and climate; theintermediate valleys and elevated plains abound withrich pastures, perpetual streams, and fruits of a delicioustaste and uncommon magnitude. This fair solitude isdecorated with the ruins of Lambesa, a Roman city, oncethe seat of a legion, and the residence of forty thousandinhabitants. The Ionic temple of iEsculapius is encom­passed with Moorish huts; and the cattle now graze inthe midst of an amphitheatre, under the shade of Corin­thian columns. A sharp perpendicular rock rises abovethe level of the mountain, where the African princes de­posited their wives and treasure; and a proverb is familiarto the Arabs, that the man may eat fire, who dares toattack the craggy cliffs and inhospitable natives of mountAurasius. This hardy enterprise was twice attemptedby the eunuch Solomon: from the first, he retreatedwith some disgrace; and in the second, his patience andprovisions were almost exhausted; and he must againhave retired, if he had not yielded to the impetuous cou­rage of his troops, who audaciously scaled, to the asto­nishment of the Moors, the mountain, the hostile camp,and the summit of the Geminian rock. A citadel waserected to secure this important conquest, and to remindthe barbarians of their defeat: and as Solomon pursuedhis march to the west, the long-lost province of Mauri-tanian Sitifi was again annexed to the Roman empire.
i Procopius is tie first who describes mount Aurasius. (Vandal. lib. 2. c. 13.De ediOc. lib. 6. c. 7.) He may be compared with Leo Africanus, (dell Africa, parte5. in Bamiwio, torn. 1. fol. 77, recto) Marmol, (torn. 2. p. 430.) and Shaw, (p.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


highways to annoy the feet of the horses; and as newgates could not suddenly be procured, the entrance wasguarded by a Spartan rampart of his bravest soldiers.At the expiration of twenty-five days, Totila returned byhasty marches from Apulia, to avenge the injury and dis­grace. Belisarius expected his approach. The Gothswere thrice repulsed in three general assaults; they lostthe flower of their troops; the royal standard had almostfallen into the hands of the enemy, and the fame of To­tila sunk, as it had risen, with the fortune of his arms.Whatever skill and courage could achieve, had been per­formed by the Roman general; it remained only, thatJustinian should terminate, by a strong and seasonableeffort, the war which he had ambitiously undertaken.The indolence, perhaps the impotence, of a prince whodespised his enemies, and envied his servants, protractedthe calamities of Italy. After a long silence, Belisariuswas commanded to leave a sufficient garrison at Rome,and to transport himself into the province of Lucania,whose inhabitants, inflamed by Catholic zeal, had castaway the yoke of their Arian conquerors. In this igno­ble warfare, the hero, invincible against the power of theBarbarians, was basely vanquished by the delay, the dis­obedience, and the cowardice of his own officers. Hereposed in his winter-quarters of Crotona, in the full as­surance, that the two passes of the Lucanian hills wereguarded by his cavalry. They were betrayed by treach­ery or weakness; and the rapid march of the Gothsscarcely allowed time for the escape of Belisarius to thecoast of Sicily. At length a fleet and army were assem­bled for the relief of Ruscianum, or Rossano," a fortresssixty furlongs from the ruins of Sybaris, where the noblesof Lucania had taken refuge. In the first attempt, the
a herb with a prickly fruit common in Italy. (Martin, ad Virgil. Georgic. 1. 153.vol. 2. p. 33.)
8 Rascia, the navale Thuriarum, was transferred to the distance of sixty stadia toRuscianam, Rossano, an archbishopric without suffragans. The republic of Sybarisis now the estate of the duke of Corigliano. (Riedesel, Trarels into Magna Grreciaand Sicily, p. 166—171.)







OCR Output








4/0 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLVI.


the African navy cast anchor in the Hellespont. Theirstandard was joined at Abidus by the fugitives and exileswho thirsted for revenge; the ships of Heraclius, whoselofty masts were adorned with the holy symbols of reli­gion,8 steered their triumphant course through the Pro-pontis; and Phocas beheld from the windows of the pa­lace, his approaching and inevitable fate. The greenfaction was tempted by gifts and promises, to oppose afeeble and fruitless resistance to the landing of the Afri­cans; but the people, and even the guards, were deter­mined by the well-timed defection of Crispus; and thetyrant was seized by a private enemy, who boldly invadedthe solitude of the palace. Stripped of the diadem andpurple, clothed in a vile habit, and loaded with chains, hewas transported in a small boat to the imperial galley ofHeraclius, who reproached him with the crimes of hisabominable reign. "Wilt thou govern better?" werethe last words of the despair of Phocas. After sufferingeach variety of insult and torture, his head was severedfrom his body, the mangled trunk was cast into theflames, and the same treatment was inflicted on the sta­tues of the vain usurper, and the seditious banner of thegreen faction. The voice of the clergy, the senate, andthe people, invited Heraclius to ascend the throne whichhe had purified from guilt and ignominy; after someReign of graceful hesitation he yielded to their entreaties. Hisa.'d! 6io, coronation was accompanied by that of his wife Eudoxia;a" d56« anc^ their posterity, till the fourth generation, continuedFeb. 11. to reign over the empire of the east. The voyage ofHeraclius had been easy and prosperous, the tediousmarch of Nicetas was not accomplished before thedecision of the contest: but he submitted without amurmur to the fortune of his friend, and his laudableintentions were rewarded with an equestrian statue, and
% According to Theophanes tu@»rria and ftxova dcojuijrffof. Cedrenas adds anaprEippn-ottiTov Eucora rov xvpov, whicli Heraclias bore as a banner in the first Persianexpedition. See George Pisid. Acroas I. 140. The manufacture seems to haveflourished; hut Foggiui, the Roman editor,(p. 26.) is at a loss to determine whetherthis picture was an original or a copy.







OCR Output








372 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIV.


the simplicity of the civil law was never clouded by thelong and intricate entails which confine the happinessand freedom of unborn generations.C'u'iCil'i» Conquest and the formalities of law established theuse of codicils. If a Roman was surprised by death in aremote province of the empire, he addressed a short epistleto his legitimate or testamentary heir; who fulfilled withhonour, or neglected with impunity, this last request,which the judges before the age of Augustus were notauthorized to enforce. A codicil might be expressed inany mode, or in any language; but the subscription offive witnesses must declare that it was the genuine com^position of the author. His intention, however laudable,was sometimes illegal; and the invention of Jidei-com-missa, or trusts, arose from the struggle between naturaljustice and positive jurisprudence, A stranger of Greeceor Africa might be the friend or benefactor of a childlessRoman, but none, except a fellow^citizen, could act ashis heir. The Voconian law, which abolished femalesuccession, restrained the legacy or inheritance of a wo­man to the sum of one hundred thousand sesterces ;r andan only daughter was condemned almost as an alien inher father's house. The zeal of friendship, and parentalaffection, suggested a liberal artifice: a qualified citizenwas named in the testament, with a prayer or injunctionthat he would restore the inheritance to the person forwhom it was truly intended. Various was the conductof the trustees in this painful situation: they had swornto observe the laws of theircountry, but honour promptedthem to violate their oath; and if they preferred theirinterest under the mask of patriotism, they forfeited theesteem of every virtuous mind. The declaration of Au­gustus relieved their doubts, gave a legal sanction to con­fidential testaments and codicils, and gently unravelledthe forms and restraints of the republican jurisprudence.5
'Dion Cassius (tom. 2. lib. 56. p. 814. with Reimar's Notes) specifies in Greekmoney the 6Um of twenty-five thousand drachms.
* 1■he revolutions of the Roman laws of inheritance are finely, though sometimesfaucifully, deduced by Montesquieu. (lispiit. des LoU, lib. s!7.) • *'







OCR Output








441 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLVI.


Tyranny The throne of Chosroes Nushirvan was filled by Hor-of hil son mouz, or Hormisdas, the eldest or the most favoured ofa.°™579 nis sons- With the kingdoms of Persia and India, he—590. inherited the reputation and example of his father, theservice, in every rank, of his wise and valiant officers, anda general system of administration, harmonized by timeand political wisdom, to promote the happiness of theprince and people. But the royal youth enjoyed a stillmore valuable blessing, the friendship of a sage who hadpresided over his education, and who always preferredthe honour to the interest of his pupil, his interest to hisinclination. In a dispute with the Greek and Indian phi­losophers, Buzurgh had once maintained, that the mostgrievous misfortune of life is old age without the remem­brance of virtue; and our candour will presume that thesame principle compelled him, during three years, to di­rect the councils of the Persian empire. His zeal was re-Warded by the gratitude and docility of Hormouz, whoacknowledged himself more indebted to his preceptorthan to his parent: but when age and labour had im­paired the strength and perhaps the faculties of this pru­dent counsellor, he retired from court, and abandonedthe youthful monarch to his own passions and those ofhis favourites. By the fatal vicissitude of human affairs,the same scenes were renewed at Ctesiphon, which hadbeen exhibited in Rome after the death of Marcus Anto­ninus. The ministers of flattery and corruption, who hadbeen banished by the father, were recalled and cherishedby the son; the disgrace and exile of the friends of Nush­irvan established their tyranny; and virtue was driven bydegrees from the mind of Hormouz, from his palace, andfrom the government of the state. The faithful agents,'
Buzurg Mjhir may be considered, in his character and station, as the Seneca"ofthe east; hat his virtues, and perhaps his faalts, are less known than those of the Ro­man, who appears to have been mnch more loquacious. The Persian sage was thoperson who imported from India the game of chess and the fables of Pilpay. Suchhas been the fame of his wisdom and virtues, that the Christians claim him as a be­liever in the gospel; and the Mahometans revere Buzurg as a premature Mussulman.D'Herbelot, Bibliotheqne Orienta-e, p. 218,







OCR Output








CtfAP. XXXIX,] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.?


head of six thousand volunteers, he secretly left thecamp in quest of adventures, descended the Danube asfar as Singidunum or Belgrade, and soon returned to hisfather with the spoils of a Sarmatian king whom he hadvanquished and slain. Such triumphs, however, wereproductive only of fame, and the invincible Ostrogothswere reduced to extreme distress by the want of clothingand food. They unanimously resolved to desert theirPannonian encampments, and boldly to advance into thewarm and wealthy neighbourhood of the Byzantinecourt, which already maintained in pride and luxury somany bands of confederate Goths. After proving bysome acts of hostility that they could be dangerous, or atleast troublesome, enemies-, the Ostrogoths sold at a highprice their reconciliation and fidelity, accepted a dona­tive of lands and money, and wfcere intrusted with thedefence of the Lower Danube, under the command ofTheodoric, who succeeded after his father's death to thehereditary throne of the Amali."
A hero, descended from a race of kings, must have The reigndespised the base Isaurin who was invested with the Ro- a. d. 474man purple, without any endowments, of mind or body, APt99.FeI>'without any advantages of royal birth, or superior quali­fications. After the failure of the Theodosian line, thechoice of Pulcheria and of the senate might be justifiedin some measure by the characters of Martian and Leo,but the latter of these princes confirmed and dishonouredhis reign by the perfidious murder of Aspar and his sons,,who too rigorously exacted the debt of gratitude and obe­dience. The inheritance of Leo and of the east waspeaceably devolved on his infant grandson, the son ofhis daughter Ariadne; and her Isaurian husband, thefortunate Trascalisseus, exchanged that barbarous soundfor the Grecian appellation of Zeno. After the deceaseof the elder Leo, he approached with unnatural respect
e The state of the Ostrogoths, and the first years of Theodoric, are found in Jor-nandes (c. 52—56. p. 689—696.) and Malchus (Excerpt. Legat. p. 78—80.) who.erroneonsly styles him the son of Walamir,







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. Ill


vailed among the Magi; that the nobles were haughty,the courtiers servile, and the magistrates unjust; thatthe guilty sometimes escaped, and that the innocent wereoften oppressed. The disappointment of the philoso­phers, provoked them to overlook the real virtues of thePersians; and they were scandalized, more deeply per­haps than became their profession, with the plurality ofwives and concubines, the incestuous marriages, and thecustom of exposing dead bodies to the dogs and vultures,instead of hiding them in the earth, or consuming themwith fire. Their repentance was expressed by a preci­pitate return, and they loudly declared, that they hadrather die on the borders of the enjpire, than enjoy thewealth and favour of the barbarian. From this journey,however, they derived a benefit which reflects the purestlustre on the character of Chosroes. He required, thatthe seven sages, who had visited the court of Persia,should be exempted from the penal laws which Justinianenacted against his Pagan subjects; and this privilege,expressly stipulated in a treaty of peace, was guarded bythe vigilance of a powerful mediator/ Simplicius and ™e last ofhis companions ended their lives in peace and obscurity : Pher«.and as they left no disciples, they terminate the long listof Grecian philosophers, who may be justly praised, not­withstanding their defects, as the wisest and most vir­tuous of their contemporaries. The writings of Simpli­cius are now extant. His physical and metaphysicalcommentaries on Aristotle have passed away with thefashion of the times; but his moral interpretation ofEpictetus is preserved in the library of nations, as a clas­sic book, most excellently adapted to direct the will, topurify the heart, and confirm the understanding, by ajust confidence in the nature both of God and man.
About the same time that Pythagoras first invented ne Ro.m,n
J ^ consulship
extinguish*
r Agathias (lib. 2. p. 69—71.)relates tins cnrious story. Chosroes ascended the eil by Jus-throne in the year 531, and made his first peace with the Romans in the beginning of t■ nian'
, (Asse


533, a date most compatible with his young fame and old age of Isidore. (Astemail, a, jj# 54].Bibliot. Orient, tom. 3. p. 401. Pajfi, tom. 2. p. 543.5i0.)







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLVI.


df the sacred and profane buildings of the Asiatic suburbs,while, he impatiently waited the arrival of his Scythianfriends on the opposite side of the Bosphorus. On the29th of June, thirty thousand barbarians, the vanguardof the Avars, forced the long wall, and drove into thecapital a promiscuous crowd of peasants, citizens, andsoldiers. Fourscore thousand0 of his native subjects,and of the vassal tribes of Gepidas. Russians, Bulgarians,and Sclavonians, advanced under the standard of thechagan: a month was spent in marches and negotia­tions, but the whole city was invested on the 31st ofJuly, from the suburbs of Pera and Galata to the Bla-chernae and seven towers; and the inhabitants descriedwith terror the flaming signals of the European andAsiatic shores. In the meanwhile the magistrates of Con­stantinople repeatedly strove to purchase the retreat ofthe chagan: but their deputies were rejected and insult­ed; and he suffered the patricians to stand before histhrone, while the Persian envoys, in silk robes, were seat­ed by his side.—" You see (said the haughty barbarian)the proofs of my perfect union with the great king: andhis lieutenant is ready to send into my camp a select bandof three thousand warriors. Presume no longer to temptyour master with a partial and inadequate ransom: yourwealth and your city are the only presents worthy of myacceptance. For yourselves, I shall permit you to depart,each with ap under-garment and a shirt; and, at myen-treatyj my friend Sarbar will not refuse a passage throughhis lines. Your absent prince, even now a captive or afugitive, has left Constantinople to its fate; nor can youescape the arms of the Avars and Persians, unless youcould soar into the air like birds, unless like fishes youcould dive into the waves."d During ten successive days,
* This number of' eight myriads is specified by George of Pisidia. (Bell. A bar.219.) The poet (50—88) clearly indicates that the old chagan lived till the reign ofHeraclius, and that his son and successor was born" of a foreign mother. Yet Foggini(Annotat. p. 67i) has given another interpretation to this passage.
* A bird, a frog, a mouse, and five arrows, had been the present of the Scythianking to Darius. (Herodot. lib. 4. c. 131, 132.) Substituez une lettre a ces signes(says Rousseau, with much good taste) plus ella sera nienecante inoins elle efl'rayera:c« tie fera queune fanfarrerwde, dont Darius n'eut fait quorire, (lituile, torn. 3. p. 146.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLII.J OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 203


the mode of revenge which Justinian embraced. Insteadof asserting the rights of a sovereign for the protectionof his subjeets, the emperor invited a strange people toinvade and possess the Roman provinces between theDanube and the Alps; and the ambition of the Gepida?was checked by the rising power and fame of the Lom­bards.8 This corrupt appellation has been diffused in j^1'^ Lom"the thirteenth century by the merchants and bankers,the Italian posterity of these savage warriors: but theoriginal name of Langobards is expressive only of thepeculiar length and fashion of their beards. I am notdisposed either to question or to justify their Scandina­vian origin;11 nor to pursue the migrations of the Lom­bards through unknown regions artd marvellous adven­tures. About the time of Augustus and Trajan, a rayof historic light breaks on the darkness of their antiqui­ties, and they are discovered, for the first time, betweenthe Elbe and the Oder. Fierce, beyond the example oftheGermans, they delighted to propagate the tremendousbelief, that their heads were formed like the heads ofdogs, and that they drank the blood of their enemieswhom they vanquished in battle. The smallness of theirnumbers was recruited by the adoption of their bravestslaves ; and alone, amidst their powerful neighbours, theydefended by arms their high-spirited independence. Inthe tempests of the north, which overwhelmed so manynames and nations, this little bark of the Lombards stillfloated on the surface : they gradually descended towardsthe south and the Danube: and at the end of four hun­dred years they again appear with their ancient valour
( Gens Germana feritate ferociur, says Velleius Paterculus or the Lomhards.(2. 106.) Langohardos paucitas nohilitat. Plurimis ac valentissimis nationibuseiucti don per obsequium sed prrcliis et periclitando tuti sunt. (Tacit. de MoribusGerman. c. 40.) See likewise Strabo. (lib. 7. p. 446.) The best geographers place(hem beyond the Elbe,in the hishoprick of Magdburegh and the middle march of Bran.denburgh; and their situation will agree with the patriotio remark of the count deHertzburg, that most of the harharian conquerors issued from the same countrieswhich still produce the armies of Prussia.
h The Scandinavian origin of the Gotbs and Lomhards, as stated by Paul Warne- «•rid, surnamed the deacon, is attacked by Cluverius, (Germaiiia Anticj. lib. 3. c. 26.p. 103, &o.) a native of Prussia, and defended by Grotiusj (Prolegom. ad Hist. Goth,p. 28, &c.) the Swedish amhassador.


P 2







OCR Output








CHAP. XLII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


or Mingrelia,* which* on three sides, is fortified bythe Iberian and Armenian mountains, and whose ma-^ritime coast extends about two hundred miles, fromthe neighbourhood of Trebizond to Dioscurias and theconfines of Circassia. Both the soil and climate are re­laxed by excessive moisture; twenty-eight rivers, besidesthe Phasis and his dependant streams, convey their wa­ters to the sea; and the hollowness of the ground ap­pears to indicate the subterraneous channels betweenthe Euxine and the Caspian. In the fields where wheator barley is sown, the earth is too soft to sustain the ac­tion of the plough; but the gom, a small grain not un­like the millet or coriander seed, supplies the ordinaryfood of the people; and the use of bread is confined tothe prince and his nobles, Yet the vintage is moreplentiful than the harvest; and the bulk of the stems, aswell as the quality of the wine, display the unassistedpowers of nature. The same powers continually tend toovershadow the face of the country with thick forests;the timber of the hills, and the flax of the plains, contri­bute to the abundance of naval stores; the wild and thetame animals, the horse, the ox, and the hog, are re-rmarkably prolific, and the name of the pheasant is ex­pressive of his native habitation on the banks of the Pha­sis. The gold mines to the south of Trebizond, whichare still worked with sufficient profit, were a subject ofnational dispute between Justinian and Chosroes; and itis not unreasonable to believe, that a vein of preciousmetal may be equally diffused through the circle of thehills, although these secret pleasures are neglected by the
tuay consult the geographical descriptions of Colchos, by Strabo, (lib. 11. p. 760—?765.) and Pliny. (Hist. Natqr. 6.5.19,&c.)
x I shall quote, and have used, three modern descriptions of Mingrelia and theadjacent countries. 1. Of the Pare Archangel! .Lsmberti, (Relations de Theve-not, part 1. p. 31—52. with a map) who has all the knowledge and prejudices of amissionary. 2. Of Chardin: (Voyages en Perse, tom. 1. p. 54. 68—168.) his obser­vations are judicious; and his own adventures in the country are still more instruc­tive than his observations. 3. Of Peyssonnel: (Observations sur les Peuples Bar-hares, p. 49—51. 58.62. 64, 65. 71, &c. and a more recent treatise, Sur le Commercede la Mer Noire, tom. 2. p. 1—53.) be had long resided at Caffa, as consul of France ^and his erudition is less valuable than bis experience.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. X.LII1.


I desire to believe, but I dare not affirm, that Belisa-Baigari- rius sincerely rejoiced in the triumph of Narses. YetA.*b. 559. the consciousness of his own exploits might teach himto esteem without jealousy the merit of a rival; and therepose of the aged warrior was crowned by a last victorywhich saved the emperor and the capital. The barba­rians who annually visited the provinces of Europe wereless discouraged by some accidental defeats, than theywere excited by the double hope of spoil and of subsidy.In the thirty-second winter of Justinian's reign> the Da­nube was deeply frozen: Zabergan led the cavalry ofthe Bulgarians, and his standard was followed by a pro­miscuous multitude of Sclavonians. The savage chiefpassed, without opposition, the river and the mountains,spread his troops over Macedonia and Thrace, and ad­vanced with no more than seven thousand horse to thelong walls which should have defended the territory ofConstantinople. But the works of man are impotentagainst the assaults of nature: a recent earthquake hadshaken the foundations of the wall; and the forces ofthe empire were employed on the distant frontiers ofItaly, Africa, and Persia. The seven schools? or com­panies of the guards or domestic troops, had been aug­mented to the number of five thousand five hundredmen, whose ordinary station was in the peaceful citiesof Asia. But the places of the brave Armenians wereinsensibly supplied by lazy citizens, who purchased anexception from the duties of civil life, without being ex­posed to the dangers of military service. Of such sol­diers, few could be tempted to sally from the gates; and,none could be persuaded to remain in the field, unless,they wanted strength and speed to escape from the Bul­garians. The report of the fugitives exaggerated thenumbers and fierceness of an enemy, who had polluted •holy virgins, and abandoned new-born infants to. the
» In the deoay of these military schools, the satire of Prooopins (Anecdot. c.Aleman.p. 103,103.) is confirmed and illustrated by Agalhias, (lib. 5. p. 159.) whocannot be rejected as an hostile witnesj.







OCR Output








316 DECLINE AND PALL [CHAP. XLIV


On the subject of civil law, which has exhausted so manylearned lives, and clothed the walls of such spacious li­braries. In a single, if possible in a short chapter, I shalltrace the Roman jurisprudence from Romulus to Justi­nian,' appreciate the labours of that emperor, and pauseto contemplate the principles of a science so importantto the peace and happiness of society. The laws of anation form the most instructive portion of its history;and, although I have devoted myself to write the annalsof a delining monarchy, I shall embrace the occasion tobreathe the pure and invigorating air of the republic.Laws of The primitive government of Romef was composed,of'itome! with some political skill, of an elective king, a council ofnobles, and a general assembly of the people. War andreligion were administered by the supreme magistrate;and he alone proposed the laws, which were debated inthe senate, and finally ratified or rejected by a majorityof votes in the thirty cwrice or parishes of the city. Ro­mulus, Numa, and Servius Tullius, are celebrated asthe most ancient legislators; and each of them claimshis peculiar part in the threefold division of Jurispru­dence.8 The laws of marriage, the education of children,and the authority of parents, which may seem to drawtheir origin from nature itself, are ascribed to the untu­tored wisdom of Romulus. The law of nations and ofreligious worship, which Numa introduced, was derivedfrom his nocturnal converse with the nymph Egeria.The civil law is attributed to the experience of Servius rhe balanced the rights and fortunes of the seven classesof citizens; and guarded, by fifty new regulations, the
e Our original text is a fragment de Origine Juris (Pandect, lib. 1. tit. 2.) of Pom-ponius, a Roman lawyer, who lived under the Antonines, (Heinecc. tom. 3. syll. 8.p. 66—126.) It has been abridged, and prohably corrupted, by Tribonian, andsince restored by Bynkershnek. (Opp. tom. 1. p. 279—304.)
f The constitutional history of the kings of Rome may be studied in the first bookOf IJvyf and more copiously in Diouysius Halicarnassensis, (lib. 2. p. 80—96. 119■—130; lib. 4. p. 198—220.) who sometimes betrays the character of a rhetoricianand a Greek.
t This threefold division of the law was applied to the three Roman kings by JustusLipsius, (Opp. tom. 4. p. 279.) is adopted by Gravina, (Origincs Juris Civilis, p. 28.edit. Lips. 1737.) and is reluctantly admitted by Mascou, his German editor.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIH.} dF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


liberality of Justinian had raised them from a savage orservile condition; that they were already enriched by thespoils of Africa, the treasure, the slaves, and the move­ables, of the vanquished barbarians; and that the ancientand lawful patrimony of the emperors would be appliedonly to the support of that government on which theirown safety and reward must ultimately depend. Themutiny was secretly inflamed by a thousand soldiers,for the most part Heruli, who had imbibed the doctrines,and were instigated by the clergy, of the Arian sect;and the cause of perjury and rebellion was sanctified bythe dispensing powers of fanaticism. The Arians de­plored the ruin of their church, triumphant above a cen­tury in Africa; and they were justly provoked by thelaws of the conqueror, which interdicted the baptism oftheir children, and the exercise of all religious worship.Of the Vandals chosen by Belisarius, the far greater part,in the honours of the eastern service, forgot their coun­try and religion. But a generous band of four hundredobliged the mariners, when they were in sight of the isleof Lesbos, to alter their course: they touched on Pelo­ponnesus, ran ashore on a desert coast of Africa, andboldly erected, on mount Aurasius, the standard of in­dependence and revolt. While the troops of the pro­vince disclaimed the command of their superiors, a con­spiracy was formed at Carthage against the life of Solo­mon, who filled with honour the place of Belisarius; andthe Arians had piously resolved to sacrifice the tyrant atthe foot of the altar, during the awful mysteries of thefestival of Easter. Fear or remorse restrained the dag­gers of the assassins, but the patience of Solomon em­boldened their discontent; and at the end of ten days, afurious sedition was kindled in the circus, which deso­lated Africa above ten years. The pillage of the city,and the indiscriminate slaughter of its inhabitants, weresuspended only by darkness, sleep, and intoxication: thegovernor, with seven companions, among whom was the







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


which, by mutual respiration^ is transfused from the in­fected persons to the lungs and stomach of those whoapproach them. While philosophers believe and trem­ble, it is singular, that the existence of a real dangershould have been denied by a people most prone to vain'and imaginary terrors.8 Yet the fellow-citizens of Pro-copius were satisfied, by some short and partial expe­rience, that the infection could not be gained by the:closest conversation ;b and this persuasion might supportthe assiduity of friends or physicians in the care of thesick, whom inhuman prudence would have condemnedto solitude and despair. But the fatal security, like thepredestination of the Turks, must have aided the progressof the contagion; and those salutary precautions, to'which Europe is indebted for her safety* were unknownto the government of Justinian. No restraints were im-'posed on the free and frequent intercourse of the Ro-iman provinces; from Persia to France, the nations weremingled and infected by wars and emigrations: and thepestilential odour, which lurks for years in a bale of cot­ton, was imported, by the abuse of trade, into the mostdistant regions. The mode of its propagation is ex­plained by the remark of Procopius himself, that it al­ways spread from the sea-coast to the inland country; the'most sequestered islands and mountains were succes­sively visited; the places which had escaped the fury ofits passage, were alone exposed to the contagion of theensuing year. The winds might diffuse that subtle ve­nom; but, unless the atmosphere be previously disposedfor its reception, the plague would soon expire in the coldor temperate climates of the earth. Such was the uni-
a Mead proves that the plagus is contagions, from Thucydides, Lucretius, Aristo­tle, Galen, and common experience ; (p. 10-—20.) and he refutes (Preface, p. 2—13.)the contrary opinion of the French pbysicians who visited Marseilles In the year1720, Yet these were the recent and enlightened spectators of a plague which, in afew months, swept away fifty thousand inhahitants (sur la Peste de Marseille, Paris,1786) of a city that, in the present hour of prosperity and trade, contains no morethan ninety thousand souls. (Necker, sur les Finances, tom. 1. p. 231.)
b The strong assertions of Prooopins—oure yag ietrgai gut« yaf titnry—are over­thrown by the subsequent experience of Evagrius.
VOL. V. Y







OCR Output








26 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XXXIX.


of wine was sometimes sold in Italy for less than threefarthings, and a quarter of wheat at about five shillingsand sixpence/ A country possessed of so many valuableobjects of exchange, soon attracted the merchants of theworld, whose beneficial traffic was encouraged and pro­tected by the liberal spirit of Theodoric. The free in­tercourse of the provinces by land and water was re­stored and extended; the city-gates were never shuteither by day or by night; and the common saying, thata purse of gold might be safely left in the fields, was ex­pressive of the conscious security of the inhabitants.uAriu" ^ difference of religion is always pernicious and oftenfatal to the harmony of the prince and people; the Go­thic conqueror had been educated in the profession ofArianism, and Italy was devoutly attached to the Ni-cene faith. But the persuasion of Theodoric was notinfected by zeal, and he piously adhered to the heresyof his fathers, without condescending to balance thesubtle arguments of theological metaphysics. Satisfiedwith the private toleration of his Arian sectaries, he justlyconceived himself to be the guardian of the public wor­ship; and his external reverence for a superstition whichhe despised, may have nourished in his mind the salutaryHistoiera- indifference of a statesman or philosopher. The Ca-Catholics. tholics of his dominions acknowledged, perhaps with re­luctance, the peace of the church ; their clergy, accord­ing to the degrees of rank or merit, were honourablyentertained in the palace of Theodoric; he esteemed theliving sanctity of Caesarius8 and Epiphanius,h the ortho­dox bishops of Aries and Pavia; and presented a decentoffering on the tomb of St. Peter, without any scrupul-
'LX inodli trilici in solidum ipsius tempore fuerunt, et vioum SO amphorM insolidnm. (Fragment. Vales.) Corn was distributed from the granaries at fifteen ortwenty-fire roodii for a piece of gold, and the price was still moderate.
K See the life of St. Cssarius in Baronius. (A. D. 508. no. 12—14.) Tbaking presented him with three thousand gold solidi, and a discus of silver of the weightof sixty pounds.
k Ennodius in vit. St Epiphanii, in Sirmond Op. torn. 1. p. 1672—1690. Theodoric bestowed some important favours on this bishop, whom he used as a counselloriu peace and war.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND KALI* [CHAP. XLIVI


dox or innovations. The freedom of Labeo was en­slaved, however, by the rigour of his own conclusions, andhe decided according to the letter of the law, the samequestions which his indulgent competitor resolved witha latitude of equity more suitable to the common senseand feelings of mankind. If a fair exchange had beensubstituted to the payment of money, Capito still consi­dered the transaction as a legal sale and he consultednature for the age of puberty, without confining his defi­nition to the precise period of twelve or fourteen years.1This opposition of sentiments was propagated in thewritings and lessons of the two founders; the schoolsof Capito and Labeo maintained their inveterate conflictfrom the age of Augustus to that of Hadrian ;u and thetwo sects derived their appellations from Sabinus andProculus, their most celebrated teachers. The namesof Cassians and Pegasians were likewise applied to thesame parties; but, by a strange reverse, the popularcause was in the hands of Pegasus," a timid slave of Do-mitian, while the favourite of the Caesars was represent­ed by Cassius/ who gloried in his descent from the pa­triot assassin. By the perpetual edict, the controversiesof the sects were in a great measure determined. Forthat important work, the emperor Hadrian preferred thechief of the Sabinians; the friends of monarchy prevailed; but the moderation of Salvius Julian insensibly re-
• Justinian (Institul. lib. 3. tit. 23. and Theophil. Vers. Grace, p. 677, 68a) bucommemorated this weighty dispute, and the verses of Homer that were alleged oneither side as legal authorities. It was decided by Paul, (leg. 33. ad Edict, in Pan­dect, lib. 18. tit. 1. leg. 1.) since, in a simple exchange, the buyer could not be discri­minated from the seller.
! This controversy was likewise given for the Proculians, to supersede the inde­cency of a search, and to comply with the aphorism of Hippocrates, who was at­tached to the septenary number of two weeks of years, or seven hundred of days,(lnstitot. lib. 1. tit. 22.) Plutarch and the stoics, (de Placit. Philosoph. lib. 5- c.24.) assign a more natural reason. Fourteen 3 ears is the age—wt(t m i oTrejjuaTixccxpiw-rai opfoc. See the vestigia of the sects in Mascot), c. 9. p. 145—276.
"The series and conclusion of the sects are described by Mascou, (c. 2—7. p,24—120.) and it would be almost ridiculous to praise his equal justice to these obso­lete sects.
31 At the first summons he flies to the turbot council; yet Juvenal (Sat. 4. 75—81.)styles the prefect or bailiff of Rome sanctissimns legum interpres. From his science,says the old scholiast, he was called, not a man, but a book. He derived the singu­lar name of Pegasus from the galley which his father commanded.
y Tacit. Annal. 17. 7. Sueton. in Neronc, c. 37.







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OP THE ROMAN EMPtRE.


people; his victory was displayed by the immediate res­toration of their enemy; and they felt above ten years,under his oppressive administration, that he was stimu­lated by revenge, rather than instructed by misfortune.Their murmurs served only to fortify the resolution ofJustinian; but the prefect, in the insolence of favour,provoked the resentment of Theodora, disdained a power,before which every knee was bent, and attempted tosow the seeds of discord between the emperor and hisbeloved consort. Even Theodora herself was constrainedto dissemble, to wait a favourable moment, and, by anartful conspiracy, to render John of Cappadocia the ac­complice of his own destruction. At a time when Beli-sarius, unless he had been a hero, must have shewn him­self a rebel, his wife Antonina, who enjoyed the secretconfidence of the empress, communicated his feigneddiscontent to Euphemia, the daughter of the prefect;the credulous virgin imparted to her father the dan­gerous project, and John, who might have known thevalue of oaths and promises, was tempted to accept anocturnal, and almost treasonable interview with thewife of Belisarius. An ambuscade of guards and eu­nuchs had been posted by the command of Theodora;they rushed with drawn swords to seize or punish theguilty minister: he was saved by the fidelity of his at­tendants; but, instead of appealing to a gracious sove­reign, who had privately warned him of his danger, hepusillanimously fled to the sanctuary of the church.The favourite of Justinian was sacrificed to conjugaltenderness or domestic tranquillity; the conversion of aprefect into a priest extinguished his ambitious hopes,but the friendship of the emperor alleviated his disgrace,and he retained, in the mild exile of Cyzicus, an ampleportion of hi& riches. Such imperfect revenge couldnot satisfy the unrelenting hatred of Theodora; themurder of his old enemy, the bishop of Cyzicus, affordeda decent pretence;, and John of Cappadocia, whose







OCR Output








CHAP. XXXIX.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 17


summer and winter solstice during an equal period offorty days.' The long night of his absence or deathwas the mournful season of distress and anxiety, till themessengers who had been sent to the mountain-tops,descried the first rays of returning light, and proclaimedto the plain below the festival of his resurrection."
The life of Theodoric represents the rare and merito- His deicn-rious example of a barbarian, who sheathed his sword inthe pride of victory and the vigour of his age. A reignof three-and-thirty years was consecrated to the duties ofcivil government, and the hostilities in which he wassometimes involved, were speedily terminated by the con­duct of his lieutenants, the discipline of his troops, thearms of his allies, and even by the terror of his name.'He reduced, under a strong and regular government,the unprofitable countries of Rhastia, Noricum, Dalma-tia, and Pannonia, from the source of the Danube andthe territory of the Bavarians/ to the petty kingdomerected by the Gepidae on the ruins of Sirmium. Hisprudence could not safely intrust the bulwark of Italyto such feeble and turbulent neighbours; and his justicemight claim the lands which they oppressed, either as apart of his kingdom, or as the inheritance of his father.The greatness of a servant, who was named perfidiousbecause he was successful, awakened the jealousy of theemperor Anastasius; and a war was kindled on the Da-cian frontier, by the protection which the Gothic king,
I In the system or romance of M. Bailly, (Lettres sur les Sciences et sar l'Atlantide,tom 1. p. 249—356. tom. 2. p. 114—139.) the phoenix of the Edda, and the annualdeath and revival of Adonis and Osiris, are the allegorical'symbols of the absenceand return of the sun in the arctic regions. The ingenious writer is a wortby dis­ciple of the great Buffon : nor is it easy for the coldest reason to withstand themagic of their philosopby.
« Aut>i ts ©yXirai; fi jotsj'tfl'rii tot Eograjv wn, says Procopius. At present a rndoManicheism (generons enough) prevails among the Samoyedes in Greenland and inLapland; (Hist. des Voyages, tom. 18. p. 508,509. tom. 19. p. 105,106. 527,528.)yet, according to Grotius, Samojutae coelum atque astra adoraHt, numina baud aliisiniquiora (de Rebus Belgicis, lib. 4. p. 338. folio edition) : a sentence which Tacitiuswould not have disowned. ■
x See the Hist, des Peoples Anoiens, &c. tom. 9. p. 255—273. 396—501. The.count de-Buat was French minister at the court of Bavaria: a liberal curiosity prompt­ed his inquiries into the antiquities of the country, and that curiosity was the ge; »iof twelve respectable volumes.







OCR Output








HQ DECLINE AND PALt- [GHAP. Xhl.


a strong gale from the north-east, and finally cast anchorat the promontory of Caput Vada, about five days jour­ney to the south of Carthage.1*Beiiurias If Gelimer had been informed of the approach of the
lands on * * .
the coast of enemy, he must have delayed the conquest of Sardinia,September, for the immediate defence of his person and kingdom.
A detachment of five thousand soldiers, and one hun­dred and twenty galleys, would have joined the remainingforces of the Vandals; and the descendant of Gensericmight have surprised and oppressed a fleet of deep-ladentransports, incapable of action, and of light brigantines,that seemed only qualified for flight. Belisarius had se­cretly trembled when he overheard his soldiers, in thepassage, emboldening each other to confess their appre­hensions: if they were once on shore, they hoped tomaintain the honour of their arms; but if they should beattacked at sea, they did not blush to acknowledge, thatthey wanted courage to contend at the same time withthe winds, the waves, and the barbarians.q The know^ledge of their sentiments decided Belisarius to seize thefirst opportunity of landing them on the coast of Africa,and he prudently rejected, in a council of war, the pro­posal of sailing with the fleet and army into the port ofCarthage. Three months after their departure fromConstantinople, the men and horses, the arms and mili­tary stores, were safely disembarked, and five soldierswere left as a guard on board each of the ships, whichwere disposed in the form of a semicircle. The re­mainder of the troops occupied a camp on the sea-shore,which they fortified, according to ancient discipline, witha ditch and rampart; and the discovery of a source offresh water, while it allayed the thirst, excited the super­stitious confidence of the Romans. The next morning,
P The Caput vada of Procopius, (where Jastinian afterward founded a city—deEdific. lib. 6. c. 6.) is the promontory of Ammon in Strabu, the Brachodes of Ptolermy, the Cnpaudia of the moderns, a long narrow slip that runs into the sea. (Shaw'sTravels, p. 111.)
i A centurion of Mark Antony expressed, though in a more manly strain, thesame dislike to the sea and to naval comhats. (Plutarch in Antonio, p. 1730. edit.Hen. Stepb.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XXXIX.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 37


Boethius, he derived some comfort from the safety ofhis two sons, of his wife, and his father-in-law, the ve­nerable Symmachus. But the grief of Symmachus wasindiscreet, and perhaps disrespectful: he had presumedto lament, he might dare to revenge, the death of an in­jured friend. He was dragged in chains from Rome to Death ofthe palace of Ravenna; and the suspicions of Theodoric chus.could only be appeased by the blood of an innocent and A"D'5<*'aged senator.' •"'
Humanity will be disposed to encourage any report Remorse
, . , , . L.i ...... 11 and death
which testifies the jurisdiction or conscience and the re- ofTheo-morse of kings; and philosophy is not ignorant that the A"rD.'5t6,most horrid spectres are sometimes created by the pow- Ausost 3aers of a disordered fancy, and the weakness of a distem­pered body. After a life of virtue and glory, Theodoricwas now descending with shame and guilt into the grave:his mind was humbled by the contrast of the past, andjustly alarmed by the invisible terrors of futurity. Oneevening, as it is related, when the head of a large fish wasserved on the royal table,k he suddenly exclaimed, thathe beheld the angry countenance of Symmachus, hiseyes glaring fury and revenge, and his mouth armedwith long sharp teeth, which threatened to devour him.•The monarch instantly retired to his chamber, and as helay trembling with aguish cold under a weight of bed­clothes, he expressed in broken murmurs to his physi­cian Elpidius, his deep repentance for the murders ofBoethius and Symmachus.1 His malady increased, and
third, the learned Pope Silvester II. who, like Boethins himself, was styled a magicianby the ignorance of the times. The Catholic martyr had carried his head in his handsa considerable way ; (Baronius, A. D. 526, no, 17, 18.) yet, on a similar tale, a ladyof my acquaintance once observed, " La distance n'y fait rien ; il n'y a que le premierpas qui conte."
* Boelbius applauds the virtues of his father-in-law. (lib. 1. pros. 4. p. 59. lib. 2.pros. 4. p. 118.) Procopius, (Goth. lib. 1. c. 1.) the Valesiau Fragment, (p. 724.)and the Historia Miscella, (lib. 15. p. 105.) agree in praising the superior innocenceor sanctity of Symmachus; and in the estimation of the legend, the guilt of his mur­der is equal to the imprisonment of a pope.'
k In the fanciful eloquence of Cassiodorius the variety of sea and river fish are anevidenceof extensive dominion ; and those of the Rhine, of Sicily, and of the Danube,were served on the table of Theodoric. (Var. 12. 14.) The monstrous turbot of Do-mitian (Juvenal, Satir. S. 39.) had been caught on the shores of the Adriatic.
1 Procopius, Goth. lib. 1. c. 1. Bat he might have informed us whether he had







OCR Output








W'l DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI»


post had given way, the Romans, and Rome itself, wereirrecoverably lost. This perilous day was the most glo­rious in the life of Belisarius, Amidst tumult and dis­may, the whole plan of the attack and defence was dis­tinctly present to his mind; he observed the changes ofeach instant, weighed every possible advantage, trans­ported his person to the scenes of danger, and commu­nicated his spirit in calm and decisive orders. The con­test was fiercely maintained from the morning to theevening; the Goths were repulsed on all sides, and eachRoman might boast, that he had vanquished thirty bar­barians, if the strange disproportion of numbers were notcounterbalanced by the merit of one man. Thirty thou­sand Goths, according to the confession of their ownchiefs, perished in this bloody action; and the multitudeof the wounded was equal to that of the slain. Whenthey advanced to the assault, their close disorder sufferednot a javelin to fall without effect; and as they retired,the populace of the city joined the pursuit, and slaugh­tered, with impunity, the backs of their flying enemies.His sallies. Belisarius instantly sallied from the gates; and while thesoldiers chanted his name and victory, the hostile en­gines of war were reduced to ashes. Such was the lossand consternation of the Goths, that, from this day, thesiege of Rome degenerated into a tedious and indolentblockade; and they were incessantly harassed by the Ro­man general, who, in frequent skirmishes, destroyedabove five thousand of their bravest troops. Their ca­valry was unpractised in the use of the bow; their archersserved on foot; and this divided force was incapable ofcontending with their adversaries, whose lances and ar­rows, at a distance, or at hand, were alike formidable,,The consummate skill of Belisarius embraced the favour­able opportunities: and as he chose the ground and themoment, as he pressed the charge, or sounded the re­treat/ the squadrons which he detached were seldom
'For the Komon trumpet and its rarious notes, consult Lipiius, de Militia Ro-







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 315


Institutes ;a the public reason of the Romans hasbeen silently or studiously transfused into the domesticinstitutions of Europe/ and the laws of Justinian stiltcommand the respect or obedience of independent na­tions. Wise or fortunate is the prince who connectshis own reputation with the honour and interest of a per^petual order of men. The defence of their founder isthe first cause, which in evsry age has exercised the zealand industry of the civilians. They piously commemo­rate his virtues; dissemble or deny his failings; andfiercely chastise the guilt or folly of the rebels who pre­sume to sully the majesty of the purple. The idolatryof love has provoked, as it usually happens, the rancourof opposition: the character of Justinian has been ex­posed to the blind vehemence of flattery and invective,and the injustice of a sect (the Anti-Tribonians) has re­fused all praise and merit to the prince, his ministers, andhis laws.c Attached to no party, interested only for thetruth and candour of history, and directed by the mosttemperate and skilful guides/ I enter with just diffidence
» The civilians of the darker ages have established an absurd and incomprehensiblemode of quotation, which is supported by authority and custom. In their referencesto the Code, the Pandects, and the Institutes, they mention the number not of thebook, hat'only of the law; and content themselves with recitiug the first words ofthe title to which it belongs ; and of these titles there are more than a thousand.Lndewig (Vit. Justiniani, p. £68.) wishes to shake off this pedantic yoke; and Ihave dared to adopt the simple and rational method of numbering the book, the title,and the law.
D Germany, Bohemia, Hungary, Poland, and Scotland, have received them ascommon law or reason; in France, Italy, &c. they possess a direct or indirect influ­ence; and they were respected in England, from Stephen to Edward I. our nationalJustinian, (Duck, de TJsu et Auctoritate Juris Civilis, lib. 2. c. 1. 8—15. Heineo-cius, Hist. Juris Germaoici, c. 3, 4. no. 55—124.) and the legal historians of eachcountry.
c Francis Hottoman, a learned and acute lawyer of the sixteenth century, wished,to mortify Cujacius, and to please the chancellor do l'Hopital. His Anti-Triboni-anus (which I have never been able to procure) was published in French in 1609:and his seetwas propagated in Germany. (Heineixius, Opp. tom. 3. sylloge 3. p. 171—183.)
d At the head of these guides I shall respectfully place the learned and perspicuousHeineccius, a German professor, who died at Halle in the year 1741, (see his Elogein the Nouvelle Bibliotheque Germanique, tom. 2. p. 51—64.) His ample workshave been collected in eight volames in 4to. Geneva, 1743—1748. The treatiseswhich I have separately used are, 1. Historia Juris Romani et Germanic!, Lugd.Batav. 1740, in 8vo. 2. Syntagma Antiquitatum Romanam Jurisprudentiam illus-trantium, 2 vols, in 8vo. Traject. ad RhenuBi. 3. Elementa Juris Civilis secundumOrdinem Institutionum, Lugd. Bat. 1751, in 8vo. 4. Elementa J.C. secundum Or-dinem Pandectarum, Traject. 1772, in 8vo. 2. vols.


Y 1"?







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV.] OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 3Q5


night, his domestics were awakened by an importunatecrowd, who thundered at his door, and obtained admit­tance by revealing themselves to be the principal mem­bers of the senate. These welcome deputies announcedthe recent and momentous secret of the emperor's de­cease: reported, or perhaps invented, his dying choiceof the best beloved and the most deserving of his ne­phews, and conjured Justin to prevent the disorders ofthe multitude, if they should perceive, with the returnof light, that they were left without a master. Aftercomposing his countenance to surprise, sorrow, and de­cent modesty, Justin, by the advice of his wife Sophia,submitted to the authority of the senate. He was conduct­ed with speed and silence to the palace; the guards sa­luted their new sovereign, and the martial and religiousrites of his coronation were diligently accomplished. Bythe hands of the proper officers he was invested with theimperial garments, the red buskins, white tunic, and pur­ple robe. A fortunate soldier, whom he instantly pro­moted to the rank of tribune, encircled his neck with amilitary collar: four robust youths exalted him on ashield; he stood firm and erect to receive the adorationof his subjects; and their choice was sanctioned by thebenediction of the patriarch, who imposed the diadem on Reign ofthe head of an orthodox prince. The hippodrome was or the"already filled with innumerable multitudes; and no ^"d^'ssooner did the emperor appear on his throne, than the 1S-'voices of the blue and the green factions were confound- December,ed in the same loyal acclamations. In the speecheswhich Justin addressed to the senate and people, he pro­mised to correct the abuses which had disgraced the ageof his predecessor, displayed the maxims of a just andbeneficent government, and declared, that on the ap- His con •proaching calends of January/ he would revive in his a.'d! see,
January 1.
c It is surprising how Pagi (Critica in Anna!. Barou. tpm. 2. p. 639.) conld betempted by any chronicles to contradict the plain and decisive text of Corippus (vi­dua dona, lib. 2. 354; vidua dies, lib. 4. 1.) and to postpone, till A. D. 567, the con-mlship of Justin.


1 D 1







OCR Output








CHAP, XLIV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 343


of Papinian and Ulpian. The science of the laws is thesloW growth of time and experience, and the advantageboth of method and materials is naturally assumed bythe most recent authors. The civilians of the reign ofthe Antonines had studied the works of their predeees*sors: their philosophic spirit had mitigated the rigour ofantiquity, simplified the forms of proceeding, and emerg­ed from the jealousy and prejudice of the rival sects. Thechoice of the authorities that compose the Pandects, de-*pended on the judgment of Tribonian: but the powerof his sovereign could not absolve him from the sacredobligations of truth and fidelity. As the legislator ofthe empire, Justinian might repeal the acts of the An­tonines, or condemn, as seditious, the free principles^which were maintained by the last of the Roman law­yers.1 But the existence of past facts is placed beyondthe reach of despotism; and the emperor was guilty offraud and forgery, when he corrupted the integrity oftheir text, inscribed with their venerable names thewords and ideas of his servile reign,1" and suppressed, bythe hand of power, the pure and authentic copies oftheir sentiments. The changes and interpolations ofTribonian and his colleagues are excused by the pretenceof uniformity: but their cares have been insufficient;and the antinomies, or contradictions of the Code andPandects, still exercise the Patience and subtlety of mo­dern civilians."
A rumour devoid of evidence has been propagated by Lossoflne
r ° J ancient ju-
1 risprudence
collected by Duker. (Opuscnla de Lalinitale velerum Jurisconsultorura, Lugd. Bat.1721. !n 12ni<>.)
1 Nomina quidem vcteribus servavimus, legum antem veritatem nostram fecimns.Itaque siquid erat in illis seditiosum, inulta autem talia erant ibi reposita, hoc deci-lom est ot definitmn, et in perspicaum finem dedacla est quxque lex. (Cod. Justi­nian, lib. 1. tit. 17. leg. 3. no. 10.) A frank confession!
nl The number of these emblemata (a polite name for forgeries) is much reduced byByukershoek (in the four last books of his observations), who poorly maintains theright of Justinian and the duty of Tribonian. 3"The antinomies, or opposite laws of the Code and Pandects, are sometimesthe cauae, and often the excuse, of the glorious uncertainty Of the civil law]which ao often affords what Montague calls "Questions ponr l'Ami." See afine passage of Franciscus Balduiuus in Justinian, (lib. 2. p. 259, &c. apnd Lindenwig, f> 305, 306.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


cise of similar diligence. Such, in truth, may be thefreedom and plenty of a small colony cast on a fruitfulisland. But the colony multiplies, while the space stillcontinues the same; the common rights, the equal in­heritance of mankind, are engrossed by the bold andcrafty; each field and forest is circumscribed by thelandmarks of a jealous master; and it is the peculiarpraise of the Roman jurisprudence, that it asserts theclaim of the first occupant to the wild animals of theearth, the air, and the waters. In the progress of pri­mitive equity to final ipjustice, the steps are silent, theshades are almost imperceptible, and the absolute mono­poly is guarded by positive laws and artificial reason. Theactive insatiate principle of self-love can only supply thearts of life and the wages of industry; and as soon ascivil government and exclusive property have been intro­duced, they become necessary to the existence of thehuman race. Except in the singular institutions of Sparta;the wisest,legislators have disapproved an Agrarian lawas a false and dangerous innovation. Among the Ro­mans, the enormous disproportion of wealth surmount­ed the ideal restraints of a doubtful tradition, and anobsolete statute; a tradition that the poorest follower ofRomulus had been endowed with the perpetual inherit­ance of two jugeraa statute which confined the rich^est citizen to the measure of five hundred jugera, orthree hundred and twelve acres of land. The originalterritory of Rome consisted only of some miles of wopdand meadow along the banks of the Tiber; and domes­tic exchange could add nothing to the national stock.But the goods of an alien or enemy were lawfully ex­posed to the first hostile occupier; the city was enrichedby the profitable trade of war; and the blood of her sonswas the only price that was paid for the Volscian sheep^
1 The heredium of the first Romans is defined by Varro, (de Re Rustica, lib. i.o. 2. p. 141. o. 10. p. 160, 161. edit. Gesner.) and clouded by Pliny's declamation.(Hist. Natur. 1B. 2.) A just and learned comment is given in the Administration desTerres chra lcs ftomaius. (p. 12—66.) .'■j







OCR Output








3Q2 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLHI,


The conspirators were detected and seized, with daggershidden under their garments: Marcellus died by his ownhand, and Sergius was dragged from the sanctuary."Pressed by remorse, or tempted by the hopes of safety, heaccused two officers of the household of Belisarius; andtorture forced them to declare that they had acted accord­ing to the secret instructions of their patron.* Posteritywill not hastily believe that a hero, who, in the vigourof life, had disdained the fairest offers of ambition andrevenge, should stoop to the murder of his prince, whomhe could not long expect to survive. His followers wereimpatient to fly; but flight must have been supportedby rebellion, and he had lived enough for nature and forglory. Belisarius appeared before the council with lessa. n. 563, fear than indignation: after forty years' service, the em-Dec'5' peror had prejudged his guilt; and injustice was sancti­fied by the presence and authority of the patriarch. - Thelife of Belisarius was graciously spared; but his fortuneswere sequestered, and from December to July he wasguarded as a prisoner in his own palace. At length hisa. d. 564, innocence was acknowledged; his freedom and honours,tl!y 19, Were restored; and death, which might be hastenedby resentment and grief, removed him from the worlda. d. 565. about eight months after his deliverance. The name oflaro 13. geusarius can never ;DUt instead of the funeral,
the monuments, the statues, so justly due to his memory,I only read, that his treasures, the spoils of the Gothsand Vandals, were immediately confiscated by the em­peror. Some decent portion was reserved, however, forthe use of his widow; and as Antonina had much torepent, she devoted the last remains of her life and for­tune to the foundation of a convent. Such is the sim­ple and genuine narrative of the tall of Belisarius andthe ingratitude of Justinian.7 That he was deprived
u The Sergius (Vandal, lib. 2. c. 21, 22. Anecdot. c. 5.) and Marcellus (Goth. lib.3. c. 32.) are mentioned by Procopins. See Theophanes, p. 197. 201.
* Alemannus (p. 3.) quotes an old Byzantine MS. which has been printad in theIniperium Orientate of Banduri.
J Of the disgrace and restoration of Belisarius, the genuine original record is pr»­







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 4Q


tive of Tyre, who had obtained the government of theAfrican Pentapolis. But this union was frail and tran­sient: Ecebolus soon rejected an expensive or faithlesscdncubine; she was reduced at Alexandria to extremedistress; and, in her laborious return to Constantinople,every city of the east admired and enjoyed the fair Cy­prian, whose merit appeared to justify her descent fromthe peculiar island of Venus. The vague commerce ofTheodora, and the most detestable precautions, preservedher from the danger which she feared; yet once, and onceonly, she became a mother. The infant was saved and edu­cated in Arabia, by his father, who imparted to him on hisdeath-bed, that he was the son of an empress. Filled withambitious hopes, the unsuspecting youth immediatelyhastened to the palace of Constantinople, and was ad­mitted to the presence of his mother. As he was nevermore seen, even after the decease of Theodora, she de­serves the foul imputation of extinguishing with his lifea secret so offensive to her imperial virtue.
In the most abject state of her fortune and reputa- Herniarytion, some vision, either of sleep or of fancy, had whis- jtaUniik.pered to Theodora the pleasing assurance that she wasdestined to become the spouse of a potent monarch.Conscious of her approaching greatness, she returnedfrom Paphlagonia to Constantinople; assumed, like askilful actress, a more decent character; relieved herpoverty by the laudable industry of spinning wool; andaffected a life of chastity and solitude in a small house,which she afterward changed into a magnificent temple.dHer beauty, assisted by art or accident, soon attracted,captivated, and fixed, the patrician Justinian, who al­ready reigned with absolute sway under the name of hisuncle. Perhaps she contrived to enhance the value ofa gift which she had so often lavished on the meanest of
d Anonym, de Antiqnitat. C. P. lib. 3. 132. in Banduri Imperium Orient, tom. 1.p. 48. Iju<lcwig(p. 151.) argoes sensibly that Theodora would not have immor­talized a brothel; but 1 auply this tact to her second and chaster residence at Con-itantioople.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL.


the appellation of philosopher, liberty and the consul­ship were founded at Rome by the elder Brutus. Therevolutions of the consular office, which may be viewedin the successive lights of a substance, a shadow, anda name, have been occasionally mentioned in the pre­sent history. The first magistrates of the republichad been chosen by the people, to exercise, in thesenate, and in the camp, the powers of peace and war,which were afterward translated to the emperors. Butthe tradition of ancient dignity was long revered by theRomans and barbarians. A gothic historian applaudsthe consulship of Theodoric as the height of all temporalglory and greatness ;s the king of Italy himself congratu-ilates those annual favourites of fortune, who, without thecares, enjoyed the splendour of the throne; and at theend of a thousand years, two consuls were created by thesovereigns of Rome and Constantinople, for the solepurpose of giving a date to the year, and a festival to thepeople. But the expenses of this festival, in which thewealthy and the vain aspired to surpass their predeces.-sors, insensibly arose to the enormous sum of 80,000/.the wisest senators declined a useless honour, which in­volved the certain ruin of their families; and to this re;-luctance I should impute the frequent chasms in the lastage of the consular Fasti. The predecessors of Justi­nian had assisted from the public treasures the dignity ofthe less opulent candidates; the avarice of that princepreferred the cheaper and more convenient method ofadvice and regulation.' Seven processions or spectacleswere the number to which his edict confined the horseand chariot races, the athletic sports, the music, and pan­tomimes of the theatre, and the hunting of wild beasts;and small pieces of silver were discreetly substituted tothe gold medals, which had always excited tumult and
• Cassiodor. Variaram Epist. 6. 1. Jornandes, c. 57. p. 696. edit, Grot. Qnodsummum bonam primumque in muudo decus edicitur.
'Sve the regulations of Justinian, (Novell. 105.) dated at Constantinople, July 5,aud a'dressed to Strategius, treasurer of the empire. - ,







OCR Output













OCR Output








136 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLII.


has been too minutely described by the historians of thetimes."
nescrip. The extreme length of the Euxine sea,' from Constan-c'ou-hos tinople to the mouth of the Phasis, may be computed asMiogreii" a vova&c °^ nme days, and a measure of seven hundredmiles. From the Iberian Caucasus the most lofty andcraggy mountains of Asia, that river descends with suchoblique vehemence, that, in a short space, it is traversedby one hundred and twenty bridges. Nor does thestream become placid and navigable, till it reaches thetown of Sarapana, five days' journey from the Cyrus,which flows from the same hills, but in a contrary di­rection, to the Caspian lake. The proximity of theserivers has suggested the practice, or at least the idea,of wafting the precious merchandise of India down theOxus, over the Caspian, up the Cyrus, and with thecurrent of the Phasis into the Euxine and Mediterraneanseas. As it successively collects the streams of the plainof Colchos, the Phasis moves with diminished speed,though accumulated weight. At the mouth it is sixtyfathom deep and half a league broad, but a small woodyisland is interposed in the midst of the channel: thewater, so soon as it has deposited an earthly or metallicsediment, floats on the surface of the waves, and is nolonger susceptible of corruption. In a course of onehundred miles, forty of which are navigable for large ves­sels, the Phasis divides the celebrated region of Colchos,™
8 The Lazic war, the content of Rome and Persia on the Phasis, is tediously spunthrough many a page of Procopius, (Persic, lib. 2. c. 15. 17. 28—30. Gothic lib. 4.c. 7—lfr.) and Agulhias. (lib. 2—4. p. 55—132. 141.) ,
'The Periplus, or circumnavigation Of the Euxine sea, was desoribed in Latin bySallust, and in Greek by Arrian.—1. The former work, which no longer exists, hasbeen restored by the lingular diligence of M. de Brosses, first president of the par­liament of Dijon, (Hist, de la Republique Romaine, lorn. 2. lib. 3. p. 199—298.) whoventures to assume the character of the Roman historian. His description of the Euxineis ingeniously formed of all the fragments of the original, and of all the Greeks andLatins whom Sallust might copy, or by whom he might lie copied; and the merit ofthe execution atones for the whimsical design. 2 The Periplus of Arrian is ad­dressed to the emperor Adrian, (in Geograph. Minor. Hudson, torn. 1.) and containswhatever the governor of Pontus had seen, from Trebizoud to Dioscorias; whatever ■be had heard from Dioscurias to the Danube; and whatever he knewfrointho Danube'to Trebizoud.
■ Besides many occasional hints from the poets, historians, &c. of antiquity, we







OCR Output








CHAP. XtlV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 935


every citizen conscious of his abilities and knowledge.The discretion of the prastor was now governed by thelessons of his teachers; the judges were enjoined toobey the comment as well as the text of the law; andthe use of codicils was a memorable innovation, whichAugustus ratified by the advice of the civilians.p'The most absolute mandate could only require that Sects,the judges shouldagree with the civilians, if the civiliansagreed "among themselves. But positive institutions areoften the result of custom and prejudice; laws and lan­guage are ambiguous and arbitrary; where reason is in­capable of pronouncing, the love of argument is inflamedby the envy of rivals, the vanity of masters, the blindattachment of their disciples: and the Roman jurispru­dence was divided by the once famous sects of the Pro-culians and Sabinians.'* Two sages of the law, AteiusCapito and Antistius Labeo/ adorned the peace of theAugustan age: the former distinguished by the favourpf his sovereign; the latter more illustrious by his con­tempt of that favour, and his stern though harmless op­position to the tyrant of Rome. Their legal studies wereinfluenced by the various colours of their temper andprinciples. Labeo was attached to the form of the oldrepublic; his rival embraced the more profitable sub­stance of the rising monarchy. But the disposition of acourtier is tame and submissive; and Capito seldom pre­sumed to deviate from the sentiments, or at least from■the words, of his predecessors: while the bold republi­can pursued his independent ideas without fear of para-
P See Pomponius, (de Origine Juris Pandect, lib. 1. tit. 2. leg. 2. no. 47.) Hei-heccius, (ad Iustitut. lib. 1. tit. 2. no. 8. lib. 2. tit. 25. in Element. et Antiquitat.)and Gravina. (p. 41—15.) Yet the monopoly of Augustus, a harsh measure,wouldappear with some softening in the contemporary evidence; and it was prohably veil­ed by a decree of the senate.
1.1 have perused the diatribe of Gotfridas Mascovius, the learned Mascou, deSectis Jurisconsultorum, (Lipsiae, 1728, in 12mo. p. 270 ) a learned treatise on anarrow and harren ground. ''
r Seethe character of Anlistius Labeo in Tacitus, (Annal. 3. 75.) and in an epis­tle of Ateius Capito, (Aul. Gellius, 13. 12.) who accuses his rival oflibertas nimia etVecors. Yet Horace woutd not have lashed a virtuous and respectable senator ; andI must adopt the emendation of Bootley, who reads Lahieuo insanior. (Serin, lib. 3.82.) See Mascou,'de Sectis. (c. 1. p. 1—24.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLII.j OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


one hundred and twenty thousand of the subjects ofJustinian. In a subsequent inroad they pierced the wallof the Thracian Chersonesus, extirpated the habitationsand the inhabitants, boldly traversed the Hellespont, andreturned to their companions, laden with the spoils ofAsia. Another party, which seemed a multitude in theeyes of the Romans, penetrated, without opposition,from the straits of Thermopylas to the isthmus of Co­rinth; and the last ruin of Greece has appeared an ob­ject too minute for the attention of history. The workswhich the emperor raised for the protection, but at theexpense of his subjects, served only to disclose the weak­ness of some neglected part; and the walls, which, byflattery, had been deemed impregnable, were either de­serted by the garrison, or scaled by the barbarians. Threethousand Sclavonians, who insolently divided themselvesinto two bands, discovered the weakness and misery ofa triumphant reign. They passed the Danube and theHebrus, vanquished the Roman generals who dared tooppose their progress, and plundered, with impunity,the cities of Illyricum and Thrace, each o£ which hadarms and numbers to overwhelm their contemptible as­sailants. Whatever praise the boldness of the Sclavo­nians may deserve, it is sullied by the wanton and deli­berate cruelty which they are accused of exercising ontheir prisoners. Without distinction of rank, or age,or sex, the captives were impaled or flayed alive, or sus­pended between four posts, and beaten with clubs tillthey expired, or inclosed in some spacious building, andleft to perish in the flames with the spoil and cattlewhich might impede the march of these savage victors."Perhaps a more impartial narrative would reduce thenumber, and qualify the nature, of these horrid acts;and they might sometimes be excused by the cruel laws
"The cruelties of the Sclavonians are related or magnified by Procopius. (Goth.lib. 3. o. 29. 38.) For their mild and liberal behaviour to their prisoners, we mayappeal to the authority, somewhat more reecut, of the emperor Maurice. (Stratagem,lib. 2.C.5.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIIt.] Of *HE R6MAN EMPIRE. 46"3


till they were roused to action by the progress of To- July. ^tHa and the reproaches of Justinian. The gates of Ve- —544.rona were secretly opened to Artabazus, at the head ofone hundred Persians in the service of the empire. TheGoths fled from the city. At the distance of sixty-fur­longs the Roman generals halted to regulate the divi­sion of the spoil. While they disputed, the enemy dis<-covered the real number of the victors: the Persianswere instantly overpowered, and it was by leaping fromthe wall that Artabazus preserved a life which he lost ina few days by the lance of a barbarian, who had defiedhim to single combat. Twenty thousand Romans en­countered the forces of Totila, near Faenza, and on thehills of Mugello, of the Florentine territory. The ar­dour of freedmen, who fought to regain their country,was opposed to the languid temper of mercenary troops,who were even destitute of the merits of strong and well-disciplined servitude. On the first attack they abandonedtheir ensigns, threw down their arms, and dispersed onall sides with an active speed which abated the loss, whilstit aggravated the shame, of their defeat. The king ofthe Goths, who blushed for the baseness of his enemies,pursued with rapid steps the path of honour and victor)'.Totila passed the Po, traversed the Appennine, suspendedthe important conquest of Ravenna, Florence, and Rome,and marched through the heart of Italy, to form thesiege, or rather blockade, of Naples. The Roman chiefs,imprisoned in their respective cities, and accusing eachother of the common disgrace, did not presume to dis­turb his enterprise. But the emperor, alarmed by thedistress and danger of his Italian conquests, dispatchedto the relief of Naples a fleet of galleys and a body ofThracian and Armenian soldiers. They landed in Si­cily, which yielded its copious stores of provisions; butthe delays of the new commander, an unwarlike magis­trate, protracted the sufferings of the besieged; and thesuccours, which he dropped with a timid and tardy hand,







OCR Output








@2 , DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL


Homo?' The fortifications of Europe and Asia were multipliedEurope, by Justinian; but the repetition of those timid and fruit?less precautions exposes to a philosophic eye the debilityof the empire.' From Belgrade to the Euxine,from theconflux of the Save to the mouth of the Danube, a chainof above fourscore fortified places was extended alongthe banks of the great river. Single watch-towers werechanged into spacious citadels; vacant walls, which theengineers contracted or enlarged according to the na­ture of the ground, were filled with colonies or garri­sons; a strong fortress defended the ruins of Trajan'sbridge," and several military stations affected to spreadbeyond the Danube the pride of the Roman name. Butthat name was divested of its terrors; the barbarians, intheir annual inroads, passed, and contemptuously re­passed, before these useless bulwarks; and the inhabit­ants of the frontiers, instead of reposing under the sha­dow of the general defence, were compelled to guard,with incessant vigilance, their separate habitations. Thesolitude of ancient cities was replenished; the new foun­dations of Justinian acquired, perhaps too hastily, theepithets of impregnable and populous; and the auspici­ous place of his own nativity attracted the grateful rever­ence of the vainest of princes. Under the name oiJusti-niana prima,the obscure village of Tauresium became theseat of an archbishop and a prefect, whose jurisdictionextended over seven warlike provinces of Illyricum,x and
ocean grow to Ihe length of fifty, eighty, or one hundred feet. (Hist, des Voyages,.tom. 15. p. 289. Pennant's British Zoology, vol. 3. p. 35.)
« Montesquieu observes, (tom. 3. p. 503. Considerations sur la Grandeur et la-Decadence des Romains, c. 20.) that Justinian's empire was like France in the timeof the Norman iuroads—never so weak as when every village was fortified.
u Procopins affirms, (lib. 4. o. 6.) that the Danube was stopped by the ruins of thebridge. Had Apollodorus, the architect, left a description of his own work, the fa­bulous wonders of Dion Cassius (lib. 68. p. 1129.) would have been corrected by thegenuine picture, Trajan's bridge consisted of twenty or twenty-two stone piles withwooden arches; the river is shallow, the current gentle, and the whole interval nomore than four hnndred and forty-three (Reimar ad Dion, from MarSigli) or fivehnndred and fifteen tuises. (d'Anville Geographie Ancienne, tom. 1. p. 305.)
* Of the two Dacias, Mediterrunea and Ripensis, Dardania, Praevalitana, the se­cond Msr'sia, and the second Macedonia. See Justinian. (Novell. 11.) who speaks,bfhis custles beyond the Danube, and of homines semper' bellicis sudoribus mbtBrrentes.







OCR Output








CHAP. XXXIX.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


and courteous demeanour, of the Gothic king excited theadmiration of the Romans, and he contemplated withequal curiosity and surprise, the monuments that remain­ed of their ancient greatness. He imprinted the footstepsof a conqueror on the Capitoline-hill, and frankly con­fessed that each day he viewed with fresh wonder theforum of Trajan and his lofty column. The theatre ofPompey appeared, even in its decay, as a huge mountainartificially hollowed and polished, and adorned by humanindustry; and he vaguely computed, that a river of goldmust have been drained to erect the colossal amphithe­atre of Titus/ From the mouths of fourteen aqueducts,a pure and copious stream was diffused into every partof the city; among these the Claudian water, whicharose at the distance of thirty-eight miles in the Sabinemountains, was conveyed along a gentle though constantdeclevity of solid arches, till it descended on the summitof the Aventine-hill. The long and spacious vaultswhich had been constructed for the purpose of commonsewers, subsisted, after twelve centuries, in their pristinestrength ; and the subterraneous channels have been pre­ferred to all the visible wonders of Rome.5 The Gothickings, so injuriously accused of the ruin of antiquity,were anxious to preserve the monuments of the nationwhom they had subdued.' The royal edicts were framedto prevent the abuses, the neglect, or the depredations,of the citizens themselves; and a professed architect, theannual sum of two hundred pounds of gold, twenty-fivethousand tiles, and the receipt of customs from the Lu-
r Cassiodorius describes, in his pompons style, the foram of Trajan, (Var. 7. 6.)the theatre ofMarcellus(c. 4.51. )and the amphitheatre of Titus, (5. 42.) and hisde-scriptions are not unwortby of the reader's perusal. According to the modern prices,the abbe Barthelemy computes that the brick-work and masoury of the Coliseumwould now cost twenty millions of French livies. (Mem. de 1'Academie des Inscrip­tions, tom. 28, p. 585, 586.) How small a part of that stupendions fabric!
• For the aqueducts and cloacae, see Strabo, (lib. 5. p. 360.) Pliny, (Hist. Nat. 36.24.)Cassiodorius, (Var. 3.30, St. 6. 6.) Procopius, (Goth. lib.1.e. 19.) and Nardini.(Roma Antica, p. 514—522.) How such works could be executed by a king of Romeis yet a problem.
1 For the Gothic care of the buildings and statues, see Cassiodorius. (Var. 1. 21.So. 2. 34. 4. 30. 7. 6. 13. 15.) and the Valesisn Fragment, (p. 721.)







OCR Output








$58 ." DECLIKE A If D FALL pCHAP, XLlYi


was unwilling to relinquish his slave. When the Romanmatrons became the equal and voluntary companions oftheir lords, a new jurisprudence was introduced, thatmarriage, like other partnerships, might be dissolved bythe abdication of one of the associates. In three centu-ries of prosperity and corruption, this principle was en-.Jarged to frequent practice and pernicious abuse. Pas-
• • sion, interest, or caprice, suggested daily motives for thedissolution of marriage; a word, a sign, a message, a let­ter, the mandate of a freedman, declared, the separation;the most tender bf human connexions was degraded to atransient society of profit or pleasure. According to thevarious conditions of life, both sexes alternately felt thedisgrace and injury; an inconstant spouse transferredher wealth to a new family, abandoning a numerous, per*haps a spurious, progeny to the paternal authority andcare of her late husband; a beautiful virgin might bodismissed to the world, old, indigent and friendless; butthe reluctance of the Romans, when they were pressedto marriage by Augustus, sufficiently marks, that tb»prevailing institutions were least favourable to the males,A specious theory is confuted by this free and perfeet ex­periment, which demonstrates, that the liberty of divorcedoes not contribute to happiness and virtue. The faci­lity of separation would destroy all mutual confidence,and inflame every trifling dispute': the minute differencebetween a husband and a stranger, which might so easilybe removed, might still more easily be forgotten; andthe matron, who in five years can submit to the em­braces of eight husbands, must cease to reverence thechastity of her own person.1
Limiia- Insufficient remedies followed, with distant and tardy
tions of 'r
the liberty k -iSio fiunt octo niariti
of divorce. . Quinque per automnos. Juvenal. Satir. C. 20.
A rapid succession, which may yet be credible, as well as the non consilium numere,sed maritorum annos suos computant, of Seneca, (de Uencficiis, 3.16.) Jerome saw atKome a triumphant hushand bury his twenty-first wife, who had interred twenty-twoof his less sturdy predecessors. (Opp. tom. 1. p. 90. ad Geroutiam.) Bat the tenhusbands iu a month of the poet Martial, is an extravagant bypei bule. (lib. 4. epi­gram. 7.) "..' .


 







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLV.


extent, but the extent of a camp would be easily circum­scribed within the limits of a city; and its martial inha­bitants must be thinly scattered over the face of a largecountry. When Alboin descended from the Alps, heinvested his nephew, the first duke of Friuli, with thecommand of the province and the people; but the pru­dent Gisulf would have declined the dangerous office,unless he had been permitted to choose, among the no­bles of the Lombards, a sufficient number of families' toform a perpetual colony of soldiers and subjects. In theprogress of conquest, the same option could not be grant­ed to the dukes of Brescia or Bergamo, of Pavia or Tu­rin, of Spoleto or Beneventum; but each of these, andeach of their colleagues, settled in his appointed districtwith a band of followers who resorted to his standard inwar and his tribunal in peace. Their attachment was freeand honourable: resigning the gifts and benefits whichthey had accepted, they might emigrate with their fami­lies into the jurisdiction of another duke; but their ab­sence from the kingdom was punished with death, as acrime of military desertion.5 The posterity of the firstconquerors struck a deeper root in the soil, which, byevery motive of interest and honour, they were bound todefend. A Lombard was born the soldier of his kingand his duke; and the civil assemblies of the nation dis­played the banners, and assumed the appellation, of a re­gular army. Of this army, the pay and the rewards weredrawn from the conquered provinces; and the distribu­tion, which was not effected till after the death of Alboin,is disgraced by the foul marks of injustice and rapine.Many of the most wealthy Italians were slain or banished;the remainder were divided among the strangers, and atributary obligation was imposed (under the name ofhospitality), of paying to the Lombards a third part of the
r Paul, lib. 2. o. 9. He calls these families or generations by the Teutonic nameof Faras, which is likewise used in the Lomhard laws. The humble deacon was not in­sensible of the nohility of his own race. See lib. 4. c. 39.
■ Compare no. 3 aud 177 of the laws ot Rotharis.







OCR Output








274 DECEINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIII.


he had signified to the ambassadors of Belisarius, his in­tention of sparing the city, he stationed an army at thedistance of one hundred and twenty furlongs, to observethe motions of the Roman general. With the remain­der of his forces, he marched into Lucania and Apulia,and occupied, on the summit of mount Garganus,0 oneof the camps of Hannibal.p The senators were draggedin his train, and afterward confined in the fortresses ofCampania: the citizens, with their wives and children,were dispersed in exile; and during forty days Romewas abandoned to desolate and dreary solitude.qRecovered The loss of Rome was speedily retrieved by an action,
byBelisa- , . , ,. / J . . .
rius, to which, according to the event, the public opinionFebraaryf' would apply the names of rashness or heroism. Afterthe departure of Totila, the Roman general sallied fromthe port at the head of a thousand horse, cut in piecesthe enemy who opposed his progress, and visited withpity and reverence the vacant space of the eternal city.Resolved to maintain a station so conspicuous in the eyesof mankind, he summoned the greatest part of his troopsto the standard which he erected on the Capitol: theold inhabitants were recalled by the love of their countryand the hopes of food; and the keys of Rome were senta second time to the emperor Justinian. The walls, asfar as they had been demolished by the Goths, were re­paired with rude and dissimilar materials; the ditch wasrestored; iron spikes' were profusely scattered in the
° Mount Garganus, now Monte St. Angelo, in the kingdom of Naples, runs threehundred stadia into the Adriatic sea, (Strab. lib. 6. p. 436.) and in the darker ageswas illustrated by the apparition, miracles, and church of St. Michael the archangel.Horace, a native of Apulia or Lucania, had seen the elms and oaks of Garganns la­bouring and bellowing with the north wind that blew on that lofty coast. (Cann.2. 9.Epist. 2. 1. 201.)
P I cannot ascertain this particular camp of Hannibal; but the Punic quarterswere long and often in the neighbourhood of Arpi. (T. Liv. 22. 9.12; 24. 3. &c.)
1 Totila .... Romam ingreditur acevertit muros domos aliquantas igni
comburens, ac omnes Romanorum res in prsedam accepit, hos ipsos Romanos in Cam-paniam captivos abduxit. Post quam devastationem, xl aut amplius dies, Roma fuitita desolata, ut nemo ibi hominura, nisi (nulla ?) bestise morarentur. (Marcellin. inChron. p. 54.)
r The tribuli are small engines with four spikes, one fixed in the ground, thethree others erect or adverse. (Procopins, Gothic, lib. 3. c. 24. Just. Lipsius, Po-liorcetosi', lib. 5. c. 3.) The metaphor was borrowed from the tribuli, (land caltrops)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


nian or Ulpian, which the reformer had proscribed, weredeemed unworthy of future notice; the' twelve tablesand praetorian edict insensibly vanished, and the monu^ments of ancient Rome were neglected or destroyed bythe envy and ignorance of the Greeks. Even the Pan­dects themselves have escaped with difficulty and dangerfrom the common shipwreck, and criticism has pronoun-i­ced, that all the editions and manuscripts of the west are de­rived from one Original." It was transcribed at Constan­tinople the beginning of the seventh century,' was succes­sively transported by the accidents of war and commerceto Amalphi,' Pisa," and Florence," and is now depositedas a sacred relic7 in the ancient palace of the republic*
of the civil law, Mucins, Brutus, and Manillas, extant volumina, scripta Manflii mo-suumenta; that of some old republican lawyers, haec versantar eorma scripta intermanus hominum. Eight of the Augustan sages were reduced to a compendium : ofCascellius, scripta not extaot sed unus liber, &c.: of Trehatius, minus frequentantur:of Tubero, libri parnm grati sunt. Many quotations in the Pandects are derived frombooks which Tribonian never saw; and in the long period from the seventh to thethirteenth oentury of Rome, the apparent reading of the moderns successively dependson the knowledge and veracity of their predecessors.
r All, in several instances, repeat the errors of the scribe and the transpositions of:Some leaves in the Florentine pandects. This faot, if it be true, is decisive. Yetthe Pandects are quoted by Ivo of Chartres (who died in 1117); by Theobald,archhishop of Canterbury, and by Vacarius, our first professor, in the year 1140. (Sel-den ad Fletam, c. 7. tom. 2. p. 1030—1085.) Have our British JV1SS. of the Pan­dects been collated?
* See the description of this original in B re nek roan, (Hist. Pandect. Florent. lib.jt. c. 2, 3; p. 4—17. and lib. 2.) ' Politian, an enthusiast, revered it as the authentipstandard of Justinian himself; (p. 407, 408.) hat this paradox is refuted by the abbre­viations of the Florentine MS. (lib. 2. c. 3. p. 117—130.) It is composed of twoquarto volumes with large margins, on a thin parchment, and the Latin characters be­tray the hand of a Greek scribe.
t Brenckman, at the end of his history, has inserted two dissertations on the re­public of Amaiphi, and the Ptsan war in the year 1185, &o.
u TJie discovery of the pandects at Amalphi <(A, D. 13.37) is 6rst noticed (in1501) by Ludovicus Bologninus, (Brenckman, lib. 1. c. 11. p. 73,74. lib. 4. c. 2. p.417—425.) on the faith ofaPis&n chronicle, j(p. 409, 410.) without a name or a date.The whole story, though, unknown to the twelth century, embellished by ignorantages, and suspected by rigid criticism, is not, however, destitute of much internalprohahility, (lib. 1# c. 4-i—8.. p. J7—50.) Tne kiber Pandectaram of Pisa was un­doubtedly consulted in the fourteeuth century by the great BarLolns. (p. 406, 407.See lib. J. c. 9. p. 50—02.)
x Pisa was taken by the Florentines in the year 1406; and in 1411 the Pandectswere transported to the capital. These events are authentic and famous.
y They were now bound in purple, deposited in a rich casket, and shewn to cWrioustravellers by the monks and magistrates hareheaded, and with lighted tapers. (Brenck­man, lib. 1. c. 10—12. p. 62—93.)
z After the collations of Politian, Bologninus, and Antoninus Augustinns, and thesplendid edition of the Pandects by Taorellns (in 1551), Heury Brenckman, a Dutch­man, undertook a pilgrimage to Florence, where he employed several years in tfiestudy of a single manuscript. His Historia Pandectarum Florentinorum, (TJtrecnt,,1722, in quarto,) though a monument of industry, is a small portion of his originaldesign. ^ , •" . t!
VOL. V. 2 A







OCR Output








CHAP.'XL.] Of1'THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 80


their fantastic capitals. A variety of ornaments and fi­gures was curiously expressed <h mosaic; and the imagesof Christ, of the Virgin, of saints, and of angels, whichhave been defaced by Turkish fanaticism, were danger­ously exposed to the superstition of the Greeks. Ac­cording to the sanctity of each object the precious me­tals wrere distributed in thin leaves or in solid masses.The balustrade of the choir, the capitals of the pillars,the ornaments of the doors and galleries, were of giltbronze; the spectator was dazzled by the glittering as­pect of the cupola; the sanctuary contained forty thou­sand pound weight of silver; and the holy vases andvestments of the altar were of the purest gold, enrichedwith inestimable gems. Before the structure of thechurch had risen two cubits above the ground, 45,200/.were already consumed ; and the whole expense amount- R^hes.ed to 320,000/.; each reader, according to the measureof his belief, may estimate their value either in gold orsilver; but the sum of 1,000,000/. sterling is the resultof the lowest computation. A magnificent temple is alaudable monument of nation altaste and religion, andthe enthusiast who entered the dome of St. Sophia, mightbe tempted to suppose that it was the residence, or eventhe workmanship, of the Deity. Yet how dull is theartifice, how insignificant is the labour, if it be comparedwith the formation of the vilest insect that crawls uponthe surface of the temple!
• So minute a description of an edifice which time has Churchesrespected, may attest the truth, and excuse the relation iTces?of the innumerable works, both in the capital and pro­vinces, which Justinian constructed on a smaller scaleand less durable foundations.0 In Constantinople alone,and the adjacent suburbs, he dedicated twenty-fivechurches to the honour of Christ, the Virgin, and the
° The six books of the Edifices of Procopius are thus distributed.—The first isconfined to Constantinople; the second incudes Mesopotamia opd-Sjria; the third,Armenia and the Euxine; the fourth, Europe; the fifth, Asia Minor and Palestine;the ahth, Egypt and Africa. Italy is forgot by the emperor or the historian, whopublished this work of adulation before the dale (A, D. 555.) of its final conquest.
VOL. V. H







OCR Output








HAP. XXXIX.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. Jf>


I


his family and people, and checked the Franks in themidst of their victorious career. I am not desirous toprolong or repeatb this narrative of military events, theleast interesting of the reign of Theodoric; and shall becontent to add, that the Alemanni were protected/ thatan inroad of the Burgundians was severely chastised, andthat the conquest of Aries and Marseilles opened a freecommunication with the Visigoths, who revered himboth as their national protector, and as the guardian ofhis grandchild, the infant son of Alaric. Under this re­spectable character, the king of Italy restored the praeto­rian prefecture of the Gauls, reformed some abuses inthe civil government of Spain, and accepted the annualtribute and apparent submission of its military governor,who wisely refused to trust his person in the palace ofRavenna.d The Gothic sovereignty was established ,from Sicily to the Danube, from Sirmium or Belgradeto the Atlantic ocean; and the Greeks themselves haveacknowledged that Theodoric reigned over the fairestportion of the western empire."
The union of the Goths and Romans might have fix- civil go-ed for ages the transient happiness of Italy; and the first iuif ac-of nations, a new people of free subjects and enlightened fj^^fj^soldiers, might have gradually arisen from the mutuallaws-emulation of their respective virtues. But the sublimemerit of guiding or seconding such a revolution, was notreserved for the reign of Theodoric; he wanted eitherthe genius or the opportunities of a legislator ;f and whilehe indulged the Goths in the enjoyment of rude liberty,
* Vol. 4. c. 38.
c Ennodius (p. 1610.) and Cassiodorius, in the royal name, (Var. 2. 41.) recordhis salutary protection of the Alemanni.
« The Golhic transactions in Gaul and Spain are represented with some perplexityin Cassiodorius, (Var. 3. 32. 38.41.43, 44.5.39.) Jornandes, (c. 58. p. 698, 099.)and Procopius. Goth. lib. 1. c. 12. I will neither hear nor reconcile the long andcontradictory arguments of the abbe Dubos and the count de Buat about the wars ofBurgundy.
e Theophanes, p. 113.
'Procopius affirms that no laws whatsoever were promulgated by Theodoric, andHie succeeding kings of Italy. (Goth. lib. 2. c. 6.) He must mean in the Gothic lan­guage. A Latin edict of Theodoric is still extant, in one hundred and ril'ty-fourarticles.







OCR Output








14 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XXXIX.


freeman were exempt from taxes, and he enjoyed the in­estimable privilege of being subject only to the laws ofhis country/ Fashion, and even convenience, soon per­suaded the conquerors to assume the more elegant dressof the natives, but they still persisted in the use of theirmother-tongue; and their contempt for the Latin schoolswas applauded by Theodoric himself, who gratified theirprejudices, or his own, by declaring, that the child whohad trembled at a rod, would never dare to look upon asword.8 Distress might sometimes provoke the indigentRoman to assume the ferocious manners, which were in­sensibly relinquished by the rich and luxurious barba­rian :h but these mutual conversions were not encouragedSeparation by the policy of a monarch who perpetuated the separa­tor's6 and ^on o^ the Italians and Goths ; reserving the former forItalians, the arts Gf peace, and the latter for the service of war.To accomplish this design, he studied to protect his in­dustrious subjects, and to moderate the violence withoutenervating the valour of his soldiers, who were maintainedfor the public defence. They held their lands and bene­fices as a military stipend; at the sound of the trumpetthey were prepared to march under the conduct of theirprovincial officers; and the whole extent of Italy wasdistributed into the several quarters of a well-regulatedcamp. The service of the palace and of the frontierswas performed by choice or by rotation ; and each extra­ordinary fatigue was recompensed by an increase of payand occasional donatives. Theodoric had convinced hisbrave companions, that empire must be acquired and de­fended by the same arts. After his example, they stroveto excel in the use, not only of the lance and sword, the
followers. (Frocop. Vandal, lib. 1. c. 8.) The Gothic nohility must have been as nobleas biave.
fSee the acknowledgment of Gothio liberty, Var. 5. 30.
• Procopius, GoLh. lib. 1. c. 2. The Roman boys learnt the language (Var. 8.31.) of the Goths. Their general ignorance is not destroyed by the exceptions ofAmalasuntha, a female, who might study without shame, or of Theodatus, whoselearning provoked the indignation and contempt of his countrymen.
h A saying of Theodoric was founded on experience.—" Romauus miser imitatorGothum ; et utilis (dives) Gothus imitatur Ronianum." (See the Fragment and Notesof Valesius, p. 719.)







OCR Output








56 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL.


and the struggle of the green and blue was supposed torepresent the conflict of the earth and sea. Their re­spective victories announced either a plentiful harvest ora prosperous navigation, and the hostility of the husband­men and mariners was somewhat less absurd than theblind ardour of the Roman people, who devoted theirlives and fortunes to the colour which they had espoused.Such folly was disdained and indulged by the wisestprinces; but the names of Caligula, Nero, Vitellius, Ve-rus, Commodus, Caracalla, and Elagabalus, were enrolledat Rome, in the blue or green factions of the circus: they frequent­ed their stables, applauded their favourites, chastised theirantagonists, and deserved the esteem of the populace, bythe natural or affected imitation of their manners. Thebloody and tumultuous contest continued to disturb thepublic festivity, till the last age of the spectacles of Rome;and Theodoric, from a motive of justice or affection, in­terposed his authority to protect the greens against the•violence of a consul and a patrician, who were passion­ately addicted to the blue faction of the circus."They Ms- Constantinople adopted the follies, though not thestaiitioopio virtues, of ancient Rome; and the same factions whiche»st.the had agitated the circus, raged with redoubled fury in thehippodrome. Under the reign of Anastasius, this po­pular frenzy was inflamed by religious zeal; and thegreens, who had treacherously concealed stones and dag­gers under baskets of fruit, massacred, at a solemn fes­tival, three thousand of their blue adversaries/ Fromthe capital this pestilence was diffused into the provincesand cities of the east, and the sportive distinction of twocolours produced two strong and irreconcilable factions,which shook the foundations of a feeble government/
u SeeOnupliriusPanviniusde LudisCircensibus, lib.I.e. 10,11. the seventeenthAnnotation on Mascou's History of the Germans, and Aleman. ad. c. 7.
x Marcellin. in Chron. p. 47. Instead of the vulgar word veneta, he dses the moreequisite terras of cctrulea and ccerealis. Baron ins, (A. D. 501. no. 4—6.) is satisfiedthat the blues were orthodox; but Tillemont is angry at the supposition, and willnot allow any martyrs in a playhouse. (Hist, des Emp. torn. 6. p. 554.)
y See Procopins, Persic, lib. 1. c. 24. In describing the vices of the factions andof the government, the public is not more favourable than the secret histoi ian. Aleniaii.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL.


of Greece, were diligently strengthened by the labours ofJustinian. From the edge of the sea-shore, throughthe forest and valleys, and as far as the summit of theThessalian mountains, a strong wall was continued,which occupied every practicable entrance. Instead ofa hasty crowd of peasants, a garrison of two thousandsoldiers was stationed along the rampart; granaries ofcom, and reservoirs of water, were provided for theiruse; and by a precaution that inspired the cowardicewhich it foresaw, convenient fortresses were erected fortheir retreat. The walls of Corinth, overthrown by anearthquake, and the mouldering bulwarks of Athensand Plataea, were carefully restored; the barbarians werediscouraged by the prospect of successive and painfulsieges; and the naked cities of Peloponnesus were co­vered by the fortifications of the isthmus of Corinth. Atthe extremity of Europe, another peninsula, the Thra-cian Chersonesus, runs three days' journey into the sea,to form, with the adjacent shores of Asia, the straits ofthe Hellespont. The intervals between eleven populoustowns were filled by lofty woods, fair pastures, and ararble lands: and the isthmus, or thirty-seven stadia or fur­longs, had been fortified by a Spartan general nine hun­dred years before the reign of Justinian.b In an age offreedom and valour, the slightest rampart may preventa surprise; and Procopius appears insensible of the su­periority of ancient times, while he praises the solid con­struction and double parapet of a wall, whose long armsstretched on either side into the sea: but whose strengthwas deemed insufficient to guard the Chersonesus, ifeach city, and particularly Galipoli and Sestus, had notbeen secured by their peculiar fortifications. The longwall, as it was emphatically styled, was a work as dis­graceful in the object, as it was respectable in the execu­tion. The riches of a capital diffuse themselves over
b Xenophon Hellenic. lib. 3. c. 2. After a long and tedious conversation withthe Byzantine declaimers, how refreshing is the truth, the simplicity, the elegance ofan Attic writer!


 







OCR Output








450 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLVI.


fortress at the dawn of day. From thence the king ofPersia was conducted to the more honourable residenceof Hierapolis; and Maurice dissembled his pride, and dis­played his benevolence, at the reception of the letters andambassadors of the grandson of Nnshirvan. They hum­bly represented the vicissitudes of fortune and the com­mon interest of princes, exaggerated the ingratitude ofBahram the agent of the evil principle, and urged, withspecious argument, that it was for the advantage of theRomans themselves to support the two monarchies whichbalance the world, the two great luminaries by whose sa­lutary influence it is vivified and adorned. The anxiety- of Chosroes was soon relieved by the assurance, that theemperor had espoused the cause of justice and royalty;but Maurice prudently declined the expense and delay ofhis useless visit to Constantinople. In the name of hisgenerous benefactor, a rich diadem was presented to thefugitive prince with an inestimable gift of jewels and gold;a powerful army was assembled on the frontiers of Syriaand Armenia under the command of the valiant and faith­ful Narses/ and this general, of his own nation, and hisown choice, was directed to pass the Tigris, and never tosheath his sword till he had restored Chosroes to thethrone of his ancestors. The enterprise, however splen-JBt return. did, was less arduous than it might appear. Persia hadalready repented of her fatal rashness, which betrayedthe heir of the house of Sassan to the ambition of a re­bellions subject; and the bold refusal of the Magi toconsecrate his usurpation, compelled Bahram to assumethe sceptre, regardless of the laws and prejudices of thelaws and prejudices of the nation. The palace was soondistracted with conspiracy, the city with tumult, the pro­vinces with insurrection; and the cruel execution of the
r In this age there were three warriors of the name of Narses, who had been oftenconfounded. (Pagi, Critica, tom. 2. p. 6.40.)—1. A Persarmenian, the brother ofIsaac and Armatius, who, after a successful action against Belissrius, deserted fromhis Persian sovereign, and afterward served in the Italian war. 2. The eunuch whaconquered Italy. 3. The restorer of Chosroes, who is celebrated in the poem ofCo-rippus (lib. 3. 220—227.) as excelsus super omnia vertice agmina .... hahitu mo*destus . . morum probitate placens, virtute vercudus; fulroineus, cantus, vigilans,&Q.







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 113


drunkenness, when they were scattered with a profusehand among the populace. Notwithstanding these pre­cautions and his own example, the succession of consulsfinally ceased in the thirteenth year of Justinian, whosedespotic temper might be gratified by the silent extinctionof a title which admonished the Romans of their ancientfreedom." Yet the annual consulship still lived in theminds of the people: they fondly expected its speedyrestoration; they applauded the gracious condescensionof successive princes, by whom it was assumed in thefirst year of their reign; and three centuries elapsed,after the death of Justinian, before that obsolete dignity,which had been suppressed by custom, could be abolishedby law/ The imperfect mode of distinguishing eachyear by the name of a magistrate, was usually suppliedby the date of a permanent era: the creation of theworld, according to the Septuagint version, was adoptedby the Greeks ;y and the Latins, since the age of Charle­magne, have computed their time from the birth ofChrist.2
11 Procopios, in Anecdot. c. 26. Aleman. p. 106. In the eighteenth year after theconsulship of Basilins, according to the reckoning of Marcellinus, Victor, Marias,&e. the secret history was composed, and, in the eyes of Frocopias, the consulshipwas finally abolished.
* By Leo the philosopher. (Novell. 94. A. D. 886—911.) SeePagi (Dissertat.Hypatica, p. 3125—362.), and Diicange, (Gloss. Graec. p. 1635,1636.) Even thetitle was vilified; consulates oodicilli . . . . vilescnnt, says the emperor himself.
v According to Julius Africanus, &c. the world was created the first of September,five thousand five hundred and eight years, three months, and twenty-five days be­fore the hirth of Christ; (see Pezron, Antiquite des Tems defendiie, p. 20—28.) andtins era has been used by the Greeks, the Oriental Christians, and even by the Rus­sians, till the reign of Peter I. The period, however arhitrary, is clear and conve­nient. Of the seven thousand two hundred and ninety-six years, which are supposedto elapse since the creation, we shall find three thousand of ignorance and darkness;two thousand either fabulous or doubtful; one thousand of ancient history, commenc­ing with the Persian empire, and the republics of Rome and Athens; one thousandfrom the fall of the Roman empire in the west to the discovery of America; and theremaining two hundred and ninety-six will almost complete three centuries of themodern state of Europe and mankind. I regret this chronology so far preferable toour double and perplexed method of counting hackward and forward the years before:and after the Christian era.
1 The era of the world has prevailed in the east since the sixth general council.(A. D. 681.) In the west the Christian era was first invented in the sixth century:it was propagated in the eighth by the authority and writings of venerable Bede; hatit was not till the tenth that the use became legal and popular. See l'Art de verifierles Dates, Dissert. Preliminaire, p. 3.12. Dictionaire Diplomatique, tom. 1. p. 329
oo7. the works of a laborious society of Benedictine monks.







OCR Output








CHAP. Xtlll.} OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 2g3


with the blood of the faithful. Buccelin was actuatedby ambition, and Lothaire by avarice. The former as­pired to restore the Gothic kingdom: the latter, after apromise to his brother of speedy succours, returned bythe same road to deposit his treasure beyond the Alps.The strength of their armies was already wasted by thechange of climate and contagion of disease: the Ger­mans revelled in the vintage of Italy; and their ownintemperance avenged, in some degree, the miseries of adefenceless people.
At the entrance of the spring, the imperial troops, whohad guarded the cities, assembled to the number of eigh- Defeat ofteen thousand men, in the neighbourhood of Rome. and Aie-Their winter hours had not been consumed in idleness. Na™e kyBy the command, and after the example, of Narses, they A-D-55*-repeated each day their military exercise on foot and onhorseback, accustomed their ear to obey the sound ofthe trumpet, and practised the steps and evolutions of.the Pyrrhic dance. From the straits of Sicily, Buccelin,with thirty thousand Franks and Alemanni, slowlymoved towards Capua, occupied with a wooden tower thebridge of Casilinum, covered his right by the stream ofthe Vulturnus, and secured the rest of his encampment,by a rampart of sharp stakes, and a circle of waggons,whose wheels were buried in the earth. He impatientlyexpected the return of Lothaire; ignorant, alas! that hisbrother could never return, and that the chief and hisarmy had been swept away by a strange diseased on thebanks of the lake Benacus, between Trent and Verona.The banners of Narses soon approached the Vulturnus,and the eyes of Italy were anxiously fixed on the eventof this final contest; Perhaps the talents of the Romangeneral were most conspicuous in the calm operations
in Switzerland, idolatry still prevailed in the year 613: St. Colomban and St. Gallwere the apostles of that rude country; and the latter founded a hermitage, whichlias swelled into an ecclesiastical principality and a populous city, the seat of freedomand commerce.
d See the death of Lothaire in Agathias (lib. 2. p. 38.) and Paul Warnefrid, sur-named Diaconus. (lib. 8. c. 3. 775.) The Greek makes bim rave and tear liia flesh.He had plundered churches.







OCR Output








190 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLI.


them for betraying their dominion and freedom to thesepigmies of the south, contemptible in their numbers, di­minutive in their stature. Before the Goths could re­cover from the first surprise, and claim the accomplish­ment of their doubtful hopes, the victor established hispower in Ravenna, beyond the danger of repentanceCaptivity and revolt. Vitiges, who perhaps had attempted to es-1 >ges' cape, was honourably guarded in his palace ;r the flowerof the Gothic youth was selected for the service of theemperor; the remainder of the people was dismissed totheir peaceful habitations in the southern provinces;and a colony of Italians was invited to replenish the depo­pulated city. The submission of the capital was imitatedin the towns and villages of Italy, which had not beensubdued, or even visited, by the Romans; and the in­dependent Goths, who, remained in arms at Pavia andVerona, were ambitious only to become the subjects ofBelisarius. But his inflexible loyalty rejected, except asthe substitute of Justinian, their oaths of allegiance;and he was not offended by the reproach of their de­puties, that he rather chose to be a slave than a king.gio'^of1"1 After the second victory of Belisarius, envy againBelisarius. whispered, Justinian listened, and the hero was recalled."The remnant of the Gothic war was no longer worthyof his presence: a gracious sovereign was impatient toreward his services, and to consult his wisdom: and healone was capable of defending the east against the innu­merable armies of Persia." Belisarius understood thesuspicion, accepted the excuse, embarked at Ravennahis spoils and trophies; and proved, by his ready obedi­ence, that such an abrupt removal from the governmentof Italy was not less unjust than it might have been in­discreet. The emperor received, with honourable cour-
r He was seized by John the Sanguinary, but an oath or sacrament was pledgedfor his safety in the Basilica Julii. (Hist. Miscefl. lib. 17. in Mnratori, torn. 1. p.107.) Anastasius (in Vit. Pont. p. 40.) gives a dark but probable account. Mont-fancon is quoted by Mascou (Hist, of the Germans, 12. 21.) for a votive shieldrepresenting the captivity of Vitiges, and now in the collection of Signer Landi atRome.







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 71


and beneficial commerce with the inhabitants of thePersian Gulf. The subjects of the great king exalted,without a rival, his power and magnificence; and theRoman, who confounded their vanity by comparing hispaltry coin with a gold medal of the emperor Anastasius,had sailed to Ceylon in an Ethiopian ship, as a simplepassenger.0
As silk became of indispensable use, the emperor intmduc-
T.. .. r . . t> • 11 Uun ofsilk-
Justinian saw, with concern, that the Persians had oc-wo,msinu>cupied by land and sea the monopoly of this importantGreece"supply, and that the wealth of his subjects was continu­ally drained by a nation of enemies and idolaters. Anactive government would have restored the trade ofEgypt and the navigation of the Red sea, which had de­cayed with the prosperity of the empire; and the Romanvessels might have sailed, for the purchase of silk, tothe ports of Ceylon, of Malacca, or even of China. Jus­tinian embraced a more humble expedient, and solicitedthe aid of his Christian allies, the ^Ethiopians of Abys­sinia, who had recently acquired the arts of navigation,the spirit of trade, and the sea-port of Adulis,d still de­corated with the trophies of a Grecian conqueror. Alongthe African coast, they penetrated to the equator insearch of gold, emeralds, and aromatics; but they wiselydeclined an unequal competition, in which they mustbe always prevented by the vicinity of the Persians tothe markets of India; and the emperor submitted to thedisappointment, till his wishes were gratified by an un­expected event. The gospel had been preached to theIndians: a bishop already governed the Christians of St.Thomas on the pepper-coast of Malabar; a church was
c The Taprohane of Pliny, (6.24.) Solinns, (c. 53.) and Salmas. Plinianae Exerci-tat. (p. 781, 782.) and most of the ancients, who often confound the islands of Ceylonand Sumatra, is more clearly described by Cosmas Indiuopleustes; yet even theChristian topographer has exaggerated its dimensions. His information on the In­dian and Chinese trade is rare and curious, (lib. 2. p. 138.lib. 11. p.337, 338. edit.Montfaucon.)
d See Proconius, Persic. (lib. 2. c. 20.) Cosmas affords some interesting know­ledge of the port and inscription of Adulis (Topograph. Christ. lib. 2. p. 138. 140—143.) and of the trade nf the Axumites along the African coast uf Barharia or Zingi,(p. 138,139.) and as far as Taprohaue. (lib. 11. p. 339.)







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLIII.


was in Capricorn, another comet appeared to follow inthe Sagitary: the size was gradually increasing; thehead was in the east, the tail in the west, and it re­mained visible about forty days. The nations, who gazedwith astonishment, expected wars and calamities fromtheir baleful influence: and these expectations wereabundantly fulfilled. The astronomers dissembled theirignorance of the nature of these blazing stars, which theyaffected to represent as the floating meteors of the air;and few among them embraced the simple notion of Se­neca and the Chaldeans, that they are only planets of alonger period and more eccentric motion/ Time andscience have justified the conjectures and predictions ofthe Roman sage: the telescope has opened new worldsto the eyes of astronomers ;g and, in the narrow space ofhistory and fable, one and the same comet is already foundto have revisited the earth in seven equal revolutions offive hundred and seventy-five years. The Jirst* whichascends beyond the Christian era one thousand sevenhundred and sixty seven years, is coeval with Ogyges,.the father of Grecian antiquity. And this appearanceexplains the tradition which Varro has preserved, thatunder his reign the planet Venus changed her colour,size, figure, and course; a prodigy without exampleeither in past or succeeding ages.' The second visit inthe year ] 193, is darkly implied in the fable of Electrathe seventh of the Pleiads, who have been reduced to sixsince the time of the Trojan war. That nymph, the
'Seneca's seventh Look of Natural Questions displays, in the theory of comets, aphilosophic miud. Yet should we not too candidly confound a vague prediction,a veniet tempus, &o. with the merit of real discoveries.
t Astronomers may study Newton and Halley. I draw my humble science fromthe article Com ftp, in the French Encyclopedic by M. d'Alembert.
b Whiston, the honest, pious, visionary Whistnn,bad fancied, for the era of Noah'sfood (two thousand two hundred and forty-two years before Christ), a prior appari­tion of the same comet which drowned the earth with its tail.
1 A dissertation of Freret (Memoires de l'Academie defl Inscriptions, torn. 10. p.357—377.) affords a happy union of philosophy and erudition. The phenomenonin the time of Ogyi;eswas preserved by Varro, (apud Augustin. de Civilate Dei, 31.8.) who quotes Castor, Dion of Naples, and Adrastusof Cyzicus—nnbiles malheaia-tici. The two subsequent periods are preserved by the Greek m vtliologistJ and thaspurious books of Sibylline verses.







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL..


women and eunuchs, whose interests and passions she in­dulged at the expense of justice; the most illustriouspersonages of the state were crowded into a dark andsultry antichamber, and when at last, after tedious at­tendance, they were admitted to kiss the feet of Theo­dora, they experienced, as her humour might suggest,the silent arrogance of an empress, or the capricious le­vity of a comedian. Her rapacious avarice to accumu­late an immense treasure, may be excused by the appre­hension of her husband's death, which could leave noalternative between ruin and the throne; and fear aswell as ambition might exasperate Theodora against twogenerals, who, during a malady of the emperor, had rash­ly declared that they were not disposed to acquiesce inthe choice of the capital. But the reproach of cruelty,so repugnant even to her softer vices, has left an indeliblestain on the memory of Theodora. Her numerousspies observed, and zealously reported, every action, orword, or look, injurious to their royal mistress. Whom­soever they accused were cast into her peculiar prisons,1'inaccessible to the inquiries of justice; and it was ru­moured, that the torture of the rack, or scourge, hadbeen inflicted in the presence of a female tyrant, insen­sible to the voice of prayer or of pity.' Some of theseunhappy victims perished in deep unwholesome dun­geons, while others were permitted, after the loss of theirlimbs, their reason, or their fortune, to appear in theworld the living monuments of her vengeance, whichwas commonly extended to the children of those whomshe had suspected or injured. The senator or bishop,whose death or exile Theodora had pronounced, was de­livered to a trusty messenger, and his diligence was quick­ened by a menace from her own mouth. "If you failin the execution of my commands, I swear by him who
h Her prisons, a labyrinth, a Tartarus, (Anecdot. c. 4.) were under the palace.Darkness is propitious to cruelty, but il is likewise favourable to calumny and fictioo.
1 A more jocular whipping was inflicted on Saturninus, for presuming to say thathis wile, a favourite of the empress, had not been found aifno;. (Anecdot. c. 17.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


this insult was a coarse allusion to the white bands whichenveloped their legs. "Add another resemblance, (re­plied an audacious Lombard) you have felt how stronglythey kick. Visit the plain of Asfield, and seek for thebones of thy brother: they are mingled with those ofthe vilest animals." The Gepidas, a nation of warriors,started from their seats, and the fearless Alboin, with hisforty companions, laid their hands on their swords. Thetumult was appeased by the venerable interposition ofTurisund. He saved his own honour and the life of hisguest; and, after the solemn rites of investiture, dismissedthe stranger in the bloody arms of his son—the gift of aweeping parent. Alboin returned in triumph; and theLombards, who celebrated his matchless intrepidity, werecompelled to praise the virtues of an enemyIn thisextraordinary visit he had probably seen the daughter ofCunimund, who soon after ascended the throne of theGepidas. Her name was Rosamond, an appellation ex­pressive of female beauty, and which our own history orromance has consecrated to amorous tales. The king ofthe Lombards (the father of Alboin no longer lived) wascontracted to the grand-daughter of Clovis; but the re­straints of faith and policy soon yielded to the hope ofpossessing the fair Rosamond, and of insulting her familyand nation. The arts of persuasion were tried withoutsuccess: and the impatient lover, by force and stratagem,obtained the object of his desires. War was the conse­quence which he foresaw and solicited; but the Lom­bards could not long withstand the furious assault of theGepidae, who were sustained by a Roman army. And asthe offer of marriage was rejected with contempt, Alboinwas compelled to relinquish his prey, and to partake ofthe disgrace which he had inflicted on the house of Cu­nimund.'
h Paul Warnefrid, the deacon of Friuli, de Gest. Langohard. lib. 1. c. 23, 24.His pictures of national manners, though rudely sketched, are more lively and faith­ful than those of Bede, or Gregory of Tours.
1 The story is told by an impostor, (Theopbylact. Symocat. Ub. 6. c. 10.) but hehad art enough to build his fictions on public and notorious facts.







OCR Output








184 DECLINE AND FALL • fcHAP; XLI.


the remaining troops of Belisarius were divided and dis­persed from the garrisons of Sicily to the shores of the•nduX. Hadriatic. His skill and perseverance overcame everyrity of Be- obstacle: Urbino was taken, the sieges of Faesulae, Or-vieto, and Auximum, were undertaken and vigorouslyprosecuted; and the eunuch Narses was at length re­called to the domestic cares of the palace. All dissensionswere healed, and all opposition was subdued, by thetemperate authority of the Roman general, to whom hisenemies could not refuse their esteem; and Belisariusinculcated the salutary lesson, that the forces of the stateshould compose one body, and be animated by one soul.But, in the interval of discord, the Goths were permittedto breathe; an important season was lost, Milan wasdestroyed, and the northern provinces of Italy wereafflicted by an inundation of the Franks.iuJySb7°r When Justinian first meditated the conquest of Italy,tie Franks, he' sent ambassadors to the kings of the Franks, and ad-
A. D 538
539. 'jured them, by the common ties of alliance and religion,to join in the holy enterprise against the Arians. TheGoths, as their wants were more urgent, employed a moreeffectual mode of persuasion, and vainly strove, by thegift of lands and money, to purchase the friendship, or atleast the neutrality, of a light and perfidious nation." Butthe arms of Belisarius, and the revolt of the Italians, hadno sooner shaken the Gothic monarchy,than Theodebertof Austrasia, the most powerful and warlike of the Me­rovingian king^, was persuaded to succour their distressby an indirect and seasonable aid. Without expectingthe consent of their sovereign, ten thousand Burgun-dians, his recent subjects, descended from the Alps, andjoined the troops which Vitiges had sent to chastise therevolt of Milan. After an obstinate siege, the capital ofLiguria was reduced by famine, but no capitulation couldbe obtained, except for the safe retreat of the Roman
e This national reproach of perfidy (Procop. Goth. lib. 2. o. 25.) offends the ear ofla Mothe le Vaycr, (tom. 8. p. 163—165.) who criticise;, as if he had not read, theGreek historian. .







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








CHAR. XLIV.J OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 357


ecclesiastical rulers. Yet the magistrates of Justinianwere not subject to the authority of the church: theemperor consulted the unbelieving civilians of antiquity,and the choice of matrimonial laws in the Code andPandects, is directed by the earthly motives of justice,policy, and the natural freedom: of both sexes.g
Besides the agreement of the parties, the essence of ^"bLeevery rational contract, the Roman marriage requiredof divorce,the previous approbation of the parents. A fathermight be forced by some recent laws to supply the wantsof a mature daughter; but even his insanity was notgenerally allowed to supersede the necessity of his con­sent. The causes of the dissolution of matrimony havevaried among the Romans ;h but the most solemn sacra­ment, the confarreation itself, might always be doneaway by rites of a contrary tendency. In the first ages,the father of a family might sell his children, and his wifewas reckoned in the number of his children: the do­mestic judge might pronounce the death of the offender,or his mercy might expel her from his bed and house;but the slavery of the wretched female was hopeless andperpetual, unless he asserted for his own conveniencethe manly prerogative of divorce. The warmest ap­plause has been lavished on the virtue of the Romans,who abstained from the exercise of this tempting pri­vilege above five hundred years:1 but the same fact ,evinces the unequal terms of a connexion in which theslave was unable to renounce her tyrant, and the tyrant
K The civil laws of marriage are exposed in the Institutes, (lib. t. tit. 10.) thePandects, lib. 23—25.) and the Code; (lib. 5 ) but as the title de rita nuptiarum isjet imperfect,'we are obliged to explore the fragments of Ulpian, (tit. 9. p. 590, 591.)and the Collatio Lcgum Mosaicarum, (tit. 16. p. 790, 791.) with the notes of Pitha>ns and Schulting. They find, in the Commentary of Servius (on the first Georgic andthe fourth jEneid), two curious passages.
'h According to Plutarch, (p. 57.) Romulus allowed only three grounds of a di­vorce—druukenness, adultery, and false keys. Otherwise,* the husband who abusedhis supremacy, forfeited half bis goods to the wife, and half to the goddess Ceres,and offered a sacrifice (wilh the remainder) to the terrestrial deities. This strange.law was either imaginary or transient.
1 In the year of Rome 523, SpurinsCarvilius Ruga repudiated a fair, a good, but abarren wife. (Dionysius Hal. lib. 2. p. 93. Plutarch in Numa, p. 141. ValeriusMaximus, lib. %. c 1. Aulus Gollius, 4. 3.) He was questioned by the censors, andbated t>y the people; but his divorce stood unimueached in law. ,







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 1Q3


fame and merit, in wealth and power, he remained, with­out a rival, the first of the Roman subjects: the voice ofenvy could only magnify his dangerous importance; andthe emperor might applaud his own discerning spiritwhich had discovered and raised the genius of Belisarius.
It was the custom of the Roman triumphs, that a slave SecretMs-should be placed behind the chariot to remind the COn~ wife Anto-queror of the instability of fortune, and the infirmities ofmn*'human nature. Procopius, in his Anecdotes, has as­sumed that servile and ungrateful office. The generousreader may cast away the libel, but the evidence of factswill adhere to his memory; and he will reluctantly con­fess, that the fame, and even the virtue, of Belisarius,were polluted by the lust and cruelty of his wife; andthat the hero deserved an appellation which may notdrop from the pen of the decent historian. The motherof Antonina" was a theatrical prostitute, and both herfather and grandfather exercised at Thessalonica andConstantinople the vile, though lucrative, profession ofcharioteers. In the various situations of their fortune,she became the companion, the enemy, the servant, andthe favourite of the empress Theodora; these loose andambitious females had been connected by similar plea­sures; they were separated by the jealousy of vice, andat length reconciled by the partnership of guilt. Beforeher marriage with Belisarius, Antonina had one husbandand many lovers; Photius, the son of her former nup­tials, was of an age to distinguish himself at the siege ofNaples; and it was not till the autumn of her age andbeauty* that she indulged a scandalous attachment to aThracian youth. Theodosius had been educated in the Her loverEunomian heresy; the African voyage was consecrated by J^"io'
n The diligence of Alemannus could add hat little to the four first and most curi­ous chapters of Anecdotes. Of these straoge Anecdotes, a part may be true, becauseprohable—and a part true, because improhable. Procopius must have known theformer, and the latter he could scarcely invent.
* Procopius insinuates (Anecdot. o. 4.) that, when Belisarius returned fo Italy,(A. D. 543.) Antonina was sixty years of age. A forced, but more polite construc­tion, which refers thai date to the moment when he was writing, (A. D. 559.)wonld be compatible with the manhood of Photius. (Gothic. lib. 1. c. 10.) in 536.







OCR Output








54 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL,


Acacius might be satiated with love, yet some applauseis clue to the firmness of a mind which could sacrificepleasure and habit to the stronger sense either of duty orinterest. The wishes and prayers of Theodora couldnever obtain the blessing of a lawful son, and she buriedan infant daughter, the sole offspring of her marriage.0Notwithstanding this disappointment, her dominion waspermanent and absolute; she preserved, by art or merit, %the affections of Justinian; and their seeming dissen­sions were always fatal to the courtiers who believedthem to be sincere. Perhaps her health had been im­paired by the licentiousness of her youth; but it was al­ways delicate, and she was directed by her physicians touse the Pythian warm baths. In this journey, the em­press was followed by the praetorian prefect, the greattreasurer, several counts and patricians, and a splendidtrain of four thousand attendants: the highways wererepaired at her approach; a palace was erected for herreception: and as she passed through Bithynia, shedistributed liberal alms to the churches," the monas­teries, and the hospitals, that they might implore hea-■nd death, ven for the restoration of her health." At length,June 11. ' in the twenty-fourth year of her marriage, and thetwenty-second of her reign, she was consumed by acancer ;q and the irreparable loss was deplored by her hus­band, who, in the room of a theatrical prostitute, mighthave selected the purest and most noble virgin of the east/Thefac- JT, A. material difference may be observed in the
tionsofthe - . , . - , ,
circus games of antiquity; the most eminent of the Greeks
° St. Sabas refused to pray for a son of Theodora, lest he should prove a hereticworse than Anastasius himself. (Cyril in Vit. St. Saba?, apud Alemaii. p. 70. 109.)
P See John Malala, torn. 2. p. 174, Thcophanes, p. 158. Prooopius de Editie.lib. 5. c. 3.
1 Theodora Chalccdonensis synod! inimica canceris ping! tolo corpore perfusavitam prodigiose finivit. (Victor Tununensis .in Chron.) .On such occasions, an or­thodox mind is steeled against pity. Alemannus (p. 12,13.) understands the liwi#»{iKoi/xnDn of Thcophanes as civil language, which does not imply either piety or re­pentance; yet two years after her death, St. Theodora is celebrated by Paul Silen-tiarius. (in Proem, 5. 58—62.)
r As she persecuted the popes, and rejected a conncil, Bnronins exhausts thenames of Eve, Dalila, Herpdias, &c. after which he has recourse to his infernaldictionary ; civis inferni—alumna d.-emonum—satanico agitata spiritft—srstro percita.diabolico, &c. &c. (A. D. 548. uo. 24.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 121


conjugal fidelity, she expressed a manly friendship toBelisarius, whom she accompanied with undaunted reso­lution in all the hardships and dangers of a militarylife.8
The preparations for the African war were not un- Prepara-worthy of the last contest between Rome and Carthage, the AfricanThe pride and flower of the army consisted of the guards ™p 533.of Belisarius, who, according to the pernicious indulgenceof the times, devoted themselves by a particular oath offidelity to the service of their patron. Their strengthand stature, for which they had been curiously selected,the goodness of their horses and armour, and the assi­duous practice of all the exercises of war, enabled themto act whatever their courage might prompt; and theircourage was exalted by the social honour of their rank,and the personal ambition of favour and fortune. Fourhundred of the bravest of the Heruli marched under thebanner of the faithful and active Pharas ; their untracta-ble valour was more highly prized than the tame sub­mission of the Greeks and Syrians; and of such import­ance was it deemed to procure a reinforcement of sixhundred Massagetas, or Huns, that they were allured byfraud and deceit to engage in a naval expedition. Fivethousand horse and ten thousand foot were embarked atConstantinople for the conquest of Africa; but the in­fantry, for the most part levied in Thrace and Isauria,yielded to the more prevailing use and reputation of thecavalry; and the Scythian bow was the weapon on whichthe armies of Rome were now reduced to place theirprincipal dependence.' From a laudable desire to assertthe dignity of his theme, Procopius defends the soldiersof his own time against the morose critics, who confinedthat respectable name to the heavy-armed warriors ofantiquity, and maliciously observed, that the word archeris introduced by Homer1" as a term of contempt. "Such
t See the hirth and character of Antonina, in the Anecdotes, c. 1. and the notes ofAlemanus, p. 3.
11 See the preface of Procopius. The enemies of archery might quote the reproachesVOL. V. K







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








238 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XLII.


laziness, or concealed by the prudence, of the Mingre-lians. The waters, impregnated with particles of gold,are carefully strained through sheep-skins or fleeces; butthis expedient, the ground-work perhaps of a marvellousfable, affords a faint image of the wealth extracted froma virgin earth by the power and industry of ancient kings.Their silver palaces and golden chambers surpass our be­lief; but the fame of their riches is said to have excitedthe enterprising avarice of the Argonauts/ Tradition hasaffirmed, with some colour of reason, that Egypt plantedon the Phasis a learned and polite colony," which manu­factured linen, built navies, and invented geographicalmaps. The ingenuity of the moderns has peopled, withflourishing cities and nations, the isthmus between theEuxine and the Caspian ;a and a lively writer, observingthe resemblance of climate, and in his apprehension oftrade, has not hesitated to pronounce the Colchos theHolland of antiquity.15Manners of But the riches of Colchos shine only through the'darkness of conjecture or tradition; and its genuine his­tory presents a uniform scene of rudeness and poverty.If one hundred and thirty languages were spoken in themarket of Dioscurias/ they were the imperfect idioms ofso many savage tribes or families, sequestered from eachother in the valleys of mount Caucasus; and their sepa­ration, which diminished the importance, must havemultiplied the number, of their rustic capitals. In thepresent state of Mingrelia, a village is an assemblage "of
I Pliny, Ui»t. Natur. lib. 33.15. The gold and silver mines of Colchos attractedthe Argonauts. (Strab. lib. 1. p. 77.) The sagacious Chardin could find no gold inmines, rivers, or elsewhere. Yet a Mingrelian lost his hand and foot for shewingsome specimens at Constantinople of native gold.
* Herodot. lib. 2. c. 104,105. p. 150,151. Diodor. Sicul. lib. 1. p. 38. edit. Wes-seling; Dionys. Perieget. 689. and Eastath. ad loc. Scholiast, ad Appollonium Ar­gonaut. lib. 4. 282—291.
» Montesquieu, Esprit des Loix, lib. 21. c. 6. L'lsthme ... convert de villes etnations qui ne font plus.
b Bougainville, Memoires de 1'Aoademis des Inscriptions, tom. 26. p. 33. on theAfrican voyage of Hanno and the commerce of antiquity.
0 A Greek historian, Timosthenes, had affirmed, in eam ccc nationes dissimilibusUnguis descenders; and the modest Pliny is content to add, et postca a nostris cxxxinterpretibus negotia ihi gesta j (6.5.) but the words nunc deserta cover a multitudeof past fictions.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. • dOl


strong assurance, that, after the defeat of the Lombards,the foreign invaders would easily be repelled, he rushedforward to encounter the implacable enemy of his nameand family. But the courage of the Gepidas could se­cure them no more than an honourable death. Thebravest of the nation fell in the field of battle; the kingof the Lombards contemplated with delight the head ofCunimund; and his skull was fashioned into a cup, tosatiate the hatred of the conqueror, or, perhaps, to com­ply with the savage custom of his country.k After thisvictory, no farther obstacle could impede the progress ofthe confederates, and they faithfully executed the termsof their agreement.' The fair countries of Walachia,Moldavia, Transylvania, and the parts of Hungary be­yond the Danube, were occupied, without resistance, bya new colony of Scvthians: and the Dacian empire ofthe chagans subsisted with splendour above two hundredand thirty years. The nation of the Gepidse was dis­solved; but, in the distribution of the captives, the slavesof the Avars were less fortunate than the companions ofthe Lombards, whose generosity adopted a valiant foe,and whose freedom was incompatible with cool and deli­berate tyranny. One moiety of the spoil introduced in­to the camp of Alboin more wealth than a barbariancould readily compute. The fair Rosamond was per­suaded, or compelled, to acknowledge the rights of hervictorious lover; and the daughter of Cunimund appearedto forgive those crimes which might be imputed to herown irresistible charms.
The destruction of a mighty kingdom established the A'b"!^ "■-fame of Alboin. In the days of Charlemagne, the Ba- the c<m-varians, the Saxons, and the other tribes of the Teuto- u^y,"nic language, still repeated the songs which described the A< D-667-
k It appears from Strabo, Pliny, and Ammianas Marcellinus, that the same prac­tice was common among the Scythian tribes, (Muratori, Scriptores Rer. Italic, lorn.1. p. 424.) The scalps of North America are likewise trophies of valour. Theskull of Cunimund was preserved above two hundred years among the Lombards;and Paul himself was one of the guests to whom duke Ratchis exhibited this cup ona high festival, (lib. 2. c. 28.)
1 Paul, lib. 1. c. 57. Menander, in Exctrpt. Lcgat. p. 110, 111.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 341


merit of the execution. From the library of Tribonian,they chose forty, the most eminent civilians of formertimes :g two thousand treatises were comprised in anabridgment of fifty-books; and it has been carefully re­corded, that three millions of lines or sentences,11 werereduced, in this abstract, to the moderate number of onehundred and fifty-thousand. The edition of this greatwork was delayed a month after that of the institutes;and it seemed reasonable that the elements should pre­cede the digest of the Roman law. As soon as the em­peror had approved their labours, he ratified, by his le­gislative power, the speculations of these private citizens:their commentaries on the twelve tables, the perpetualedict, the laws of the people, and the decrees of the se­nate, succeeded to the authority of the text; and thetext was abandoned, as a useless, though venerable, re­lic of antiquity. The Code, the Pandects, and the In­stitutes, were declared to be the legitimate system of civiljurisprudence; they alone were admitted in the tribunals,and they alone were taught in the academies of Rome,Constantinople, and Berytus. Justinian addressed tothe senate and provinces his eternal oracles; and hispride, under the mask of piety, ascribed the consumma­tion of this great design to the support and inspirationof the Deity.
Since the emperor declined the fame and envy of ori- Praise and
. , . . . . iaii censure of
gmal composition, we can only require at his nanus, me- the Codethod, choice, and fidelity, the humble, though indispens- an"able, virtues of a compiler. Among the various combi­nations of ideas, it is difficult to assign any reasonable
s Angelus Politianns (lib. 5. Epist. ult.) reckons thirty-seven (p. 192—200.) civi­lians quoted in the Pandects—a learned, and, for his times, an extraordinary list.The Greek Index to the Pandects enumerates thirty-nine; and forty are produced bythe indefatigable Fabricius. (Bibliot. Graec. tom. 3. p. 488—502.) Antoninus Au­gustus (de Nominibus Propriis; Pandect, apud Lndewig, p. 283.) is said to haveadded fifty-four names; but they must be vague or second-hand references.
h The Zti^oi of the Ancient MSS. may be strictly defined as sentences or periodsof a complete sense, which, on the breadth of the parchment rolls or volumes, com­posed as many lines of unequal length. The number of Tricot in eaeh book served asa check on the errors of the scribes. (Ludewig, p. 211—215. and his original authorSuicer. Thesaur. Ecclesiast. tom. 1. p. 1021—1036.)







OCR Output








CHAP. XLIII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 285


rapid progress of treason, and he resolved to risk theGothic kingdom on the chance of a day, in which thevaliant would be animated by instant danger, and thedisaffected might be awed by mutual ignorance. In hismarch from Ravenna, the Roman general chastised thegarrison of Rimini, traversed in a direct line the. hills ofUrbino, and re-entered the Flaminian way, nine milesbeyond the perforated rock, an obstacle of art and na­ture which might have stopped or retarded his progress.1—The Goths were assembled in the neighbourhood ofRome, they advanced, without delay, to seek a superiorenemy, and the two armies approached each other at thedistance of one hundred furlongs, between Taginam andthe sepulchres of the Gauls." The haughty message ofNarses was an offer, not of peace, but of pardon. Theanswer of the Gothic king declared his resolution to dieor conquer. "What day (said the messenger) will youfix for the combat?" "The eighth day," replied Totila:but early the next morning he attempted to surprise afoe, suspicious of deceit, and prepared for battle. Tenthousand Heruli and Lombards, of approved valour anddoubtful faith, were placed in the centre. Each of thewings was composed of eight thousand Romans; theright was guarded by the cavalry of the Huns, the left
1 The Flaminian way, as it is corrected from the Itineraries, and the best modernmaps, by d'Anville, (Analyse de I'ltalie, p. 147—162.) may be thas stated: Rometo Narni, fifty-one Roman miles; Terni,fifty-seven; Spoleto, seventy-five; Folignu,eighty-eight; Nocera, one hundred and three; Cagli, one hundred arid forty-two;Intercisa, one hundred and fifty-seven ; Fossombrone, one hundred and sixty ; Fano,one hundred and seventy-six; Pesaro, one hundred and eighty-four; Rimini, twohundred and eight—about one hundred and eighty-nine English miles. He takesno notice of the death of Totila; but Wesseling (Itinerar. p. 614.) exchangesfor the field of Taginat the unknown appellation of Ptauitts, eight miles fromNocera,
m Taginne, or rather Tadir.ae, is mentioned by Pliny; but the hishoprick of that ob­scure town, a mile from Gnaldo, in the plain, was united, in the year 1007, with thatof Nocera. Tjie signs of antiquity are preserved in the local appellations, Fossato,the camp; Cupraia, Caprea; hastia, Busta Gallorum. See Clnverius, (Italja An-tiqua, lib. 2. c. 6. p. 615—617.) Lucas Holstenius, (Annotat. ad Cluver. p. 85, 86.)Guazzesi, (Dissertat. p. 177—217. a professed inquiry) and the maps of the eccle­siastical state and the march of Ancona, by Le Maire and Magini.
D The hattle was fought in the year of Rome 458: and the consul Oecius, by de­voting his own life, assured the triumph of his country and'his colleague Fahius.(T. Liv. 10. 28, 29.) Procopius ascribes to Camillus the victory of the Busta Gal­lorum; and his error is branded by Cluverios with the national reproach of Graeco.ium nugaiacnta.







OCR Output








142 DECLINE AND 'frAtfL [CHAP. XL1.


that he might sooner compel His prisoner to embrace aresolution advantageous to the Romans, but salutary tdhimself. The obstinacy of Gelimer at length yielded toreason and necessity; the solemn assurances of Safetyand honourable treatment were ratified in the emperor sname, by the ambassador of Belisarius; and the king ofthe Vandals descended from ^he friOuntain. The firstpublic interview was in one of the suburbs of Carthage,and when the royal captive accosted his conqueror, 'heburst into a fit of laughter. The crowd might naturallybelieve, that extreme grief had deprived Gelimer off nissenses; but in this mournful State, unseasonable mirthinsinuated to more intelligent observers, that the vainand transitory scenes of human greatness are unworthyof a serious thought.11HomYof Their contempt was soon justified by a new exampleBdisarius. of a vulgar truth; that flattery adheres to power, andAutumn. ' envy to superior merit. The chiefs of the Roman armypresumed to think themselves the rivajs of a hero. Theirprivate dispatches maliciously affirmed,:that the conque­ror of Africa, strong in his reputation and the publiclove, conspiredto seat himself on the throne of the Van­dals. Justinian listened with tOo patient an ear; andhis silence was the result of jealousy rather than of con­fidence. An honourable alternative, of remaining inthe province, or of returning to the capital, was indeed"submitted to'the discretion of Belisarius; but he wiselyconcluded, from intercepted letters, and the knowledgeof his sovereign's temper, that he must either resign hishead, erect his standard, or confound his enemies by hispresence and submission. Innocence and courage de­cided, his choice: his guards, captives, and treasures,were diligently embarked; and so prosperous was thenavigation, that his arrival at Constantinople preceded
11 Herodotus elegantly describes the strange effects of grief in another royal cap­tive, Psammetichus of Kgypt, who wept at the lesser, and was silent at the greatestof his calamities, (lib. 3. c. 14.) Tn the interview of Paulus jEmilius and Perses,Belisarius might study his part: but it is probable that he never read cither Livy brPlutarch; and it is certain that his generosity did not need a tutor.







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


the well-known plenty of Egypt; the same country, asmall and populous tract, was still capable of exporting,each year, two hundred and sixty thousand quarters ofwheat for the use of Constantinople ;k and the capital ofJustinian was supplied with the manufactures of Sidon,fifteen centuries after they had been celebrated in thepoems of Homer.1 The annual powers of vegetation,instead of being exhausted by two thousand harvests,were renewed and invigorated by skilful husbandry, richmanure, and seasonable repose. The breed of domesticanimals was infinitely multiplied. Plantations, buildings,and the instruments of labour and luxury, which are moredurable than the term of human life, were accumulatedby the care of successive generations. Tradition pre­served, and experience simplified, the humble practice ofthe arts; society was enriched by the division of labourand the facility of exchange; and every Roman waslodged, clothed, and subsisted, by the industry of a thou­sand hands. The invention of the loom and distaff hasbeen piously ascribed to the gods. In every age, a va­riety of animal and vegetable productions, hair, skins,wool, flax, cotton, and at length silk, have been skilfullymanufactured to hide or adorn the human body; theywere stained with an infusion of permanent colours; andthe pencil was successfully employed to improve thelabours of the loom. In the choice of those colours,"'which imitate the beauties of nature, the freedom oftaste and fashion was indulged; but the deep purple,"
1 Eight millions of Roman modii, besides a contribution of eighty thousand aurafor the expenses of water-carriage, from which the subject was graciously excused.See the thirteenth edict. of Justinian: the numbers are checked and verified by theagreement of the Greek and Latin texts.
1 Homer's Iliad, 6. 289. These veils, irfTTXoi TraplroiiuXoi, were the work of theSidonian women. But this passage is more honourable to the manufactures than tothe navigation of Phoenicia, from whence they had been imported to Troy in Phrygianbottoms.
m See in Ovid (de Arte Amandi, .". 269, &c.) a poetical list of twelve coloursborrowed from flowers, the elements, &c. But it is almost impossible to discrimi­nate by words all the nice and various shades both of art and nature.
° By the discovery of cochineat, &c. we far surpass the colours of antiquity.Their royal purple had a strong smell, and a dark cast as deep as bull's blood.—Ob-scuritas rubens (says Cassiodorius, Var. 1. 2.) nigredo sanguinea. The presidentGoguet (Origine des Loix et des Arts, part2. lib. 2. c. 2. p. 184—21 j.) will amuss







OCR Output








DECLINE AND FAEX [CHAP. XLI.


brother Zano, who expressed a sanguine confidence thatthe king, after the example of their ancestors, had al­ready chastised the rashness of the Roman invader."Alas! my brother, (replied Gelimer,) Heaven has de­clared against our unhappy nation. While you havesubdued Sardinia, we have lost Africa. No sooner didBelisarius appear with a handful of soldiers, than courageand prosperity deserted the cause of the Vandals. Yournephew Gibamund, your brother Ammatas, have beenbetrayed to death by the cowardice of their followers.Our horses, our ships, Carthage itself, and all Africa,are in the power of the enemy. Yet the Vandals stillprefer an ignominious repose, at the expense of theirwives and children, their wealth and liberty. Nothingnow remains, except the field of Bulla, and the hope ofyour valour. Abandon Sardinia; fly to our relief; re­store our empire, or perish by our side." On the re­ceipt of this epistle, Zano imparted his grief to the prin­cipal Vandals; but the intelligence was prudently con­cealed from the natives of the island. The troops em­barked in one hundred and twenty galleys at the port ofCagliari, cast anchor the third day on the confines ofMauritania, and hastily pursued their march to join theroyal standard in the camp of Bulla. Mournful was theinterview: the two brothers embraced; they wept in si­lence; no questions were asked of the Sardinian victory;HO inquiries were made of the African misfortunes: theysaw before ,their eyes the whole extent of their calami­ties; and the absence of their wives and children af­forded a melancholy proof, that either death or capti­vity had been their lot. The languid spirit of the Van­dals was at length awakened and united by the entreatiesof their king, the example of Zano, and the instant dan­ger which threatened their monarchy and religion. Themilitary strength of the nation advanced to battle; andsuch was the rapid increase, that, before their armyreached Tricameron, about twenty miles from Carthage,







OCR Output








CHAP. XLII.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 235


active; one soldier carried a whip, another a sword, athird a bow, a fourth perhaps a battle-axe, and the wholepicture exhibited the intrepidity of the troops and thevigilance of the general. Chosroes was deluded by theaddress, and awed by the genius, of the lieutenant of Jus­tinian. Conscious of the merit, and ignorant of theforce, of his antagonist, he dreaded a decisive battle in adistant country, from whence not a Persian might returnto relate the melancholy tale. The great king hastenedto repass the Euphrates; and Belisarius pressed his re­treat, by affecting to oppose a measure so salutary to theempire, and which could scarcely have been prevented byan army of a hundred thousand men. Envy might sug­gest to ignorance and pride, that the public enemy hadbeen suffered to escape: but the African and Gothictriumphs are less glorious than this safe and bloodlessvictory, in which neither fortune, nor the valour of thesoldiers, can subtract any part of the general's renown.The second removal of Belisarius from the Persian to the a. d. 543,Italian war, revealed the extent of his personal merit, &0"which had corrected or supplied the want of disciplineand courage. Fifteen generals, without concert or skill,led through the mountains of Armenia an army of thirtythousand Romans, inattentive to their signals, theirranks, and their ensigns. Four thousand Persians, in-'trenched in the camp of Dubis, vanquished, almost with­out a combat, this disorderly multitude; their uselessarms were scattered along the road, and their horsessunk under the fatigue of their rapid flight. But theArabs of the Roman party prevailed over their bre­thren; the Armenians returned to their allegiance; thecities of Dara and Edessa resisted a sudden assault anda regular siege, and the calamities of war were sus­pended by those of pestilence. A tacit or formal agree­ment between the two sovereigns, protected the tran­quillity of the eastern frontier; and the arms of Chos­roes were confined to the Colchian or Lazic war, which


a 2







OCR Output








CHAP. XL.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 63


liveth for ever, that your skin shall be flayed from yourbody.""
If the creed of Theodora had not been tainted with Her vir«heresy, her exemplary devotion might have atoned, in,u"'the opinion of her contemporaries, for pride, avarice,and cruelty. But if she employed her influence to as­suage the intolerant fury of the emperor, the present agewill allow some merit to her religion, and much indul­gence to her speculative errors.1 The name of Theodorawas introduced, with equal honour, in all the pious andcharitable foundations of Justinian ; and the most bene­volent institution of his reign may be ascribed to thesympathy of the empress for her less fortunate sisters,who had been seduced or compelled to embrace the tradeof prostitution. A palace, on the Asiatic side of theBosphorus, was converted into a stately and spacious mo>-nastery, and a liberal maintenance was assigned to fivehundred women, who had been collected from the streetsand brothels of Constantinople. In this safe and holyretreat, they were devoted to perpetual confinement; andthe despair of some, who threw themselves headlong intothe sea, was lost in the gratitude of the penitents, whohad been delivered from sin and misery by their gene­rous benefactress.™ The prudence of Theodora is cele­brated by Justinian himself; and his laws are attributedto the sage counsels of his most reverend wife, whomhe had received as the gift of the Deity." Her couragewas displayed amidst the tumult of the people and theterrors of the court. Her chastity, from the momentof her union with Justinian, is founded on the silence ofher implacable enemies: and, although the daughter of
k Per viventem in saecula excoriari te faciam. Anastasius de Vitis Pout. Roman.in Vigilio, p. 40.
1 Ladewig, p. 161—166. I give him credit for the charitable attempt, althoughk hath not much charity in his temper.
■ Compare the Anecdotes (c. 17.) with the Edifices (lib. 1. c. 9.) How differentlyK'y the same fact be stated! John Malala (tom. 2. p. 174,175.) observes, that onthis or a similar occasion, she released and clothed the girls whom she had purchasedfrom the stews at five aurei a-piece.
° Novel. 8.1. An allusion to Theodora, Her enemies read (he name Dscniouo-<W (Aleman. p. 66.)







OCR Output








24 . DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XXXIV.


crine port, were assigned for the ordinary repairs of thewalls and public edifices. A similar care was extendedto the statues of metal or marble, of men or animals.The spirit of the horses, which have given a modernname to the Quirinal, was applauded by the barba­rians;" the brazen elephants of the Via sacra were dili­gently restoredthe famous heifer of Myron deceivedthe cattle, as they were driven through the forum ofpeace/ and an officer was created to protect these worksof art, which Theodoric considered as the noblest orna-, ment of his kingdom.
!?a°terofh:ng After the example of the last emperors, TheodoricItaly. preferred the residence of Ravenna, where he cultivatedan orchard with his own hands.2 As often as the peaceof his kingdom was threatened (for it was never invaded)by the barbarians, he removed his court to Verona" onthe northern frontier, and the image of his palace, stillextant, on a coin, represents the oldest and most authen­tic model of Gothic architecture. These two capitals, aswell as Pavia, Spoleto, Naples, and the rest of the Italiancities, acquired under his reign the useful or splendiddecorations of churches, aqueducts, baths, porticos, and,palaces.b But the happiness of the subject was moretruly conspicuous in the busy scene of labour and luxury,in the rapid increase and bold enjoyment of nationalwealth: from the shades of Tibur and Praeneste, the
u Var. 7. 15. These horses of Monte-Cavallo had been transported from Alexandriato the haths of Constantine. (Nardini, p. 188.) Their sculpture is disdained by theabbe Dnbos, (Reflections sur la Poesie et sur la Peiuture, tom. 1. section 39.) and ad­mired by Winkleman. (Hist. de l'Art, tom. 2. p. 159.)
x Var. 10. 10. They were prohably a fragment of some triumphal car. (Cuperde Elephantis, 2. 10.)
J Procopius (Goth. lib. 4. c. 21.) relates a foolish story of Myron's cow, which iscelebrated by the false wit of thirty-six Greek epigrams. (Anthalog. lib. 4. p. 302—306. edit. Hen. Steph. Auson. Epigram. 58—68.)
1 See an Epigram of Ennodius (2. 3. p. 1893, 1894.) on this garden and the royalgardener.
» His affection for' that city is proved by the epithet of " Verona taa," and the le­gend of the hero: under the harharous name of Dietrich of Bern, (Peringsciold adCochloeum, p. 240.) Maffei traces him with knowledge and pleasure in his native coun­try, (lib. 9. p. 230—236.)
k See Maffei, Verona lllustrata, part 1. p. 231, 232. 308, &c. He imputes Go­thic architecture, like the corruption of language, writing, &c. not to the harharians,hot to the Italians themselves. Compare his sentiments with those of Tiraboschi(tom. 3. p. 61.)







OCR Output








86 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP..-XL.


more spacious plan was described, and, as it required theconsent of some proprietors of ground, they obtained themost exorbitant terms from the eager desires and timo­rous conscience of the monarch. Anthemius formedthe design, and his genius directed the hands often thou­sand workmen, whose payment in pieces of fine silverwas never delayed beyond the evening. The emperorhimself, clad in a linen tunic, surveyed each day theirrapid progress, and encouraged their diligence by his fa­miliarity, his zeal, and his rewards. The new cathedralof St. Sophia was consecrated by the patriarch, five yearseleven months and ten days from the first foundation;and, in the midst of the solemn festival, Justinian ex­claimed with devout vanity, "Glory be to God, whohath thought me worthy to accomplish so great a work.:I have vanquished thee, O Solomon !"m But the prideof the Roman Solomon, before twenty years had elapsed,was humbled by an earthquake, which overthrew theeastern part of the dome. Its splendour was again re­stored by the perseverance of the same prince; and, inthe thirty-sixth year of his reign, Justinian celebratedthe second dedication of a temple, which remains, aftertwelve centuries, a stately monument of his fame. Thearchitecture of St. Sophia, which is now converted intothe principal mosch, has been imitated by the Turkishsultans, and that venerable pile continues to excite thefond admiration of the Greeks, and the more rational cu-Descrip- riosity of European travellers. The eye of the spectatoris disappointed by an irregular prospect of half domes andshelving roofs: the western front, the principal approach,is destitute of simplicity and magnificence: and the scaleof dimensions has been much surpassed by several ofthe Latin cathedrals. But the architect, who first erected
m Solomon's temple was surrounded with courts, porticoes, &c. but the properstructure of the house of God was no more (if we take the Egyptian or Hebrew cu­hit at twenty-two inches) than fifty-five feet in height, thirty-six and two-thirds inbreadth, and one hundred and ten in length—a small parish-church, says Prideaux(Connex. vol. 1. p. 144, folio); but few sanctuaries could be valued at four or fivemillions starling!







OCR Output








80 DECLINE AND FALL [CHAP. XL.


taries alone, who became the victims of his orthodoxavarice/
The minis- Dishonour might be ultimately reflected on the cha-
ters of ° J
Justinian, racter of Justinian; but much of the guilt, and stillmore of the profit, was intercepted by the ministers, whowere seldom promoted for their virtues, and not alwaysselected for their talents/ The merits of Tribonian thequaestor will hereafter be weighed in the reformation ofthe Roman law; but the economy of the east was sub­ordinate to the prastorian prefect, and Procopius hasjustified his anecdotes by the portrait which he exposesin his public history, of the notorious vices of John ofJohn of Cappadocia.2 His knowledge was not borrowed fromCjppadocia. ^ schools/ and his style was scarcely legible; but heexcelled in the powers of native genius, to suggest thewisest counsels, and to find expedients in the most des­perate situations. The corruption of his heart was equalto the vigour of his understanding. Although he wassuspected of magic and Pagan superstition, he appearedinsensible to the fear of God or the reproaches of man;and his aspiring fortune was raised on the death ofthousands, the poverty of millions, the ruin of cities,and the desolation of provinces. From the dawn oflight to the moment of dinner, he assiduously labouredto enrich his master and himself at the expense of theRoman world; the remainder of the day was spent insensual and obscene pleasures, and the silent hours ofthe night were interrupted by the perpetual dread of thejustice of an assassin. His abilities, perhaps his vices,recommended him to the lasting friendship of Justinian:the emperor yielded with reluctance to the fury of the
* John Malala, torn. 2. p. 101—103.
y One of these, Anatolins, perished in an earthquake—doubtless a judgment! Thecomplaints and olamours of the people in Agathias (lib. 5. p. 146, 147.) are almostan echo of the anecdote. The aliena pecunia reddenda of Corippus (lib. 2. 381. &c.)is not very honourable to Justinian's memory.
z See the history and character of John of Cappadocia in Procopius. (Persic. lib.1. c. 24, 25. lib. 2. c. 30. Vandal, lib. 1. c. 13. Anecdot. c. 2. 17. 22.) Theaereement of the history and anecdotes is a mortal wound to the reputation of theprefeot.
xaxfc; —a forcible expression.







OCR Output








CHAP. XLI.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 167


rable day. "Aim at the bay horse," was the universalcry. Every bow was bent, every javelin was directed,against that fatal object, and the command was repeated'and obeyed by thousands who were ignorant of its realmotive. The bolder barbarians advanced to the morehonourable combat of swords and spears; and the praiseof an enemy has graced the fall of Visandus, the standard-bearer,g who maintained his foremost station, till he waspierced with thirteen wounds, perhaps by the hand ofBelisarius himself. The Roman general was strong, ac­tive, and dexterous: on every side he discharged hisweighty and mortal strokes: his faithful guards imitatedhis valour, and defended his person; and the Goths,after the loss of a thousand men, fled before the arms ofa hero. They were rashly pursued to their camp; andthe Romans, oppressed by multitudes, made a gradual,and at length a precipitate, retreat to the gates of thecity: the gates were shut against the fugitives; and thepublic terror was increased, by the report that Belisariuswas slain. His countenance was indeed disfigured by6weat, dust, and blood; his voice was hoarse, his strengthwas almost exhausted; but his unconquerable spirit stillremained; he imparted that spirit to his despondingcompanions; and their last desperate charge was feltby the flying barbarians, as if a new army, vigorous andentire, had been poured from the city. The Flaminian vaiourofgate was thrown open to a real triumph; but it was notbefore Belisarius had visited every post, and provided forthe public safety, that he could be persuaded by his wifeand friends, to taste the needful refreshments of foodand sleep. In the more improved state of the art of war,a general is seldom required, or even permitted, to displaythe personal prowess of a soldier; and the example of
harharians, and spadix by the Romans. Honest! spadices, says Virgil. (Georgic.lib. 3. 7"S. with the observations of Martin and Heyne.) JotSiJ or (3aiw, signifies abranch of the palm-tree,whose name <f>om£, is synonimous to red. (Aulus Gellius, 2. 26.)'f I interpret SavSaXapio;, not as a proper name, but an office, standard bearer, fromhandum (vexillum), a harharic word adopted by the Greeks and Romans. (PaulDiacon. lib. 1.e. 20.p. 760. Grot, NominaGothica, p.675. Ducange, Gloss. Latiu.tom. 1, p. 539, 540.)



