


OCR Output








896 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap, present numerals, the Arabic or Indian ciphers, asXL- they are commonly styled, a regulation of office haspromoted the most important discoveries of arith­metic, algebra, and the mathematical sciences*.
In the close of his life, the emperor ConstantinePogonatus was anxious only to establish the right ofprimogeniture. The hair of his two sons, Justinianand Heraclius, was offered on the shrine of St. Peter,as a symbol of their spiritual adoption by the pope;but the elder was alone exalted to the rank of Au­gustus, and the assurance of the empire.Justinian ii. After the decease of his father, the inheritance ofSeptember! the Roman world devolved to Justinian II.; and thename of a triumphant lawgiver was dishonoured bythe vices of a boy, who imitated his namesake onlyin the expensive luxury of building. His passionswere strong, his understanding was feeble; and hewas intoxicated with a foolish pride, that his birthhad given him the command of millions, of whom thesmallest community would not have chosen him fortheir local magistrate. His favourite ministers weretwo beings the least susceptible of human sympathy;to the one he abandoned the palace, to the other thefinances: the former corrected the emperor,s motherwith a scourge; the latter suspended the insolventtributaries, with their heads downwards, over a slowand smoky fire. Since the days of Commodus andCaracalla, the cruelty of the Roman princes had mostcommonly been the effect of their fear; but Justinian,who possessed some vigour of character, enjoyed thesufferings, and braved the revenge, of his subjectsabout ten years, till the measure was full, of his


* According to a new, though probable notion, maintained by M. dc Villoisoo(Anecdota Graca, tom. ii. p. 152—157), our ciphers are not of Indian or Ara­bic invention. They were used by the Greek and Latin arithmeticians long be­fore the age of Bccthius. After the extinction of science in the West, they wereadopted by the Arabic versions from the original MSS. and restored to the Latinsabout the eleventh century.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 185


respectful distance. But his friends were numerous chap.
in the council of the emperor, and Belisarius obeyed 1.
with reluctance the commands of envy and Justinian,which forbade him to achieve the deliverance of hiscountry. On his return to the city, the people, stillconscious of their danger, accompanied his triumphwith acclamations of joy and gratitude, which wereimputed as a crime to the victorious general. Butwhen he entered the palace, the courtiers were silent,and the emperor, after a cold and thankless embrace,dismissed him to mingle with the train of slaves.Yet so deep was the impression of his glory on theminds of men, that Justinian, in the seventy-seventhyear of his age, was encouraged to advance nearforty miles from the capital, and to inspect in personthe restoration of the long wall. The Bulgarianswasted the summer in the plains of Thrace: butthey were inclined to peace by the failure of theirrash attempts on Greece and the Chersonesus. Amenace of killing their prisoners quickened the pay­ment of heavy ransoms; and the departure of Zaber-gan was hastened by the report, that double-prowedvessels were built on the Danube to intercept hispassage. The danger was soon forgotten; and avain question, whether their sovereign had shownmore wisdom or weakness, amused the idleness ofthe city*.
About two years after the last victory of Belisarius, His disgracethe emperor returned from a Thracian journey of a.]X6«i.health, or business, or devotion. Justinian was af­flicted by a pain in his head; and his private entrycountenanced the rumour of his death. Before thethird hour of the day, the bakers' shops were plun­dered of their bread, the houses were shut, and every
• The Bulgarian war, and the last victory of Belisarius, are imperfectly repre­sented in the prolix declamation of Agathias (1. 5, p. 154—174), and the dryChronicle of Theophanes (p. 197, 198).







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 67


XXXIV.


were aggravated by their own licentiousness, and the chap.unfriendly disposition of the country. While Vitigesstruggled with his fortune; while he hesitated be­tween shame and ruin; his retreat was hastened bydomestic alarms. The king of the Goths was in­formed by trembling messengers, that John the San­guinary spread the devastations of war from theApennine to the Hadriatic; that the rich spoils andinnumerable captives of Picenum were lodged in thefortifications of Rimini; and that this formidablechief had defeated his uncle, insulted his capital, andseduced, by secret correspondence, the fidelity of hiswife, the imperious daughter of Amalasontha. Yet,before he retired, Vitiges made a last effort, either tostorm or to surprise the city. A secret passage wasdiscovered in one of the aqueducts; two citizens ofthe Vatican were tempted by bribes to intoxicate theguards of the Aurelian gate; an attack was meditatedon the walls beyond the Tyber, in a place which wasnot fortified with towers; and the Barbarians ad­vanced, with torches and scaling-ladders, to the as­sault of the Pincian gate. But every attempt wasdefeated by the intrepid vigilance of Belisarius andhis band of veterans, who, in the most perilous mo­ments, did not regret the absence of their com­panions; and the Goths, alike destitute of hope andsubsistence, clamorously urged their departure, be­fore the truce should expire, and the Roman cavalryshould again be united. One year and nine daysafter the commencement of the siege, an army solately strong and triumphant burnt their tents, andtumultuously repassed the Milvian bridge. Theyrepassed not with impunity: their thronging mul­titudes, oppressed in a narrow passage, were drivenheadlong into the Tyber, by their own fears and thepursuit of the enemy; and the Roman general, sally-


F <2







OCR Output








despoiled i hesucral .nui -alccnrias vr-ra* ^.^^^ \\
or racier to esrae. =ie iewraiy of i »^ ot
deerraii :dsiioti •. isur ne swwi a ^^ ~ .^opposed his setridmem in Italy j: ^e w.*v; *-^ ^not as a concuenr. bar as » rur-ve. i3^ J"visit at tweive aay*. ae pt-Jspv- i^** lv ^^
aened. the ancient carinal cr. tie *;jrvC„*-; % ;^^rercLt and seairsdoa oi Iruy wis *-*\c:^ ^ % _;two centuries aner tse cone^s& « . -f->- , -frem his rei-n we My dice the grw^ *^ \
his Institutes, his Cede, and hi* P«J««. » * ^.rua^e which he celebrates as the proper *aa t~ ^Lie « the Roman government, the cv^^s*idiom of the palace and senate ^^f^*the camp, andmbunais of the East. Bu« «»* Krekn diTect was unknot to the r^ttn Ccf"the Asiatic province.; « «• «**^*££stood bv the greater part of the ^^*^1_ an'd the ministers of the state. Arte* • * «tconflict, nature and habit P-^^tn Itinstitutions of human power: tor the p*er* .
the two languages; the several pu
. - j „„„ cncressivelv translated . *w
nous junsprudenee were succe»miv
original wPas forgotten, the ^^^ Sthe°Greek, whose intrinsic ment ^^™^Xpreference, obtained a legal as well as P^lar e*
SKptore. Rer. **-«***$: An^Usius in Vi* Pontifical*, 1*'
iatorf. Collection, torn- in- P™ ■- P^4£ g ^


.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 383


Abubeker; and Bosra was taken in the year 632. chap.Damascus was obstinately defended, and it was not'
till after a long siege that it yielded to the Saracens.But the army of Heraclius, which had been sent toits relief, being defeated in the battle of Aiziradin,and no further hope of succour remaining, the Da­mascenes entered into a treaty with Abu Obeidah,the commander of one part of the besieging army.The capitulation was faithfully observed by him ; butCaled, who commanded the other division of the Sara­cens, took advantage of the security in which thegarrison indulged on account of the treaty, and forcedthe city at the gate opposite to that by which hiscolleague made his peaceable entry. A cruel scenethen followed ; but the slaughter was checked by thefidelity of Abu Obeidah to the terms which he hadgranted. The Damascenes who chose to abandonthe city were permitted to do so; and a great mul­titude of soldiers and citizens, of priests and laymen,of women and children, departed with such effectsas they were able to take with them. Three dayswere allowed as the period of peace, but on the fourthday, Caled, assisted by a renegade who acted as hisguide, began the pursuit, and overtaking the promis'-cuous and half armed multitude, enjoyed the satisfac­tion of believing that not a single Christian of eithersex had escaped the edge of the scimitar. The plun­der of Damascus was immense.
The emperor Heraclius did not yet abandon thedefence of Syria. A numerous army was collected
Cadi of Bagdad, who was born A. D. 748, and died A. D. 822. He likewisewrote the conquest of Egypt, of Diarbckir, \c. Above the meagre and recentchronicles of the Arabians, Al Wakiili has the double merit of antiquity and co­piousness. His tales and traditions afford an artless picture of the men and thetimes Yet his narrative is too often defective, trifling, and improbable. Tillnorr ething better shall be found, his learned and spirited interpreter (Ockley,in hishistory of the Saracens, vol. i. p. 21—.142) will not deserve the petulant animad­version of Reiske, (Prodidagn.ata ad Hagji Caliph Tabulas, p. 23G). I amsorry to think that the labours of Ockley were consummated in a jail (see histwo prefaces to the 1st vol. A.l). 1708, to the vd, 17 >8, with the list of authorsat the end).







OCR Output








364 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. fire, and destroyed the temples of the Magi; theXXXIX- statues of Chosroes, who aspired to divine honours,were abandoned to the flames; and the ruins of The-barma or Ormia, which had given birth to Zoroasterhimself, made some atonement for the injuries of theholy sepulchre. A purer spirit of religion was shownin the relief and deliverance of fifty thousand captives.Heraclius was rewarded by their tears and gratefulacclamations; but this wise measure, which spreadthe fame of his benevolence, diffused the murmurs ofthe Persians against the pride and obstinacy of theirown sovereign.
Amidst the glories of the succeeding campaign,Heraclius is almost lost to our eyes, and to those ofthe Byzantine historians. From the spacious andfruitful plains of Albania, the emperor appears tofollow the chain of Hyrcanian mountains, to descendinto the province of Media or Irak, and to cany hisvictorious arms as far as the royal cities of Casbin andIspahan, which had never been approached by a Ro­man conqueror. Alarmed by the danger of his king­dom, the powers of Chosroes were already recalledfrom the Nile and the Bosphorus, and three formida­ble armies surrounded, in a distant and hostile land,the camp of the emperor. The Colchian allies pre­pared to desert his standard; and the fears of thebravest veterans were expressed, rather than conceal­ed, by their desponding silence. "Be not terrified,"said the intrepid Heraclius, "by the multitude of"your foes. With the aid of Heaven, one Roman"may triumph over a thousand Barbarians. But if"we devote our lives for the salvation of our brethren,"we shall obtain the crown of martyrdom, and our"immortal reward will be liberally paid by God and"posterity." These magnanimous sentiments weresupported by the vigour of his actions. He repelledthe threefold attack of the Persians, improved the







OCR Output








174 THE 'DECLINE AND FALL


chap. and all the fortresses of Campania were stained withxxxvi. patrician* blood. After a period of thirteen cen­turies, the institution of Romulus expired; and if the.nobles of Rome still assumed the title of senators,few subsequent traces can be discovered of a publiccouncil, or constitutional order. Ascend six hundredyears, and contemplate the kings of the earth solicit­ing an audience, as the slaves or freedmen of theRoman senate!dafthof"1 ^ne Gothic war was yet alive. The bravest ofTdas, the the nation retired beyond the Po; and Teias wasthe Goths? unanimously chosen to succeed and revenge theirMarch,553' departed hero. The new king immediately sent am­bassadors to implore, or rather to purchase, the aidof the Franks, and nobly lavished for the publicsafety the riches which had been deposited in thepalace of Pavia. The residue of the royal treasurewas guarded by his brother Aligern at Cumae inCampania; but the strong castle which Totila hadfortified was closely besieged by the arms of Narses.From the Alps to the foot of mount Vesuvius, theGothic king, by rapid and secret marches, advancedto the relief of his brother, eluded the vigilance ofthe Roman chiefs, and pitched his camp on the banksof the Sarnus or Draco, which flows from Nuceriainto the bay of Naples. The river separated the twoarmies; sixty days were consumed in distant andfruitless combats, and Teias maintained this im­portant post, till he was deserted by his fleet and thehope of subsistence. With reluctant steps he ascendedthe Lactarian mount, where the physicians of Rome,since the time of Galen, had sent their patients forthe benefit of the air and the milk. But the Gothssoon embraced a more generous resolution: to de­


* Compare two passages of Procopius (1. Hi. c. 26. 1. iv. c. 24), which, withsome collateral hints from Marcellinus and Jomandes, illustrate the state of theexpiring senate.







OCR Output








160 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. train, and afterwards confined in the fortresses of _ Campania: the citizens, with their wives and chil­dren, were dispersed in exile; and during fortydays Rome was abandoned to desolate and drearysolitude.Recovered The loss of Rome was speedily retrieved by ansariiw, action, to which, according to the event, the publicF brii547' opinJon would apply the names of rashness or heroism.After the departure of Totila, the Roman generalsallied from the port at the head of a thousand horse,cut in pieces the enemy who opposed his progress,and visited with pity and reverence the vacant spaceof the eternal city. Resolved to maintain a stationso conspicuous in the eyes of mankind, he summonedthe greatest part of his troops to the standard whichhe erected on the Capitol: the old inhabitants wererecalled by the love of their country and the hopesof food; and the keys of Rome were sent a secondtime to the emperor Justinian. The walls, as faras they had been demolished by the Goths, were re­paired with rude and dissimilar materials; the ditchwas restored; iron spikes were profusely scattered inthe highways to annoy the feet of the horses; andas new gates could not suddenly be procured, theentrance was guarded by a Spartan rampart of hisbravest soldiers. At the expiration of twenty-fivedays, Totila returned by hasty marches from Apulia,to avenge the injury and disgrace. Belisarius ex­pected his approach. The Goths were thrice repulsedin three general assaults; they lost the flower of theirtroops; the royal standard had almost fallen into thehands of the enemy, and the fame of Totila sunk, asit had risen, with the fortune of his arms. What­ever skill and courage could achieve had been per­formed by the Roman general; it remained only,that Justinian should terminate, by a strong and







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 71


His skill and perseverance overcame every obstacle: chap.
.Urbino was taken; the sieges of Fa?sulae, Orvieto, and .-
Auximum, were undertaken and vigorously prose- *J5nne"CUted; and the eunuch Narses was at length recalled thonty ofto the domestic cares of the palace. All dissensions e lsanus-were healed, and all opposition was subdued, by thetemperate authority of the Roman general, to whomhis enemies could not refuse their esteem; and Beli-sarius inculcated the salutary lesson, that the forcesof the state should compose one body, and be ani­mated by one soul. But in the interval of discord,the Goths were permitted to breathe; an importantseason was lost, Milan was destroyed, and the northernprovinces of Italy were afflicted by an inundation ofthe Franks.
When Justinian first meditated the conquest of invasion ofItaly, he sent ambassadors to the kings of the Franks, Franks,and adjured them, by the common ties of alliance and 539.'5 8'religion, to join in the holy enterprise against theArians. The Goths, as their wants were more urgent,employed a more effectual mode of persuasion, andvainly strove, by the gift of lands and money, to pur-(,chase the friendship, or at least the neutrality, of alight and perfidious nation. But the arms of Belisarius,and the revolt of the Italians, had no sooner shakenthe1 Gothic monarchy, than Theodebert of Austrasia,the most powerful and warlike of the Merovingiankings, was persuaded to succour their distress by anindirect and seasonable aid. Without expecting theconsent of their sovereign, ten thousand Burgundians,his recent subjects, descended from the Alps, andjoined the troops which Vitiges had sent to chastisethe revolt of Milan. After an obstinate siege, thecapital of Liguria was reduced by famine, but nocapitulation could be obtained, except for the saferetreat of the Roman garrison. Three hundred thou­sand males were repotted to be slain; the female


/"


f4







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 497


of consanguinity and friendship; and chap."their martial deeds are prompted by the desire of"saving or revenging their dearest companions. In"their eyes, a retreat is a shameful flight; and"flight is indelible infamy." A nation endowedwith such high and intrepid spirit must have beensecure of victory, if these advantages had not beencounterbalanced by many weighty defects. Thedecay of their naval power left the Greeks andSaracens in possession of the sea, for every purposeof annoyance and supply. In the age which pre­ceded the institution of knighthood, the Frankswere rude and unskilful in the service of cavalry;and in all perilous emergencies, their warriors wereso conscious of their ignorance, that they chose todismount from their horses and fight on foot. Un­practised in the use of pikes, or of missile weapons,they were encumbered by the length of their swords,the weight of their armour, the magnitude of theirshields, and, if I may repeat the satire of the meagreGreeks, by their unwieldy intemperance. Their in­dependent spirit disdained the yoke of subordination,and abandoned the standard of their chief, if heattempted to keep the field beyond the term of theirstipulation or service. On all sides they were opento the snares of an enemy, less brave, but more art­ful, than themselves. They might be bribed, for theBarbarians were venal; or surprised in the night, forthey neglected the precautions of a close encamp­ment or vigilant centinels. The fatigues of a sum­mer's campaign exhausted their strength and patience,and they sunk in despair if their voracious appetitewas disappointed of a plentiful supply of wine andof food. This general character of the Franks wasmarked with some national and local shades, whichI should ascribe to accident, rather than to climate,but which were visible both to natives and to fo-
VOL. IV. K K







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 471


their children and disciples to satisfy the increasing chap.demand of the Western world. The decay of the XLI-looms of Sicily may be ascribed to the troubles of theisland, and the competition of the Italian cities. Inthe year thirteen hundred and fourteen, Lucca, alone,among her sister republics, enjoyed the lucrative mo­nopoly*. A domestic revolution dispersed the ma­nufacturers of Florence, Bologna, Venice, Milan, andeven the countries beyond the Alps; and thirteenyears after this event, the statutes of Modena enjointhe planting of mulberry trees, and regulate the du­ties on raw silkt. The northern climates are lesspropitious to the education of the silk-worm: but theindustry of France and England t is supplied and en­riched by the productions of Italy and China.
I must repeat the complaint that the vague and Revenue ofscanty memorials of the times will not afford any just empire!*estimate of the taxes, the revenue, and the resourcesof the Greek empire. From every province of Europeand Asia the rivulets of gold and silver dischargedinto the Imperial reservoir a copious and perennialstream. The separation of the branches from thetrunk increased the relative magnitude of Constan­tinople; and the maxims of despotism contractedthe state to the capital, the capital to the palace, andthe palace to the royal person. A Jewish traveller,who visited the East in the twelfth century, is lost inhis admiration of the Byzantine riches. "It is here,"says Benjamin of Tudela, "in the queen of cities,"that the tributes of the Greek empire are annually"deposited, and the lofty towers are filled with pre-


• See the Life of Castruccio Casticani, not by Machiavel, but by his moreauthentic biographer Nicholas Tegrimi. Muratori, who has inserted it in theninth volume of his Scriptores, quotes this curious passage in his Italian Anti­quities (tom. i. dissert. xxv. p. 46—48.).
t From the MS. statutes, as they are quoted by Muratori, in his Italian An­tiquities (tom. ii. dissert. xxx. p. 46—48.).
5 The broad silk manufacture was established in England in the year 1620(Anderson's Chronological Deduction, vol. ii. p. 4); but it is to the revocationof the edict of Nantes that we owe the Spitalfields colony.


H H i<







OCR Output








S>72 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. capital. The return of the emperor is marked byXXXIX' the modern name of the city of Sherhzour; he for­tunately passed mount Zara, before the snow, whichfell incessantly thirty-four days; and the citizens ofGandzaca, or Tauris, were compelled to entertainhis soldiers and their horses with a hospitable re­ception*.Flight of When the ambition of Chosroes was reduced to
Chosroes,
a. DJ327. the defence of his hereditary kingdom, the love ofglory, or even the sense of shame, should have urgedhim to meet his rival in the field. In the battle ofNineveh, his courage might have taught the Persiansto vanquish, or he might have fallen with honour bythe lance of a Roman emperor. The successor ofCyrus chose rather, at a secure distance, to expectthe event, to assemble the relics of the defeat, andto retire by measured steps before the march of He-raclius, till he beheld with a sigh the once loved man­sions of Dastagerd. Both his friends and enemieswere persuaded, that it was the intention of Chosroesto bury himself under the ruins of the city and pa­lace: and as both might have been equally adverseto his flight, the monarch of Asia, with Sira, andthree concubines, escaped through a hole in thewall, nine days before the arrival of the Romans.The slow and stately procession in which he showedhimself to the prostrate crowd was changed to arapid and secret journey; and the first evening helodged in the cottage of a peasant, whose humble-door would scarcely give admittance to the greatking. His superstition was subdued by fear; onthe third day, he entered with joy the fortificationsof Ctesiphon; yet he still doubted of his safety tillhe had opposed the river Tigris to the pursuit of the


Dec. 29.
* In describing this last expedition of Heraclius, the facts, the places, and thedates of Theophanes (p. 265—271) are so accurate and authentic, that he musthive followed the original letters of the emperor, of which the Paschal Chroniclehas preserved (p. 398—402) a very curious specimen.







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








328 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. cubines, and a troop of thirty guards, he secretly -departed from the capital, followed the banks of theEuphrates, traversed the desert, and halted at thedistance of ten miles from Circesium. About thethird watch of the night, the Roman praefect wasinformed of his approach, and he introduced theroyal stranger to the fortress at the dawn of day.From thence the king of Persia was conducted to themore honourable residence of Hierapolis; and Mau­rice dissembled his pride, and displayed his benevo­lence, at the reception of the letters and ambassadorsof the grandson of Nushirvan. They humbly re­presented the vicissitudes of fortune and the commoninterest of princes, exaggerated the ingratitude of Bah-ram the agent of the evil principle, and urged, withspecious argument, that it was for the advantage of theRomans themselves to support the two monarchieswhich balance the world, the two great luminaries bywhose salutary influence it is vivified and adorned.The anxiety of Chosroes was soon relieved by theassurance, that the emperor had espoused the causeof justice and royalty; but Maurice prudently de­clined the expense and delay of his useless visit toConstantinople. In the name of his generous bene­factor, a rich diadem was presented to the fugitiveprince with an inestimable gift of jewels and gold ; apowerful army was assembled on the frontiers of Syriaand Armenia, under the command of the valiant andfaithful Narses*; and this general, of his own nation,and his own choice, was directed to pass the Tigris,and never to sheath his sword till he had restoredChosroes to the throne of his ancestors. The enter­prise, however splendid, was less arduous than it


XXXIX.
* In this age there were three warriors of the name of Worses, who have beenoften eonfounded (Pagi, Crltica, tom. ii. p. 640): 1. A Persarmenian, the brotherof Isaac and Armatius, who, after a successful action against Belisarius, deserted
from his Persian sovereign, and afterwards served in the Italian war 2. The
eunuch who conquered Italy.—3. The restorer of Chosroes, who is celebrated inthe poem of Corippus (1. iii. 220 227).







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 85


XXXIV.


a small and sordid retinue through the streets of chap.Constantinople, his forlorn appearance excited theamazement and compassion of the people. Justinianand Theodora received him with cold ingratitude;the servile crowd, with insolence and contempt; andin the evening he retired with trembling steps to hisdeserted palace. An indisposition, feigned or real,had confined Antonina to her apartment; and shewalked disdainfully silent in the adjacent portico,while Belisarius threw himself on his bed, and ex­pected, in an agony of grief and terror, the deathwhich he had so often braved under the walls ofRome. Long after sunset a messenger was an­nounced from the empress; he opened, with anxiouscuriosity, the letter which contained the sentence ofhis fate. "You cannot be ignorant how much you"have deserved my displeasure. I am not insensible"of the services of Antonina. To her merits and"intercession I have granted your life, and permit"you to retain a part of your treasures, which might"be justly forfeited to the state. Let your gratitude,"where it is due, be displayed, not in words, but in"your future behaviour." I know not how to be­lieve or to relate the transports with which the herois said to have received this ignominious pardon. Hefell prostrate before his wife, he kissed the feet ofhis saviour, and he devoutly promised to live thegrateful and submissive slave of Antonina. A fineof one hundred and twenty thousand pounds sterlingwas levied on the fortunes of Belisarius; and withthe office of count, or master of the royal stables, heaccepted the conduct of the Italian war. At hisdeparture from Constantinople, his friends, and eventhe public, were persuaded, that as soon he regainedhis freedom, he would renounce his dissimulation,and that his wife, Theodora, and perhaps the em-


,o 3







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 353


by the writings, of the Greeks and Romans, and the chap.
subjects of Heraclius had been educated to pronounce;
the words of liberty and law. But it has always beenthe pride and policy of oriental princes to displaythe titles and attributes of their omnipotence; toupbraid a nation of slaves with their true name andabject condition, and to enforce, by cruel and insolentthreats, the rigour of their absolute commands. TheChristians of the East were scandalized by the wor­ship of fire, and the impious doctrine of the twoprinciples: the Magi were not less intolerant thanthe bishops,* and the martyrdom of some native Per­sians, who had deserted the religion of Zoroaster,was conceived to be the prelude of a fierce and generalpersecution. By the laws of Justinian, the adversariesof the church were made the enemies of the state;the alliance of the Jews, Nestorians, and Jacobites,had contributed to the success of Chosroes, and hispartial favour to the sectaries provoked the hatredand fears of the Catholic clergy. Conscious of theirfear and hatred, the Persian conqueror governed hisnew subjects with an iron sceptre; and as if hesuspected the stability of his dominion, he exhaustedtheir wealth by exorbitant tributes and licentiousrapine, despoiled or demolished the temples of theEast, and transported to his hereditary realms thegold, the silver, the precious marbles, the arts, andthe artists of the Asiatic cities. In the obscure pic­ture of the calamities of the empire*, it is not easy todiscern the figure of Chosroes himself, to separatehis actions from those of his lieutenants, or to as­certain his personal merit in the general blaze ofglory and magnificence. He enjoyed with ostenta­tion the fruits of victory, and frequently retired fromthe hardships of war to the luxury of the palace.But in the space of twenty-four years, be was de-
• Abulpharagiun, Dynast. p. 99. Klmacin, Hist. Saracen, p. 14.VOL. IV. A A







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 37


was secretly informed of the loss of Carthage, and chap.then dismissed them with obscure and contemptuous XI'advice, to seek in their native country a true know­ledge of the state of the Vandals*. The long con-Conqueststinuance of the Italian war delayed the punishment R0mans inof the Visigoths; and the eyes of Theudes were closed A^5'550before they tasted the fruits of his mistaken policy. —620.After his death, the sceptre of Spain was disputedby a civil war. The weaker candidate solicited theprotection of Justinian, and ambitiously subscribed atreaty of alliance, which deeply wounded the inde­pendence and happiness of his country. Several cities,both on the ocean and the Mediterranean, were cededto the Roman troops, who afterwards refused to eva­cuate those pledges, as it should seem, either of safetyor payment; and as they were fortified by perpetualsupplies from Africa, they maintained their impreg­nable stations, for the mischievous purpose of in­flaming the civil and religious factions of the Barba­rians. Seventy years elapsed before this painful thorncould be extirpated from the bosom of the monarchy;and as long as the emperors retained any share ofthese remote and useless possessions, their vanitymight number Spain in the list of their provinces,and the successors of Alaric in the rank of theirvassals.
The error of the Goths who reigned in Italy was Beiisanusless excusable than that of their Spanish brethren, oltrogoths'6and their punishment was still more immediate and '^l^3iterrible. From a motive of private revenge, theyenabled their most dangerous enemy to destroy theirmost valuable ally. A sister of the great Theodorichad been given in marriage to Thrasimond, theAfrican king: on this occasion, the fortress of Lily-baeum in Sicily was resigned to the Vandals: andthe princess Amalafrida was attended by a martial


* Procopius, Vandal. I. i. r. 24.


D 3







OCR Output








OF THE KOMAN EMPIKE. 317


the fleet from Carthage to Constantinople, that the chap.
other should lead an army through Egypt and Asia, _ _
and that the Imperial purple should be the reward ofdiligence and success. A faint rumour of their un­dertaking was conveyed to the ears of Phocas, andthe wife and mother of the younger Heraclius weresecured as the hostages of his faith: but the trea­cherous art of Crispus extenuated the distant peril, themeans of defence were neglected or delayed, and thetyrant supinely slept till the African navy cast anchorin the Hellespont. Their standard was joined.atAbydos by the fugitives and exiles who thirsted forrevenge; the ships of Heraclius, whose lofty mastswere adorned with the holy symbols of religion,steered their triumphant course through the Pro-pontis; and Phocas beheld from the windows ofthe palace his approaching and inevitable fate. Thegreen faction was tempted, by gifts and promises, tooppose a feeble and fruitless resistance to the land­ing of the Africans; but the people, and even theguards, were determined by the well-timed defectionof Crispus; and the tyrant was seized by a privateenemy, who boldly invaded the solitude of the palace.Stripped of the diadem and purple, clothed in a vile . .
habit, and loaded with chains, he was transported ina small boat to the Imperial galley of Heraclius, whoreproached him with the crimes of his abominablereign. "Wilt thou govern better?" were the lastwords of the despair of Phocas. After suffering eachvariety of insult and torture, his head was severedfrom his body, the mangled trunk was cast into theflames, and the same treatment was inflicted on thestatues of the vain usurper, and the seditious bannerof the green faction. The voice of the clergy, thesenate, and the people, invited Heraclius to ascendthe throne which he had purified from guilt andignominy; after some graceful hesitation, he yielded







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 195


African fever is generated from the putrefaction of chap.animal substances, and especially from the swarms XXXVLof locusts, not less destructive to mankind in theirdeath than in their lives. The fatal disease which de­populated the earth in the time of Justinian and hissuccessors first appeared in the neighbourhood ofPelusium, between the Serbonian bog and the easternchannel of the Nile. From thence, tracing as it werea double path, it spread to the East, over Syria, Persia,and the Indies, and penetrated to the West, alongthe coast of Africa, and over the continent of Europe.In the spring of the second year, Constantinople,during three or four months, was visited by thepestilence; and Procopius, who observed its progressand symptoms with the eyes of a physician, has emu­lated the skill and diligence of Thucydides in thedescription of the plague of Athens. The infectionwas sometimes announced by the visions of a dis­tempered fancy, and the victim despaired as soon ashe had heard the menace and felt the stroke of aninvisible spectre. But the greater number, in theirbeds, in the streets, in their usual occupation, weresurprised by a slight fever; so slight, indeed, thatneither the pulse nor the colour of the patient gaveany signs of the approaching danger. The same,the next, or the succeeding day, it was declared bythe swelling of the glands, particularly those of thegroin, of the arm-pits, and under the ear; and whenthese buboes or tumors were opened, they were foundto contain a coal, or black substance, of the size of alentil. If they came to a just swelling and suppura­tion, the patient was saved by this kind and naturaldischarge of the morbid humour. But if they con­tinued hard and dry, a mortification quickly ensued,and the fifth day was commonly the term of his life.The fever was often accompanied with lethargy ordelirium; the bodies of the sick were covered with


r


o 2







OCR Output








816 THE DECLINE AND FALL


CHAP. XXXIX.


CHAP.XXXIX.
Contest ofRome andPersia.


Revolutions of Persia after the Death qf'Chosroes or Nu-shirvan.—His Son Hormouz, a Tyrant, is deposed.—
Usurpation of Baharam Flight and Restoration of
Chosroes II.—His Gratitude to the Romans.—The Cha-gan of the Avars.—Revolt of the Army against Maurice.—His Death.— Tyranny of Phocas.—Elevation ofHe-raclius.—The Persian War.—Chosroes subdues Syria,Egypt, and Asia Minor.—Siege of Constantinople by thePersians and Avars.—Persian Expeditions.— Victoriesand Triumph of Heraclius.—Observations.
The conflict of Rome and Persia was prolongedfrom the death of Crassus to the reign of Heraclius.An experience of seven hundred years might con­vince the rival nations of the impossibility of main­taining their conquests beyond the fatal limits of theTigris and Euphrates. Yet the emulation of Trajanand Julian was awakened by the trophies of Alex­ander, and the sovereigns of Persia indulged theambitious hope of restoring the empire of Cyrus.Such extraordinary efforts of power and courage willalways command the attention of posterity; but theevents by which the fate of nations is not materiallychanged leave a faint impression on the page ofhistory, and the patience of the reader would beexhausted by the repetition of the same hostilities,undertaken without cause, prosecuted without glory,and terminated without effect. The arts of negotia­tion, unknown to the simple greatness of the senateand the Caesars, were assiduously cultivated by theByzantine princes; and the memorials of their per­petual embassies* repeat, with the same uniformprolixity, the language of falsehood and declamation,
• See the embassies of Menander, extracted and preserved in the tenth centuryby the order of Constantine Porphyrogenitus.







OCR Output








362 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. sians were not invincible, and that a hero was in-xx x' vested with the purple. Strong in victory and fame,Heraclius boldly ascended the heights of mountTaurus, directed his march through the plains ofCappadocia, and established his troops for the winterseason in safe and plentiful quarters on the banks ofthe river Halys *. His soul was superior to the vanityof entertaining Constantinople with an imperfecttriumph: but the presence of the emperor was indis­pensably required to soothe the restless and rapaciousspirit of the Avars.His second Since the days of Scipio and Hannibal, no bolderaTd. 623^ enterprise has been attempted than that which Hera-o"24,625. clius achieved for the deliverance of the empire t.He permitted the Persians to oppress for a while theprovinces, and to insult with impunity the capital ofthe East; while the Roman emperor explored hisperilous way through the Black Sea, and the moun­tains of Armenia, penetrated into the heart of Per­sia t, and recalled the armies of the great king to thedefence of their bleeding country. With a selectband of five thousand soldiers, Heraclius sailed fromConstantinople to Trebizond; assembled his forceswhich had wintered in the Pontic regions ; and, fromthe mouth of the Phasis to the Caspian Sea, encou­raged his subjects and allies to march with the suc­cessor of Constantine under the faithful and victo­rious banner of the cross. When the legions of Lu-cullus and Pompey first passed the Euphrates, they


* George of Pisidia, an eye-witness (Acroas. ii. 122, &c.), described, in threeacroateit or cantos, the first expedition of Heraclius. The poem has been lately(1777) published at Rome; but such vague and declamatory praise is far from'corresponding with the sanguine hopes of Pagi, D'Anville, &e.
f Theophanes (p. 256) carries Heraclius swiftly (m™ invof) into Armenia.Nicephorus (p. II), though he confounds the two expeditions, defines the provinceof Lazica. Eutychius (Annal. tom. ii. p. 231) has given the 5000 men, with themore probable station of Trebizond.
X The expedition of Heraclius into Persia is finely illustrated by M. d'Anville(Memoirs de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom, xxviii. p. 559—573). He dis­covers the situation of Gandzaca, Thebarma, Dastagerd, &c. with admirable skilland learning; but the obscure campaign of 624 he passes over in silence.







OCR Output








144 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. as the public disorders were sufficiently mature, StozaXXXV1, was again alive, in arms, and at the gates of Carthage.He fell in a single combat, but he smiled in theagonies of death, when he was informed that his ownjavelin had reached the heart of his antagonist. Theexample of Stoza, and the assurance that a fortunatesoldier had been the first king, encouraged the am­bition of Gontharis, and he promised, by a privatetreaty, to divide Africa with the Moors, if, with theirdangerous aid, he should ascend the throne of Car­thage. The feeble Areobindus, unskilled in the af­fairs of peace and war, was raised, by his marriagewith the niece of Justinian, to the office of Exarch.He was suddenly oppressed by a sedition of theguards, and his abject supplications, which provokedthe contempt, could not move the pity, of the in­exorable tyrant. After a reign of thirty days, Gon­tharis himself was stabbed at a banquet by the handof Artaban; and it is singular enough, that an Ar­menian prince, of the royal family of Arsaces, shouldre-establish at Carthage the authority of the Romanempire. In the conspiracy which unsheathed thedagger of Brutus against the life of Caesar, everycircumstance is curious and important to the eyes ofposterity: but the guilt or merit of these loyal orrebellious assassins could interest only the contem­poraries of Procopius, who, by their hopes and fears,their friendship or resentment, were personally en­gaged in the revolutions of Africa.Rebellion That country was rapidly sinking into the state ofMoors, barbarism, from whence it had been raised by the—5m).543 Phoenician colonies and Roman laws; and every stepof intestine discord was marked by some deplorablevictory of savage man over civilized society. TheMoors, though ignorant of justice, were impatient ofoppression: their vagrant life and boundless wilder­ness disappointed the arms, and eluded the chains, of







OCR Output








140 THE DECLINE AND FAIX


chap. Justinian knelt; the Negus raised him from thexxxv- ground, embraced Nonnosus, kissed the seal, perusedthe letter, accepted the Roman alliance, and brandish­ing his weapons, denounced implacable war againstthe worshippers of fire. But the proposal of thesilk-trade was eluded; and notwithstanding the as­surances, and perhaps the wishes, of the Abyssinians,these hostile menaces evaporated without effect. TheHomerites were unwilling to abandon their aromaticgroves, to explore a sandy desert, and to encounter,after all their fatigues, a formidable nation fromwhom they had never received any personal injuries.Instead of enlarging his conquests, the king ofEthiopia was incapable of defending his possessions.Abrahah, the slave of a Roman merchant of Adulis,assumed the sceptre of the Homerites; the troops ofAfrica were seduced by the luxury of the climate;and Justinian solicited the friendship of the usurper,who honoured, with a slight tribute, the supremacyof his prince. After a long series of prosperity, thepower of Abrahah was overthrown before the gates ofMecca; his children were despoiled by the Persianconqueror; and the ^Ethiopians were finally expelledfrom the continent of Asia. This narrative of ob­scure and remote events is not foreign to the declineand fall of the Roman empire. If a Christian powerhad been maintained in Arabia, Mahomet must havebeen crushed in his cradle, and Abyssinia would haveprevented a revolution which has changed the civiland religious state of the world*.
"The revolutions of Yemen in the sixth century must be collected from Pro-copius (Persic. 1.i.e. 19,20), Theophanes Byzant. (apud Phot . cod. lxiii. p. HO),St., Theophanes (in Chronograph, p. 144, 145. 188, 189. 206, 207, who is full ofstrange blunders), Pocock (Specimen Hist. Arab. p. 02.05), d'llerbelot (Bibliot.Orientale, p. 12. 477), and Sale's Preliminary Discourse and Koran (c. 105).The revolt of Abrahah, as mentioned by Procopius, is an historical fact.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 183


defeats, than they were excited by the double hope chap.
of spoil and of subsidy. In the thirty-second winter 'm
of Justinian's reign, the Danube was deeply frozen:Zabergan led the cavalry of the Bulgarians, and hisstandard was followed by a promiscuous multitude ofSclavonians. The savage chief passed, without op­position, the river and the mountains, spread histroops over Macedonia and Thrace, and advancedwith no more than seven thousand horse to the longwalls which should have defended the territory of.Constantinople. But the works of man are impotentagainst the assaults of nature: a recent earthquakehad shaken the foundations of the wall; and theforces of the empire were employed on the distantfrontiers of Italy, Africa, and Persia. The sevenschools, or companies of the guards or domestictroops, had been augmented to the number of fivethousand five hundred men, whose ordinary stationwas in the peaceful cities of Asia. But the places ofthe brave Armenians were insensibly supplied bylazy citizens, who purchased an exemption from theduties of civil life, without being exposed to thedangers of military service. Of such soldiers, fewcould be tempted to sally from the gates; and nonecould be persuaded to remain in the field, unlessthey wanted strength and speed to escape from theBulgarians. The report of the fugitives exaggeratedthe numbers and fierceness of an enemy, who hadpolluted holy virgins, and abandoned new-born in­fants to the dogs and vultures; a crowd of rustics,imploring food and protection, increased the con­sternation of the city, and the tents of Zabergan werepitched at the distance of twenty miles, on the banksof a small river, which encircles Melanthias, andafterwards falls into the Propontis. Justinian treni*bled: and those who had only seen the emperor inhis old age were pleased to suppose, that he had lost


n 4







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 443


property of his wife, he condemned the ship to the chap.flames, with a sharp reproach, that her avarice had


XL.


degraded the character of an empress into that of amerchant. Yet his last choice intrusted her with Michaeim.the guardianship of the empire and her son Michael, January 20.who was left an orphan in the fifth year of his age.The restoration of images, and the final extirpationof the Iconoclasts, has endeared her name to the de­votion of the Greeks; but in the fervour of religiouszeal, Theodora entertained a grateful regard for thememory of her husband. After thirteen years of aprudent and frugal administration, she perceived thedecline of her influence; but the second Irene imi­tated only the virtues of her predecessor. Insteadof conspiring against the life or government of herson, she retired without a struggle, though not with­out a murmur, to the solitude of private life, deplor­ing the ingratitude, the vices, and the inevitable ruin,of the worthless youth.
During the minority of Michael the Third, in the invasion ofsufferings of prostrate Italy the name of Rome the'sara-awakens a solemn and mournful recollection. In A^ 846the year 846, a fleet of Saracens from the Africancoast presumed to enter the mouth of the Tyber,and to approach a city, which even yet, in her fallenstate, was revered as the metropolis of the Christianworld. The gates and ramparts were guarded by atrembling people; but the tombs and temples of St.Peter and St. Paul were left exposed in the suburbsof the Vatican, and of the Ostian way. Their sanc­tity had protected them against the Goths, the Van­dals, and the Lombards, but the Arabs disdainedboth the gospel and the legend; and their rapaciousspirit was approved and animated by the precepts ofthe Koran. A silver altar was torn away from theshrine of St. Peter; and if the bodies or the build­ings were left entire, their deliverance must be im-







OCR Output








OE THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


He survived this impious menace; sailed into the chapmouth of the Danube; trusted his person in the'
loyal village of the Bulgarians, and purchased the aidofTerbelis, a pagan conqueror, by the promise of hisdaughter and a fair partition of the treasures of theempire. The Bulgarian kingdom extended to theconfines of Thrace; and the two princes besiegedConstantinople at the head of fifteen thousand horse.Apsimar was dismayed by the sudden and hostileapparition of his rival, whose head had been promisedby'the Chozar, and of whose evasion he was yet ig­norant. After an absence of ten years, the crimes ofJustinian were faintly remembered, and the birth andmisfortunes of their hereditary sovereign excited thepity of the multitude, ever discontented with theruling powers; and by the active diligence of hisadherents, he was introduced into the city and palaceof Constantine.
In rewarding his allies, and recalling his wife, Jus- Hisrestora-tinian displayed some sense of honour and gratitude; death, a.d.and Terbelis retired, after sweeping away a heap of705- 7"'golden coin which he measured with his Scythianwhip. But never was vow more religiously performedthan the sacred oath of revenge which he had swornamidst the storms of the Euxine. The two usurpers,for I must reserve the name of tyrant for the con­queror, were dragged into the hippodrome, the onefrom his prison, the other from his palace. Beforetheir execution, Leontius and Apsimar were cast pro­strate in chains beneath the throne of the emperor;and Justinian, planting a foot on each of their necks,contemplated above an hour the chariot race. Theuniversal defection which he had once experiencedmight provoke him to repeat the wish of Caligula,that the Roman people had but one head: yet I shallpresume to observe, that such a wish is unworthy ofan ingenious tyrant, since his revenge and cruelty







OCR Output








2G0 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. were allowed before a Roman was delivered into thexxxvn- power of his fellow-citizen. In this private prison,twelve ounces of rice were his daily food; he mightbe bound with a chain of fifteen pounds weight; andhis misery was thrice exposed in the market-place, tosolicit the compassion of his friends and countrymen.At the expiration of sixty days, the debt was dis­charged by the loss of liberty or life; the insolventdebtor was either put to death, or sold in foreignslavery beyond the Tyber: but if several creditorswere alike obstinate and unrelenting, they might le­gally dismember his body, and satiate their revengeby this horrid partition. The advocates for this savagelaw have insisted, that it must strongly operate indeterring idleness and fraud from contracting debtswhich they were unable to discharge; but experiencewould dissipate this salutary terror, by proving, thatno creditor could be found to exact this unprofitablepenalty of life or limb. As the manners of Romewere insensibly polished, the criminal code of thedecemvirs was abolished by the humanity of accusers,witnesses, and judges; and impunity became the con­sequence of immoderate rigour. The Porcian andValerian laws prohibited the magistrates from inflict­ing on a free citizen any capital, or even corporalpunishment; and the obsolete statutes of blood wereartfully, and perhaps truly, ascribed to the spirit, notof patrician, but of regal, tyranny.
Abolition or In the absence of penal laws and the insufficiency
oblivion of . .. . . - -, . . r ,
penal laws, of civil actions, the peace and justice or the city wereimperfectly maintained by the private jurisdiction ofthe citizens. The malefactors who replenish our gaolsare the outcasts of society, and the crimes for whichthey suffer may be commonly ascribed to ignorance,poverty, and brutal appetite. For the perpetrationof similar enormities, a vile plebeian might claim andabuse the sacred character of a member of the re­







OCR Output








410 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. Egypt and Arabia lay torpid and almost lifeless in'their frozen camp. They revived on the return ofspring: a second effort had been made in theirfavour; and their distress was relieved by the arrivalof two numerous fleets, laden with corn and arms,and soldiers: the first from Alexandria, of four hun­dred transports and galleys; the second, of threehundred and sixty vessels, from the ports of Africa.But the Greek fires were again kindled; and if thedestruction was less complete, it was owing to theexperience which had taught the Moslems to remainat a safe distance. The Egyptian mariners desertedwith their ships to the emperor of the Christians.The trade and navigation of the capital were re­stored; and the produce of the fisheries suppliedthe wants, and even the luxury, of the inhabitants,But the calamities of famine and disease were soonfelt by the troops of Moslemah; and, as the formerwas miserably assuaged, so the latter was dreadfullypropagated, by the pernicious nutriment which hun­ger compelled them to extract from the most uncleanor unnatural food. The spirit of conquest and evenof enthusiasm was extinct. The Saracens could nolonger straggle beyond their lines, either single or insmall parties, without exposing themselves to themerciless retaliation of the Thracian peasants. Anarmy of Bulgarians was attracted from the Danubeby the gifts and promises of Leo, and these savageauxiliaries made some atonement for the evils whichthey had inflicted on the empire, by the defeat andslaughter of twenty-two thousand Asiatics. Are-port was dexterously scattered that the Franks, theunknown nations of the Latin world, were arming bysea and land in the defence of the Christian cause;and their formidable aid was expected, with far dif­ferent sensations, in the camp and city. At length,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 24.5


it is the peculiar praise of the Roman jurisprudence, chap.
that it asserts the claim of the first occupant to the 'm
wild animals of the earth, the air, and the waters.In the progress from primitive equity to final in*justice, the steps are silent, the shades are almost im­perceptible, and the absolute monopoly is guarded bypositive laws and artificial reason. The active in­satiate principle of self-love can alone supply the artsof life and the wages of industry; and as soon as civilgovernment and exclusive property have been in­troduced, they become necessary to the existence ofthe human race. Except in the singular institutionsof Sparta, the wisest legislators have disapproved anagrarian law as a false and dangerous innovation.Among the Romans, the enormous disproportion ofwealth surmounted the ideal restraints of a doubtfultradition, and an obsolete statute; a tradition thatthe poorest follower of Romulus had been endowedwith the perpetual inheritance of two jugera; a sta­tute which confined the richest citizen to the measureof five hundred jugera, or three hundred and twelveacres of land. The original territory of Rome con­sisted only of some miles of wood and meadow alongthe banks of the Tyber; and domestic exchange couldadd nothing to the national stock. But the goods ofan alien or enemy were lawfully exposed to the firsthostile occupier; the city was enriched by the profit­able trade of war; and the blood of her sons was theonly price that was paid for the Volscian sheep, theslaves of Britain, or the gems and gold of Asiatickingdoms. In the language of ancient jurisprudence*which was corrupted and forgotten before the age ofJustinian, these spoils were distinguished by the nameof manceps or mancipium, taken with the hand ; andwhenever they were sold or emancipated, the pur­chaser required some assurance that they had beenthe property of an enemy, and not of a.fellow-citizen.


r3







OCR Output








OF THE UOAIAN EMPIRE. 455


state of that country in the ninth century. The three chap.
great nations of the world, the Greeks, the Saracens, XL'
and the Franks, encountered each other on the thea­tre of Italy. The southern provinces, which nowcompose the kingdom of Naples, were subject for themost part to the Lombard dukes and the princes ofBeneventum: these last were so powerful in war,that they checked for a moment the genius of Charle­magne; and so liberal in peace, that they main­tained in their capital an academy of thirty-two phi­losophers and grammarians. The division of thisflourishing state produced the rival principalities ofBenevento, Salerno, and Capua; and the thoughtlessambition or revenge of the competitors invited theSaracens to the ruin of their common inheritance.During a calamitous period of two hundred years,Italy was exposed to a repetition of wounds, whichthe invaders were not capable of healing by the unionand tranquillity of a perfect conquest. Their frequentand almost annual squadrons issued from the port ofPalermo, and were entertained with too much indul­gence by the Christians of Naples; the more formida­ble fleets were prepared on the African coast; andeven the Arabs of Andalusia were sometimes temptedto assist or oppose the Moslems of an adverse sect.In the revolution of human events, a new ambuscadewas concealed in the Caudine forks; the fields ofCannae were bedewed a second time with the bloodof the Africans; and the sovereign of Rome againattacked or defended the walls of Capua and Taren-tum. A colony of Saracens had been planted at Bari,which commands the entrance of the Adriatic gulf;and their impartial depredations provoked the resent­ment, and conciliated the union, of the two emperors.An offensive alliance was concluded between Basilthe Macedonian, the first of his race, and Lewis thegreat-grandson of Charlemagne; and each party sup-


'.'


g g 4







OCR Output








290 THE DECLINE AND FALL


December.


chap. customed to behold with jealousy and hatred his bro-
1 thers and cousins, the rivals of his hopes; nor could
he depend on the gratitude of those who would acceptthe purple as a restitution, rather than a gift. Ofthese competitors, one had been removed by exile,and afterwards by death; and the emperor himselfhad inflicted such cruel insults on another, that hemust either dread his resentment or despise his pa­tience. This domestic animosity was refined into agenerous resolution of seeking a successor, not in hisfamily, but in the republic; and the artful Sophiarecommended Tiberius, his faithful captain of theguards, whose virtues and fortune the emperor mightAssociation cherish as the fruit of his judicious choice. Thea. D. 574, ceremony of his elevation to the rank of Caesar orAugustus was performed in the portico of the palace,in the presence of the patriarch and the senate.Justin collected the remaining strength of his mindand body: but the popular belief that his speech wasinspired by the Deity betrays a very humble opinionboth of the man and the times. "You behold," saidthe emperor, " the ensigns of supreme power. You"are about to receive them, not from my hand, but"from the hand of God. Honour them, and from"them you will derive honour. Respect the em-"press your mother: you are now her son; before,"you were her servant. Delight not in blood, ab-** stain from revenge, avoid those actions by which"I have incurred the public hatred, and consult the"experience rather than the example of your pre-"decessor. As a man, I have sinned; as a sinner,"even in this life I have been severely punished:"but these servants (and he pointed to his ministers),"who have abused my confidence, and inflamed my"passions, will appear with me before the tribunal"of Christ. I have been dazzled by the splendour"of the diadem: be thou wise and modest; re.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 175


scend the hill, to dismiss their horses, and to die in chap.
arms, and in the possession of freedom. The king _
marched at their head, bearing in his right hand alance, and an ample buckler in his left: with the onehe struck dead the foremost of the assailants; withthe other he received the weapons which every handwas ambitious to aim against his life. After a com­bat of many hours, his left arm was fatigued by theweight of twelve javelins which hung from his shield.Without moving from his ground, or suspending hisblows, the hero called aloud on his attendants for afresh buckler, but in the moment while his side wasuncovered, it was pierced by a mortal dart. He fell;and his head exalted on a spear, proclaimed to thenations, that the Gothic kingdom was no more. Butthe example of his death served only to animate thecompanions who had sworn to perish with their .leader. They fought till darkness descended on theearth. They reposed on their arms. The combatwas renewed with the return of light, and maintainedwith unabated vigour till the evening of the secondday. The repose of a second night, the want ofwater, and the loss of their bravest champions, de­termined the surviving Goths to accept the fair ca­pitulation which the prudence of Narses was inclinedto propose. They embraced the alternative of re­siding in Italy as the subjects and soldiers of Justinian,or departing with a portion of their private wealth,in search of some independent country. Yet the oathof fidelity or exile was alike rejected by one thousandGoths, who broke away before the treaty was signed,and boldly effected their retreat to the walls of Pavia.The spirit, as well as the situation of Aligern, promptedhim to imitate rather than to bewail his brother: astrong and dexterous archer, he transpierced with asingle arrow the armour and breast of his antagonist;







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 451


nutive person, was always followed by a train of chap.tall and handsome domestics. Basil attended his pa- XL"tron to the government of Peloponnesus; eclipsed,by his personal merit, the birth and dignity of Theo-philus; and formed an useful connexion with awealthy and charitable matron of Patras. Danielispresented him with thirty slaves; and the produce ofher bounty was expended in the support of his bro­thers, and the purchase of some large estates in Ma­cedonia. His gratitude or ambition still attached himto the service of Theophilus; and a lucky accidentrecommended him to the notice of the court. Afamous wrestler, in the train of the Bulgarian ambas­sadors, had defied, at the royal banquet, the boldestand most robust of the Greeks. The strength ofBasil was praised; he accepted the challenge; andthe Barbarian champion was overthrown at the firstonset. A beautiful but vicious horse was con­demned to be hamstrung: it was subdued by thedexterity and courage of the servant of Theophilus;and his conqueror was promoted to an honourablerank in the Imperial stables. But it was impossibleto obtain the confidence of Michael without comply­ing with his vices; and his new favourite, the greatchamberlain of the palace, was raised and supportedby a disgraceful marriage with a royal concubine, andthe dishonour of his sister, who succeeded to herplace. The public administration had been aban­doned to the Caesar Bardas, the brother and enemyof Theodora; but the arts of female influence per­suaded Michael to hate and 'to fear his uncle: hewas drawn from Constantinople under the pretext ofa Cretan expedition, and stabbed in the tent of audi­ence by the sword of the chamberlain, and in thepresence of the emperor. About a month after thisexecution, Basil was invested with the title of Au­gustus and the government of the empire. He sup-


g g 2







OCR Output








>8 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. ing from the Pincian gate, inflicted a severe and dis-xxxiv. graceful Wound on their retreat. The slow lengthof a sickly and desponding host was heavily draggedalong the Flaminian way; from whence the Bar­barians were sometimes compelled to deviate, lest theyshould encounter the hostile garrisons that guardedthe high road to Rimini and Ravenna. Yet so power­ful was this flying army, that Vitiges spared tenthousand men for the defence of the cities which hewas most solicitous to preserve, and detached hisnephew Uraias, with an adequate force, for the chas­tisement of rebellious Milan. At the head of hisprincipal army, he besieged Rimini, only thirty-threemiles distant from the Gothic capital. A feeblerampart, and a shallow ditch, were maintained by theskill and valour of John the Sanguinary, who sharedthe danger and fatigue of the meanest soldier, andemulated, on a theatre less illustrious, the militaryLoseRi. virtues of his great commander. The towers andbattering engines of the Barbarians were rendereduseless; their attacks were repulsed; and the tediousblockade, which reduced the garrison to the last ex-. tremity of hunger, afforded time for the union andmarch of the Roman forces. A fleet which had sur­prised Ancona sailed along the coast of the Ha-driatic, to the relief of the besieged city. The eunuchNarses landed in Picenum with two thousand Heruliand five thousand of the bravest troops of the East.The rock of the Apennine was forced; ten thousandveterans moved round the foot of the mountains,under the command of Belisarius himself; and a newarmy, whose encampment blazed with innumerablelights, appeared to advance along the Flaminian way.Overwhelmed with astonishment and despair, theGoths abandoned the siege of Rimini, their tents,their standards, and their leaders; and Vitiges, who


mini.







OCR Output








314 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. Severus Alexander. A system was formed, schoolsxxxvit. were instituted, books were composed, and both theliving and the dead became subservient to the in­struction of the student. The tripartite of iEliusPaetus, surnamed Catus, or the Cunning, was pre­served as the oldest work of jurisprudence. Catothe censor derived some additional fame from hislegal studies, and those of his son: the kindred ap­pellation of Mucius Scaevola was illustrated by threesages of the law; but the perfection of the sciencewas ascribed to Servius Sulpicius their disciple, andthe friend of Tully; and the long succession, whichshone with equal lustre under the republic and underthe Caesars, is finally closed by the respectable cha­racters of Papinian, of Paul, and of Ulpian. Theirnames, and the various titles of their productions,have been minutely preserved, and the example ofLabeo may suggest some idea of their diligence andfecundity. That eminent lawyer of the Augustanage divided the year between the city and country,between business and composition; and four hundredbooks are enumerated as the fruit of his retirement.Of the collections of his rival Capito, the two hundredand fifty-ninth book is expressly quoted; and fewteachers could deliver their opinions in less than aThird pe- century of volumes. In the third period, betweenaTu. c. tne reigns of Alexander and Justinian, the oracles of888—1230. jurisprudence were almost mute. The measure ofcuriosity had been filled: the throne was occupiedby tyrants and Barbarians; the active spirits werediverted by religious disputes, and the professors ofRome, Constantinople, and Berytus, were humblycontent to repeat the lessons of their more enlightenedpredecessors. From the slow advances and rapid de­cay of these legal studies, it may be inferred that theyrequire a state of peace and refinement. From themultitude of voluminous civilians who fill the inter­







OCR Output








458 THE-DECLINE AND FALL


chap. Crotona. On that day the scale of war was turned'against the Franks by the valour of the Saracens.These corsairs had indeed been driven by the Byzan­tine fleets from the fortresses and coasts of Italy;but a sense of interest was more prevalent than su­perstition or resentment; and the caliph of Egypthad transported forty thousand Moslems to the aidof his Christian ally. The successors of Basil amusedthemselves with the belief that the conquest of Lom-bardy had been achieved, and was still preserved, bythe justice of their laws, the virtues of their ministers,and the gratitude of a people whom they had rescuedfrom anarchy and oppression. A series of rebellionsmight dart a ray of truth into the palace of Constan­tinople; and the illusions of flattery were dispelledby the easy and rapid success of the Norman adven­turers.
The glorious reign of the emperor Basil was ter­minated by an accident in the chase. A furious stagentangled his horns in the belt of the monarch, andraised him from his horse: he was rescued by anattendant, who cut the belt, and slew the animal;but the fall, or the fever, exhausted the strength ofthe aged emperor, and he expired in the palace,amidst the tears of his family and people.
Of the four sons of Basil, Constantine died beforehis father: Stephen the youngest was content withthe honours of a patriarch and saint: both Leo andAlexander were alike invested with the purple, butthe powers of government were solely exercised bythe elder brother.Leo vi. the The name of Leo the sixth has been dignified byJuoTSwr' *ne ^\e of philosopher; and the union of the princeMarch i. an(l f-^g sage, of the active and speculative virtues,would indeed constitute the perfection of human na­ture. But the claims of Leo are far short of thisideal excellence. Did he reduce his passions and







OCR Output








402 THE DECLINE AND FALL


XLI.


chap. and, as a medium between the extremes of four andsixteen, the foot-soldiers of Leo and Constantinewere formed eight deep; but the cavalry charged infour ranks, from the reasonable consideration, thatthe weight of the front could not be increased byany pressure of the hindmost horses. If the ranksof the infantry or cavalry were sometimes doubled,this cautious array betrayed a secret distrust of thecourage of the troops, whose numbers might swellthe appearance of the line, but of whom only achosen band would dare to encounter the spears andswords of the Barbarians. The order of battle musthave varied according to the ground, the object, andthe adversary; but their ordinary disposition, in twolines and a reserve, presented a succession of hopesand resources most agreeable to the temper as well asthe judgment of the Greeks. In case of a repulse,the first line fell back into the intervals of the second;and the reserve, breaking into two divisions, wheeledround the flanks to improve the victory or cover theretreat. Whatever authority could enact was accom­plished, at least in theory, by the camps and marches,the exercises and evolutions, the edicts and books, ofthe Byzantine monarch. Whatever art could pro­duce from the forge, the loom, or the laboratory, wasabundantly supplied by the riches of the prince, andthe industry of his numerous workmen. But neitherauthority nor art could frame the most importantmachine, the soldier himself; and if the ceremoniesof Constantine always suppose the safe and triumphalreturn of the emperor, his tactics seldom soar abovethe means of escaping a defeat, and procrastinatingthe war. Notwithstanding some transient success,the Greeks were sunk in their own esteem and thatof their neighbours. A cold hand and a loquacioustongue was the vulgar description of the nation: theauthor of the tactics was besieged in his capital; and







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


public: but on the proof or suspicion of guilt, the chap.slave, or the stranger, was nailed to a cross, and this xxxvnstrict and summary justice might be exercised with­out restraint over the greatest part of the populaceof Rome. Each family contained a domestic tribunal,which was not confined, like that of the prator, tothe cognizance of external actions: virtuous prin­ciples and habits were inculcated by the discipline ofeducation; and the Roman father was accountable tothe state for the manners of his children, since hedisposed, without appeal, of their life, their liberty,and their inheritance. In some pressing emergencies,the citizen was authorized to avenge his private orpublic wrongs. The consent of the Jewish, the Athe­nian, and the Roman laws, approved the slaughterof the nocturnal thief; though in open day-light arobber could not be slain without some previous evi­dence of danger and complaint. Whoever surprisedan adulterer in his nuptial bed might freely exercisehis revenge*; the most bloody or wanton outragewas excused by the provocation; nor was it beforethe reign of Augustus that the husband was reducedto weigh the rank of the offender, or that the parentwas condemned to sacrifice his daughter with herguilty seducer. After the expulsion of the kings, theambitious Roman who should dare to assume theirtitle, or imitate their tyranny, was devoted to the in­fernal gods: each of his fellow-citizens was armedwith a sword of justice; and the act of Brutus, how­ever repugnant to gratitude or prudence, had beenalready sanctified by the judgment of his country.The barbarous practice of wearing arms in the midstof peace, and the bloody maxims of honour, wereunknown to the Romans; and, during the two purest


• The first speech of Lysias (Reiske, Orator. Graw. tom. v. p. 2 48), is in
defence of a husband who had killed the adulterer. The right of husbands andfathers at Rome and Athens is discussed with much learning by Dr. Taylor (Lee,tiones Lysiacas, c. xi. in Reiske, tom. vi. p. 301—300).


s3







OCR Output








422 THE DECLINE AND FALL


XL.


chap. nounced with reluctant murmurs; and the bold re­fusal of the Armenian guards encouraged a free andgeneral declaration, that Constantine the Sixth wasthe lawful emperor of the Romans. In this charac­ter he ascended his hereditary throne, and dismissedIrene to a life of solitude and repose. But herhaughty spirit condescended to the arts of dissimu­lation; she flattered the bishops and eunuchs, re­vived the filial tenderness of the prince, regainedhis confidence, and betrayed his credulity. Thecharacter of Constantine was not destitute of senseor spirit; but his education had been studiouslyneglected; and his ambitious mother exposed tothe public censure the vices which she had nourishedand the actions which she had secretly advised; hisdivorce and second marriage offended the prejudicesof the •clergy, and by his imprudent rigour he for­feited the attachment of the Armenian guards.
A powerful conspiracy was formed for the restora­tion of Irene; and the secret, though widely diffused,was faithfully kept above eight months, till the em­peror, suspicious of his danger, escaped from Con­stantinople, with the design of appealing to the pro­vinces and armies. By this hasty flight the empresswas left on the brink of the precipice; yet before sheimplored the mercy of her son, Irene addressed aprivate epistle to the friends whom she had placedabout his person, with a menace that unless they ac­complished, she would reveal, their treason. Theirfear rendered them intrepid; they seized the em­peror on the Asiatic shore; and he was transportedto the porphyry apartment of the palace, where he hadfirst seen the light. In the mind of Irene, ambitionhad stifled every sentiment of humanity and nature;and it was declared in her bloody council, that Con­stantine should be rendered incapable of the throne;her emissaries assaulted the sleeping prince, and







OCR Output








OF tfHE ROMAN EMPIRE. 411


after a siege of thirteen months *, the hopeless Mos- chap.lemah received from the caliph the welcome permis- XL'


sion of retreat. The march of the Arabian cavalry Failure andover the Hellespont, and through the provinces of s^acens.Asia, was executed without delay or molestation;but an army of their brethren had been cut in pieceson the side of Bithynia; and the remains of the fleetwas so repeatedly damaged, by tempest and fire, thatonly five galleys entered the port of Alexandria, torelate the tale of their various and almost incredibledisasters t.
In the two sieges, the deliverance of Constan- inventiontinople may be chiefly ascribed to the novelty, the ter- ^e Greekrors, and the eflicacy of the Greek fire J. The im- fire*portant secret of compounding and directing the arti­ficial flame was imparted by Callinicus, a native ofHeliopolis in Syria, who deserted from the service ofthe caliph to that of the emperor §. The skill of achemist and engineer was equivalent to the succourof fleets and armies; and this discovery, or improve­ment, of the military art, was fortunately reservedfor the distressful period when the degenerate Ro­mans of the East were incapable of contending withthe warlike enthusiasm and youthful vigour of theSaracens. The historian who presumes to analysethis extraordinary composition should suspect his


• Both Nicephorus and Theophanes agree that the siege of Constantinople wasraised on the 15th of August, A. D. 718.
"f In the second siege of Constantinople, I have followed Nicephorus (Brev.p. 33—36), Theophanes (Chronograph, p. 324—334), Cedrenus (Compend.p. 449—452), Zonaras (tom. ii. p. 98—102), Elmacin (Hist. Saracen, p. 88),Abulfeda (Annal. Moslem, p. 126), and Abulpharagius (Dynast, p. 130), themost satisfactory of the Arabs.
$ Our sure and indefatigable guide, in the middle ages and Byzantine history,Charles du Fresne du Cange, has treated in several places of the Greek fire, andbis collections leave few gleanings behind. See particularly, Glossar. Med. et Infin,Graecitat. p. 1275. sub voce Tlup Qothatrc-iav, vypn,. Glossar. Med. et Infin. La-tinitat. Ignis Graecus; Observations sur Villehardouin, p. 305, 306 ; Observationssur Joinville, p. 71, 72.
§ Theophanes styles him spyiTixren, (p. 295). Cedrenus (p. 437) bringsthiB artist from the ruins of Heliopolis, in Egypt; and chemistry was, indeed, thepeculiar science of the Egyptians.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 285


emperor Justin the rapid and irretrievable loss of his chap.
YY YVITI
provinces and cities*. One city, which had been''
diligently fortified by the Goths, resisted the arms ofa new invader; and while Italy was subdued by theflying detachments of the Lombards, the royal campwas fixed above three years before the western gateof Ticinum, or Pavia. The same courage which ob­tains the esteem of a civilized enemy provokes thefury of a savage; and the impatient besieger hadbound himself by a tremendous oath, that age, andsex, and dignity, should be confounded in a generalmassacre. The aid of famine at length enabled himto execute his bloody vow; but as Alboin enteredthe gate, his horse stumbled, fell, and could not beraised from the ground. One of his attendants wasprompted by compassion, or piety, to interpret thismiraculous sign of the wrath of Heaven: the con­queror paused and relented; he sheathed his sword,and, peacefully reposing himself in the palace ofTheodoric, proclaimed to the trembling multitudethat they should live and obey. Delighted with thesituation of a city, which was endeared to his prideby the difficulty of the purchase, the prince of theLombards disdained the ancient glories of Milan;and Pavia, during some ages, was respected as thecapital of the kingdom of Italy t.
The reign of the founder was splendid and tran- Alboin issient; and before he could regulate his new con- by^swifequests, Alboin fell a sacrifice to domestic treason and ""iTIs?:!'female revenge. In a place near Verona, which had June 28.not been erected for the Barbarians, he feasted the


* Paul has given a description of Italy, as it was then divided, into eighteenregions (1. ii. c. 14—24). The Dissertatio Chorographica de Italia Medii jEvi,by Father Beretti, a Benedictine monk, and regius professor at Pavia, has beenusefully consulted.
•f- For the conquest of Italy, see the original materials of Paul (1. ii. c. 7—10.12. 14. 25, 20, 27), the eloquent narrative of Sigonius (tom. ii. de Regno Italics,I. i. p. 13—19), and the correct and critical review of Muratori (Annali d'ltalia,tom. v. p. 104—180).







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 119


ble citadel, and improving his advantage in the field, chap.either to intercept their retreat, or perhaps to enter .the gates with the flying Barbarians. He advancedone day's journey on the territories of Persia, re­duced the fortress of Sisaurane, and sent the go­vernor, with eight hundred chosen horsemen, toserve the emperor in his Italian wars. He detachedArethas and his Arabs, supported by twelve hundredRomans, to pass the Tigris, and to ravage the har­vests of Assyria, a fruitful province, long exemptfrom the calamities of war. But the plans of Beli-sarius were disconcerted by the untractable spirit ofArethas, who neither returned to the camp, nor sentany intelligence of his motions. The. Roman ge­neral was fixed in anxious expectation to the samespot; the time of action elapsed, the ardent sun ofMesopotamia inflamed with fevers the blood of hisEuropean soldiers; and the stationary troops andofficers of Syria affected to tremble for the safety oftheir defenceless cities. Yet this diversion had al­ready succeeded in forcing Chosroes to return withloss and precipitation; and if the skill of Belisariushad been seconded by discipline and valour, his suc­cess might have satisfied the sanguine wishes of thepublic, who required at his hands the conquest ofCtesiphon and the deliverance of the captives ofAntioch. At the end of the campaign, he was re- a. v. 042.called to Constantinople by an ungrateful court, butthe dangers of the ensuing spring restored his con­fidence and command; and the hero, almost alone,was despatched, with the speed of post-horses, torepel, by his name and presence, the invasion ofSyria. He found the Roman generals, among whomwas a nephew of Justinian, imprisoned by their fearsin the fortifications of Hierapolis. But instead oflistening to their timid counsels, Belisarius com­manded them to follow him to Europus, where he


1 4







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. • 141


CHAP. XXXVI.
Rebellions of Africa.—Restoration of the Gothic Kingdomby Totila. — Loss and Recovery of Rome.—final Con­quest of Italy by Narses.—Extinction of the Ostrogoths.Defeat of the Franks and Alemanni.—Last Victory, Dis­grace, and Death of Belisarius.—Death and Characterof Justinian.—Comet, Earthquakes, and Plague.
The review of the nations from the Danube to the chap.
Nile has exposed on every side the weakness of the _
Romans; and our wonder is reasonably excited thatthey should presume to enlarge an empire, whose an­cient limits they were incapable of defending. Butthe wars, the conquests, and the triumphs of Justi­nian, are the feeble and pernicious efforts of old age,which exhaust the remains of strength, and acceleratethe decay of the powers of life. He exulted in theglorious act of restoring Africa and Italy to the re­public; but the calamities which followed the de­parture of Belisarius betrayed the impotence of theconqueror, and accomplished the ruin of those un­fortunate countries.
From his new acquisitions, Justinian expected that The trou-his avarice, as well as pride, should be richly gratified. A2^^A rapacious minister of the finances closely pursued A-r^-53f,the footsteps of Belisarius; and as the old registersof tribute had been burnt by the Vandals, he indulgedhis fancy in a liberal calculation and arbitrary assess­ment of the wealth of Africa*. The increase of taxes,which were drawn away by a distant sovereign, and ageneral resumption of the patrimony or crown lands,soon dispelled the intoxication of the public joy: butthe emperor was insensible to the modest complaintsof the people, till he was awakened and alarmed by


* For the troubles of Africa, I neither have nor desire another guide than Pro-copius, whose eye contemplated the image, and whose ear collected the reports,of the memorable events of his own times.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 481


perial figure appeared in new and more gorgeous ap- chap.parel, and the interview was concluded in haughty XLI-and majestic silence. In this honest and curiousnarrative the bishop of Cremona respresents the cere­monies of the Byzantine court, which are still prac­tised in the sublime Porte, and which were preservedin the last age by the dukes of Muscovy or Russia.After a long journey by the sea and land, from Ve­nice to Constantinople, the ambassador halted at thegolden gate, till he was conducted by the formal officersto the hospitable palace prepared for his reception;but this palace was a prison, and his jealous keepersprohibited all social intercourse either with strangersor natives. At his first audience, he offered the giftsof his master, slaves, and golden vases, and costlyarmour. The ostentatious payment of the officersand troops displayed before his eyes the riches of theempire: he was entertained at a royal banquet, inwhich the ambassadors of the nations were marshalledby the esteem or contempt of the Greeks: from hisown table, the emperor, as the most signal favour, sentthe plates which he had tasted; and his favouriteswere dismissed with a robe of honour. In the morn­ing and evening of each day, his civil and military ser­vants attended their duty in the palace; their labourwas repaid by the sight, perhaps by the smile, of theirlord; his commands were signified by a nod or asign: but all earthly greatness stood silent and submis­sive in his presence. In his regular or extraordinary Proces.processions through the capital, he unveiled his per- and accia-son to the public view: the rites of policy were con- ma lons-nected with those of religion, and his visits to theprincipal churches were regulated by the festivals ofthe Greek calendar. On the eve of these processions,the gracious or devout intention of the monarch wasproclaimed by the heralds. The streets were clearedand purified; the pavement was strewed with flowers;the most precious furniture, the gold and silver plate,
VOL. IV. i i







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAJST EMPIRE. 459


appetites under the dominion of reason? His life chap.was spent in the pomp of the palace, in the society ofhis wives and concubines; and even the clemencywhich he showed, and the peace which he strove topreserve, must be imputed to the softness and indo­lence of his character. Did he subdue his prejudicesand those of his subjects? His mind was tinged withthe most puerile superstition, and the errors of thepeople were consecrated by his laws. If we still in­quire the reason of his sage appellation, it can onlybe replied, that the son of Basil was less ignorantthan the greater part of his contemporaries in churchand state; that his education had been directed bythe learned Thotius; and that several books of pro­fane and ecclesiastical science were composed by thepen, or in the name, of the Imperial philosopher.







OCR Output








OF THE KOMAN EMPIRE. 41


obedience had provoked her to inflict. The Barba- chap.
rians resented the.indignity which had been offered'
to their king; accused the regent of conspiringagainst his life and crown; and imperiously de­manded, that the grandson of Theodoric should berescued from the dastardly discipline of women andpedants, and educated, like a valiant Goth, in thesociety of his equals, and the glorious ignorance ofhis ancestors. To this rude clamour, importunatelyurged as the voice of the nation, Amalasontha wascompelled to yield her reason, and the dearest wishesof her heart. The king of Italy was abandoned towine, to women, and to rustic sports; and the in­discreet contempt of the ungrateful youth betrayedthe mischievous designs of his favourites and herenemies. Encompassed with domestic foes, she en­tered into a secret negotiation with the emperorJustinian; obtained the assurance of a friendly re­ception, and had actually deposited at Dyrachium, inEpirus, a treasure of forty thousand pounds of gold.Happy would it have been for her fame and safety,if she had calmly retired from barbarous faction, tothe peace and splendour of Constantinople. But themind of Amalasontha was inflamed by ambition andrevenge; and while her ships lay at anchor in theport, she waited for the success of a crime which herpassions excused or applauded as an act of justice.Three of the most dangerous malecontents had beenseparately removed, under the pretence of trust andcommand, to the frontiers of Italy: they were assas­sinated by her private emissaries; and the blood ofthese noble Goths rendered the queen-mother abso­lute in the court of Ravenna, and justly odious to afree people. But if she had lamented the disordersof her son, she soon wept his irreparable loss; andthe death of Athalaric, who, at the age of sixteen,was consumed by premature intemperance, left her


/


r







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 69


gave or followed the example of flight, never halted chaptill he found a shelter within the walls and morasses xxx^-


of Ravenna. Retire to
To these walls, and to some fortresses destitute of , , ,
Jealousy of
any mutual support, the Ciothic monarchy was now the Romanreduced. The provinces of Italy had embraced the aTd. 538.party of the emperor; and his army, gradually re­cruited to the number of twenty thousand men, musthave achieved an easy and rapid conquest, if theirinvincible powers had not been weakened by thediscord of the Roman chiefs. Before the end of thesiege, an act of blood, ambiguous and indiscreet, sul­lied the fair fame of Belisarius. Presidius, a loyalItalian, as he fled from Ravenna to Rome, was rudelystopped by Constantine, the military governor ofSpoleto, and despoiled, even in a church, of two dag­gers richly inlaid with gold and precious stones. Assoon as the public danger had subsided, Presidiuscomplained of the loss and injury: his complaint washeard, but the order of restitution was disobeyed bythe pride and avarice of the offender. Exasperatedby the delay, Presidius boldly arrested the general'shorse as he passed through the forum; and with thespirit of a citizen, demanded the common benefit ofthe Roman laws. The honour of Belisarius was en­gaged; he summoned a council; claimed the obe­dience of his subordinate officer; and was provoked,by an insolent reply, to call hastily for the presenceof his guards. Constantine, viewing their entranceas the signal of death, drew his sword, and rushedon the general, who nimbly eluded the stroke, andwas protected by his friends; while the desperateassassin was disarmed, dragged into a neighbouringchamber, and executed, or rather murdered, by theguards, at the arbitrary command of Belisarius. In Death ofthis hasty act of violence, the guilt of Constantine tm'e.stan"


f3







OCR Output








308 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. above its banks, and rushed with irresistible violencexxxviii. into t^e vaneyS of tne seven hills. A pestilentialdisease arose from the stagnation of the deluge; andso rapid was the contagion, that fourscore personsexpired in an hour in the midst of a solemn proces­sion, which implored the mercy of heaven. A societyin which marriage is encouraged and industry pre­vails soon repairs the accidental losses of pestilenceand war; but as the far greater part of the Romanswas condemned to hopeless indigence and celibacy,the depopulation was constant and visible, and thegloomy enthusiasts might expect the approachingfailure of the human race. Yet the number of citi­zens still exceeded the measure of subsistence: theirprecarious food was supplied from the harvests ofSicily or Egypt; and the frequent repetition offamine betrays the inattention of the emperor to adistant province. The edifices of Rome were ex­posed to the same ruin and decay; the moulderingfabrics were easily overthrown by inundations, tem­pests, and earthquakes. It is commonly believed,that pope Gregory the First attacked the templesand mutilated the statues of the city; that by thecommand of the Barbarian, the Palatine library wasreduced to ashes; and that the history of Livy wasthe peculiar mark of his absurd and mischievousfanaticism. The writings of Gregory himself revealhis implacable aversion to the monuments of classicgenius. But the evidence of his destructive rage isdoubtful and recent; the Temple of Peace, or thetheatre of Marcellus, have been demolished by theslow operation of ages; and a formal proscriptionwould have multiplied the copies of Virgil and Livyin the countries which were not subject to theecclesiastical dictator.The tombs Like Thebes, or Babylon, or Carthage, the nameuf the of Rome might have been erased from the earth, if


apostles.







OCR Output








OF THE ItOMAN EMPIRE. 249


succeeded to the vacant possessions of a Roman chap.citizen*. xxxvil.
The order of succession is regulated by nature, or introduc-at least by the general and permanent reason of the Hberty oflawgiver: but this order is frequently violated by thetestaments-arbitrary and partial wills which prolong the dominionof the testator beyond the grave. In the simple stateof society, this last use or abuse of the right ofproperty is seldom indulged: it was introduced atAthens by the laws of Solon; and the private testa­ments of the father of a family are authorised by thetwelve tables. Before the time of the decemvirs t, aRoman citizen exposed his wishes and motives to theassembly of the thirty curiae or parishes, and thegeneral law of inheritance was suspended by an oc­casional act of the legislature. After the permissionof the decemvirs, each private lawgiver promulgatedhis verbal or written testament in the presence of fivecitizens, who represented the five classes of the Ro­man people; a sixth witness attested their concur­rence; a seventh weighed the copper money, whichwas paid by an imaginary purchaser; and the estatewas emancipated by a fictitious sale and immediaterelease. This singular ceremony t, which excited thewonder of the Greeks, was still practised in the ageof Severus; but the praetors had already approved amore simple testament, for which they required theseals and signatures of seven witnesses, free from alllegal exception, and purposely summoned for theexecution of that important act. A domestic mon­arch, who reigned over the lives and fortunes of his
• See the law of succession in the Institutes of Caius (1. ii. tit . viii. p. 130—144.), and Justinian (I. iii. tit. i—vi. with the (ireek version of Theophilus,p. 515—576. 588-600), the Pandects (1. xxxviii. tit . vi— xvii.), the Code (l.vi.tit. Iv—lx.), and the Novels (cxviii.).
f Prior examples of testaments are perhaps fabulous. At Athens a childlessfather only could make a will (Plutarch, in Solone, tom. i. p. 164. See Isa;usand Jones).
* The testament of Augustus is specified by Suetonius (in August . c. 101. inNeron. c . 4), who may be studied as a code of Roman antiquities.


/


r







OCR Output








14 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. soldiers were left as a guard on board each of the
YYYTV
'ships, which were disposed in the form of a semi­circle. The remainder of the troops occupied acamp on the sea-shore, which they fortified, accordingto ancient discipline, with a ditch and rampart; andthe discovery of a source of fresh water, while itallayed the thirst, excited the superstitious con­fidence of the Romans. The next morning, someof the neighbouring gardens were pillaged; andBelisarius, after chastising the offenders, embracedthe slight occasion, but the decisive moment, of in­culcating the maxims of justice, moderation, andgenuine policy. "When I first accepted the com-"mission of subduing Africa, I depended much less,""said the general, "on the numbers, or even the"bravery, of my troops, than upon the friendly dis-"position of the natives, and their immortal hatred"to the Vandals. You alone can deprive me of this"hope: if you continue to extort by rapine what"might be purchased for a little money, such acts of"violence will reconcile these implacable enemies,"and unite them in a just and holy league against the"invaders of their country." These exhortationswere enforced by a rigid discipline, of which the sol­diers themselves soon felt and praised the salutaryeffects. The inhabitants, instead of deserting theirhouses, or hiding their corn, supplied the Romanswith a fair and liberal market: the civil officers ofthe province continued to exercise their functions inthe name of Justinian; and the clergy assiduouslylaboured to promote the cause of a Catholic emperor.The small town of Sullecte, one day,s journey fromthe camp, had the honour of being foremost to openher gates, and to resume her ancient allegiance: thelarger cities of Leptis and Adrumetum imitated theexample of loyalty as soon as Belisarius appeared;and he advanced without opposition as far as Grasse,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 463


stration is stained with the same blemishes; yet it is chap.
discriminated by peculiar merit: the antiquities of'''
the nations may be doubtful or fabulous; but thegeography and manners of the Barbaric world aredelineated with curious accuracy. Of these nations, Embassy ofthe Franks alone were qualified to observe in their 1U pran'turn, and to describe, the metropolis of the East.The ambassador of the great Otho, a bishop of Cre­mona, has painted the state of Constantinople aboutthe middle of the tenth century: his style is glowing,his narrative lively, his observation keen; and eventhe prejudices and passions of Liutprand are stampedwith an original character of freedom and genius.From this scanty fund of foreign and domestic mate­rials, I shall investigate the form and substance of theByzantine empire; the provinces and wealth, thecivil government and military force, the character andliterature, of the Greeks in a period of six hundredyears, from the reign of Heraclius to the successfulinvasion of the Franks or Latins.
After the final division between the sons of Theo- Thedosius, the swarms of Barbarians from Scythia and th™.es or
7 J provinces
Germany overspread the provinces and extinguished °fthe em-.the empire of ancient Rome. The weakness of Con- limits instantinople was concealed by extent of dominion :every age'her limits were inviolate, or at least entire; and thekingdom of Justinian was enlarged by the splendidacquisition of Africa and Italy. But the possessionof these new conquests was transient and precarious;and almost a moiety of the Eastern empire was tornaway by the arms of the Saracens. Syria and Egyptwere oppressed by the Arabian caliphs; and, after thereduction of Africa, their lieutenants invaded andsubdued the Roman province, which had been changedinto the Gothic monarchy of Spain. The islands ofthe Mediterranean were not inaccessible to their navalpowers; and it was from their extreme stations, the







OCR Output








380 THE DECLINE AND FALL


CHAP, arslan to the Loire and Charles Martel, we lose sight ofXXXIX. the immediate subjects of the history. It frequently hap-~~ pens page after page, and sometimes chapter after chapter,succeed each other, in which the Greek empire is either en­tirely unnoticed, or mentioned only in a secondary or veryinferior degree of importance.
I am far from denying that some advantages arise fromthe method which Mr. Gibbon has adopted. He has pointedout several which are entitled to consideration; but whateveropinion may be formed as to the comparative merit of thetwo systems, in the larger works of our author, I think,there can be no doubt as to the preference which will begiven to an uninterrupted narrative in a history which is somuch contracted. The remainder of this publication willtherefore be conducted on the same plan as the former partof it.
The history of the Eastern branch of the Roman empirewill be continued without interruption; and, under thereign of each prince, the reader will find the relation of allthe events of importance which took place during that period.But although the order in which the historical events arerelated is here made to correspond with the time of theiroccurrence, the language of the history continues, with a fewexceptions, to be that of the original author. The readerwill still, in the far greater part, peruse the pages of Mr.Gibbon; but he will read them according to the order oftime in which the events occurred, instead of the trans­position which the author thought it expedient to adopt inthe ninth and tenth volumes of his history.
The Editor.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 495


Arabians had more nicely fashioned the hands of the chap.Chinese, and the heads of the Greeks. U


A name of some German tribes between the Rhine The Franksand the Weser had spread its victorious influence overthe greatest part of Gaul, Germany, and Italy; andthe common appellation of Franks was applied bythe Greeks and Arabians to the Christians of theLatin church, the nations of the West, who stretchedbeyond their knowledge to the shores of the AtlanticOcean. The vast body had been inspired and unitedby the soul of Charlemagne; but the division anddegeneracy of his race soon annihilated the Imperialpower, which would have rivalled the Caesars of By­zantium, and revenged the indignities of the Chris­tian name. The enemies no longer feared, nor couldthe subjects any longer trust, the application of apublic revenue, the labours of trade and manufacturesin the military service, the mutual aid of provincesand armies, and the naval squadrons which were re­gularly stationed from the mouth of the Elbe to thatof the Tyber. In the beginning of the tenth cen­tury, the family of Charlemagne had almost disap­peared; his monarchy was broken into many hostileand independent states; the regal title was assumedby the most ambitious chiefs; their revolt was imi­tated in a long subordination of anarchy and discord,and the nobles of every province disobeyed theirsovereign, oppressed their vassals, and exercised per­petual hostilities against their equals and neighbours.Their private wars, which overturned the fabric ofgovernment, fomented the martial spirit of the na­tion. In the system of modern Europe, the powerof the' sword is possessed, at least in fact, by five orsix mighty potentates; their operations are con­ducted on a distant frontier, by an order of menwho devote their lives to the study and practice ofthe military art: the rest of the country and com-







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 81


her innocence; and he stooped, against his faith and chap.judgment, to abandon those imprudent friends who XXXIV-had presumed to accuse or doubt the chastity of hiswife. The revenge of a guilty woman is implacableand bloody: the unfortunate Macedonia, with thetwo witnesses, were secretly arrested by the ministerof her cruelty: their tongues were cut out, theirbodies were hacked into small pieces, and their re­mains were cast into the sea of Syracuse. A rash,though judicious saying of Constantine, " I would"sooner have punished the adulteress than the boy,"was deeply remembered by Antonina: and two yearsafterwards, when despair ]had armed that officeragainst his general, her sanguinary advice decidedand hastened his execution. Even the indignationof Photius was not forgiven by his mother; the exileof her son prepared the recall of her lover; and Theo-dosius condescended to accept the pressing and hum­ble invitation of the conqueror of Italy. In the ab­solute direction of his household, and in the im­portant commissions of peace and war, the favouriteyouth most rapidly acquired a fortune of four hun­dred thousand pounds sterling; and after their re­turn to Constantinople, the passion of Antonina, atleast, continued ardent and unabated. But Theo-dosius dreaded the busy scandal of the capital, andthe indiscreet fondness of the wife of Belisarius; heescaped from her embraces, and retiring to Ephesus,shaved his head, and took refuge in the sanctuary ofa monastic life. The despair of the new Ariadnecould scarcely have been excused by the death of herhusband. She wept, she tore her hair, she filled thepalace with her cries; "she had lost the dearest of"friends, a tender, a faithful friend!" But her warmentreaties, fortified by the prayers of Belisarius, wereinsufficient to draw the holy monk from the solitudeof Ephesus. It was not till the general moved for-
VOL. IV. G







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 473


allies; and both have attained their respective ends, chap.of military power and domestic tranquillity.'
Whatever might be consumed for the present wants, p0mP andor reserved for the future use, of the state, the iirst ^ empf.and most sacred demand was for the pomp and plea- *»"•sure of the emperor; and his discretion only coulddefine the measure of his private expense. Theprinces of Constantinople were far removed from thesimplicity of nature; yet, with the revolving seasons,they were led by taste or fashion to withdraw to apurer air, from the smoke and tumult of the capital.They enjoyed, or affected to enjoy, the rustic festivalof the vintage: their leisure was amused by the exer­cise of the chase and the calmer occupation of fish­ing, and in the summer heats they were shaded fromthe sun, and refreshed by the cooling breezes fromthe sea. The coasts and islands of Asia and Europewere covered with their magnificent villas: but in­stead of the modest art which secretly strives to hideitself and to decorate the scenery of nature, the mar­ble structure of their gardens served only to exposethe riches of the lord, and the labours of the archi­tect. The successive casualties of inheritance andforfeiture had rendered the sovereign proprietor ofmany stately houses in the city and suburbs, of whichtwelve were appropriated to the ministers of state;but the great palace*, the centre of the Imperial re- The palace
° „r . . ,, ofComtan-
sidence, was fixed during eleven centuries to the same tinopie.position, between the hippodrome, the cathedral ofSt. Sophia, and the gardens, which descended by manya terrace to the shores of the Propontis. The pri­mitive edifice of the first Constantine was a copy orrival of ancient Rome; the gradual improvements ofhis successors aspired to emulate the wonders of the


* For a copious and minute description of the Imperial palace, see the Con-stantinop. Christiana (1. ii. c 4. p. 113—123.) of Ducange, the Tillemont of themiddle ages.







OCR Output








020 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. fleet, and seventy thousand captives were transplanted"from Hyrcania to the isle of Cyprus. On the return
of spring, Justinian descended into the fertile plainsof Assyria, the flames of war approached the re-A^nTi)* sidence of Nushirvan, the indignant monarch sunkinto the grave, and his last edict restrained his suc­cessors from exposing their person in a battle againstthe Romans. Yet the memory of this transient affrontwas lost in the glories of a long reign; and his for­midable enemies, after indulging their dream of con­quest, again solicited a short respite from the calami­ties of war*.Tyranny The throne of Chosroes Nushirvan was filled byhis son Hormouz, or Hormisdas, the eldest or the most fa-a.°r 579 voured of his sons. With the kingdoms of Persia—590. and In(Jia, he inherited the reputation and exampleof his father, the service, in every rank, of his wiseand valiant officers, and a general system of admini­stration, harmonized by time and political wisdom topromote the happiness of the prince and people. Butthe royal youth enjoyed a still more valuable blessing,the friendship of a sage who had presided over hiseducation, and who always preferred the honour tothe interest of his pupil, his interest to his inclina­tion. In a dispute with the Greek and Indian phi­losophers, Buzurgt had once maintained, that themost grievous misfortune of life is old age withoutthe remembrance of virtue; and our candour willpresume that the same principle compelled him,during three years, to direct the councils of the Per­sian empire. His zeal was rewarded by the gratitude


• For these Persian wars and treaties, see Menander, in Excerpt. Legat.p. 113—125. Thijophanes Byzant. apud Photium, cod. lxiv. p. 77- 80, 81.Evagrius, 1. v. c. 7— 15. Theophylact, 1. iii. c. 9—16. Agathias, 1. iv. p. 140.
■f Buzurg Mihir may be considered, in his character and station, as the Senecaof the East; but his virtues, and perhaps his faults, are less known than timeof the Roman, who appears to have been much more loquacious. The Persiansage was the person who imported from India the game of chess and the fables ofPilpay.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 469


But the wealth of the province, and the trust of chap.the revenue, were founded on the fair and plentiful XLLproduce of trade and manufactures; and some sym-Manufac-ptoms of liberal policy may be traced in a law which 'STyof1*-exempts from all personal taxes fhe mariners ofsilk>Peloponnesus, and the workmen in parchment andpurple. This denomination may be fairly appliedor extended to the manufactures of linen, woollen,and more especially of silk: the two former of which ,had flourished in Greece since the days of Homer;and the last was introduced perhaps as early as thereign of Justinian. These arts, which were exer­cised at Corinth, Thebes, and Argos, afforded foodand occupation to a numerous people: the men,women, and children, were distributed according totheir age and strength; and if many of these weredomestic slaves, their masters, who directed the workand enjoyed the profit, were of a free and honourablecondition. The gifts which a rich and generousmatron of Peloponnesus presented to the emperorBasil, her adopted son, wftre doubtless fabricated inthe Grecian looms. Danielis bestowed a carpet offine wool, of a pattern which imitated the spots of apeacock,s tail, of a magnitude to overspread the floorof a new church. She gave six hundred pieces ofsilk and linen, of various use and denomination; thesilk was painted with the Tyrian die, and adornedby the labours of the needle; and the linen was soexquisitely fine, that an entire piece might be rolledin the hollow of a cane. In his description of theGreek manufactures, an historian of Sicily discrimi­nates their price, according to the weight and qualityof the silk, the closeness of the texture, the beautyof the colours, and the taste and materials of theembroidery. A single, or even a double or treblethread, was thought sufficient for ordinary sale; butthe union of six threads composed a piece of stronger


r


h u 3







OCR Output








104 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. quests, they offered the friendship and military aid ofxxxv- the Turks; and their sincerity was attested by direfulimprecations (if they were guilty of falsehood) againsttheir own head, and the head of Disabul their master.The Greek prince entertained with hospitable regardthe ambassadors of a remote and powerful monarch:the sight of silk-worms and looms disappointed thehopes of the Sogdoites; the emperor renounced, orseemed to renounce, the fugitive Avars, but he ac­cepted the alliance of the Turks; and the ratificationof the treaty was carried by a Roman minister to thefoot of mount Altai. Under the successors of Jus­tinian, the friendship of the two nations was cul­tivated by frequent and cordial intercourse; the mostfavoured vassals were permitted to imitate the exampleof the great khan, and one hundred and six Turks,who, on various occasions, had visited Constantinople,departed at the same time for their native country.The duration and length of the journey from theByzantine court to mount Altai are not specified: itmight have been difficult to mark a road through thenameless deserts, the mountains, rivers, and morassesof Tartary; but a curious account has been preservedof the reception of the Roman ambassadors at theroyal camp. After they had been purified with fireand incense, according to a rite still practised underthe sons of Zingis, they were introduced to the pre­sence of Disabul. In a valley of the Golden Moun­tain, they found the great khan in his tent, seated ina chair with wheels, to which a horse might be oc­casionally harnessed. As soon as they had deliveredtheir presents, which were received by the properofficers, they exposed, in a florid oration, the wishesof the Roman emperor, that victory might attend the


p. 521, Sec.) has given two alphabets of Thibet and of the Eygours. I have longharboured a suspicion that all the Scythian, and some, perhaps much, of theIndian science, was derived from the Greeks of Bactriana.







OCR Output








266 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. tutes to the degrees of moral and religious turpitude.
'Adultery was first declared to be a capital offence;
the frailty of the sexes was assimilated to poison orassassination, to sorcery or parricide; the same pe­nalties were inflicted on the passive and active guiltof paederasty: and all criminals of free or servilecondition were either drowned, or beheaded, or castalive into the avenging flames. The adulterers werespared by the common sympathy of mankind; butthe lovers of their own sex were pursued by generaland pious indignation. Justinian relaxed the punish­ment at least of female infidelity; the guilty spousewas only condemned to solitude and penance, and atthe end of two years she might be recalled to thearms of a forgiving husband. But the same emperordeclared himself the implacable enemy of unmanlylust. A French philosopher* has dared to remark,that whatever is secret must be doubtful, and thatour natural horror of vice may be abused as an engineof tyranny. But the favourable persuasion of thesame writer, that a legislator may confide in the tasteand reason of mankind, is impeached by the unwel­come discovery of the antiquity and extent of thedisease.onheTe"^ The free citizens of Athens and Rome enjoyed, inpie- all criminal cases, the invaluable privilege of being
tried by their country. 1. The administration otjustice is the most ancient office of a prince: it wasexercised by the Roman kings, and abused by Tar-quin: who alone, without law or council, pronouncedhis arbitrary judgments. The first consuls succeededto this regal prerogative; but the sacred right of ap­peal soon abolished the jurisdiction of the magistrates,and all public causes were decided by the supremetribunal of the people. But a wild democracy, su­perior to the forms, too often disdains the essential
* Montesquieu, Esprit des Loix, 1. xii. c . 6.







OCR Output








154 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. Belisarius declined a battle, he preferred the safeXXXVL and speedy navigation of five days from the coast of
Epirus to the mouth of the Tyber.^■Siby After reducing, by force or treaty, the towns ofA6T?ot4fi inferior no*e i n tne midland provinces of Italy, TotilaMay. 'proceeded, not to assault, but to encompass andstarve, the ancient capital. Rome was afflicted bythe avarice, and guarded by the valour, of Bessas, aveteran chief of Gothic extraction, who filled, with agarrison of three thousand soldiers, the spacious circleof her venerable walls. From the distress of the peoplehe extracted a profitable trade, and secretly rejoicedin the continuance of the siege. It was for his usethat the granaries had been replenished; the charityof Pope Vigilius had purchased and embarked anample supply of Sicilian corn; but the vessels whichescaped the Barbarians were seized by a rapaciousgovernor, who imparted a scanty sustenance to thesoldiers, and sold the remainder to the wealthy Ro­mans. The medimnus, or fifth part of the quarter ofwheat, was exchanged for seven pieces of gold; fiftypieces were given for an ox, a rare and accidentalprize; the progress of famine enhanced this ex­orbitant value, and the mercenaries were tempted todeprive themselves of the allowance which was scarcelysufficient for the support of life. A tasteless andunwholesome mixture, in which the bran thrice ex­ceeded the quantity of flour, appeased the hunger ofthe poor; they were gradually reduced to feed ondead horses, dogs, cats, and mice, and eagerly tosnatch the grass, and even the nettles which grewamong the ruins of the city. A crowd of spectres,pale and emaciated, their bodies oppressed withdisease, and their minds with despair, surroundedthe palace of the governor, urged, with unavailingtruth, that it was the duty of a master to maintainhis slaves, and humbly requested, that he would pro­







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 21


other in the salutary labour; and Gelimer, who had chap.feared to trust his person in an open town, beheld XXXIv-with astonishment and despair the rising strength ofan impregnable fortress.
That unfortunate monarch, after the loss of his Final defeatcapital, applied himself to collect the remains of an and thearmy scattered, rather than destroyed, by the pre- a^dTms.ceding battle; and the hopes of pillage attracted November,some Moorish bands to the standard of Gelimer.He encamped in the fields of Bulla, four days'journey from Carthage; insulted the capital, whichhe deprived of the use of an aqueduct; proposed ahigh reward for the head of every Roman; affectedto spare the persons and property of his Africansubjects, and secretly negotiated with the Ariansectaries and the confederate Huns. Under thesecircumstances, the conquest of Sardinia served onlyto aggravate his distress; he reflected with thedeepest anguish, that he had wasted, in that uselessenterprise, five thousand of his bravest troops; andhe read, with grief and shame, the victorious lettersof his brother Zano, who expressed a sanguine con­fidence that the king, after the example of their an­cestors, had already chastised the rashness of theRoman invader. "Alas! my brother," replied Ge­limer, "Heaven has declared against our unhappy"nation. While you have subdued Sardinia, we"have lost Africa. No sooner did Belisarius appear"with a handful of soldiers, than courage and pros-"perity deserted the cause of the Vandals. Your"nephew Gibamund, your brother Ammatas, have"been betrayed to death by the cowardice of their"followers. Our horses, our ships, Carthage itself,"and all Africa, are in the power of the enemy."Yet the Vandals still prefer an ignominious repose,"at the expense of their wives and children, their"wealth and liberty. Nothing now remains, except


c3







OCR Output








336 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. The martial ardour of Maurice was opposed by the
XXXIX. . . . rt
* grave flattery of the senate, the timid superstition of
the patriarch, and the tears of the empress Constan-tina; and they all conjured him to devolve on somemeaner general the fatigues and perils of a Scythiancampaign. Deaf to their advice and entreaty, theemperor boldly advanced seven miles from the capi­tal; the sacred ensign of the cross was displayed inthe front, and Maurice reviewed, with consciouspride, the arms and numbers of the veterans whohad fought and conquered beyond the Tigris. An-chialus was the last term of his progress by sea andland; his mind was confounded by the death of afavourite horse, the encounter of a wild boar, a stormof wind and rain, and the birth of a monstrous child;and he forgot that the best of omens is to unsheathour sword in the defence of our country *. Underthe pretence of receiving the ambassadors of Persia,the emperor returned to Constantinople, exchangedthe thoughts of war for those of devotion, and dis­appointed the public hope, by his absence and thechoice of his lieutenants. The blind partiality offraternal love might excuse the promotion of hisbrother Peter, who fled with equal disgrace from theBarbarians, from his own soldiers, and from the in­habitants of a Roman city. That city, if we maycredit the resemblance of name and character, wasthe famous Azimuntum, which had alone repelledthe tempest of Attila. The example of her warlikeyouth Was propagated to succeeding generations;and they obtained, from the first or the secondJustin, an honourable privilege, that their valourshould be always reserved for the defence of theirnative country. The brother of Maurice attempted


* Elf oiu)v®j ajif ^ auimer&rei irioi irarari;. Iliad, xii. 243.
This noble verse, which unites the spirit of a hero with the reason of a sage,may prove that'Homer was in every light superior to his age and country.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 237


the laws: and the misconduct of either party might chap.afford, under another name, a future subject for an'
action of theft. To this loose and voluntary com­pact, religious and civil rites were no longer essential;and, between persons of a similar rank, the apparentcommunity of life was allowed as sufficient evidenceof their nuptials. The dignity of marriage was re­stored by the Christians, who derived all spiritualgrace from the prayers of the faithful and the bene­diction of the priest or bishop. The origin, validity,and duties of the holy institution, were regulated bythe tradition of the synagogue, the precepts of thegospel, and the canons of general or provincial sy­nods; and the conscience of the Christians was awedby the decrees and censures of their ecclesiasticalrulers. Yet the magistrates of Justinian were notsubject to the authority of the church: the emperorconsulted the unbelieving civilians of antiquity, andthe choice of matrimonial laws in the Code and Pan­dects is directed by motives of justice, policy, andthe natural freedom of both sexes *.
Besides the agreement of the parties, the essence Liberty andof every rational contract, the Roman marriage re- divorce.quired the previous approbation of the parents. Afather might be forced by some recent laws to supplythe wants of a mature daughter; but even his in­sanity was not generally allowed to supersede thenecessity of his consent. The causes of the dissolu­tion of matrimony have varied among the Romans;but the most solemn sacrament, the confarreation it­self, might always be done away by rites of a contrarytendency. In the first ages, the father of a familymight sell his children, and his wife was reckoned in the


* The civil laws of marriage are exposed in the Institutes (1. i. tit. x), thePandects (1. xxiii, xxiv, xxv), and the Code (1. v), but as the title de ritu nuptiarumis yet imperfect, we are obliged to explore the fragments of Ulpian (tit. ix. p. 590,591), and the Collatio Legum Mosaicarum (tit , xvi. p. 790, 791), with the Notesof Pithieus and Shulting. They find, in the Commentary of Servius (on the 1stGeorgic and the 4th flSneid), two curious passages.







OCR Output








OF THE EOMAN EMPIRE. 211


three codes obtained an equal authority in the tri- chap.bunals; and any act which was not included in the XXXVILsacred deposit might be disregarded by the judge asspurious or obsolete.
Among savage nations, the want of letters is im- Forms ofperfectly supplied by the use of visible signs, which **Romanawaken attention, and perpetuate the remembranceof any public or private transaction. The juris­prudence of the first Romans exhibited the scenes ofa pantomime; the words were adapted to the ges­tures, and the slightest error or neglect- in the formsof proceeding was sufficient to annul the substanceof the fairest claim. The communion of the mar­riage-life was denoted by the necessary elements offire and water: and the divorced wife resigned thebunch of keys, by the delivery of which she had beeninvested with the government of the family. Themanumission of a son, or a slave, was performed byturning him round with a gentle blow on the cheek:a work was prohibited by the casting of a stone; pre­scription was interrupted by the breaking of a branch;the clenched fist was the symbol of a pledge or de­posit; the right hand was the gift of faith and con­fidence. The indenture of covenants was a brokenstraw; weights and scales were introduced into everypayment; and the heir who accepted a testament wassometimes obliged to snap his fingers, to cast awayhis garments, and to leap and dance with real oraffected transport. If a citizen pursued any stolengoods into a neighbour's house, he concealed hisnakedness with a linen towel, and hid his face witha mask or basin, lest he should encounter the eyes ofa virgin or a matron. In a civil action, the plaintifftouched the ear of his witness, seized his reluctantadversary by the neck, and implored, in solemnlamentation, the aid of his fellow-citizens. The twocompetitors grasped each other's hand as if they


p 2







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 5}


neral Vitiges, whose valour had been signalized in chap.the Illyrian war, was raised with unanimous applause XXXIV-on the bucklers of his companions. On the firstrumour, the abdicated monarch fled from the justiceof his country; but he was pursued by private re­venge. A Goth, whom he had injured in his love,overtook Theodatus on the Flaminian way, and re­gardless of his unmanly cries, slaughtered him, as helay prostrate on the ground, like a victim (says thehistorian) at the foot of the altar. The choice ofthe people is the best and purest title to reign overthem: yet such is the prejudice of every age, thatVitiges impatiently wished to return to Ravenna,where he might seize, with the reluctant hand of thedaughter of Amalasontha, some faint shadow of he­reditary right. A national council was immediatelyheld, and the new monarch reconciled the impatientspirit of the Barbarians to a measure of disgrace,which the misconduct of his predecessor renderedwise and indispensable. The Goths consented toretreat in the presence of a victorious enemy; to de­lay till the next spring the operations of offensivewar; to summon their scattered forces; to relinquishtheir distant possessions, and to trust even Rome itselfto the faith of its inhabitants. Leuderis, an agedwarrior, was left in the capital with four thousandsoldiers; a feeble garrison, which might have se­conded the zeal, though it was incapable of opposingthe wishes, of the Romans. But a momentary en­thusiasm of religion and patriotism was kindled intheir minds. They furiously exclaimed, that theapostolic throne should no longer be profaned bythe triumph or toleration of Arianism; that thetombs of the Caesars should no longer be trampledby the savages of the north; and, without reflecting,that Italy must sink into a province of Constan­tinople, they fondly hailed the restoration of a Roman


/"


E 2







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 439


prayers and promises; and detained the Roman am- chap.bassadors to be the witnesses of his great revenge. XL-They had nearly been the witnesses of his shame.The vigorous assaults of fifty-five days were encoun­tered by a faithful governor, a veteran garrison, anda desperate people; and the Saracens must haveraised the siege, if a domestic traitor had not pointedto the weakest part of the wall, a place which wasdecorated with the statues of a lion and a bull.The vow of Motassem was accomplished with un­relenting rigour; tired rather than satiated with de­struction, he returned to his new palace of Samara,in the neighbourhood of Bagdad, while the unfor­tunate Theophilus implored the tardy and doubtfulaid of his Western rival, the emperor of the Franks.Yet in the siege of Amorium above seventy thousandMoslems had perished; their loss had been revengedby the slaughter of thirty thousand Christians, andthe sufferings of an equal number of captives, whowere treated as the most atrocious criminals. Mu­tual necessity could sometimes extort the exchangeor ransom of prisoners; but in the national and reli­gious conflict of the two empires, peace was withoutconfidence, and war without mercy. Quarter wasseldom given in the field; those who escaped theedge of the sword were condemned to hopeless ser­vitude or exquisite torture. To a point of honourMotassem had sacrificed a flourishing city, two hun­dred thousand lives, and the property of millions.The same caliph descended from his horse, and dir­tied his robe, to relieve the distress of a decrepit oldman, who, with his laden ass, had stumbled into aditch. On which of these actions did he reflectwith the most pleasure when he was summoned bythe angel of death *? With Motassem the eighth of the


• For Theophilus, Motassem, and the Amorian war, see the continuator ofThaophanes, Genesius, Cedrenus, Elmacin, Abulpharagius, Abulfeda, andd'Herbelot, in locis.


r


r


F F 4







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 135


ments of rage and despair the Colchians would have chap.
sacrificed their country and religion to the gratifica- _
tion of revenge. But the authority and eloquence ofthe wiser few obtained a salutary pause: the victoryof the Phasis restored the terror of the Roman arms,and the emperor was solicitous to absolve his ownname from the imputation of so foul a murder. Ajudge of senatorial rank was commissioned to inquireinto the conduct and death of the king of the Lazi.He ascended a stately tribunal, encompassed by theministers of justice and punishment: in the presenceof both nations, this extraordinary cause was pleaded,according to the forms of civil jurisprudence, andsome satisfaction was granted to an injured people, bythe sentence and execution of the meaner criminals.
In peace, the king of Persia continually sought the Negotia-pretences of a rupture; but no sooner had he taken treatiesup arms, than he expressed his desire of a safe and ^u^n^nhonourable treaty. During the fiercest hostilities, and Ch°s-the two monarchs entertained a deceitful negotiation; a. d. 540and such was the superiority of Chosroes, that whilst—S61"he treated the Roman ministers with insolence andcontempt, he obtained the most unprecedented ho­nours for his own ambassadors at the Imperial court.The successor of Cyrus assumed the majesty of theEastern sun, and graciously permitted his youngerbrother Justinian to reign over the West, with thepale and reflected splendour of the moon. This gi­gantic style was supported by the pomp and eloquenceof Isdigune, one of the royal chamberlains. His wifeand daughters, with a train of eunuchs and camels,attended the march of the ambassador: two satrapswith golden diadems were numbered among his fol­lowers: he was guarded by five hundred horse, themost valiant of the Persians; and the Roman go­vernor of Dara wisely refused to admit more thantwenty of this martial and hostile caravan. When


k 4







OCR Output








344. THE DECLINE AND FALL


racter,


chap. and Theodosius. As a subject and a Christian, it
YYYIV .
, was the duty of Gregory to acquiesce in the esta­
blished government, but the joyful applause withwhich he salutes the fortune of the assassin has sul­lied with indelible disgrace the character of thesaint. The successor of the apostles might haveinculcated with decent firmness the guilt of blood,and the necessity of repentance: he is content tocelebrate the deliverance of the people and the fallof the oppressor; to rejoice that the piety and be­nignity of Phocas have been raised by Providence tothe Imperial throne; to pray that his hands may bestrengthened against all his enemies; and to expressa wish, that, after a long and triumphant reign, hemay be transferred from a temporal to an everlastingkingdom. I have already traced the steps of a re­volution so pleasing, in Gregory's opinion, both toheaven and earth; and Phocas does not appear lesshateful in the exercise than in the acquisition of
His dm- power. The pencil of an impartial historian has de-hneated the portrait of a monster; his diminutiveand deformed person, the closeness of his shaggy eye­brows, his red hair, his beardless chin, and his cheekdisfigured and discoloured by a formidable scar.Ignorant of letters, of laws, and even of arms, heindulged in the supreme rank a more ample pri­vilege of lust and drunkenness, and his brutal plea­sures were either injurious to his subjects or dis­graceful to himself. Without assuming the office ofa prince, he renounced the profession of a soldier;and the reign of Phocas afflicted Europe with igno­minious peace, and Asia with desolating war. Hissavage temper was inflamed by passion, hardened byfear, exasperated by resistance or reproach. Theflight of Theodosius to the Persian court had beenintercepted by a rapid pursuit, or a deceitful mes­sage: he was beheaded at Nice, and the last hours







OCR Output








506 THE DECLINE AND EALL


chap. humbly content to admire and copy the oracles ofXL1, antiquity, nor did the schools or pulpit produce anyrivals of the fame of Athanasius and Chrysostom.Want of In all the pursuits of active and speculative life,
emulation, the emulation of states and individuals is the mostpowerful spring of the efforts and improvements ofmankind. The cities of ancient Greece were castin the happy mixture of union and independence,which is repeated on a larger scale, but in a looserform, by the nations of modern Europe: the unionof language, religion, and manners, which rendersthem the spectators and judges of each other,s merit:the independence of government and interest, whichasserts their separate freedom, and excites them tostrive for pre-eminence in the career of glory. Thesituation of the Romans was less favourable; yet inthe early ages of the republic, which fixed the na­tional character, a similar emulation was kindledamong the states of Latium and Italy; and, in thearts and sciences, they aspired to equal or surpasstheir Grecian masters. The empire of the Caesarsundoubtedly checked the activity and progress of thehuman mind; its magnitude might indeed allowsome scope for domestic competition; but when itwas gradually reduced, at first to the East and at lastto Greece and Constantinople, the Byzantine subjectswere degraded to an abject and languid temper, thenatural effect of their solitary and insulated state.From the North they were oppressed by namelesstribes of Barbarians, to whom they scarcely impartedthe appellation of men. The language and religionof the more polished Arabs were an unsurmountablebar to all social intercourse. The conquerors of Eu­rope were their brethren in the Christian faith; butthe speech of the Franks or Latins was unknown,their manners were rude, and they were rarely con­nected, in peace or war, with the successors of He-







OCR Output








OF THE KOMAN EMPIRE. 167


Danube and the rebels of Africa: the first report of chap.his promotion revived the hopes of the Italians: and XXXVI-he was privately assured, that a crowd of Roman de­serters would abandon, on his approach, the standardof Totila. His second marriage with Malasontha,the grand-daughter of Theodoric, endeared Ger-manus to the Goths themselves y and they marchedwith reluctance against the father of a royal infant,the last offspring of the line of Amali. A splendidallowance was assigned by the emperor: the generalcontributed his private fortune; his two sons werepopular and active; and he surpassed, in the prompti­tude and success of his levies, the expectation ofmankind. He was permitted to select some squa­drons of Thracian cavalry: the veterans, as well asthe youth of Constantinople and Europe, engagedtheir voluntary service; and as far as the heart ofGermany, his fame and liberality attracted the aid ofthe Barbarians. The Romans advanced to Sardica;an army of Sclavonians fled before their march; butwithin two days of their final departure, the designsof Germanus were terminated by his malady anddeath. Yet the impulse which he had given to theItalian war still continued to act with energy andeffect. The maritime towns, Ancona, Crotona,Centumcelhe, resisted the assaults of Totila. Sicilywas reduced by the zeal of Artaban, and the Gothicnavy was defeated near the coast of the Hadriatic.The two fleets were almost equal, forty-seven to fiftygalleys: the victory was decided by the knowledgeand dexterity of the Greeks; but the ships were soclosely grappled, that only twelve of the Gothsescaped from this unfortunate conflict. They af­fected to depreciate an element in which they wereunskilled, but their own experience confirmed thetruth of a maxim, that the master of the sea willalways acquire the dominion of the land.


M 4







OCR Output








GIBBON'S
HISTORY


OF THE


DECLINE AND FALL


THE ROMAN EMPIRE:
FOR THE USE OF
iFamilteg ant) poung person^
REPRINTED FROM THE ORIGINAL TEXT,
WITH THE CAREFUL OMISSION OF ALL PASSAGES OF ANIRRELIGIOUS OR IMMORAL TENDENCY.


By THOMAS BOWDLER, Esg. F.R.S. S.A.
EDITOR OF THE FAMILY SHAKSPEARE.


O Hamlet! thou hast cleft my heart in twain.O, throw away the worser part of it;And live the purer with the other half.


IN FIVE VOLUMES.
VOL. IV.LONDON:
PRINTED FOR
LONGMAN, REES, OKME, BROWN, AND GREEN,
PATERNOSTER-ROW.


34-


•;■


1826.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMriRE. 331


mercenary friendship of the Roman prince had been chap.
purchased with costly and important gifts: the strong _
cities of Martyropolis and Dara were restored, andthe Persarmenians became the willing subjects of anempire, whose eastern limit was extended, beyondthe example of former times, as far as the banks ofthe Araxes and the neighbourhood of the Caspian *.
While the majesty of the Roman name was revived Pride, po-in the East, the prospect of Europe is less pleasing po£erof theand less glorious. By the departure of the Lom- |j!*?nofbards, and the ruin of the Gepidae, the balance of a. d. 570power was destroyed on the Danube; and the Avarsspread their permanent dominion from the foot ofthe Alps to the sea-coast of the Euxine. The reignof Baian is the brightest aera of their monarchy;their chagan, who occupied the rustic palace ofAttila, appears to have imitated his character andpolicy f; but as the same scenes were repeated in asmaller circle, a minute representation of the copywould be devoid of the greatness and novelty of theoriginal. The pride of the second Justin, of Ti­berius, and Maurice, was humbled by a proud Bar­barian, more prompt to inflict, than exposed tosuffer, the injuries of war; and as often as Asia wasthreatened by the Persian arms, Europe was op­pressed by the dangerous inroads, or costly friend­ship, of the Avars. When the Roman envoys ap­proached the presence of the chagan, they werecommanded to wait at the door of his tent, till, atthe end perhaps of ten or twelve days, he conde­scended to admit them. If the substance or thestyle of their message was offensive to his ear, he in-


* The whole series of the tyranny of Hormouz, the revolt of Bahrain, and theflight and restoration of Chosroes, is related by two contemporary Greets—moreconcisely by Evagrius (L vi. c. 16, 17, 18, 19)—and most diffusely by Theo.phylact Simocatta (1. iii. c. 6—18. 1. iv. c. 1—16. 1. v. c . 1—15); succeedingcompilers, Zonaras and Cedrenus, can only transcribe and abridge.
f A general idea of the pride and power of the chagan may be taken fromMenander (Excerpt. Legat. p. 117, &c.) and Theophylact (1. i. c. 3.1. vii. c. 15),whose eight books are much more honourable to the Avar than to the Romanprince.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. Maurice, with his wife and nine children, escaped tothe Asiatic shore; but the violence of the wind com­pelled him to land at the church of St. Autonomus*near Chalcedon, from whence he despatched Thec-dosius, his eldest son, to implore the gratitude andfriendship of the Persian monarch. For himself, herefused to fly: his body was tortured with sciaticpains, his mind was enfeebled by superstition; hepatiently awaited the event of the revolution, andaddressed a fervent and public prayer to the Al­mighty, that the punishment of his sins might beinflicted in this world rather than in a future life.After the abdication of Maurice, the two factionsdisputed the choice of an emperor; but the favouriteof the blues was rejected by the jealousy of their an­tagonists, and Germanus himself was hurried alongby the crowds, who rushed to the palace of Heb-domon, seven miles from the city, to adore the ma­jesty of Phocas the centurion. A modest wish ofresigning the purple to the rank and merit of Ger­manus was opposed by his resolution, more obstinate,and equally sincere: the senate and clergy obeyedhis summons, and as soon as the patriarch was assuredof his orthodox belief, he consecrated the successfulusurper in the church of St. John the Baptist. Onthe third day, amidst the acclamations of a thought­less people, Phocas made his public entry in a chariotdrawn by four white horses: the revolt of the troopswas rewarded by a lavish donative, and the new sove­reign, after visiting the palace, beheld from his thronethe games of the hippodrome. In a dispute of pre­cedency between the two factions, his partial judg­ment inclined in favour of the greens. "Remember"that Maurice is still alive," resounded from the


XXXIX
* The port of Eutropius, where Maurice and his children were murdered, udescribed by Gyllius (de Bosphoro Thracio, 1. iii. c. xi.) as one of the two bar.b.mrs of Chalcedon.







OCR Output








454 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. Basil himself only two could be found who mightXL" be safely intrusted with such dangerous powers; andthey justified his esteem by declining his confidence.But the serious and successful diligence of the em­peror established by degrees an equitable balance ofproperty and payment, of receipt and expenditure;a peculiar fund was appropriated to each service; anda public method secured the interest of the princeand the property of the people. After reforming theluxury, he assigned two patrimonial estates to supplythe decent plenty, of the Imperial table: the con­tributions of the subject were reserved for his de­fence; and the residue was employed in the embel­lishment of the capital and provinces. A taste forbuilding, however costly, may deserve some praiseand much excuse; from thence industry is fed, artis encouraged, and some object is attained of publicemolument or pleasure: the use of a road, an aque­duct, or a hospital, is obvious and solid; and thehundred churches that arose by the command of Basilwere consecrated to the devotion of the age. In thecharacter of a judge he was assiduous and impartial;desirous to save, but not afraid to strike: the op­pressors of the people were severely chastised; buthis personal foes, whom it might be unsafe to pardon,were condemned, after the loss of their eyes, to a lifeof solitude and repentance. The change of languageand manners demanded a revision of the obsoletejurisprudence of Justinian: the voluminous body ofhis institutes, pandects, code, and novels, was di­gested under forty titles, in the Greek idiom; andthe Basilics, which were improved and completed byhis son and grandson, must be referred to the ori­ginal genius of the founder of their race.state of I must now turn to the acquisitions in the south
ninth™ *e of Ita'v during the reign of the emperor Basil; buttury- it will first be necessary to take a short view of the







OCR Output








Vlll CONTENTS,


CHAP. XXXVI.


Rebellions of Africa.—Restoration of the Gothic Kingdom by
Totila.—Loss and Recovery of Rome.—Final Conquest of
Italy by Narses.—Extinction of the Ostrogoths.—Defeat of
the Franlcs and Alamanni.—Last Victory, Disgrace, and Death
of Belisarius.—Death and Character of Justinian.—Comets,
Earthquakes, and Plague.


A. D.
535—545. The troubles of Africa
543—558. Rebellion of the Moors
540 Revolt of the Goths
541—544. Victories of Totila, king of Italy-
Contrast of Greek vice and Gothic virtue
544—648. Second command of Belisarius in Italy
546 Rome besieged by the Goths
Attempt of Belisarius
Rome taken by the Goths
547 Recovered by Belisarius .
548 Final recall of Belisarius
549 Rome again taken by the Goths
549—551. Preparations of Justinian for the Gothic
552 Character and expedition of the eunuch Narses
Defeat and death of Totila .
Conquest of Rome by Narses
553 Defeat and death of Teias, the last king of the
Invasion of Italy by the Franks and Alamanni


554 Defeat of the Franks and Alamanni by Narses
554—568. Settlement of Italy .
559 Invasion of the Bulgarians
Last victory of Belisarius . -
561 His disgrace and death
565 Death and character of Justinian
531—539. Comets
Earthquakes
542 Plague—its origin and nature
542—594. Extent and duration .


Goths


141
144
147
148
149
151
154
155
157
160
161
164
166
168
170
173
174
176
178
180
182
184
185
188
190
193
194
197







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


Christian religion; and, during the long reign of chap.Simeon, the -most distinguished of their kings, as- XL-sumed a rank among civilized nations. This mon­arch gained several battles against the Greeks; helaid siege to Constantinople, and the emperor Ro-manus was contented to make peace on terms honour­able to the Bulgarians. But the power of that na­tion declined after the death of Simeon; and wasdestroyed in the beginning of the eleventh century,by the victories of the second Basil.
Stauracius, the son and heir of Nicephorus, escaped stauracius,from the battle in which his father was killed, buthe escaped with an incurable wound. Six monthsof an expiring life were sufficient to refute his in­decent though popular declaration, that he would inall things avoid the example of his father. On thenear prospect of his decease, Michael, the greatmaster of the palace, and the husband of his sisterProcopia, was named by every person of the palaceand city, except by his envious brother. Tenaciousof a sceptre now falling from his hand, he conspiredagainst the life of his successor, and cherished theidea of changing to a democracy the Roman empire.But these rash projects served only to inflame thezeal of the people, and to remove the scruples of thecandidate. Michael the First accepted the purple,and before he sunk into the grave, the son of Nice­phorus implored the clemency of his new sovereign.Had Michael in an age of peace ascended an here- Michael i.ditary throne, he might have reigned and died the A dUTu'father of his people; but his mild virtues were adapted October 2.to the shade of private life, nor was he capable ofcontrolling the ambition of his equals, or of resistingthe arms of the victorious Bulgarians. While his wantof ability and success exposed him to the contemptof the soldiers, the masculine spirit of his wife Pro­copia wakened their indignation. Even the Greeks


r







OCR Output








224 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. while he invoked spirits more congenial to his own,
XXXVII
'the Syrians, Greeks, and Africans, who flocked tothe Imperial court to study Latin as a foreign tongue,and jurisprudence as a lucrative profession. But theministers of Justinian were instructed to labour, notfor the curiosity of antiquarians, but for the imme­diate benefit of his subjects. It was their duty toselect the useful and practical parts of the Romanlaw; and the writings of the old republicans, how­ever curious or excellent, were no longer suited to thehew system of manners, religion, and government.Perhaps, if the preceptors and friends of Cicero werestill alive, our candour would acknowledge, that,except in-purity of language, their intrinsic meritwas excelled by the school of Papinian and Ulpian.The science of the laws is the slow growth of timeand experience, and the advantage both of methodand materials is naturally assumed by the most re­cent authors. The civilians of the reign of the An-tonines had studied the works of their predecessors:their philosophic spirit had mitigated the rigour ofantiquity, simplified the forms of proceeding, andemerged from the jealousy and prejudice of the rivalsects. The choice of the authorities that compose thePandects depended on the judgment of Tribonian:but the power of his sovereign could not absolve himfrom the sacred obligations of truth and fidelity. Asthe legislator of the empire, Justinian might repealthe acts of the Antonines, or condemn, as seditious,the free principles which were maintained by the lastof the Roman lawyers. But the existence of pastfacts is placed beyond the reach of despotism; andthe emperor was guilty of fraud and forgery, whenhe corrupted the integrity of their text, inscribedwith their venerable names the words and ideas ofhis servile reign, and suppressed, by the hand ofpower, the pure and authentic copies of their senti-







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 239


and virtue. The facility of separation would destroy chap.
• YYYVTT
all mutual confidence, and inflame every trifling dis-
pute: the minute difference between a husband anda stranger, which might so easily be removed, mightstill more easily be forgotten; and the matron, whoin five years can submit to the embraces of eight hus­bands, must cease to reverence the chastity of herown person.
Insufficient remedies followed with distant and Limitationstardy steps the rapid progress of the evil. The an- °f divorce/cient worship of the Romans afforded a peculiar god­dess to hear and reconcile the complaints of a marriedlife; but her epithet of Viriplaca, the appeaser ofhusbands, too clearly indicates on which side sub­mission and repentance were always expected. Everyact of a citizen was subject to the judgment of thecensors; the first who used the privilege of divorceassigned, at their command, the motives of his con­duct; and a senator was expelled for dismissing hisvirgin spouse without the knowledge or advice of hisfriends. Whenever an action was instituted for therecovery of a marriage-portion, the prcetor, as theguardian of equity, examined the cause and the cha­racters, and gently inclined the scale in favour of theguiltless and injured party. Augustus, who unitedthe powers of both magistrates, adopted their dif­ferent modes of repressing or chastising the licence ofdivorce*. The presence of seven Roman witnesseswas required for the validity of this solemn and de-'
liberate act: If any adequate provocation had beengiven by the husband, instead of the delay of twoyears, he was compelled to refund immediately, or inthe space of six months; but if he could arraign themanners of his wife, her guilt or levity was expiatedby the loss of the sixth or eighth part of her marriage-


* See the laws of Augustus and his successors, in Ileineccius, ad LegemPapiam Poppaeam, c . 19, in Opp. tom, vi. P. i. p. 323—333.







OCR Output








198 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. the universal corruption of the air, that the pestilence
YYYVt
1 which burst forth in the fifteenth year of Justinian
was not checked or alleviated by any difference of theseasons. In time, its first malignity was abated anddispersed; the disease alternately languished and re­vived; but it was not till the end of a calamitousperiod of fifty-two years, that mankind recovered theirhealth, or the air resumed its pure and salubriousquality. No facts have been preserved to sustain anaccount, or even a conjecture, of the numbers thatperished in this extraordinary mortality. I onlyfind, that during three months, five, and at lengthten thousand persons, died each day at Constanti­nople; that many cities of the East were left vacant,and that in several districts of Italy the harvest andthe vintage withered on the ground. The triplescourge of war, pestilence, and famine, afflicted thesubjects of Justinian; and his reign is disgraced by avisible decrease of the human species, which has neverbeen repaired in some of the fairest countries of theglobe.







OCR Output








OE THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 171


The haughty message of Narses was an offer, not of chap.
peace, but of pardon. The answer of the Gothic _
king declared his resolution, to die or conquer."What day," said the messenger, "will you fix for"the combat?" "The eighth day," replied Totila:but early the next morning he attempted to surprisea foe, suspicious of deceit, and prepared for battle.Ten thousand Heruli and Lombards, of approvedvalour and doubtful faith, were placed in the centre.Each of the wings was composed of eight thousandRomans; the right was guarded by the cavalry ofthe Huns, the left was covered by fifteen hundredchosen horse, destined, according to the emergenciesof action, to sustain the retreat of their friends, or toencompass the flank of the enemy. From his properstation at the head of the right wing, the eunuchrode along the line, expressing by his voice andcountenance the assurance of victory; exciting thesoldiers of the emperor to punish the guilt and mad­ness of a band of robbers; and exposing to their viewgold chains, collars, and bracelets, the rewards ofmilitary virtue. From the event of a single combat,they drew an omen of success; and they beheld withpleasure the courage of fifty archers, who maintaineda small eminence against three successive attacks ofthe Gothic cavalry. At the distance only of twobow-shots, the armies spent the morning in dreadfulsuspense, and the Romans tasted some necessary food,without unloosening the cuirass from their breast,or the bridle from their horses. Narses awaited thecharge; and it was delayed by Totila till he had re­ceived his last succours of two thousand Goths. Whilehe consumed the hours in fruitless treaty, the kingexhibited in a narrow space the strength and agilityof a warrior. His armour was enchased with gold;his purple banner floated with the wind: he cast his







OCR Output








H26 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. and hereditary sovereign. By a pathetic appeal toXXXIX- their humanity, he extorted that pity which is seldomrefused to the fallen fortunes of a king; and whilethey beheld the abject posture and squalid appearanceof the prisoner, his tears, his chains, and the marks ofignominious stripes, it was impossible to forget howrecently they had adored the divine splendour of hisdiadem and purple. But an angry murmur arose inthe assembly as soon as he presumed to vindicate hisconduct, and to applaud the victories of his reign.He defined the duties of a king, and the Persiannobles listened with a smile of contempt; they werefired with indignation when he dared to vilify thecharacter of Chosroes; and by the indiscreet offer ofresigning the sceptre to the second of his sons, hesubscribed his own condemnation, and sacrificed thelife of his innocent favourite. The mangled bodies ofthe boy and his mother were exposed to the people;the eyes of Hormouz were pierced with a hot needle;and the punishment of the father was succeededElevation by the coronation of his eldest son. Chosroes had
of his son •
chosroes. ascended the throne without guilt, and his piety stroveto alleviate the misery of the abdicated monarch;from the dungeon he removed Hormouz to an apart­ment of the palace, supplied with liberality the con­solations of sensual enjoyment, and patiently enduredthe furious sallies of his resentment and despair. Hemight despise the resentment of a blind and- un­popular tyrant, but the tiara was trembling on hishead, till he could subvert the power, or acquire thefriendship, of the great Bahram, who sternly deniedthe justice of a revolution, in which himself and hissoldiers, the true representatives of Persia, had neverbeen consulted. The offer of a general amnesty, andof the second rank in his kingdom, was answered byan epistle from Bahram, friend of the gods, conquerorof men, and enemy of tyrants, the satrap of satraps,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRF. 385


and the islands of Cyprus, Rhodes *, and the Cyclades, CHAP.were successively exposed to their rapacious visits. XL-
While the victorious Saracens were thus extendingtheir conquests in Asia, they were not less attentiveto Africa, which became the next object of their am­bition. In the year 638, they invaded Egypt, andin a short time made themselves masters of the opencountry ; but the siege of Alexandria was protractedduring fourteen months, and the vigorous defence ofthe garrison occasioned the loss of 23,000 Saracenswho perished in the siege. At length the Greeksembarked their dispirited and diminished numbers,and the standard of Mahomet was planted on thewalls of the capital of Egypt. This calamitous eventafflicted the declining health of Heraclius, and theemperor died of a dropsy in the year 641, about sevenweeks after the loss of Alexandria.
I should deceive the expectation of the reader, if The Alex.I passed in silence the fate of the Alexandrian ££j£library, as it is described bythelearned Abulpharagius.The spirit of Amrou was more curious and liberalthan that of his brethren; and, in his leisure hours,the Arabian chief was pleased with the conversationof John the last disciple of Ammonius, and who de­rived the surname of Philoponus, from his laboriousstudies of grammar and philosophy. Emboldenedby this familiar intercourse, Philoponus presumed tosolicit a gift inestimable in his opinion, contemptiblein that of the Barbarians—the royal library; whichalone, among the spoils of Alexandria, had not beenappropriated by the visit and the seal of the conqueror.


* The massy trunk and huge fragments of the Colossus of Rhodes (one of thewonders of the ancient world), after lying scattered during eight centuries, werecollected by the Saracens and sold to a Jewish merchant of Edessa. He is saidto have laden 900 camels with the weight of the brass metal.—Every passage andevery fact that relates to the isle, the cky, and the Colossus of Rhodes, are com­piled in the laborious treatise of Meursius; who has bestowed the same diligenceon the two larger islands of Crete and Cyprus. See, in the 3d vol. of his works,the Rhodus of Meursius. The Byzantine writers, Theophanes and Constantine,have ignorantly prolonged the term to 1360 years, and ridiculously divide theweight among 30,000 camels.
VOL. IV. C C







OCR Output








110 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. the Magi. The code of laws of the first Artaxerxesxxxv- was revived and published as the rule of the magi­


strates; but the assurance of speedy punishment wasthe best security of their virtue. Their behaviourwas inspected by a thousand eyes, their words wereoverheard by a thousand ears, the secret or publicagents of the throne; and the provinces, from theIndian to the Arabian confines, were enlightened bythe frequent visits of a sovereign, who affected toemulate his celestial brother in his rapid and salutarycareer. Education and agriculture he viewed as thetwo objects most deserving of his care. In everycity of Persia, orphans and the children of the poorwere maintained and instructed at the public ex­pense; the daughters were given in marriage to therichest citizens of their own rank, and the sons, ac­cording to their different talents, were employed inmechanic trades, or promoted to more honourableservice. The deserted villages were relieved by hisbounty; to the peasants and farmers who were foundincapable of cultivating their lands, he distributedcattle, seed, and the instruments of husbandry; andthe rare and inestimable treasure of fresh water wasparsimoniously managed, and skilfully dispersed overthe arid territory of Persia. The prosperity of thatkingdom was the effect and the evidence of his vir­tues: his vices are those of Oriental despotism; butin the long competition between Chosroes and Jus­tinian, the advantage both of merit and fortune isalmost always on the side of the Barbarian.Hisioveof To the praise of justice Nushirvan united the re­putation of knowledge; and the seven Greek phi­losophers, who visited his court, were invited anddeceived by the strange assurance, that a disciple ofPlato was seated on the Persian throne. Did theyexpect that a prince, strenuously exercised in thetoils of war and government, should agitate, with


learning.







OCR Output








JH THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. forded, in the place of bread, a coarse and less nu-
XXXV. . . . .
'L tritive food. The incessant rapine of their neigh­


bours compelled them to bury this treasure in theearth; but on the appearance of a stranger, it wasfreely imparted by a people, whose unfavourable cha­racter is qualified by the epithets of chaste, patient,and hospitable. As their supreme god, they adoredan invisible master of the thunder. The rivers andthe nymphs obtained their subordinate honours, andthe popular worship was expressed in vows and sa­crifice. The Sclavonians disdained to obey a despot,a prince, or even a magistrate; but their experiencewas too narrow, their passions too headstrong, tocompose a system of equal law or general defence.Some voluntary respect was yielded to age and va­lour; but each tribe or village existed as a separaterepublic, and all must be persuaded where none couldbe compelled. They fought on foot, almost naked,and, except an unwieldy shield, without any defensivearmour: their weapons of offence were a bow, aquiver of small poisoned arrows, and a long rope,which they dexterously threw from a distance, andentangled their enemy in a running noose. In thefield, the Sclavonian infantry was dangerous by theirspeed, agility, and hardiness : they swam, they dived,they remained under water, drawing their breaththrough a hollow cane; and a river or lake was oftenthe scene of their unsuspected ambuscade. Butthese were the achievements of spies or stragglers;the military art was unknown to the Sclavonians;their name was obscure, and their conquests wereinglorious.Their in- I have marked the faint and general outline of theSclavonians and Bulgarians, without attempting todefine their immediate boundaries, which were notaccurately known or respected by the Barbariansthemselves. Their importance was measured by







OCR Output








152 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. by his friends and enemies; and the Gothic war was


xxxvi.


imposed as a trust or an exile on the veteran com-in Italy, mander. A hero on the banks of the Euphrates, a—548. slave in the palace of Constantinople, he accepted,with reluctance, the painful task of supporting hisown reputation, and retrieving the faults of his suc­cessors. The sea was open to the Romans: the shipsand soldiers were assembled at Salona, near the palace• of Diocletian: he refreshed and reviewed his troopsat Pola in Istria, coasted round the head of the Ha-driatic, entered the port of Ravenna, and despatchedorders rather than supplies to the subordinate cities.His first public oration was addressed to the Gothsand Romans, in the name of the emperor, who hadsuspended for a while the conquest of Persia, andlistened to the prayers of his Italian subjects. Hegently touched on the causes and the authors of therecent disasters; striving to remove the fear of pu­nishment for the past, and the hope of impunity forthe future, and labouring, with more zeal than suc­cess, to unite all the members of his government ina firm league of affection and obedience. Justinian,his gracious master, was inclined to pardon and re­ward; and it was their interest, as well as duty, toreclaim their deluded brethren, who had been se­duced by the arts of the usurper. Not a man wastempted to desert the standard of the Gothic king.Belisarius soon discovered, that he was sent to remainthe idle and impotent spectator of the glory of ayoung Barbarian; and his own epistle exhibits agenuine and lively picture of the distress of a noblemind. "Most excellent prince, we are arrived in"Italy, destitute of all the necessary implements of"war, men, horses, arms, and money. In -nur late"circuit through the villages of Thrace and Ulyri-"cum, we have collected, with extreme difficulty,*' about four thousand recruits, naked, and unskilled







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 421


and to lead them in arms and in the purple to the chap,gates of Constantinople. But the Athenian people,


ever zealous in the cause of Irene, prevented herjustice or cruelty; and the five sons of Copronymuswere plunged in darkness and oblivion.
For himself, that emperor had chosen a Barbarian Constantinewife, the daughter of the khan of the Chozars: but, i^ne)ndin the marriage of his heir, he preferred an Athenian Aj ^„780'virgin, an orphan, seventeen years old, whose solefortune must have consisted in her personal accom­plishments. The nuptials of Leo and Irene werecelebrated with royal pomp; she soon acquired thelove and confidence of a feeble husband; and in histestament he declared the empress guardian of theRoman world, and of their son Constantine theSixth, who was no more than ten years of age.During his childhood, Irene most ably and assi­duously discharged, in her public administration,the duties of a faithful mother. But the emperor %attained the maturity of youth; the maternal yokebecame more grievous; and he listened to the fa­vourites of his own age, who shared his pleasures,and were ambitious of sharing his power. Theirreasons convinced him of his right, their praises ofhis ability, to reign; and he consented to rewardthe services of Irene by a perpetual banishment tothe isle of Sicily. But her vigilance and penetra­tion easily disconcerted their rash projects; a simi­lar, or more severe, punishment was retaliated onthemselves and their advisers; and Irene inflictedon fche ungrateful prince the chastisement of a boy.After this contest the mother and the son were atthe head of two domestic .factions; and instead ofmild influence and voluntary obedience, she held inchains a captive and an enemy. The empress wasoverthrown by the abuse of victory; the oath offidelity, which she exacted to herself alone, was pro-


ee3







OCR Output








450 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. birth; and their Roman patriotism rejected the'' tempting offers of the Persian and Arabian powers,- who recalled them to their native country. Buttheir splendour was insensibly clouded by time andpoverty; and the father of Basil was reduced to asmall farm, which he had cultivated with his ownhands: yet he scorned to disgrace the blood of theArsacides by a plebeian alliance: his wife, a widow ofAdrianople, was pleased to count among her ancestorsthe great Constantine; and their royal infant wasconnected by some dark affinity of lineage or countrywith the Macedonian Alexander. No sooner was heborn, than the cradle of Basil, his family, and hiscity, were swept away by an inundation of the Bul­garians; he was educated a slave in a foreign land;and in this severe discipline, he acquired the hardi­ness of body, and flexibility of mind, which pro­moted his future elevation. In the age of youth ormanhood, he shared the deliverance of the Romancaptives, who generously broke their fetters, marchedthrough Bulgaria to the shores of the Euxine, de­feated two armies of Barbarians, embarked in theships which had been stationed for their reception,and returned to Constantinople; from whence theywere distributed to their respective homes. But thefreedom of Basil was naked and destitute: his farmwas ruined by the calamities of war: after his father,sdeath, his manual labour or service could no longersupport a family of orphans; and he resolved to seeka more conspicuous theatre, in which every virtue andevery vice may lead to the paths of greatness. Thefirst night of his arrival at Constantinople, withoutfriends or money, the weary pilgrim slept on thesteps of the church of St. Diomede: he was fed bythe casual hospitality of a monk; and was intro­duced to the service of a cousin and namesake of theemperor Theophilus, who, though himself a dimi­







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 139


ruled above two thousand years the sequestered re- chap.
j YYYT7
gion of myrrh and frankincense. The conqueror ('
immediately announced the victory of the gospel, re­quested an orthodox patriarch, and so warmly pro­fessed his friendship to the Roman empire, that Jus­tinian was flattered by the hope of diverting the silktrade through the channel of Abyssinia, and of ex­citing the forces of Arabia against the Persian king.Nonnosus, descended from a family of ambassadors, Their ain-was named by the emperor to execute this important Justinian,commission. He wisely declined the shorter, butA,1)-533-more dangerous, road through the sandy deserts ofNubia; ascended the Nile, embarked on the RedSea, and safely landed at the African port of Adulis.From Adulis to the royal city of Axume is no morethan fifty leagues, in a direct line; but the windingpasses of the mountains detained the ambassadorfifteen days; and as he traversed the forests, hesaw, and vaguely computed, about five thousand wildelephants. The capital, according to his report, waslarge and populous; and the village of Axume isstill conspicuous by the regal coronations, by theruins of a Christian temple, and by sixteen or seven­teen obelisks inscribed with Grecian characters*.But the Negus gave audience in the open field,seated on a lofty chariot, which was drawn by fourelephants superbly caparisoned, and surrounded byhis nobles and musicians. He was clad in a linengarment and cap, holding in his hand two javelinsand a light shield; and, although his nakedness wasimperfectly covered, he displayed the Barbaric pompof gold chains, collars, and bracelets, richly adornedwith pearls and precious stones. The ambassador of
* Alvarez (in Ramusio, tom. i. fol. 219 vers. 221 vers.) saw the flourishingstate of Axume in the year 1520—luogo molto buono e grandc. It was ruined inthe same century by the Turkish invasion. No more than one hundred housesremain; but the memory of its past greatness is preserved by the regal coronation(Ludolph. Hist. et Comment. 1. it c. 11).


r







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. ages, from the establishment of equal freedom to the
'' end of the Punic wars, the city was never disturbed
by sedition, and rarely polluted with atrocious crimes.The failure of penal laws was more sensibly felt whenevery vice was inflamed by faction at home and do­minion abroad. In the time of Cicero, each privatecitizen enjoyed the privilege of anarchy; each mi­nister of the republic was exalted to the temptationsof regal power, and their virtues are entitled to thewarmest praise as the spontaneous fruits of nature orphilosophy. After a triennial indulgence of lust, ra­pine, and cruelty, Verres, the tyrant of Sicily, couldonly be sued for the pecuniary restitution of threehundred thousand pounds sterling; and such was thetemper of the laws, the judges, and perhaps the ac­cuser himself, that on refunding a thirteenth part ofhis plunder, Verres could retire to an easy and lux­urious exile *.Revival of The grst imperfect attempt to restore the propor-
capital pu-. r ■ i • 1 ill
nishments. tion of crimes and punishments, was made by thedictator Sylla, who, in the midst of his sanguinarytriumph, aspired to restrain the licence, rather thanto oppress the liberty, of the Romans. He gloriedin the arbitrary proscription of four thousand sevenhundred citizens-f. But in the character of a legis­lator, he respected the prejudices of the times; andinstead of pronouncing a sentence of death againstthe robber or assassin, the general who betrayed anarmy, or the magistrate who ruined a province, Syllawas content to aggravate the pecuniary damages bythe penalty of exile, or, in more constitutional lan­guage, by the interdiction of fire and water. TheCornelian, and afterwards the Pompeian and Julian


• Verres lived near thirty years after his trial, till the second triumvirate, whenhe was proscribed by the taste of Mark-Antony for the sake of his Corinthianplate (Plin. Hist. Natur. xxxiv. 3).
t Such is the number assigned by Valerius Maximus. Florus distinguishes2000 senators and knights, Appian more accurately computes 40 victims of thesenatorian rank, and HiOO of the equestrian census or order.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


stabbed their daggers with such violence and precipita- chap.tion into his eyes, as if they meant to execute a mortal XL-sentence. An ambiguous passage of Theophanes per­suaded the annalist of the church that death was theimmediate consequence of this barbarous execution.The catholics have been deceived or subdued by theauthority of Baronius; and protestant zeal has re­echoed the words of a cardinal, desirous, as it shouldseem, to favour the patroness of images.
Yet the blind son of Irene survived many years,oppressed by the court and forgotten by the world:the Isaurian dynasty was silently extinguished; andthe memory of Constantine was recalled only by thenuptials of his daughter Euphrosyne with the em-'peror Michael the Second; the crime of Irene wasleft five years unpunished; her reign was crownedwith external splendour; and if she could silence thevoice of conscience, she neither heard nor regardedthe reproaches of mankind.
While the popes established in Italy their freedomand dominion, the images, the first cause of their re­volt, were restored in the Eastern empire. Irene, assoon as she reigned in her own name and that of herson, undertook the ruin of the Iconoclasts. Nicewas chosen for a second synod; and the council pro­nounced, that the worship of images is agreeable toscripture and to reason. Of this second Nicene councilthe acts are still extant, a curious monument of super­stition and ignorance, of falsehood and folly. Yetthese acts are now revered by the catholics; and thesecond council of Nice is regarded as the seventh ofthe general councils.
In the East its decrees were approved, and rigor- Coronationously executed, by the despotism of Irene. But not- magn"e-withstanding the acceptance of the acts of the coun- ^ £;®"°-cil of Nice, the popes, during the reign of Irene, con- of it«iysummated the separation of Italy from the Greek Greeks.


e e 4







OCR Output








434 THE DECLINE ANfc> PALL


chap. ther. But the nuptials of Michael and EuphrosyneXL" were barren; and she was content with the title ofmother of Theophilus, his son and successor.The Arabs Under the reigns of Almamon at Bagdad, and ofisieofCrete, Michael the Stammerer at Constantinople, the islandsa.d.823, o-f Crete#and Sicily were subdued by the Arabs.The former of these conquests is disdained by theirown writers, who were ignorant of the fame of Jupi­ter and Minos; but it has not been overlooked by theByzantine historians, who now begin to cast a clearerlight on the affairs of their own times. A band ofAndalusian volunteers, discontented with the climateor government of Spain, explored the adventures ofthe sea; but as they sailed in no more than ten ortwenty galleys, their warfare must be branded withthe name of piracy. As the subjects and sectaries ofthe white party, they might lawfully invade the do­minions of the black Caliphs. A rebellious factionintroduced them into Alexandria; they cut in piecesboth friends and foes, pillaged the churches and themosques, sold above six thousand Christian captives,and maintained their station in the capital of Egypt,till they were oppressed by the forces and the presenceof Almamon himself. From the mouth of the Nileto the Hellespont, the islands and sea-coasts both ofthe Greeks and Moslems were exposed to their depre­dations; they saw, they envied, they tasted, the fer­tility of Crete, and soon returned with forty galleys toa more serious attack. The first habitation was theircamp, with a ditch and rampart, in the bay of Suda;but an apostate monk led them to a more desirableposition in the eastern parts; and the name of Can-dax, their fortress and colony, has been extended tothe whole island, under the corrupt and modern ap­


* The authors from whom I have learnt the most of the ancient and modem stateof Crete are Belon (Observations, &c. c. 3—20. Paris, 1555), Tournefort (Voyagedu Levant, tom. i. lettre ii. et iii.), and Meursius (Creta in his works, tom. iii.p. 343—544).







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 73


the innocent and helpless, history might exult in the chap.misery of the conquerors, who, in the midst of riches, XXXIV-were left destitute of bread or wine, reduced to drinkthe waters of the Po, and to feed on the flesh of dis­tempered cattle. The dysentery swept away ofce-third of their army; and the clamours of his sub­jects, who were impatient to pass the Alps, disposedTheodebert to listen with respect to the mild ex­hortations of Belisarius. The memory of this inglo­rious and destructive warfare was perpetuated on themedals of Gaul; and Justinian, without unsheathinghis sword, assumed the title of conqueror of theFranks. The Merovingian prince was offended bythe vanity of the emperor; he affected to pity thefallen fortunes of the Goths; and his insidious offerof a federal union was fortified by the promise ormenace of descending from the Alps at the head offive hundred thousand men. His plans of conquestwere boundless, and perhaps chimerical. The kingof Austrasia threatened to chastise Justinian, and tomarch to the gates of Constantinople: he was over­thrown and slain by a wild bull, as he hunted in theBelgic or German forests.
As soon as Belisarius was delivered from his foreign Belisariusand domestic enemies, he seriously applied his forces RwfnL.to the final reduction of Italy. In the siege of Osimo,the general was nearly transpierced with an arrow, ifthe mortal stroke had not been intercepted by one ofhis guards, who lost, in that pious office, the use ofhis hand. The Goths of Osimo, four thousand war­riors, with those of Faesulae and the Cottian Alps,were among the last who maintained their independ­ence; and their gallant resistance, which almost tiredthe patience, deserved the esteem, of the conqueror.His prudence refused to subscribe the safe-conductwhich they asked, to join their brethren of Ravenna:but they saved, by an honourable capitulation, one







OCR Output








122 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. Constantinople to the mouth of the Phasis, may be
, _ computed as a voyage of nine days, and a measure of
seven hundred miles. From the Iberian Caucasus,the most lofty and craggy mountains of Asia, .thatriver descends with such oblique vehemence, that ina short space it is traversed by one hundred andtwenty bridges. Nor does the stream become placidand navigable, till it reaches the town of Sarapana,five days' journey from the Cyrus, which flows fromthe same hills, but in a contrary direction, to theCaspian lake. The proximity of these rivers hassuggested the practice, or at least the idea, of waft­ing the precious merchandise of India down theOxus, over the Caspian, up the Cyrus, and with thecurrent of the Phasis into the Euxine and Mediter­ranean seas. As it successively collects the streamsof the plain of Colchos, the Phasis moves with di­minished speed, though accumulated weight. Atthe mouth it is sixty fathoms deep and half a leaguebroad, but a small woody island is interposed in themidst of the channel: the water, so soon as it hasdeposited an earthy or metallic sediment, floats onthe surface of the waves, and is no longer susceptibleof corruption. In a course of one hundred miles,forty of which are navigable for large vessels, thePhasis divides the celebrated region of Colchos, orMingrelia, which, on three sides, is fortified by theIberian and Armenian mountains, and whose mari­time coast extends about two hundred miles, fromthe neighbourhood of Trebizond to Dioscurias, andthe confines of Circassia. Both the soil and climateare relaxed by excessive moisture: twenty-eightrivers, besides the Phasis and his dependent streams,convey their waters to the sea; and the hollownessof the ground appears to indicate the subterraneouschannels between the Euxine and the Caspian. Inthe fields where wheat or barley is sown, the earth







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 155


vide for their subsistence, permit their flight, or com- chap.mand their immediate execution. Bessas replied, XXXVI-with unfeeling tranquillity, that it was impossible tofeed, unsafe to dismiss, and unlawful to kill, the sub­jects of the emperor. Yet the example of a privatecitizen might have shown his countrymen that a ty­rant cannot withhold the privilege of death. Piercedby the cries of five children, who vainly called ontheir father for bread, he ordered them to follow hissteps, advanced with calm and silent despair to oneof the bridges of the Tyber, and, covering his face,threw himself headlong into the stream, in the pre­sence of his family and the Roman people. To therich and pusillanimous, Bessas sold the permission ofdeparture; but the greatest part of the fugitives ex­pired on the public highways, or were intercepted bythe flying parties of Barbarians. In the meanwhile,the artful governor soothed the discontent, and re­vived the hopes, of the Romans, by the vague re­ports of the fleets and armies which were hastening totheir relief from the extremities of the East. Theyderived more rational comfort from the assurancethat Belisarius had landed at the port; and, withoutnumbering his forces, they firmly relied on the hu­manity, the courage, and the skill of their great de­liverer.
The foresight of Totila had raised obstacles worthy Attempt ofof such an antagonist. Ninety furlongs below the e sanus'city, in the narrowest part of the river, he joined thetwo banks by strong and solid timbers in the form ofa bridge; on which he erected two lofty towers,manned by the bravest of his Goths, and profuselystored with missile weapons and engines of offence.The approach of the bridge and towers was coveredby a strong and massy chain of iron; and the chain,at either end, on the opposite sides of the Tyber, wasdefended by a numerous and chosen detachment of







OCR Output








494 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. appeared to swell the pomp and magnitude of'their host: and the horses of the enemy were oftendisordered by the uncouth figure and odious smellof the camels of the East. Invincible by their pa­tience of thirst and heat, their spirits were frozen bya winter,s cold, and the consciousness of their pro­pensity to sleep exacted the most rigorous precau­tions against the surprises of the night. Their orderof battle was a long square of two deep and solidlines; the first of archers, the second of cavalry.In their engagements by sea and land, they sustainedwith patient firmness the fury of the attack, and sel­dom advanced to the charge till they could discernand oppress the lassitude of their foes. But if theywere repulsed and broken, they knew not how torally or renew the combat; and their dismay washeightened by the superstitious prejudice, that Godhad declared himself on the side of their enemies.The decline and fall of the caliphs countenanced thisfearful opinion; nor were there wanting, among theMahometans and Christians, some obscure prophecieswhich prognosticated their alternate defeats. Theunity of the Arabian empire was dissolved, but theindependent fragments were equal to populous andpowerful kingdoms; and in their naval and militaryarmaments, an emir of Aleppo or Tunis might com­mand no despicable fund of skill and industry andtreasure. In their transactions of peace and warwith the Saracens, the princes of Constantinople toooften felt that these Barbarians had nothing bar­barous in their discipline; and that if they weredestitute of original genius, they had been endowedwith a quick spirit of curiosity and imitation. Themodel was indeed more perfect than the copy: theirships, and engines, and fortifications, were of a lessskilful construction: and they confess, without shame,• that the same God who has given a tongue to the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 99


"it is because we wander without any fixed habita- c:hap."tions, in the exercise of war and hunting. Are we xxxv-"strong? we advance and conquer: are we feeble?"we retire and are concealed. Should the Turks"confine themselves within the walls of cities, the"loss of a battle would be the destruction of their"empire. The Bonzes preach only patience, hu-"mility, and the renunciation of the world. Such,"O king! is not the religion of heroes." Theyentertained with less reluctance the doctrines ofZoroaster; but the greatest part of the nation ac­quiesced, without inquiry, in the opinions, or ratherin the practice, of their ancestors. The honours ofsacrifice were reserved for the supreme deity; theyacknowledged, in rude hymns, their obligations tothe air, the fire, the water, and the earth; and theirpriests derived some profit from the art of divination.Their unwritten laws were rigorous and impartial:theft was punished by a tenfold restitution : adultery,treason, and murder, with death: and no chastise­ment could be inflicted too severe for the rare andinexpiable guilt of cowardice. As the subject na­tions marched under the standard of the Turks, theircavalry, both men and horses, were proudly computedby millions; one of their effective armies consistedof four hundred thousand soldiers, and in less thanfifty years they were connected in peace and warwith the Romans, the Persians, and the Chinese.In their northern limits, some vestige may be disco­vered of the form and situation of Kamtchatka, of apeople of hunters and fishermen, whose sledges weredrawn by dogs, and whose habitations were buriedin the earth. The Turks were ignorant of astro­nomy; but the observation taken by some learnedChinese, with a gnomon of eight feet, fixes the royalcamp in the latitude of forty-nine degrees, and markstheir extreme progress within three, or at least ten


h 2







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 387


stance, the conflagration would have speedily expired chap.in the deficiency of materials. I shall not recapitulate XL"the disasters of the Alexandrian library, or the invo­luntary flame that was kindled by Caesar in his owndefence. But if we gradually descend from the ageof the Antonines to that of Theodosius, we shall learnfrom a chain of contemporary witnesses, that theroyal palace and the temple of Serapis no longer con­tained the four, or the seven hundred thousand volumes,which had been assembled by the curiosity and mag­nificence of the Ptolemies.
The emperor Heraclius - had punished a tyrant,and ascended his throne; and the memory of hisreign is perpetuated by the transient conquest, andirreparable loss, of the eastern provinces. After thedeath of Edocia, his first wife, he disobeyed the pa­triarch, and violated the laws by his second marriagewith his niece Martina. But the opinion of an illegi­timate birth is sufficient to distract the choice, andloosen the obedience of the people: the ambition ofMartina was quickened by maternal love, and per­haps by the envy of a stepmother; and the aged hus­band was too feeble to withstand the arts of con­jugal allurements. Constantine, his eldest son, en­joyed in a mature age the title of Augustus, but theweakness of his constitution required a colleagueand a guardian, and he yielded, with secret reluct- a. d. C38,ance, to the partition of the empire *. The senate July 4tIuwas summoned to the palace to ratify or attestthe association of Heracleonas, the son of Martina:the imposition of the diadem was consecrated by theprayer and blessing of the patriarch; the senatorsand patricians adored the majesty of the great em­peror and the partners of his reign; and as soon as
• Mr. Gibbon has in general abundantly supplied his history with references tothe authors from whose works his information is derived. But in the series ofGreek empe/ors, from Heraclius to Isaac Angelus, there are many circumstancesin respect to which no authority is quoted. I mention this circumstance, that Imay not be suspected of having carelessly omitted the references. Edit.


cc2







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 271


of the judge. The business of life is multiplied by chap.
the extent of commerce and dominion, and the re-'
sidence of the parties in the distant provinces of anempire is productive of doubt, delay, and inevitableappeals from the local to the supreme magistrate.Justinian, the Greek emperor of Constantinople andthe East, was the legal successor of the Latian shep­herd who had planted a colony on the banks of theTyber. In a period of thirteen hundred years, thelaws had reluctantly followed the changes of govern­ment and manners; and the laudable desire of con­ciliating ancient names with recent institutions de­stroyed the harmony, and swelled the magnitude, ofthe obscure and irregular system. The laws whichexcuse on any occasions the ignorance of their sub­jects confess their own imperfections; the civil juris­prudence, as it was abridged by Justinian, still con­tinued a mysterious science and a profitable trade,and the innate perplexity of the study was involvedin tenfold darkness by the private industry of thepractitioners. The expense of the pursuit sometimesexceeded the value of the prize, and the fairest rightswere abandoned by the poverty or prudence of theclaimants. Such costly justice might tend to abatethe spirit of litigation, but the unequal pressureserves only to increase the influence of the rich, andto aggravate the misery of the poor. By these dila­tory and expensive proceedings, the wealthy pleaderobtains a more certain advantage than he could hopefrom the accidental corruption of his judge. Theexperience of an abuse, from which our own age andcountry are not perfectly exempt, may sometimesprovoke a generous indignation, and extort the hastywish of exchanging our elaborate jurisprudence forthe simple and summary decrees of a Turkish cadhi.Our calmer reflection will suggest, that such forms







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 129


the south of the Phasis. Instead of being protected chap.by the valour, Colchos was insulted by the licentious- xxxv-ness, of foreign mercenaries; the benefits of com­merce were converted into base and vexatious mo­nopoly; and Gubazes, the native prince, was reducedto a pageant of royalty, by the superior influence ofthe officers of Justinian. Disappointed in their ex­pectations of Christian virtue, the indignant Lazi re­posed some confidence in the justice of an unbeliever.After a private assurance that their ambassador shouldnot be delivered to the Romans, they publicly solicitedthe friendship and aid of Chosroes. The sagaciousmonarch instantly discerned the use and importanceof Colchos; and meditated a plan of conquest, whichwas renewed at the end of a thousand years by ShahAbbas, the wisest and most powerful of his suc­cessors*. His ambition was fired by the hope oflaunching a Persian navy from the Phasis, of com­manding the trade and navigation of the Euxine sea,of desolating the coast of Pontus and Bithynia, ofdistressing, perhaps of attacking, Constantinople, andof persuading the Barbarians of Europe to second hisarms and counsels against the common enemy of man­kind. Under the pretence of a Scythian war, hesilently led his troops to the frontiers of Iberia; theColchian guides were prepared to conduct themthrough the woods and along the precipices of mountCaucasus; and a narrow path was laboriously formedinto a safe and spacious highway, for the march ofcavalry, and even of elephants, Gubazes laid hisperson and diadem at the feet of the king of Persia;his Colchians imitated the submission of their prince;and after the walls of Petra had been shaken, the
• See the amusing letters of Pietro della Valle, the Roman traveller (Viaggi,tom. ii. 207- 209. 213. 215. 206. 286. 300. tom. iii. p. 54. 127). In the years1618, 1619, and 1620, he conversed with Shah Abbas, and strongly encourageda design which might have united Persia and Europe against their common enemy,the Turk.
VOL. IV. K







OCR Output








76 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. fleet, laden with provisions, sailed as a welcome guest*' "into the deepest recess of the harbour: the gates were


Subdues the opened to the fancied king of Italy; and Belisarius,kingdom of without meeting an enemy, triumphantly marchedA^D 539 through the streets of an impregnable city. The'December. Romans were astonished by their success; the mul­titude of tall and robust Barbarians were confoundedby the image of their own patience; and the mascu­line females, spitting in the faces of their sons andhusbands, most bitterly reproached them for betray­ing their dominion and freedom to these pygmies ofthe South, contemptible in their numbers, diminutivein their stature. Before the Goths could recover fromthe first surprise, and claim the accomplishment oftheir doubtful hopes, the victor established his powerin Ravenna, beyond the danger of repentance andCaptivity of revolt. Vitiges, who perhaps had attempted to escape,was honourably guarded in his palace; the flower ofthe Gothic youth was selected for the service of theemperor; the remainder of the people was dismissedto their peaceful habitations in the southern pro­vinces; and a colony of Italians was invited to re­plenish the depopulated city. The submission of thecapital was imitated in the towns and villages ofItaly, which had not been subdued, or even visited,by the Romans; and the independent Goths, whoremained in arms at Pavia and Verona, were am­bitious only to become the subjects of Belisarius.But his inflexible loyalty rejected, except as the sub­stitute of Justinian, their oaths of allegiance; and hewas not offended by the reproach of their deputies,that he rather chose to be a slave than a king.^tur"fand After the second victory of Belisarius, envy againBelisarius. whispered, Justinian listened, and the hero was re­called. "The remnant of the Gothic war was no"longer worthy of his presence: a gracious sovereign







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 14o


a conqueror; and experience had shown, that neither chap.
oaths nor obligations could secure the fidelity of their'
attachment. The victory of mount Auras had awedthem into momentary submission; but if they re­spected the character of Solomon, they hated anddespised the pride and luxury of his two nephews,Cyrus and Sergius, on whom their uncle had impru­dently bestowed the provincial governments of Tri­poli and Pentapolis. A Moorish tribe encamped underthe walls of Leptis, to renew their alliance, and re­ceive from the governor the customary gifts. Four­score of their deputies were introduced as friendsinto the city; but on the dark suspicion of a con­spiracy, they were massacred at the table of Sergius;and the clamour of arms and revenge was re-echoedthrough the valleys of mount Atlas, from both theSyrtes to the Atlantic ocean. A personal injury,the unjust execution or murder of his brother, ren­dered Antalus the enemy of the Romans. The defeatof the Vandals had formerly signalized his valour;the rudiments of justice and prudence were still moreconspicuous in a Moor; and while he laid Adrume-tum in ashes, he calmly admonished the emperor thatthe peace of Africa might be secured by the recal ofSolomon and his unworthy nephews. The exarch ledforth his troops from Carthage: but, at the distanceof six days'journey, in the neighbourhood of Tebeste,he was astonished by the superior numbers and fierceaspect of the Barbarians. He proposed a treaty; so­licited a reconciliation; and offered to bind himselfby the most solemn oaths. "By what oaths can he"bind himself?" interrupted the indignant Moors."Will he swear by the gospels, the divine books of"the Christians? It was on those books that the faith"of his nephew Sergius was pledged to eighty of our"innocent and unfortunate brethren. Before we trust"them a second time, let us try their efficacy in the
VOL. IV. L







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 35


ascended the hills, the naked and disorderly crowd chap.was dazzled by glittering arms and regular evo- .lutions; and the menace of their female prophetswas repeatedly fulfilled, that the Moors should bediscomfited by a beardless antagonist. The victo­rious eunuch advanced thirteen days, journey fromCarthage, to besiege mount Aurasius, the citadel,and at the same time the garden of Numidia. Thatrange of hills, a branch of the great Atlas, contains,within a circumference of one hundred and twentymiles, a rare variety of soil and climate; the inter­mediate valleys and elevated plains abound with richpastures, perpetual streams, and fruits of a delicioustaste and uncommon magnitude. This fair solitudeis decorated with the ruins of Lambesa, a Romancity, once the seat of a legion, and the residence offorty thousand inhabitants. The Ionic temple ofuEsculapius is encompassed with Moorish huts; andthe cattle now graze in the midst of an amphitheatre,under the shade of Corinthian columns. A sharpperpendicular rock rises above the level of the moun­tain, where the African princes deposited their wivesand treasure; and a proverb is familiar to the Arabs,that the man may eat fire who dares to attack thecraggy clifts and inhospitable natives of mount Au­rasius. This hardy enterprise was twice attemptedby the eunuch Solomon: from the first, he retreatedwith some disgrace; and in the second, his patienceand provisions were almost exhausted; and he mustagain have retired, if he had not yielded to the im­petuous courage of his troops, who audaciously scaled,to the astonishment of the Moors, the mountain, thehostile camp, and the summit of the Germinian rock.A citadel was erected to secure this important con­quest, and to remind the Barbarians of their defeat:and as Solomon pursued his march to the West, thelong-lost province of Mauritanian Sitifi was again


r


u 2 I







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 215


mediate space, it is evident, that such studies may be chap.pursued, aud such works may be performed, with a'
common share of judgment, experience, and industry.The genius of Cicero and Virgil was more sensiblyfelt, as each revolving age had been found incapableof producing a similar or a second: but the mosteminent teachers of the law were assured of leavingdisciples equal or superior to themselves in merit andreputation.
The jurisprudence which had been grossly adapted T^" pW-to the wants of the first Komans was polished andimproved in the seventh century of the city, by thealliance of Grecian philosophy. The Scaevolas hadbeen taught by use and experience; but Servius Sul-picius was the first civilian who established his art ona certain and general theory. For the discernmentof truth and falsehood, he applied, as an infalliblerule, the logic of Aristotle and the stoics, reducedparticular cases to general principles, and diffusedover the shapeless mass the light of order and elo­quence. Cicero, his contemporary and friend, de­clined the reputation of a professed lawyer; but thejurisprudence of his country was adorned by his in­comparable genius, which converts into gold everyobject that it touches. After the example of Plato,he composed a republic; and, for the use of his re­public, a treatise of laws; in which he labours todeduce, from a celestial origin, the wisdom and jus­tice of the Roman constitution. The whole universe,according to his sublime hypothesis, forms one im­mense commonwealth: gods and men, who partici­pate of the same essence, are members of the samecommunity: reason prescribes the law of nature andnations; and all positive institutions, however mo­dified by accident or custom, are drawn from the ruleof right, which the Deity has inscribed on everyvirtuous mind. From these philosophical mysteries,'


p4







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 417


and the forces of the invaders were destroyed. An chap.Exarch was still permitted to reside at Ravenna,'
but he was rather a captive than a ruler; and althoughthe government of Rome and Italy continued to beexercised in the name of the successors of Constan-tine, their authority from this period was rather no­minal than real. Leo made no farther attempts tore-establish his power in Italy. He expired peace­ably, in the palace of Constantinople, after a reign oftwenty-four years; and the purple which he had ac­quired was transmitted by the right of inheritance tothe third generation.
Constantine the Fifth, surnamed Copronymus, the Constan-son and successor of Leo, during a long reign of j^f^thirty-four years, attacked with less temperate zeal A-D- 741-the images or idols of the church. A synod was heldat Blacharnae, a suburb of Constantinople, which wascomposed of three hundred and thirty-eight bishops,who, after serious deliberation, subscribed an unani­mous decree, that image worship is a corruption ofChristianity, and a renewal of Paganism; and thatall such monuments of idolatry should be broken orerased. The East, after many disturbances, obeyedwith reluctance, and the images were removed; butthey were fondly cherished and vigorously defendedby the independent zeal of the Italians. A newenemy now invaded Romagna. Liutprand, king ofthe Lombards, declared himself the champion of theimages; and the Catholics of the Exarchate yieldedwithout reluctance, and admitted him into Ravenna.The city was soon afterwards recovered by the forcesof the Venetians; but Astolphus, the successor ofLiutprand, declared himself the equal enemy of theemperor and the pope, and either by force or trea­chery made himself master of Ravenna, and this final Ravennaconquest extinguished the series of the Exarchs, who Lombards.
VOL. IV. E E







OCR Output








OV THE HOMAN EMPIRE. 453


XL.


if not the national spirit, at least the order and nia- chap.jesty of the Roman empire. His application was in­defatigable, his temper cool, his understanding vi­gorous and decisive; and in his practice he observedthat rare and salutary moderation which pursues eachvirtue at an equal distance between the opposite vices.His military service had been confined to the palace;nor was the emperor endowed with the spirit or ta­lents of a warrior. Yet under his reign, the Romanarms were again formidable to the Barbarians. Assoon as he had formed a new army by discipline andexercise, he appeared in person on the banks of theEuphrates, curbed the pride of the Saracens, andsuppressed the dangerous though just revolt of theManichaaans. His indignation against a rebel, whohad long eluded his pursuit, provoked him to wishand to pray that, by the grace of God, he mightdrive three arrows into the head of Chrysochir. Thatodious head, which had been obtained by treason ra­ther than by valour, was suspended from a tree, andthrice exposed to the dexterity of the Imperial archer—a base revenge against the dead, more worthy of thetimes than of the character of Basil; but his prin­cipal merit was in the civil administration of thefinances and of the laws. To replenish an exhaustedtreasury, it was proposed to resume the lavish andill-placed gifts of his predecessor: his prudence abatedone moiety of the restitution; and a sum of twelvehundred thousand pounds was instantly procured, toanswer the most pressing demands, and to allow somespace for the mature operations of economy. Amongthe various schemes for the improvement of the re­venue, a new mode was suggested of capitation ortribute, which would have too much depended on thearbitrary discretion of the assessors. A sufficient listof honest and able agents was instantly produced bythe minister; but on the more careful scrutiny of


r


G G 3







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 227


It is the first care of a reformer to prevent any chap.future reformation. To maintain the text of the xxxvn-Pandects, the Institutes, and the Code, the use of Legal in-ciphers and abbreviations was rigorously proscribed ; justiiJan."and as Justinian recollected that the perpetual edicthad been buried under the weight of commentators,he denounced the punishment of forgery against therash civilians who should presume to interpret orpervert the will of their sovereign. The scholars ofAccursius, of Bartolus, of Cujacius, should blush fortheir accumulated guilt, unless they dare to disputehis right of binding the authority of his successors,and the native freedom of the mind. But the em­peror was unable to fix his own inconstancy; and,while he boasted of renewing the exchange of Dio-mede, of transmuting brass into gold*, he discoveredthe necessity of purifying his gold from the mixtureof baser alloy. Six years had not elapsed from the Secondpublication of the Code before he condemned the the Code,imperfect attempt, by a new and more accurate edi- N0v?'i6?4'tion of the same work; which he enriched with twohundred of his own laws, and fifty decisions of thedarkest and most intricate points of jurisprudence.Every year, or, according to Procopius, each day, ofhis long reign, was marked by some legal innovation.Many of his acts were rescinded by himself; manywere rejected by.his successors, many have beenobliterated by time; but the number of sixteenedicts, and one hundred and sixty-eight novels f, The Novels,has been admitted into the authentic body of the '!s65.civil jurisprudence. In the opinion of a philosopher


• Xpue-ia .^a'huiwi, ixaro.ufti iwnt&iuiv, apud Horaerum pattem omnia virtutis(1st Prafat. ad Pandect.). A line of Milton or Tasso would surprise us in anact of parliament. Qua; omnia obtinere sancimus in omne aevum. Of the firstCode, he says (2d Prafat.) in a;temum valiturum. Man and for ever!
f Novella: is a classic adjective, but a barbarous substantive (Ludewig, p. 245).Justinian never collected them himself: the nine collations, the legal standard ofmodern tribunals, consist of ninety-eight Novels; but the number was increasedby the diligence of Julian, Haloander, and Contius (Ludewig. p. 249. 258.Alcman. Not. in Anecdot. p. 98).


q2







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 149


portant conquest of Ravenna, Florence and Rome, chap.and marched through the heart of Italy, to form the XXXVI-siege, or rather blockade, of Naples. The Romanchiefs, imprisoned in their respective cities, and ac­cusing each other of the common disgrace, did notpresume to disturb his enterprise. But the emperor,alarmed by the distress and danger of his Italianconquests, despatched to the relief of Naples a fleetof galleys and a body of Thracian and Armenian sol­diers. They landed in Sicily, which yielded its co­pious stores of provisions; but the delays of the newcommander, an unwarlike magistrate, protracted thesufferings of the besieged; and the succours, whichhe dropt with a timid and tardy hand, were succes­sively intercepted by the armed vessels stationed byTotila in the bay of Naples. The principal officer ofthe Romans was dragged, with a rope round his neck,to the foot of the wall, from whence, with a tremblingvoice, he exhorted the citizens to implore, like him­self, the mercy of the conqueror. They requested atruce, with a promise of surrendering the city, if noeffectual relief should appear at the end of thirtydays. Instead of one month, the audacious Barbariangranted them three, in the just confidence that faminewould anticipate the term of their capitulation. Afterthe reduction of Naples and Cumae, the provinces ofLucania, Apulia, and Calabria, submitted to the kingof the Goths. Totila led his army to the gates ofRome, pitched his camp at Tibur, or Tivoli, withintwenty miles of the capital, and calmly exhorted thesenate and people to compare the tyranny of theGreeks with the blessings of the Gothic reign.
The rapid success of Totila maybe partly ascribed Contrast ofto the revolution which three years, experience had virtue?1produced in the sentiments of the Italians. At thecommand, or at least in the name, of a Catholic em­peror, the pope, their spiritual father, had been torn


l 3







OCR Output








208 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Constitu.tions of the


chap. cases; and the temptations of injustice were removed
VY WIT
'by the Cornelian law, which compelled the praetor of
the year to adhere to the letter and spirit of his firstproclamation. It was reserved for the curiosity andlearning of Hadrian to accomplish the design whichhad been conceived by the genius of Ceesar; and thepraetorship of Salvius Julian, an eminent lawyer, was
The per- immortalized by the composition of the perpetual
petual edict. . .' *.
edict. This well-digested code was ratified by theemperor and the senate; the long divorce of law andequity was at length reconciled; and, instead of thetwelve tables, the perpetual edict was fixed as theinvariable standard of civil jurisprudence.
From Augustus to Trajan, the modest Caesarsemperors, were content to promulgate their edicts in the va­rious characters of a Roman magistrate; and, in thedecrees of the senate, the epistles and orations of theprince were respectfully inserted. Hadrian appearsto have been the first who assumed, without disguise,the plenitude of legislative power. And this in­novation, so agreeable to his active mind, was coun­tenanced by the patience of the times, and his longabsence from the seat of government. The samepolicy was embraced by succeeding monarchs, and,according to the harsh metaphor of Tertullian, "the"gloomy and intricate forest of ancient laws was"cleared away by the axe of royal mandates and"constitutions." During four centuries, from Ha­drian to Justinian, the public and private juris­prudence was moulded by the will of the sovereign;and few institutions, either human or divine, werepermitted to stand on their former basis. The originof Imperial legislation was concealed by the darknessof ages and the- terrors of armed despotism; and adouble fiction was propagated by the servility, or per­haps the ignorance, of the civilians who basked in thesunshine of the Roman and Byzantine courts. I. To







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 63


gates was committed; the various precautions, of chap.
patroles, watch-words, lights, and music, were re- _
peatedly employed to discover whatever passed onthe ramparts; out-guards were posted beyond theditch, and the trusty vigilance of dogs supplied theniore doubtful fidelity of mankind. A letter wasintercepted, which assured the king of the Goths,that the Asinarian gate, adjoining to the Lateranchurch, should be secretly opened to his troops. On ExUe ofthe proof or suspicion of treason, several senators venus/"were banished; and the pope Sylverius was summoned No^n7'to attend the representative of his sovereign, at hishead-quarters in the Pincian palace. The ecclesi­astics, who followed their bishops, were detained inthe first or second apartment, and he alone was ad­mitted to the presence of Belisarius. The conquerorof Rome and Carthage was modestly seated at thefeet of Antonina, who reclined on a stately couch:the general was silent, but the voice of reproach andmenace issued from the mouth of his imperious wife.Accused by credible witnesses, and the evidence ofhis own subscription, the successor of St. Peter wasdespoiled of his pontifical ornaments, clad in themean habit of a monk, and embarked, without delay,for a distant exile in the East.
The epistle of Belisarius to the emperor announced Deliverancehis victory, his danger, and his resolution. "Accord-"ing to your commands, we have entered the do-"minions of the Goths, and reduced to your obe-"dience Sicily, Campania, and the city of Rome; but"the loss of these conquests will be more disgraceful"than their acquisition was glorious. Hitherto we"" have successfully fought against the multitude of"the Barbarians, but their multitudes may finally"prevail. Victory is the gift of Providence, but the"reputation of kings and generals depends on the"success or the failure of their designs. Permit me







OCR Output








294 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. gret of succeeding times. Constantinople believedxxxviii. tjiat tjie emperor had discovered a treasure: but hisgenuine treasure consisted in the practice of liberaleconomy, and the contempt of all vain and super­fluous expense. The Romans of the East wouldhave been happy, if the best gift of heaven, a patriotking, had been confirmed as a proper and permanentblessing. But in less than four years after the deathof Justin, his worthy successor sunk into a mortaldisease, which left him only sufficient time to restorethe diadem, according to the tenure by which heheld it, to the most deserving of his fellow-citizens.He selected Maurice from the crowd, a judgmentmore precious than the purple itself: the patriarchand senate were summoned to the bed of the dyingprince; he bestowed his daughter and the empire;and his last advice was solemnly delivered by thevoice of the quaestor. Tiberius expressed his hope,that the virtues of his son and successor Would erectthe noblest mausoleum to his memory. His memorywas embalmed by the public affliction; but the mostsincere grief evaporates in the tumult of a new reign,and the eyes and acclamations of mankind werespeedily directed to the rising sun.The feign The emperor Maurice derived his origin from an-
of Maurice, r . . °
a. d. 582, cient Home; but his immediate parents were settleda!d. 602^ &t Arabissus in Cappadocia, and their singular feli-Nov. 27. city preserved them alive to behold and partake thefortune of their august son. The youth of Mauricewas spent in the profession of arms; Tiberius pro­moted him to the command of a new and favouritelegion of twelve thousand confederates: his valourand conduct were signalized in the Persian war; andhe returned to Constantinople to accept, as his justreward, the inheritance of the empire. Mauriceascended the throne at the mature age of forty-three







OCR Output








OV THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 467


outstripped the royal standard of Bulgaria. The chap.strangers of old, Cadmus, and Danaus, and Pelops, XLLhad planted in that fruitful soil the seeds of policyand learning; but the savages of the north eradicatedwhat yet remained of their sickly and withered roots.In this irruption the country and the inhabitants weretransformed; the Grecian blood was contaminated;and the proudest nobles of Peloponnesus were brandedwith the names of foreigners and slaves. By the di­ligence of succeeding princes, the land was in somemeasure purified from the Barbarians; and thehumble remnant was bound by an oath of obedience,tribute, and military service, which they often re­newed and often violated. The siege of Patras wasformed by a singular concurrence of the Sclavoniansof Peloponnesus and the Saracens of Africa. In theirlast distress, a pious fiction of the approach of thepraetor of Corinth revived the courage of the citizens.Their sally was bold and successful; the strangersembarked, the rebels submitted, and the captive racewas for ever devoted to the service and vassalage ofthe metropolitan church of Patras. By the revolt oftwo Sclavonian tribes in the neighbourhood of Helosand Lacedaemon, the peace of the peninsula was oftendisturbed. They sometimes insulted the weakness,and sometimes resisted the oppression, of the Byzan­tine government, till at length the approach of theirhostile brethren extorted a golden bull to define therights and obligations of the Ezzerites and Milengi,whose annual tribute was defined at twelve hundredpieces of gold. From these strangers the Imperialgeographer has accurately distinguished a domesticand perhaps original race, who, in some degree,might derive their blood from the much-injuredHelots. The liberality of the Romans, and espe­cially of Augustus, had enfranchised the maritimecities from the dominion of Sparta; and the con-


ii ii 2


/-







OCR Output








452 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. ported this unequal association till his influence wasXL- fortified by popular esteem. His life was endangeredby the caprice of the emperor; and his dignity wasprofaned by a second colleague, who had rowed inthe galleys. Yet the murder of his benefactor mustbe condemned as an act of ingratitude and treason;and the churches which he dedicated to the name ofSt. Michael were a poor and puerile expiation of hisguilt.
The different ages of Basil the first may be com­pared with those of Augustus. The situation of theGreek did not allow him in his earliest youth to leadan army against his country, or to proscribe thenoblest of her sons; but his aspiring genius stoopedto -the arts of a slave; he dissembled his ambition,and even his virtues, and grasped with the bloodyhand of an assassin the empire, which he ruled withthe wisdom and tenderness of a parent. A private citi­zen may feel his interest repugnant to his duty; butit must be from a deficiency of sense or courage thatan absolute monarch can separate his happiness fromhis glory, or his glory from the public welfare. Thelife or panegyric of Basil has, indeed, been composedand published under the long reign of his descend­ants; but even their stability on the throne may bejustly ascribed to the superior merit of their ancestor.In this character his grandson Constantine has at­tempted to delineate a perfect image of royalty; butthat feeble prince, unless he had copied a real model,could not easily have soared so high above the levelof his own conduct or conceptions. But the mostsolid praise of Basil is drawn from the comparison ofa ruined and flourishing monarchy, that which hewrested from the dissolute Michael, and that whichhe bequeathed to the Macedonian dynasty. Theevils which had been sanctified by time and examplewere corrected by his master hand; and he revived,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


which restored two hundred bishops to their churches, chap.
» 1CXXTV-
and allowed the free profession of the Athanasian'


creed. But the Catholics accepted, with cold andtransient gratitude, a favour so inadequate to theirpretensions, and the virtues of Hilderic offended theprejudices of his countrymen. The Arian clergy-presumed to insinuate that he had renounced thefaith, and the soldiers more loudly complained thathe had degenerated from the courage, of his ancestors.His ambassadors were suspected of a secret and dis­graceful negotiation in the Byzantine court; and hisgeneral, the Achilles, as he was named, of the Vandals,lost a battle against the naked and disorderly Moors.The public discontent was exasperated by Gelimer, Geiimer,whose age, descent, and military fame, gave him an 'ls34.5apparent title to the succession: he assumed, withthe consent of the nation, the reins of government;and his unfortunate sovereign sunk without a strugglefrom the throne to a dungeon, where he was strictlyguarded with a faithful counsellor, and his unpopularnephew the Achilles of the Vandals. But the in­dulgence which Hilderic had shown to his Catholicsubjects had powerfully recommended him to thefavour of Justinian, who, for the benefit of his ownsect, could acknowledge the use and justice of re­ligious toleration: their alliance, while the nephewof Justin remained in a private station, was cementedby the mutual exchange of gifts and letters ; and theemperor Justinian asserted the cause of royalty andfriendship. In two successive embassies, he admo­nished the usurper to repent of his treason, or toabstain, at least, from any further violence, whichmight provoke the displeasure of God and of theRomans; to reverence the laws of kindred and suc­cession, and to suffer an infirm old man peaceably toend his days, either on the throne of Carthage, or inthe palace of Constantinople. The passions or even


b2







OCR Output








168 THE DECLINE AND FALL


.CHAP.XXXVI.
Characterand expedition of theeunuchNarses,A. D. 552.


After the loss of Germanus, the nations were pro­voked to smile, by the strange intelligence, that thecommand of the Roman armies was given to aneunuch. But the eunuch Narses * is ranked amongthe few who have rescued that unhappy name fromthe contempt and hatred of mankind. A feeble di­minutive body concealed the soul of a statesman anda warrior. His youth had been employed in themanagement of the loom and distaff, in the cares ofthe household, and the service of female luxury;but while his hands were busy, he secretly exercisedthe faculties of a vigorous and discerning mind. Astranger to the schools and the camp, he studied inthe palace to dissemble, to flatter, and to persuade;and as soon as he approached the person of the em­peror, Justinian listened with surprise and pleasureto the manly counsels of his chamberlain and privatetreasurer t. The talents of Narses were tried andimproved in frequent embassies; he led an army intoItaly, acquired a practical knowledge of the war andthe country, and presumed to strive with the geniusof Belisarius. Twelve years after his return, theeunuch was chosen to achieve the conquest whichhad been left imperfect by the first of the Romangenerals. Instead of being dazzled by vanity oremulation, he seriously declared, that unless he werearmed with an adequate force, he would never con­sent to risk his own glory, and that of his sovereign.Justinian granted to the favourite, what he mighthave denied to the hero: the Gothic war was re­kindled from its ashes, and the preparations were notunworthy of the ancient majesty of the empire. The


• Procopius relates the whole series of this second Gothic war and the victoryof Narses (1. iv. c . 21. 26—35). A splendid scene! Among the six subjectsof epic poetry which Tasso revolved in his mind, he hesitated between the con­quests of Italy by Belisarius and by Narses (Hayley's Works, vol. iv. p. 70).
.f The country of Narses is unknown, since he must not be confounded withthe Persarmenian.







OCR Output








488 THK DECLINE AND l'ALL


chap, proved, that whatever is gained in the extent, is lostL' in the safety and solidity, of regal power.Military Whatever titles a despot may assume, whateverGreeks, the claims he may assert, it is on the sword that he mustamTthe8' ultimately depend to guard him against his foreignFranks. an(i domestic enemies. From the age of Charlemagneto that of the Crusades, the world (for I overlookthe remote monarchy of China) was occupied anddisputed by the three great empires or nations of theGreeks, the Saracens, and the Franks. Their militarystrength may be ascertained by a comparison of theircourage, their arts and riches, and their obedience toa supreme head, who might call into action all theenergies of the state. The Greeks, far inferior totheir rivals in the first, were superior to the Franks,and at least equal to the Saracens, in the second andthird of these warlike qualifications.Navy of The wealth of the Greeks enabled them to pur­chase the service of the poorer nations, and to main­tain a naval power for the protection of their coastsand the annoyance of their enemies. A commerceof mutual benefit exchanged the gold of Constan­tinople for the blood of the Sclavonians and Turks,the Bulgarians and Russians; their valour contri­buted to the victories of Nicephorus and Zimisces;and if a hostile people pressed too closely on thefrontier, they were recalled to the defence of theircountry, and the desire of peace, by the well-ma­naged attack of a more distant tribe. The commandof the Mediterranean, from the mouth of the Tanaisto the columns of Hercules, was always claimed, andoften possessed, by the successors of Constantine.Their capital was filled with naval stores and dexter­ous artificers: the situation of Greece and Asia, thelong coasts, deep gulfs, and numerous islands, accus­tomed their subjects to the exercise of navigation;and the-trade of Venice and Amalfi supplied a nursery







OCR Output








210 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. of a great empire can seldom be influenced by anyx l' personal considerations. Virtue, or even reason, willsuggest to bis impartial mind, that he is the guardianof peace and equity, and that the interest of societyis inseparably connected with his own. Under theweakest and most vicious reign, the seat of justice wasfilled by the wisdom and integrity of Papinian andUlpian; and the purest materials of the Code andPandects are inscribed with the names of Caracallaand his ministers. The tyrant of Rome was some­times the benefactor of the provinces. A daggerterminated the crimes of Domitian ; but the prudenceof Nerva confirmed his acts, which, in the joy of theirdeliverance, had been rescinded by an indignantTheir re- senate. Yet in the rescripts, replies to the consulta-tions of the magistrates, the wisest of princes mightbe deceived by a partial exposition of the case. Andthis abuse, which placed their hasty decisions on thesame level with mature and deliberate acts of legisla­tion, was ineffectually condemned by the sense andexample of Trajan. The rescripts of the emperor,his grants and decrees, his edicts and pragmaticsanctions, were subscribed in purple ink, and trans­mitted to the provinces as general or special laws,which the magistrates were bound to execute, andthe people to obey. But as their number continuallymultiplied, the rule of obedience became each daymore doubtful and obscure, till the will of the sove­reign was fixed and ascertained in the Gregorian, theHermogenian, and the Theodosian codes. The twofirst, of which some fragments have escaped, wereframed by two private lawyers, to preserve the con­stitutions of the Pagan emperors from Hadrian toConstantine. The third, which is still extant, wasdigested in sixteen books by the order of the youngerTheodosius, to consecrate the laws of the Christianprinces from Constantine to his own reign. But the







OCR Output








256 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. The most simple interest was condemned by theXXXV11' clergy of the East and West: but the sense of mu­tual benefit, which had triumphed over the laws ofthe republic, has resisted with equal firmness thedecrees of the church, and even the prejudices ofmankind.injuries. 3. Nature and society impose the strict obligationof repairing an injury; and the sufferer by privateinjustice acquires a personal right and a legitimateaction. If the property of another be intrusted toour care, the requisite degree of care may rise andfall according to the benefit which we derive fromsuch temporary possession; we are seldom made re­sponsible for inevitable accident, but the conse­quences of a voluntary fault must always be imputedto the author*. A Roman pursued and recoveredhis stolen goods by a civil action of theft; they mightpass through a succession of pure and innocent hands,but nothing less than a prescription of thirty yearscould extinguish his original claim. They were re­stored by the sentence of the praetor, and the injurywas compensated by double, or three-fold, or evenquadruple damages, as the deed had been perpetratedby secret fraud or open rapine, as the robber hadbeen surprised in the fact or detected by a subsequentresearch. The Aquilian law-f defended the livingproperty of a citizen, his slaves and cattle, from thestroke of malice or negligence: the highest pricewas allowed that could be ascribed to the domesticanimal at any moment of the year preceding hisdeath; a similar latitude of thirty days was granted


the necessary rules and restrictions are inserted in the Pandects (1. xxii. tit. i. ii.).and the Code (1. iv. tit. xxxii. xxxiii.).
• Sir William Jones has given an ingenious and rational Essay on the Lawof Bailment (London, 1781, p. 127, hi 8vo.). He is perhaps the only lawyerequally conversant with the year-books of Westminster, the Commentaries ofTJlpian, the Attic pleadings of Isaeus, and the sentences of Arabian and Persiancadhis.
•f Noodt (Opp. tom. i. p. 137—172) has composed a separate treatise, ad Le­gem Aquiliam (Pandect. 1. ix. tit. ii.).







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 143


restrained the daggers of the assassins, but the pa- chap.tience of Solomon emboldened their discontent; and XXXVLat the end of ten days, a furious sedition was kindledin the Circus, which desolated Africa above ten years.The pillage of the city, and the indiscriminate slaugh­ter of its inhabitants, were suspended only by dark­ness, sleep, and intoxication: the governor, withseven companions, among whom was the historianProcopius, escaped to Sicily: two thirds of the armywere involved in the guilt of treason; and eightthousand insurgents, assembling in the field of Bulla,elected Stoza for their chief, a private soldier, whopossessed in a superior degree the virtues of a rebel.Under the mask of freedom, his eloquence could lead,or at least impel, the passions of his equals. He raisedhimself to a level with Belisarius, and the nephew ofthe emperor, by daring to encounter them in thefield; and the victorious generals were compelled toacknowledge, that Stoza deserved a purer cause anda more legitimate command. Vanquished in battle,he dexterously employed the arts of negotiation; aRoman army was seduced from their allegiance, andthe chiefs who had trusted to his faithless promisewere murdered by his order in a church of Numidia.When every resource, either of force or perfidy, wasexhausted, Stoza, with some desperate Vandals, re­tired to the wilds of Mauritania, obtained the daughterof a Barbarian prince, and eluded the pursuit of hisenemies, by the report of his death. The personalweight of Belisarius, the rank, the spirit, and thetemper, of Germanus, the emperor,s nephew, and thevigour and success of the second administration ofthe eunuch Solomon, restored the modesty of thecamp, and maintained for a while the tranquillity ofAfrica. But the vices of the Byzantine court werefelt in that distant province; the troops complainedthat they were neither paid nor relieved y and as soon


"







OCR Output








500 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. blishment in the Byzantine monarchy. The birth'and residence of succeeding princes estranged them


from the Roman idiom: Tiberius by the Arabs, andMaurice by the Italians, are distinguished as the firstof the Greek Caesars, as the founders of a new dy­nasty and empire; the silent revolution was accom­plished before the death of Heraclius; and the ruinsof the Latin speech were darkly preserved in theterms of jurisprudence and the acclamations of thepalace. After the restoration of the Western empireby Charlemagne and the Othos, the names of Franksand Latins acquired an equal signification and ex­tent; and these haughty Barbarians asserted, withsome justice, their superior claim to the languageand dominion of Rome. They insulted the aliensof the East who had renounced the dress and idiomof Romans; and their reasonable practice will justifyThe Greek the frequent appellation of Greeks. But this con-and'thfS temptuous appellation was indignantly rejected byretafoand ^e prince and people to whom it is applied. What-«ssert the soever changes had been introduced by the lapse ofRomans, ages, they alleged a lineal and unbroken successionfrom Augustus and Constantine; and, in the lowestperiod of degeneracy and decay, the name of Ro­mans adhered to the last fragments of the empire ofConstantinople.fnorMcf While the government of the East was transactedin Latin, the Greek was the language of litera­ture and philosophy; nor could the masters of thisrich and perfect idiom be tempted to envy the bor­rowed learning and imitative taste of their Romandisciples.
After the fall of paganism, the loss of Syria andEgypt, and the extinction of the schools of Alex­andria and Athens, the studies of the Greeks insen­sibly retired to some regular monasteries, and above







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 51


of Praxiteles or Lysippus were torn from their lofty chap.pedestals, and hurled into the ditch on the heads of XXXI •the besiegers *. To each of his lieutenants, Beli-sarius assigned the defence of a gate, with the wiseand peremptory instruction, that, whatever might bethe alarm, they should steadily adhere to their re­spective posts, and trust their general for the safetyof Rome. The formidable host of the Goths was in­sufficient to embrace the ample measure of the city:of the fourteen gates, seven only were invested, fromthe Praenestine to the Flaminian way; and Vitigesdivided his troops into six camps, each of which wasfortified with a ditch and rampart. On the Tuscanside of the river, a seventh encampment was formedin the field or circus of the Vatican, for the importantpurpose of commanding the Milvian bridge and thecourse of the Tyber; but they approached with de­votion the adjacent church of St. Peter; and thethreshold of the holy apostles was respected duringthe siege by a Christian enemy. In the ages of vic­tory, as often as the senate decreed some distant con­quest, the consul denounced hostilities, by unbar­ring, in solemn pomp, the gates of the temple ofJanus "\. Domestic war now rendered the admoni­tion superfluous, and the ceremony was superseded bythe establishment of a new religion. But the brazentemple of Janus was left standing in the forum; of asize sufficient only to contain the statue of the god,five cubits in height, of a human form, but with twofaces, directed to the east and west. The double
• Praxiteles excelled in Fauns, and that of Athens was his own masterpiece.Rome now contains above thirty of the same character. When the ditch of St.Angelo was cleansed under Urban VIII. the workmen found the sleeping Faunof die Barberini palace; but a leg, a thigh, and the right arm, had been brokenfrom that beautiful statue (Winckelman, Hist . de l'Art, tom. ii. p. 52, 53, tom.iii. p. 265).
•f Procopius has given the best description of the temple of Janus, a nationaldeity of Latium (Heyne, Excurs. v. ad 1. vii. /Encid.). It was once a gate in theprimitive city of Romulus and Numa (Nardini, p. 13. 25C. 329). Virgil hasdescribed the ancient rite, like a poet and an antiquarian.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 165


risk the event of a desperate and decisive sally. But chap.their spirit insensibly stooped to the offers of ca- XXXVLpitulation: they retrieved their arrears of pay, andpreserved their arms and horses, by inlisting in theservice of Totila ;. their chiefs, who pleaded a laud­able attachment to their wives and children in theEast, were dismissed with honour; and above fourhundred enemies, who had taken refuge in thesanctuaries, were saved by the clemency of the victor.He no longer entertained a wish of destroying theedifices of Rome*, which he now respected as theseat of the Gothic kingdom: the senate and peoplewere restored to their country; the means of sub­sistence were liberally provided; and Totila, in therobe of peace, exhibited the equestrian games of thecircus. Whilst he amused the eyes of the multitude,four hundred vessels were prepared for the embarka­tion of his troops. The cities of Rhegium and Ta^rentum were reduced: he passed into Sicily, theobject of his implacable resentment; and the islandwas stripped of its gold and silver, of the fruits ofthe earth, and of an infinite number of horses, sheep,and oxen. Sardinia and Corsica obeyed the fortuneof Italy; and the sea coast of Greece was visited bya fleet of three hundred galleys t. The Goths werelanded in Corcyra and the ancient continent of Epi-rus; they advanced as far as Nicopolis, the trophyof Augustus and Dodona, once famous by the oracleof Jove. In every step of his victories, the wise Bar­barian repeated to Justinian his desire of peace, ap-
• The Romans were still attached to the monuments of their ancestors; andaccording to Procopius (Goth. 1. iv. c. 22), the galley of .Eneas, of a single rankof oars, 25 feet in breadth, 120 in length, was preserved entire in the navalia,near Monte Testaceo, at the foot of the Aventine (Nardini, Roma Antica, 1. vii.c. 9. p. 466. Donatus, Roma Antiqua, 1. iv. c. 13, p. 334). But all antiquityis ignorant of this relic.
•f- In these seas, Procopius searched without success for the isle of Calypso.He was shown, at Phaeacia or Corcyra, the petrified ship of Ulysses (Odyss. xiii.163); but he found it a recent fabric of many stones, dedicated by a merchantto Jupiter Cassius (L iv. c. 22). Eustathius had supposed it to be the fancifullikeness of a rock.


M 3







OCR Output








Ubi animus requievit, et mini reliquam oetatem a Republicaprocul habendam ducreyi, non fuit consilium socordiaatque desidia bonum otium conterere.


 







OCR Output








OF THE KOMAN EMPIRE. 857


offer of Sain the Persian general, to conduct an chap.embassy to the presence of the great king, was ac- XXX1X-cepted with the warmest gratitude, and the prayerfor pardon and peace was humbly presented by thepratorian prefect, the praefect of the' city, and oneof the first ecclesiastics of the patriarchal church.But the lieutenant of Chosroes had fatally mistakenthe intentions of his master. "It was not an em-"bassy," said the tyrant of Asia, " it was the person"of Hejaclius, bound in chains, that he should have"brought to the foot of my throne. I will never give"peace to the emperor of Rome till he has abjured"his crucified God, and embraced the worship of the"sun." Sain was flayed alive, according to the in­human practice of his country; and the separate andrigorous confinement of the ambassadors violated thelaw of nations and the faith of an express stipulation.Yet the experience -of six years at length persuadedthe Persian monarch to renounce the conquest ofConstantinople, and to specify the annual tribute orransom of the Roman Empire: a thousand talents ofgold, a thousand talents of silver, a thousand silkrobes, a thousand horses, and a thousand virgins.Heraclius subscribed these ignominious terms; butthe time and space which he obtained to collect suchtreasures from the poverty of the East was indus­triously employed in the preparations of a bold anddesperate attack.
Of the characters conspicuous in history, that ofHisPre-
tt t • e i t i • parations
Heraclius is one of the most extraordinary and in- for war,consistent. In the first and last years of a long reign,'the emperor appears to be the slave of sloth, of plea­sure, or of superstition, the careless and impotentspectator of the public calamities. But the languidmists of the morning and evening are separated bythe brightness of the meridian sun: the Arcadius ofthe palace arose the Caesar of the camp; and the


a a 3







OCR Output








472 , THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. "cious magazines of silk, purple, and gold. It isXLL "said, that Constantinople pays each day to her"sovereign twenty thousand pieces of gold; which"are levied on the shops, taverns, and markets, on"the merchants of Persia and Egypt, of Russia and"Hungary, of Italy and Spain, who frequent the"capital by sea and land." In all pecuniary matters,the authority of a Jew is doubtless respectable; butas the three hundred and sixty-five days would pro­duce a yearly income exceeding seven millions ster­ling, I am tempted to retrench at least the numerousfestivals of the Greek calendar. The mass of trea­sure that was saved by Theodora and Basil thesecond will suggest a splendid, though indefinite,idea of their supplies and resources. The mother ofMichael, before she retired to a cloister, attemptedto check or expose the prodigality of her ungratefulson, by a free and faithful account of the wealthwhich he inherited, one hundred and nine thou­sand pounds of gold, and three hundred thousandof silver, the fruits of her own economy and that ofher deceased husband *. The avarice of Basil is notless renowned than his valour and fortune: his vic­torious armies were paid and rewarded without break­ing into the mass of two hundred thousand poundsof gold (about eight millions sterling) which he hadburied in the subterraneous vaults of the palacet.Such accumulation of treasure is rejected by thetheory and practice of modern policy; and we aremore apt to compute the national riches by the useand abuse of the public credit. Yet the maxims ofantiquity are still embraced by a monarch formidableto his enemies; by a republic respectable to her


• See the continuator of Theophanes (1. iv. p. 107), Ceilrenus (p. 544), andZonaras (tom. ii. 1 . xvi. p. 157).
t Zonaras (tom. ii. 1 . xvii. p. 225), instead of pounds, uses the more classicappellation of talents) which, in a literal sense and strict computation, wouldmultiply sixty fold the treasure of Basil.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 223


of the Roman law. As soon as the emperor had chap.approved their labours, he ratified, by his legislative |
power, the speculations of these private citizens:their commentaries on the twelve tables, the per­petual edict, the laws of the people, and the decreesof the senate, succeeded to the authority of the text;and the text was abandoned, as an useless, thoughvenerable, relic of antiquity. The Code, the Pan­dects, and the Institutes, were declared to be thelegitimate system of civil jurisprudence; they alonewere admitted in the tribunals, and they alone weretaught in the academies of Rome, Constantinople,and Berytus.
Since the emperor declined the fame and envy ofPraise and
... .. , . l-ii censure ot
original composition, we can only require at his hands the Codemethod, choice, and fidelity, the humble, though in- dects.""dispensable, virtues of a compiler. Among the variouscombinations of ideas, it is difficult to assign anyreasonable preference; but as the order of Justinianis different in his three works, it is possible that allmay be wrong; and it is certain that two cannot beright. In the selection of ancient laws, he seems to haveviewed his predecessors without jealousy, and withequal regard: the series could not ascend above thereign of Hadrian, and the distinction of Paganismand Christianity, introduced by Theodosius, had beenabolished by the consent of mankind. But the ju­risprudence of the Pandects is circumscribed withina period of a hundred years, from the perpetual edictto the death of Severus Alexander: the civilians wholived under the first Caesars are seldom permitted tospeak, and only three names can be attributed to theage of the republic. The favourite of Justinian (ithas been fiercely urged) was fearful of encounteringthe light of freedom and the gravity of Roman sages.Tribonian condemned to oblivion the genuine andnative widom of Cato, the Screvolas, and Sulpicius;


r







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. H7


The jealousy of the Byzantine court had not per- chap.mitted Belisarius to achieve the conquest of Italy; XXVI"and his ahrupt departure revived the courage of the Revolt ofGoths *, who respected his genius, his virtue, and a.V.054o.even the laudable motive which had urged the ser­vant of Justinian to deceive and reject them. Theyhad lost their king (an inconsiderable loss), their ca­pital, their treasures, the provinces from Sicily to theAlps, and the military force of two hundred thousandBarbarians, magnificently equipped with horses andarms. Yet all was not lost, as long as Pavia was de­fended by one thousand Goths, inspired by a senseof honour, the love of freedom, and the memory oftheir past greatness. The supreme command wasunanimously offered to the brave Uraias; and it wasin his eyes alone that the disgrace of his uncle Vitigescould appear as a reason of exclusion. His voice in­clined the election in favour of Hildibald, whose per­sonal merit was recommended by the vain hope thathis kinsman Theudes, the Spanish monarch, wouldsupport the common interest of the Gothic nation.The success of his arms in Liguria and Venetiaseemed to justify their choice; but he soon declaredto the world, that he was incapable of forgiving orcommanding his benefactor. The consort of Hildi­bald was deeply wounded by the beauty, the riches,and the pride of the wife of Uraias; and the deathof that virtuous patriot excited the indignation of afree people. A bold assassin executed their sentenceby striking off the head of Hildibald in the midst ofa banquet: the Rugians, a foreign tribe, assumed theprivilege of election; and Totila, the nephew of the


* In the second (c. 30) and third book (c. 1—40), Procopius continues thehistory of the Gothic war from the fifth to the fifteenth year of Justinian. As theevents are less interesting than in the former period, he allots only half the space .to double the time. Jornandes and the Chronicle of Marcellinus afford somecollateral hints. Sigonius, Pagi, Muratori, Mascou, and De Buat, are useful,and have been used.


L 2







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRIC 113


and barren. Yet the Brachman may assume the chap.merit of inventing a pleasing fiction, which adorns the xxxv-nakedness of truth, and alleviates, perhaps, to a royalear, the harshness of instruction. With a similar de­sign, to admonish kings that they are strong only inthe strength of their subjects, the same Indians in­vented the game of chess, which was likewise intro­duced into Persia under the reign of Nushirvan *.
The son of Kobad found his- kingdom involved in Peace anda war with the successor of Constantine; and the Romans,anxiety of his domestic situation inclined him to grant ^jgf33the suspension of arms, which Justinian was impatientto purchase. Chosroes saw the Roman ambassadorsat his feet. He accepted eleven thousand poundsof gold, as the price of an endless or indefinite peace;some mutual exchanges were regulated; the Persianassumed the guard of the gates of Caucasus, and thedemolition of Dara was suspended, on condition thatit should never be made the residence of the generalof the East. This interval of repose had been soli­cited, and was diligently improved by the ambitionof the emperor: his African conquests were the firstfruits of the Persian Treaty; and the avarice of Chos­roes was soothed' by a large portion of the spoils ofCarthage, which his ambassadors required in a toneof pleasantry, and under the colour of friendship t.But the trophies of Belisarius disturbed the slumbersof the great king; and he heard with astonishment,envy, and fear, that Sicily, Italy, and Rome itself,had been reduced, in three rapid campaigns, to theobedience of Justinian. Unpractised in the art ofviolating treaties, he secretly excited his bold and sub­tle vassal Almondar. That prince of the Saracens,who resided at Hira, had not been included in the


* See the Historia Shahiludii of Dr. Hyde (Syntagm. Dissertat. tom. ii. p. 61—69.)
"f Procopius, Persic. 1. i. c. 26.
VOL. IV. I







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 15


a palace of the Vandal kings, at the distance of fifty chap.miles from Carthage. The weary Romans indulged XXXIV-themselves in the refreshment of shady groves, coolfountains, and delicious fruits; and the preferencewhich Procopius allows to these gardens over anythat he had seen, either in the East or West, may beascribed either to the taste or the fatigue of thehistorian. In three generations prosperity and awarm climate had dissolved the hardy virtue of theVandals, who insensibly became the most luxuriousof mankind. In their villas and gardens, whichmight deserve the Persian name of paradise, theyenjoyed a cool and elegant repose; and, after thedaily use of the bath, the Barbarians were seated ata table profusely spread with the delicacies of theland and sea. Their silken robes, loosely flowingafter the fashion of the Medes, were embroideredwith gold: love and hunting were the labours oftheir life, and their vacant hours were amused bypantomimes, chariot-races, and the music and dancesof the theatre.
In a march often or twelve days, the vigilance of Defeats theBelisarius was constantly awake and active against afi"stbattTe.his unseen enemies, by whom in every place, and atevery hour, he might be suddenly attacked. Anofficer of confidence and merit, John the Armenian,led the vanguard of three hundred horse; six hun­dred Massagetae covered at a certain distance theleft flank; and the whole fleet steering along thecoast, seldom lost sight of the army, which movedeach day about twelve miles, and lodged in theevening in strong camps, or in friendly towns. Thenear approach of the Romans to Carthage filled themind of Gelimer with anxiety and terror. He pru­dently wished to protract the war till his brother,with his veteran troops, should return from theconquest of Sardinia; and he now lamented the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. £


untractable valour was more highly prized than the chap.
YYY1V
tame submission of the Greeks and Syrians; and of'
such importance was it deemed to procure a rein­forcement of six hundred Massagetae, or Huns, thatthey were allured by fraud and deceit to engage ina naval expedition. Five thousand horse and tenthousand foot were embarked at Constantinople forthe conquest of Africa, but the infantry, for the mostpart levied in Thrace and Isauria, yielded to themore prevailing use and reputation of the cavalry;and the Scythian bow was the weapon on which thearmies of Rome were now reduced to place theirprincipal dependence. From a laudable desire toassert the dignity of his theme, Procopius defendsthe soldiers of his own time against the morosecritics, who confined that respectable name to theheavy-armed warriors of antiquity, and maliciouslyobserved, that the word archer is introduced byHomer as a term of contempt. "Such contempt"might perhaps be due to the naked youths who"appeared on foot in the fields of Troy, and, lurking"behind a tomb-stone, or the shield of a friend,*' drew the bow-string to their breast, and dismissed"a feeble and lifeless arrow. But our archers"(pursues the historian) are mounted on horses,"which they manage with admirable skill; their"head and shoulders are protected by a cask or"buckler; they wear greaves of iron on their legs,"and their bodies are guarded by a coat of mail."On their right side hangs a quiver, a sword on"their left, and their hand is accustomed to wield a"lance or javelin in closer combat. Their bows are"strong and weighty; they shoot in every possible"direction, advancing, retreating, to the front, to"the rear, or to either flank; and as they are taught"to draw the bow-string not to the breast, but to"the right ear, firm indeed must be the armour that







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 131


conqueror had strengthened the fortifications of Jus- chap.tinian; and the places least inaccessible were covered xxxv-by additional bulwarks. In this important fortress,the vigilance of Chosroes had deposited a magazineof offensive and defensive arms, sufficient for fivetimes the number, not only of the garrison, but ofthe besiegers themselves. The stock of flour andsalt provisions was adequate to the consumption offive years; the want of wine was supplied by vinegar,and of grain from whence a strong liquor was ex­tracted; and a triple aqueduct eluded the diligence,and even the suspicions, of the enemy. But thefirmest defence of Petra was placed in the valour offifteen hundred Persians, who resisted the assaults ofthe Romans, whilst, in a softer vein of earth, a minewas secretly perforated. The wall, supported byslender and temporary props, hung tottering in theair; but Dagisteus delayed the attack till he hadsecured a specific recompense; and the town was re­lieved before the return of his messenger from Con­stantinople. The Persian garrison was reduced tofour hundred men, of whom no more than fifty wereexempt from sickness or wounds; yet such had beentheir inflexible perseverance, that they concealedtheir losses from the enemy, by enduring, without amurmur, the sight and putrifying stench of the deadbodies of their eleven hundred companions. Aftertheir deliverance, the breaches were hastily stoppedwith sand-bags; the mine was replenished with earth;a new wall was erected on a frame of substantialtimber; and a fresh garrison of three thousand menwas stationed at Petra to sustain the labours of asecond siege. The operations, both of the attack anddefence, were conducted with skilful obstinacy; andeach party derived useful lessons from the experienceof their past faults. A battering ram was invented,of light construction and powerful effect; it was


/


k 2 r







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 379


series of the Greek emperors, from the seventh to the thirteenth CHAP,century; he must have read a long chapter respecting the XXXIX.worship of images, and the establishment and decline of theempire of Charlemagne; and have studied the history ofArabia and Mahomet. At length, after perusing a wholevolume of the original work, the reader may discover in theHistory of the Saracens, an account of the important eventswhich occurred in the latter part of the reign of Heraclius;and which contributed so very materially to the decline ofthe Eastern branch of the Roman empire., There is another observation which it is necessary that Ishould make at this period of our work.
Mr. Gibbon, in the first eight volumes of his History, hasselected the transactions of four centuries, detailing them inthe usual manner, in the order of time in which they oc­curred; but at this point he alters his plan; and, during along period, from the year 628, in the reign of Heraclius, tothe taking of Constantinople by the Latins in 1203, he aban­dons the order of time, and divides his subject into tenbranches. He gives in the first a sketch of the private livesand characters of the Greek emperors, during a period ofnear six hundred years. The history of sixty monarchs ishere comprised in one chapter; and the reader, who, a littlewhile before, was employed during a whole volume with thesingle reign of Justinian, can hardly persuade himself thatin one evening he has traversed the history of six centuries.He is brought in the first chapter of the ninth volume tothe year 1203. In the next chapter he is suddenly carriedback to the eighth century, and is engaged with the Popes,the worship of images, the Franks, and the emperor Char­lemagne. He then returns to the sixth and seventh cen-turieSi to the birth and history of Mahomet, and of the ca­liphs. Bulgarians, Russians, Normans, and Turks, are suc­cessively described in succeeding chapters; and in the hi­story of each of those nations, many circumstances occur inwhich the Greek empire is deeply interested: but they arerelated so irregularly in respect to the time of their occur­rence, that the reader must look back to a former volume,if he wishes to discover the names of the emperors whoreigned at Constantinople, when the capital was besiegedby the Saracens, or when Epirus was invaded by the Nor­mans. While we are thus led from the Tigris and Alp­







OCR Output








376 THE DECLINE AND FALL


XXXIX.


chap, long impatience, the senate, the clergy, and the peo­ple, went forth to meet their hero, with tears andacclamations, with olive branches and innumerablelamps: he entered the capital in a chariot drawn byfour elephants; and as soon as the emperor coulddisengage himself from the tumult of public joy, hetasted more genuine satisfaction in the embraces ofhis mother and his son*.
The succeeding year was illustrated by a triumphof a very different kind, the restitution of the truecross to the holy sepulchre. Heraclius performed inperson the pilgrimage of Jerusalem, the identity ofthe relic was verified by the patriarch, and this augustceremony has been commemorated by the annualfestival of the exaltation of the cross. Before the em­peror presumed to tread the consecrated ground, hewas instructed to strip himself of the diadem andpurple, the pomp and vanity of the world. He againascended his throne to receive the congratulations ofthe ambassadors of France and India; and the fameof Alexander was eclipsed, in the popular estimation,by the superior merit and glory of the great Hera­clius. Yet the deliverer of the East was indigentand feeble. Of the Persian spoils, the most valuableportion had been expended in the war, distributed tothe soldiers, or buried, by an unlucky tempest, in thewaves of the Euxine. The conscience of the em­peror was oppressed by the obligation of restoringthe wealth of the clergy, which he had borrowed fortheir own defence; a perpetual fund was requiredto satisfy these inexorable creditors; the provinces,already wasted by the arms and avarice of the Per­sians, were compelled to a second payment of the
• The burden of Corneille's song,
"Montrez Heraclius au peuple qui 1'attend,"is much belter suited to the present occasion. See bis triumph in Thcophanes(p. 272, 27li) and Nicephoras (p. 15, 16). The life of the mother and tender­ness of the sbn are attested by George of Pisidia (Bcl1 . Abar. 1255, &c. p. 49).







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 437


birthplace of the caliph Motassem, whose father chap.Harun was attended in peace or war by the most'favourite of his wives and concubines. The revoltof a Persian impostor employed at that moment thearms of the Saracen, and he could only intercede infavour of a place, for which he felt and acknowledgedsome degree of filial affection. These solicitationsdetermined the emperor to wound his pride in sosensible a part. Sozopetra was levelled with theground,; the Syrian prisoners were marked or mu­tilated with ignominious cruelty; and a thousandfemale captives were forced away from the adjacentterritory. Among those a matron of the house ofAbbas invoked, in an agony of despair, the name ofMotassem; and the insults of the Greeks engagedthe honour of her kinsman to avenge his indignity,and to answer her appeal. Under the reign of thetwo elder brothers, the inheritance of the youngesthad been confined to Anatolia, Armenia, Georgia,and Circassia; this frontier station had exercised hismilitary talents; and, among his accidental claims tothe name ofOctonary*, the most meritorious are theeight battles which he gained or fought against theenemies of the Koran. In this personal quarrel, thetroops of Irak, Syria, and Egypt, were recruitedfrom the tribes of Arabia and the Turkish hordes;his cavalry might be numerous, though we shoulddeduct some myriads from the hundred and thirtythousand horses of the royal stables; and the ex­pense of the armament was computed at four millionssterling, or one hundred thousand pounds of gold.
From Tarsus, the place of assembly, the Saracensadvanced in three divisions along the high road ofConstantinople. Motassem himself commanded thecentre, and the vanguard was given to his son Abbas,
"He was also the eighth of the Abassides: h* reigned eight years, eiglitmonths, and eight days; left eight sons, eight daughters, eight thousand slaves,eight millions of gold. . /*
FF3


r







OCR Output








204 THE DECLINE AND FAIX


chap. Whatever might be the origin or the merit of theXXXVIt> twelve tables, they obtained among the Romans thatTheir cha- blind and partial reverence which the lawyers of everyInfluenTe. country delight to bestow on their municipal institu­tions. The study is recommended by Cicero as equallypleasant and instructive. "They amuse the mind by"the remembrance of old words and the portrait of"ancient manners; they inculcate.the soundest prin-"ciples of government and morals; and I am not"afraid to affirm, that the brief composition of the"Decemvirs surpasses in genuine value the libraries"of Grecian philosophy. How admirable," saysTully, with honest or affected prejudice, "is the"wisdom of our ancestors! We alone are the masters"of civil prudence; and our superiority is the more"conspicuous, if we deign to cast our eyes on the"rude and almost ridiculous jurisprudence of Dra-"con, of Solon, and of Lycurgus." The twelve tableswere committed to the memory of the young and themeditation of the old; they were transcribed and il­lustrated with learned diligence: they had escapedthe flames of the Gauls, they subsisted in the age ofJustinian, and their subsequent loss has been imper­fectly restored by the labours of modern critics. Butalthough these venerable monuments were consideredas the rule of right, and the fountain of justice, theywere overwhelmed by the weight and variety of newlaws, which, at the end of five centuries, became agrievance more intolerable than the vices of the city.Three thousand brass plates, the acts of the senateand people, were deposited in the Capitol: and someof the acts, as the Julian law against extortion, sur­passed the number of a hundred chapters. The De­cemvirs had neglected to import the sanction ofZaleucus, which so long maintained the integrity ofhis republic. A Locrian who proposed any new law







OCR Output








350 THE DECLINE AND FALL


citap. an independent standard at Hierapolis in Syria: hej was betrayed by fallacious promises, and burnt alive
in the market-place of Constantinople. Deprived ofthe only chief whom they could fear or esteem, thebands which he had led to victory were twice brokenby the cavalry, trampled by the elephants, and piercedby the arrows of the Barbarians; and a great numberof the captives were beheaded on the field of battleby the sentence of the victor, who might justly con­demn these seditious mercenaries as the authors oraccomplices of the death of Maurice. Under thereign of Phocas, the fortifications of Merdin, Dara,Amida, and Edessa, were successively besieged, re-His con- duced, and destroyed, by the Persian monarch: heSyri£of passed the Euphrates, occupied the Syrian cities,a. d. en; Hierapolis, Chalchis, and Berrlnea or Aleppo, andsoon encompassed the walls of Antioch with his irre­sistible arms. The rapid tide of success disclosesthe decay of the empire, the incapacity of Phocas,and the disaffection of his subjects; and Chosroesprovided a decent apology for their submission orrevolt, by an impostor who attended his camp, as theson of Maurice* and the lawful heir of the mon­archy.
The first intelligence from the East which He-raclius received f was that of the loss of Antioch; butthe aged metropolis, so often overturned by earth­quakes and pillaged by the enemy, could supply buta small and languid stream of treasure and blood.


* The Persian historians have been themselves deceived; but Theophanes(p. 244) accuses Chosroes of the fraud and falsehood; and Eutychius believes(Annal. tom. ii. p. 211) that the son of Maurice, who was saved from the as­sassins, lived and died a monk on mount Sinai.
+ Eutychius dates all the losses of the empire under the reign of Phocas, anerror which saves the honour of Heraclius, whom he brings not from Carthage,but Salonica, with a fleet laden with vegetables for the relief of Constantinople(Annal. tom. ii. p. 223, 224). The other Christians of the East, Barhebrsus(apud Asseman, Bibliothec. Oriental, tom. iii. p. 412, 413), Elmacin (Hist. Sa­racen, p. 13—16), Abulpharagius (Dynast . p. 98, 99), are more sincere and ac­curate. The years of the Persian war. are disposed in the chronology of Pagi.







OCR Output








496 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. munity enjoys in the midst of war the tranquillity of


XLI.


peace, and is only made sensible of the change bythe aggravation or decrease of the public taxes. Inthe disorders of the tenth and eleventh centuries,every peasant was a soldier, and every village a for­tification; each wood or valley was a scene of murderand rapine; and the lords of each castle were com­pelled to assume the character of princes and war­riors. To their own courage and policy they boldlytrusted for the safety of their family, the protectionof their lands, and the revenge of their injuries;and, like the conquerors of a larger size, they weretoo apt to transgress the privilege of defensive war.The powers of the mind and body were hardened bythe presence of danger and necessity of resolution:the same spirit refused to desert a friend and to for­give an enemy; and, instead of sleeping under theguardian care of the magistrate, they proudly dis­dained the authority of the laws. In the days offeudal anarchy, the instruments of agriculture andart were converted into the weapons of bloodshed;the peaceful occupations of civil and ecclesiasticalsociety were abolished or corrupted; and the bishopwho exchanged his mitre for a helmet was moreforcibly urged by the manners of the times than bythe obligation of his tenure.Their cha- The love of freedom and of arms was felt, withtactics."' conscious pride, by the Franks themselves, and isobserved by the Greeks with some degree of amaze­ment and terror. "The Franks," says the emperorConstantine, "are bold and valiant to the verge of"temerity; and their dauntless spirit is supported"by the contempt of danger and death. In the"field and in close onset, they press to the front,"and rush headlong against the enemy, without"deigning to compute either his numbers or their"own. Their ranks are formed by the firm con-







OCR Output








304 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. marriage the daughter of the king of Bavaria; andxxxviii. Qarit)ald accepted the alliance of the Italian monarch.Impatient of the slow progress of negotiation, theardent lover escaped from his palace, and visited thecourt of Bavaria in the train of his own embassy. Atthe public audience, the unknown stranger advancedto the throne, and informed Garibald, that the am­bassador was indeed the minister of state, but thathe alone was the friend of Autharis, who had trustedhim with the delicate commission of making a faith­ful report of the charms of his spouse. Theudelindawas summoned to undergo this important examina­tion, and after a pause of silent rapture, he hailedher as the queen of Italy, and humbly requestedthat, according to the custom of the nation, shewould present a cup of wine to the first of her newsubjects. By the command of her father, she obeyed:Autharis received the cup in his turn, and, in re­storing it to the princess, he secretly touched herhand, and drew his own finger over his face and lips.In the evening, Theudelinda imparted to her nursethe indiscreet familiarity of the stranger, and wascomforted by the assurance, that such boldness couldproceed only from the king her husband, who, byhis beauty and courage, appeared worthy of her love.The ambassadors were dismissed: no sooner did theyreach the confines of Italy, than Autharis, - raisinghimself on his horse, darted his battle-axe againsta tree, with incomparable strength and dexterity:"Such," said he to the astonished Bavarians, "such"are the strokes of the king of the Lombards." Onthe approach of a French army, Garibald and hisdaughter took refuge in the dominions of their ally;and the marriage was consummated in the palace ofVerona. At the end of one year, it was dissolved bythe death of Autharis: but the virtues of Theude­linda had endeared her to the nation, and she was







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 415


XL.


plebeian from the last to the first rank of society sup- chap.poses some qualifications above the level of the mul- ^titude. He would probably be ignorant and dis­dainful of speculative science; and, in the pursuit offortune, he might absolve himself from the obliga­tions of benevolence and justice; but to his characterwe may ascribe the useful virtues of prudence andfortitude, the knowledge of mankind, and the im­portant art of gaining their confidence, and directingtheir passions. It is agreed that Leo was a nativeof Isauria, and that Conon was his primitive name.The writers, whose awkward satire is praise, describehim as an itinerant pedlar, who drove an ass withsome paltry merchandize to the country fairs; andfoolishly relate, that he met on the road some Jewishfortune-tellers, who promised him the Roman empireon condition that he would abolish the worship ofidols. A more probable account relates the migra­tion of his father from Asia Minor to Thrace, wherehe exercised the lucrative trade of a grazier; and hemust have acquired considerable wealth, since the firstintroduction of his son was procured by a supply offive hundred sheep to the Imperial camp. His firstservice was in the guards of Justinian, where he soonattracted the notice, and by degrees the jealousy ofthe tyrant. His valour and dexterity were conspi­cuous in the Colchian war: from Anastasius he re­ceived the command of the Anatolian legions, and bythe suffrage of the soldiers he was raised to the em­pire, with the general applause of the Roman world.2. In this dangerous elevation, Leo the Third sup­ported himself against the envy of his equals, the dis­content of a powerful faction, and the assaults of hisforeign and domestic enemies. The Catholics, whoaccuse his religious innovations, are obliged to con­fess that they were undertaken with temper, andconducted with firmness. Their silence respects the







OCR Output








10 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. "can resist the rapid violence of their shaft." Five _ hundred transports, navigated by twenty thousand


mariners of Egypt, Cilicia, and Ionia, were collectedin the harbour of Constantinople. The smallest ofthese vessels may be computed at thirty, the largestat five hundred tons; and the fair average will supplyan allowance, liberal, but not profuse, of about onehundred thousand tons, for the reception of thirty-five thousand soldiers and sailors, of five thousandhorses, of arms, engines, and military stores, and ofa sufficient stock of water and provisions for a voyage,perhaps, of three months. The proud galleys, whichin former ages swept the Mediterranean with somany hundred oars, had long since disappeared;and the fleet of Justinian was escorted only byninety-two light brigantines, covered from the mis­sile weapons of the enemy, and rowed by two thou­sand of the brave and robust youth of Constantinople.Twenty-two generals are named, most of whom wereafterwards distinguished in the wars of Africa andItaly: but the supreme command, both by land andsea, was delegated to Belisarius alone, with a bound­less power of acting according to his discretion as ifthe emperor himself were present. The separationof the naval and military professions is at once theeffect and the cause of the modern improvements inthe science of navigation and maritime war.Departure Jn the seventh year of the reign of Justinian, and
of the fleet, . * & ,11
a.d. 533. about the time oi the summer solstice, the wholefleet of six hundred ships was ranged in martialpomp before the gardens of the palace. The pa­triarch pronounced his benediction, the emperorsignified his last commands, the general's trumpetgave the signal of departure, and every heart, ac­cording to its fears or wishes, explored with anxiouscuriosity the omens of misfortune and success. Thefirst halt was made at Perinthus or Heraclea, where







OCR Output








16 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. rash policy of his ancestors, who, by destroying theXXXIV- fortifications of Africa, had left him only the dan­gerous resource of risking a battle in the neigh­bourhood of his capital. The Vandal conquerors,from their original number of fifty thousand, weremultiplied, without including their women and chil­dren, to one hundred and sixty thousand fightingmen: and such forces, animated with valour andunion, might have crushed, at their first landing,the feeble and exhausted bands of the Roman ge­neral. But the friends of the captive king weremore inclined to accept the invitations, than to resistthe progress, of Belisarius; and many a proud Bar­barian disguised his aversion to war under the morespecious name of his hatred to the usurper. Yet theauthority and promises of Gelimer collected a for­midable army, and his plans were concerted withsome degree of military skill. An order was de­spatched to his brother Ammatas, to collect all theforces of Carthage, and to encounter the van of theRoman army at the distance of ten miles from thecity; his nephew Gibamund, with two thousandhorse, was destined to attack their left, when themonarch himself, who silently followed, should chargetheir rear, in a situation which excluded them fromthe aid or even the view of their fleet. But therashness of Ammatas was fatal to himself and hiscountry. He anticipated the hour of attack, out­stripped his tardy followers, and was pierced with amortal wound, after he had slain with his own handtwelve of his boldest antagonists. His Vandals fledto Carthage; the highway, almost ten miles, wasstrewed with dead bodies; and it seemed incrediblethat such multitudes could be slaughtered by theswords of three hundred Romans. The nephew ofGelimer was defeated after a slight combat by thesix hundred Massagetae: they did not equal the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 447


dually formed the large and populous suburb of the chap.Vatican, and their various habitations were distin- .
guished, in the language of the times, as the schoolsof the Greeks and Goths, of the Lombards andSaxons. But this venerable spot was still open tosacrilegious insult. The enclosing it with walls andtowers exhausted all that authority could supply. Thepious labour of four years was animated in every sea­son, and at every hour, by the presence of the inde­fatigable pontiff. The love of fame, a generous butworldly passion, may be detected in the name of theLeonine city, which he bestowed on the Vatican, yetthe pride of the dedication was tempered with Chris­tian penance and humility.
Among the successors of Nero and Elagabalus,we have not hitherto found, in the imitation of theirvices, the character of a Roman prince who consi­dered pleasure as the object of life, and virtue as theenemy of pleasure.
Whatever might have been the maternal care ofTheodora, in the education of Michael the Third,her unfortunate son was a king before he was aman. If the ambitious mother laboured to check theprogress of reason, she could not cool the ebullitionof passion; and her selfish policy was justly repaidby the contempt and ingratitude of the headstrong. youth. At the age of eighteen, he rejected her au­thority, without feeling his own incapacity to governthe empire and himself. With Theodora, all gravityand wisdom retired from the court; their place wassupplied by the alternate dominion of vice and folly;and it was impossible, without forfeiting the publicesteem, to acquire or preserve the favour of the em­peror. The millions of gold and silver which hadbeen accumulated for the service of the state werelavished on the vilest of men, who flattered his pas­sions, and shared his pleasures; and in a reign of







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 193


some future capital in the Siberian or American chap.wilderness. • xxxvi.
II. The near approach of a comet may injure or Earth-destroy the globe which we inhabit; but the changes quon its surface have been hitherto produced by theaction of volcanos and earthquakes. The nature ofthe soil may vindicate the countries most exposed tothese formidable concussions, since they are causedby subterraneous fires, and such fires are kindled bythe union and fermentation of iron and sulphur. Buttheir times and effects appear to lie beyond the reachof human curiosity; and the philosopher will discreetlyabstain from the prediction of earthquakes, till he hascounted the drops of water that silently filtrate on theinflammable mineral, and measured the caverns whichincrease by resistance the explosion of the imprisonedair. Without assigning the cause, history will di­stinguish the periods in which these calamitous eventshave been rare or frequent, and will observe that thisfever of the earth raged with uncommon violenceduring the reign of Justinian *. Each year is markedby the repetition of earthquakes, of such duration thatConstantinople has been shaken above forty days; ofsuch extent, that the shock has been communicatedto the whole surface of the globe, or at least of theRoman empire. An impulsive or vibratory motionwas felt: enormous chasms were opened, huge andheavy bodies were discharged into the air, the seaalternately advanced and retreated beyond its ordinarybounds, and a mountain was torn from Libanus, andcast into the waves, where it protected, as a mole,the new harbour of Botrys in Phoenicia. The strokethat agitates an ant-hill may crush the insect my­riads in the dust; yet truth must extort a confession,that man has industriously laboured for his own de-
• The earthquakes that shook the Roman world in the reign of Justinian aredescribed or mentioned by Procopius (Anecdot. c. 18), Agathias, John Malala,and Theophanes. • • *
VOL. IV. o







OCR Output








24. THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. was almost satiated with the treasures of gold and
XXXIV
1 silver, the accumulated fruits of conquest or economy


in a long period of prosperity and peace. In thisfrantic search, the troops even of Belisarius forgottheir caution and respect. Intoxicated with lust andrapine, they explored in small parties, or alone, theadjacent fields, the woods, the rocks, and the caverns,that might possibly conceal any desirable prize: ladenwith booty, they deserted their ranks, and wandered,without a guide, on the high road to Carthage ; andif the flying enemies had dared to return, very fewof the conquerors would have escaped. Deeply sen­sible of the disgrace and danger, Belisarius passed anapprehensive night on the field of victory; at thedawn of day, he planted his standard on a hill, re­called his guards and veterans, and gradually re­stored the modesty and obedience of the camp. Itwas equally the concern of the Roman general tosubdue the hostile, and to save the prostrate Bar­barian; and the suppliant Vandals, who could befound only in churches, were protected by his au­thority, disarmed, and separately confined, that theymight neither disturb the public peace, nor becomethe victims of popular revenge. After despatchinga light detachment to tread the footsteps of Gelimer,he advanced with his whole army, about ten days'march, as far as Hippo Regius, which no longerpossessed the relics of St. Augustin. The season,and the certain intelligence that the Vandal had fledto the inaccessible country of the Moors, determinedBelisarius to relinquish the vain pursuit, and to fixhis winter quarters at Carthage. From thence hedespatched his principal lieutenant, to inform theemperor, that in the space of three months he hadachieved the conquest of Africa.Conquest of Belisarius spoke the language of truth. The sur-
Afnca by r . ° .
Belisarius. viving Vandals yielded, without resistance, their arms







OCR Output








42 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. destitute of any firm support or legal authority. In-XXXIV- stead of submitting to the laws of her country, whichheld as a fundamental maxim, that the successioncould never pass from the lance to the distaff, thedaughter of Theodoric conceived the impracticabledesign of sharing, with one of her cousins, the regaltitle, and of reserving in her own hands the substanceof supreme power. He received the proposal withprofound respect and affected gratitude; and theeloquent Cassiodorius announced to the senate andthe emperor, that Amalasontha and Theodatus hadascended the throne of Italy. His birth (for hismother was the sister of Theodoric) might be con­sidered as an imperfect title; and the choice ofAmalasontha was more strongly directed by her con­tempt of his avarice and pusillanimity, which had de­prived him of the love of the Italians, and the esteemof the Barbarians. But Theodatus was exasperatedby the contempt which he deserved: her justice hadrepressed and reproached the oppression which heexercised against his Tuscan neighbours; and theprincipal Goths, united by common guilt and resent­ment, conspired to instigate his slow and timid dis-Hcr exile position. The letters of congratulation were scarcelya.d.535. despatched before the queen of Italy was imprisonedApril so. i n a small island of the lake of Bolsena, where, aftera short confinement, she was strangled in the bath,by the order, or with the connivance, of the newking, who instructed his turbulent subjects to shedthe blood of their sovereigns.Beiisarius Justinian beheld with ioy the dissensions of thesubduesan Goths; and the mediation of an ally concealed and\'dJji' rv promoted the ambitious views of the conqueror. HisDec . 3i. ambassadors, in their public audience, demanded thefortress of Lilybaeum, ten Barbarian fugitives, and ajust compensation for the pillage of a small town onthe Illyrian borders; but they secretly negotiated







OCR Output








4G8 THE DECLINE AND PALL


chap. tinuance of the same benefit ennobled them with theXLL title of Eleulhero, or Free-Laconians. In the timeFreemen of of Constantine Porphyrogenitus, they had acquiredthe name of Mctinotes, under which they dishonourthe claim of liberty by the inhuman pillage of allthat is shipwrecked on their rocky shores. Theirterritory, barren of corn, but fruitful of olives, ex­tended to the Cape of Malea: they accepted a chiefor prince from the Byzantine praetor, and a lighttribute of four hundred pieces of gold was the badgeof their immunity rather than of their dependence.The freemen of Laconia assumed the character ofRomans, and long adhered to* the religion of theGreeks. By the zeal of the emperor Basil, they werebaptized in the faith of Christ: but the altars ofVenus and Neptune had been crowned by theserustic votaries five hundred years after they werecities and proscribed in the Roman world. In the theme ofPdoponne- Peloponnesus, forty cities were still numbered, andthe declining state of Sparta, Argos, and Corinth,may be suspended in the tenth century, at an equaldistance, perhaps, between their antique splendourand their present desolation. The duty of militaryservice, either in person or by substitute, was imposedon the lands or benefices of the province: a sum offive pieces of gold was assessed on each of the sub­stantial tenants; and the same capitation was sharedamong several heads of inferior value. On the pro­clamation of an Italian war, the Peloponnesians ex­cused themselves by a voluntary oblation of one hun­dred pounds of gold (four thousand pounds sterling),and a thousand horses with their arms and trappings.The churches and monasteries furnished their con­tingent; a sacrilegious profit was extorted from thesale of ecclesiastical honours; and the indigent bi­shop of Leucadia was made responsible for a pensionof one hundred pieces of gold.


sus.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 405


subdue the Barbarians of Germany, to follow the chap.course of the Danube from its source to the Euxine ,,'
Sea, to overthrow the empire of Constantinople, andunite his new acquisitions with Antioch and Syria.But his design, which is attested by several Arabianhistorians, was checked at Lugo in Gallicia, by amessenger of the caliph, who recalled Musa to Da­mascus *.
At the end of the first century of the Hegira, about Empire ofthe year 718, the caliphs were the most potent and cens,A™i).absolute monarchs of the globe. Their empire ex- 7l8,tended two hundred days' journey from east to west,from the confines of Tartary and India to the shoresof the Atlantic Ocean. But the thirst of conquest Theyin-and the extension of empire still prevailed in the ^fv.^T'breasts of the Moslems. They subdued the south- —7si.ern provinces of France; and, in the year 731, un­der the conduct of Abderame, they extended theirconquests as far as the banks of the Loire, and thegates of Tours. It was between this city and Poitiers,in the heart of France, that, in the year 732, aftersix days of desultory combat, Abderame was slain,and his army was totally defeated, by the Franks, theGepidae, and the Germans, under the command of theheroic Charles Martel, the father of Pepin and grand­father of Charlemagne.
The victory of the Franks was complete; the Arabs Defeated bynever resumed the conquest of Gaul ; and they were Martd!soon driven beyond the Pyrenees, by Charles Martel A-D- 787-and his valiant descendants t.


* This design which is attested by several Arabian historians (Cardonnc, vol.i. p. 95, 96), may be compared with that of Mithridates, to march from the Cri­mea to Rome; or with that of Caesar, to conquer the East, and return home hythe North: and all three are perhaps surpassed by the real and successful enter­prise of Hannibal.
f I will not presume to conjecture what might have happened if theGallic hero had fallen in the battle of Tours, and the victory of Abderame hadbeen as complete as bis defeat. I trust, however, that my countrymen will notblame me, if I venture to differ from Mr. Gibbon, in the opinion which he ex-


D D 3







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 97


terms of their deliverance were speedy and moderate, chap.But the subject, or the historian of Justinian, ex- xxxv-haled his just indignation in the language of com­plaint and reproach; and Procopius has confidentlyaffirmed, that in a reign of thirty-two years, eachannual inroad of the Barbarians consumed two hun­dred thousand of the inhabitants of the Roman em­pire. The entire population of Turkish Europe,which nearly corresponds with the provinces of Jus­tinian, would perhaps be incapable of supplying sixmillions of persons, the result of this incredibleestimate *.
In the midst of these obscure calamities, Europe 0^ andfelt the shock of a revolution, which first revealed to m°™«*ythe world the name and nation of the Turks. Like in Asia," *Romulus, the founder of that martial people was&cD-545'suckled by a she-wolf, who afterwards made him thefather of a numerous progeny; and the representa­tion of that animal in the banners of the Turks pre­served the memory, or rather suggested the idea, ofa fable, which was invented, without any mutual in­tercourse, by the shepherds of Latium and those ofScythia. At the equal distance of two thousandmiles from the Caspian, the Icy, the Chinese, andthe Bengal seas, a ridge of mountains is conspicuous,the centre, and perhaps the summit, of Asia; which,in the language of different nations, has been styledImaus, and Caf, and Altai, and the Golden Moun­tains, and the Girdle of the Earth. The sides ofthe hills were productive of minerals; and the ironforges, for the purpose of war, were exercised by theTurks, the most despised portion of the slaves of thegreat khan of the Gedugen. But their servitudecould only last till a leader, bold and eloquent, should


* According to the malevolent testimony of the Anecdotes (c. 18), these in­roads had reduced the provinces south of the Danube to the state of a Scythianwilderness.
VOL. IV. H







OCR Output








332 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. suited, with a real or affected fury, their own dignity,XXXIX and that of their prince; their baggage was plun­dered, and their lives were only saved by the promiseof a richer present and a more respectful address.But his sacred ambassadors enjoyed and abused anunbounded licence in the midst.of Constantinople:they urged, with importunate clamours, the increaseof tribute, or the restitution of captives and deserters;and the majesty of the empire was almost equallydegraded by a base compliance, or by the false andfearful excuses with which they eluded such insolentdemands. The chagan had never seen an elephant;and his curiosity was excited by the strange, andperhaps fabulous, portrait of that wonderful animal.At his command, one of the largest elephants of theImperial stables was equipped with stately caparisons,and conducted by a numerous train to the royal vil­lage in the plains of Hungary. He surveyed theenormous beast with surprise, with disgust, and pos­sibly with terror; and smiled at the vain industry ofthe Romans, who, in search of such useless rarities,could explore the limits of the land and sea. Hewished, at the expense of the emperor, to repose ina golden bed. The wealth of Constantinople, andthe skilful diligence of her artists, were instantly de-yoted to the gratification of his caprice; but whenthe work was finished, he rejected with scorn a pre­sent so unworthy the majesty of a great king*.These were the casual sallies of his pride, but theavarice of the chagan was a more steady and tract­able passion: a rich and regular supply of silk ap­parel, furniture, and plate, introduced the rudimentsof art and luxury among the tents of the Scythians;their appetite was stimulated by the pepper and cin­namon of India; the annual subsidy or tribute wasraised from fourscore to one hundred and twentythousand pieces of gold; and after each hostile in­


* Theophylact, I. i. c. 5, 6.







OCR Output








202 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. I shall not repeat the well-known story of thexxxvii. DecemvirS, who sullied by their actions the honourThe twelve of inscribing on brass, or wood, or ivory, the twelveDecemvirs.6tables of the Roman laws*. They were dictatedby the rigid and jealous spirit of an aristocracy,which had yielded with reluctance to the just demandsof the people. But the substance of the twelve tableswas adapted to the state of the city; and the Ro­mans had emerged from barbarism, since they werecapable of studying and embracing the institutions oftheir more enlightened neighbours. A wise Ephesianwas driven by envy from his native country: beforehe could reach the shores of Latium, he had observedthe various forms of human nature and civil society;he imparted his knowledge to the legislators of Rome,and a statue was erected in the forum to the perpetualmemory of Hermodorus. The names and divisionsof the copper-money, the sole coin of the infant state,were of Dorian origin: the harvests of Campania andSicily relieved the wants of a people whose agriculturewas often interrupted by war and faction; and sincethe trade was established, the deputies who sailedfrom the Tyber might return from the same har­bours with a more precious cargo of political wisdom.The colonies of Great Greece had transported andimproved the arts of their mother-country. Cumaeand Rhegium, Crotona and Tarentum, Agrigentumand Syracuse, were in the rank of the most flourish­ing cities. The disciples of Pythagoras applied phi­losophy to the use of government; the unwritten


character as the Saliare Carmen, which, in the time of Horace, none could under­stand. The Roman idiom, by an infusion of Doric and yEolic Greek, was gra­dually ripened into the style of the xii tables, of the Duillian column, of Ennius,of Terence, and of Cicero (Gruter. Inscript . tom. i. p. cxlii. Scipion Maflbi. Is -toria Diplomatics p. 241—258. Bibliotheque Italique, tom. iii. p. 30—41.174—205. tom. xiv. p. 1—52).
* From the historians, Heineccius (Hist. J. It. 1. i. No. 26) maintains thatthe twelve tables were of brass—(ereas; in the text of Pomponius we readchoreas; for which Scaliger has substituted roboreas (Bynkershoek, p. 286).Wood, brass, and ivory, might be successively employed.







OCR Output








338 THE DECLINE AND FALL


armies:


chap. penetrated so deeply into the old Dacia: yet theXXX1X- success of Priscus was transient and barren •, and hewas soon recalled, by the apprehension, that Baian,with dauntless spirit and recruited forces, was pre­paring to avenge his defeat under the walls of Con­stantinople *.state of The theory of war was not more familiar to the
the Kenan ^ q£ Ca;sar ^ Trajan than to those of Justinian
and Mauricet. The iron of Tuscany or Pontus stillreceived the keenest temper from the skill of the By­zantine workmen. The magazines were plentifullystored with every species of offensive and defensivearms. In the construction and use of ships, engines,and fortifications, the Barbarians admired the superioringenuity of a people whom they so often vanquishedin the field. The science of tactics, the order, evolu­tions, and stratagems of antiquity, was transcribedand studied in the books of the Greeks and Romans.But the solitude or degeneracy of the provinces couldno longer supply a race of men to handle thoseweapons, to guard those walls, to navigate thoseships, and to reduce the theory of war into bold andsuccessful practice. The genius of Belisarius andNarses had been formed without a master, and ex­pired without a disciple. Neither honour, nor pa­triotism, nor generous superstition, could animatethe lifeless bodies of slaves and strangers, who hadsucceeded to the honours of the legions: it was inthe camp alone that the emperor should have ex­ercised a despotic command; it was only in the


• The general detail of the war against the Avars may be traced in the first,second, sixth, seventh, and eighth books of the History of the emperor Maurice,by Theophylact Simocatta. As he wrote in the reign of Heraclius, he had notemptation to flatter; but his want of judgment renders him diffuse in trifles andeoncise in the most interesting facts.
f Maurice himself composed twelve books on the military art, which arestill extant, and have been published (Upsal, 1664) by John Scheffer atthe end of the Tactics of Arrian (Fabricius, Bibliot . Graeca, 1. iv. c . 8.tom. iii. p. 278), who promises to speak more fully of his work in its properplace.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 487


mains of the authority of the senate were finally era- chap.cheated by Leo the philosopher. A lethargy of servi-'
tude had benumbed the minds of the Greeks; in thewildest tumults of rebellion they ntver aspired to theidea of a free constitution; and the private characterof the prince was the only source and measure of theirpublic happiness. Superstition riveted their chains;in the church of St. Sophia he was solemnly crownedby the patriarch; at the foot of the altar, theypledged their passive and unconditional obedience tohis government and family. . On his side he engaged Coronationto abstain as much as possible from the capital punish-oath*ments of death and mutilation; his orthodox creedwas subscribed with his own hand, and he promised toobey the decrees of the seven synods, and the canonsof the holy church. But the assurance of mercy wasloose and indefinite.' The Greek ecclesiastics werethemselves the subjects of the civil magistrate; atthe nod of a tyrant the bishops were created, or trans­ferred, or deposed, or punished with an ignominiousdeath: whatever might be their wealth or influence,they could never succeed like the Latin clergy in theestablishment of an independent republic; and thepatriarch of Constantinople condemned, what he se­cretly envied, the temporal greatness of his Romanbrother. Yet the exercise of boundless despotism ishappily checked by the laws of nature and necessity.In proportion to his wisdom and" virtue, the masterof an empire is confined to the path of his sacred andlaborious duty. In proportion to his vice and folly,he drops the sceptre too weighty for his hands ; andthe motions of the royal image are ruled by the im­perceptible thread of some minister or favourite, whoundertakes for his private interest to exercise thetask of the public oppression. In some fatal moment,the most absolute monarch may dread the reason orthe caprice of a nation of slaves; and experience has


11 4







OCR Output








186 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. citizen, with hope or terror, prepared for the impend-
ling tumult. The senators themselves, fearful and
suspicious, were convened at the ninth hour; andthe praefect received their commands to visit everyquarter of the city, and proclaim a general illumina­tion for the recovery of the emperor's health. Theferment subsided; but every accident betrayed theimpotence of the government and the factious tem­per of the people: the guards were disposed to mu­tiny as often as their quarters were changed or theirpay was withheld: the frequent calamities of firesand earthquakes afforded the opportunities of dis­order; the disputes of the blues and greens de­generated into bloody battles; and in the presenceof the Persian ambassador, Justinian blushed forhimself and for his subjects. Capricious pardon andarbitrary punishment embittered the irksomeness anddiscontent of a long reign: a conspiracy was formedin the palace; and, unless we are deceived by thenames of Marcellus and Sergius, the most virtuousand the most profligate of the courtiers were asso­ciated in the same designs. They had fixed thetime of the execution; their rank gave them accessto the royal banquet; and their black slaves werestationed in the vestibule and porticos, to announcethe death of the tyrant, and to excite a sedition inthe capital. But the indiscretion of an accomplicesaved the poor remnant of the days of Justinian.The conspirators were detected and seized, withdaggers hidden under their garments: Marcellusdied by his own hand, and Sergius was dragged fromthe sanctuary. Pressed by remorse, or tempted bythe hopes of safety, he accused two officers of thehousehold of Belisarius; and torture forced them todeclare that they had acted according to the secretinstructions of their patron. Posterity will nothastily believe that a hero who, in the vigour of life,







OCR Output








S18 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. avowed and supported as the brethren and subjectsXXXIX- of the Roman emperor. The complaints of Nushir-van were disregarded by the Byzantine court; Justinyielded to the importunities of the Turks, who offeredan alliance against the common enemy; and thePersian monarchy was threatened at the same instantby the united forces of Europe, of ^Ethiopia, and ofHfe lastwu Scythia. At the age of fourscore the sovereign ofRomans, the East would perhaps have chosen the peaceful&c. 572' enjoyment of his glory and greatness; but as soonas war became inevitable, he took the field with thealacrity of youth, whilst the aggressor trembled inthe palace of Constantinople. Nushirvan, or Chos-roes, conducted in person the siege of Dara; andalthough that important fortress had been left desti­tute of troops and magazines, the valour of the in­habitants resisted above five months the archers, theelephants, and the military engines of the great king.In the mean while, his general Adarman advancedfrom Babylon, traversed the desert, passed the Eu­phrates, insulted the suburbs of Antioch, reduced toashes the city of Apamea, and laid the spoils ofSyria at the feet of his master, whose perseverancein the midst of winter at length subverted the bul­wark of the East. But these losses, which astonishedthe provinces and the court, produced a salutaryeffect in the repentance and abdication of the em­peror Justin: a new spirit arose in the Byzantinecouncils; and a truce of three years was obtained bythe prudence of Tiberius. That seasonable intervalwas employed in the preparations of war; and thevoice of rumour proclaimed to the world, that fromthe distant countries of the Alps and the Rhine,from Scythia, Maesia, Pannonia, Illyricum, and Isau-ria, the strength of the Imperial cavalry was rein­forced with one hundred and fifty thousand soldiers.Yet the king of Persia, without fear, or without faith,







OCR Output








374 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. themselves patriots, were tempted by the wealth and* honours of a new reign; to the soldiers, the heir of


Chosroes promised an increase of pay; to the Chris­tians, the free exercise of their religion; to the cap­tives, liberty and rewards; and to the nation, instantpeace and the reduction of taxes. It was determinedby the conspirators, that Siroes, with the ensigns ofroyalty, should appear in the camp; and if the enter­prise should fail, his escape was contrived to the Im­perial court. But the new monarch was saluted withHe is de. unanimous acclamations; the flight of Chosroes (yeta*d!C28. where could he have fled?) was rudely arrested,F*. 25. eighteen sons were massacred before his face, and he
and mur- °
dered by was thrown into a dungeon, where he expired on thesiroes, fifth day. The Greeks and modern Persians mi-*eb. 28. llutely describe how Chosroes was insulted, and fa­mished, and tortured, by the command of an inhumanson, who so far surpassed the example of his father;but at the time of his death, what tongue would re­late the story of the parricide? what eye could pene­trate into the toxcer of darltness? The glory of thehouse of Sassan ended with the life of Chosroes; hisunnatural son enjoyed only eight months the fruit ofhis crime's; and in the space of four years, the regaltitle was assumed by nine candidates, who disputed,with the sword or dagger, the fragments of an ex­hausted monarchy. Every province, and each cityof Persia, was the scene of independence, of dis­cord, mid of blood; and the state of anarchy prevailedabout eight years longer, till the factions were silencedand united under the common yoke of the Arabiancaliphs *.Treaty of As soon as the mountains became passable, the em-fween the peror received the welcome news of the success of


two empires,
* The best oriental accounts of this last period of the Sassanian kings arefound in Eutychius (AnnuL torn. ii. p. '2hI—256), who dissembles the parricideof Siroes, D'Herbelot (Bibliotheque Orientalc, p. 789), and Assemanni (Biblio-thec. OrientaL tom, iii- p. 416— 4'JO).







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 25


and their freedom: the neighbourhood of Carthage chap.submitted to his presence; and the more distant pro- XXXIV-vinces were successively subdued by the report of hisvictory. Tripoli was confirmed in her voluntary al­legiance; Sardinia and Corsica surrendered to anofficer, who carried, instead of a sword, the head ofthe valiant Zano; and the isles of Majorca, Minorca,and Yvica, consented to remain an humble appendageof the African kingdom. Caesarea, a royal city, whichin looser geography may be confounded with the mo­dern Algiers, was situate thirty days, march to thewestward of Carthage: by land, the road was in­fested by the Moors; but the sea was open, and theRomans were now masters of the sea. An activeand discreet tribune sailed as far as the Straits,where he occupied Septem or Ceuta, which rises op­posite to Gibraltar on the African coast; that re­mote place was afterwards adorned and fortified byJustinian; and he seems to have indulged the vainambition of extending his empire to the columns ofHercules. He received the messengers of victory atthe time when he was preparing to publish the pan­dects of the Roman law ; and the emperor celebratedthe divine goodness, and confessed, in silence, themerit of his successful general *. Impatient toabolish the temporal and spiritual tyranny of theVandals, he proceeded, without delay, to the fullestablishment of the Catholic church. Her juris­diction, wealth, and immunities, were restored andamplified with a liberal hand; the Arian worshipwas suppressed; the Donatist meetings were pro­scribed; and the synod of Carthage, by the voice oftwo hundred and seventeen bishops, applauded thejust measure of retaliation. On such an occasion, it
• See the second and third preambles to the Digest, or Pandects, promulgatedA. D. 533, December 10. To the titles of Vandalicw and Africanut, Justinian,or rather Bclisarius, had acquired a just claim: Gothicut was premature, andFrattcicui false, and offensive to a great nation.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 319


resolved to prevent the attack of the enemy; again chap.
passed the Euphrates, and dismissing the ambassadors 1
of Tiberius, arrogantly commanded them to awaithis arrival at Caesarea, the metropolis of the Cappa-docian provinces. The two armies encountered eachother in the battle of Melitene: the Barbarians, whodarkened the air with a cloud of arrows, prolongedtheir line, and extended their wings across the plain;while the Romans, in deep and solid bodies, expectedto prevail in closer action, by the weight of theirswords and lances. A Scythian chief, who com­manded their right wing, suddenly turned the flankof the enemy, attacked their rear-guard in the pre­sence of Chosroes, penetrated to the midst of thecamp, pillaged the royal tent, profaned the eternalfire, loaded a train of camels with the spoils of Asia,cut his way through the Persian host, and returnedwith songs of victory to his friends, who had con­sumed the day in single combats, or ineffectualskirmishes. The darkness of the night, and the se­paration of the Romans, afforded the Persian mon­arch an opportunity of revenge; and one of theircamps was swept away by a rapid and impetuousassault. But the review of his loss, and the con­sciousness of his danger, determined Chosroes to aspeedy retreat; he burnt, in his passage, the vacanttown of Melitene; and, without consulting the safetyof his troops, boldly swam the Euphrates on the backof an elephant. After this unsuccessful campaign,the want of magazines, and perhaps some inroad ofthe Turks, obliged him to disband or divide his forces;the Romans were left masters of the field, and theirgeneral Justinian, advancing to the relief of the Pers-armenian rebels, erected his standard on the banksof the Araxes. The great Pompey had formerlyhalted within three days, march of the Caspian : thatinland sea was explored, for the first time, by a hostile


r







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 333


terruption, the payment of the arrears, with exorbi- chap.tant interest, was always made the first condition of XXXIX-the new treaty. In the language of a Barbarianwithout guile, the prince of the Avars affected tocomplain of the insincerity of the Greeks*, yet hewas not inferior to the most civilized nations in therefinements of dissimulation and perfidy. As thesuccessor of the Lombards, the chagan asserted hisclaim to the important city of Sirmium, the ancientbulwark of the Illyrian provinces. The plains ofthe Lower Hungary were covered with the Avarhorse, and a fleet of large boats was built in theHercynian wood, to descend the Danube, and totransport into the Save the materials of a bridge.But as the strong garrison of Singidunum, whichcommanded the conflux of the two rivers, might havestopped their passage and baffled his designs, he dis­pelled their apprehensions by a solemn oath, that hisviews were not hostile to the empire. He swore byhis sword, the symbol of the god of war, that he didnot, as the enemy of Rome, construct a bridge uponthe Save. "If I violate my oath," pursued the in­trepid Baian, " may I myself, and the last of my"nation, perish by the sword! may the heavens,"and fire, the deity of the heavens, fall upon our"heads! may the forests and mountains bury us in"their ruins! and the Save returning, against the"laws of nature, to his source, overwhelm us in his"angry waters!" After this barbarous imprecation,he calmly inquired, what oath was most sacred andvenerable among the Christians, what guilt of per­jury it was most dangerous to incur. The bishop ofSingidunum presented the gospel, which the chaganreceived with devout reverence. "I swear," saidhe, "by the God who has spoken in this holy book,


* Theophylact, 1. vi. c. 6. 1. vii. c. 15. The Greek historian confesses thetruth and justice of his reproach.







OCR Output








M2 lH£ DECLINE AND FALL


chap. most as an alien in her father,s house. The zeal of
TYYVIT
'friendship, and parental affection, suggested a liberalartifice: a qualified citizen was named in the testa­ment, with a prayer or injunction that he would re­store the inheritance to the person for whom it wastruly intended. Various was the conduct of thetrustees in this painful situation: they had swornto observe the laws of their country, but honourprompted them to violate their oath; and if theypreferred their interest under the mask of patriotism,they forfeited the esteem of every virtuous mind.The declaration of Augustus relieved their doubts,gave a legal sanction to confidential testaments andcodicils, and gently unravelled the forms and re­straints of the republican jurisprudence. But as thenew practice of trusts degenerated into some abuse,the trustee was enabled, by the Trebellian and Pega-sian decrees, to reserve one-fourth of the estate, orto transfer on the head of the real heir all the debtsand actions of the succession. The interpretationof testaments was strict and literal; but the languageof trusts and codicils was delivered from the minuteand technical accuracy of the civilians *.
in. Op HI. The general duties of mankind are imposed
by their public and private relations: but their spe­cific obligations to each other can only be the effectof, 1. a promise, 2. a benefit, or 3. an injury: andwhen these obligations are ratified by law, the in­terested party may compel the performance by ajudicial action. On this principle the civilians ofevery country have erected a similar jurisprudence,the fair conclusion of universal reason and justice.
Promises. l. The goddess of faith (of human and socialfaith) was worshipped, not only in her temples, but


* Of the civil jurisprudence of successions, testaments, codicils, legacies, andtrusts, the principles are ascertained in the Institutes of Cains (1. ii. tit. ii—ix.p. 91—144), Justinian (I. ii. tit. x—xxv.), and Theophilus (p. 328—514) ; andthe immense detail occupies twelve books (xxviii—xxxix.) of the Pandects.







OCR Output








Xll CONTENTS.


CHAP. XXXIX.
Revolutions of Persia after the Death of Chosroes or Nushirvan.
—His Son Hormouz, a Tyrant, is deposed.— Usurpation of
Bahram.—Flight and Restoration of Chosroes II.—His Gra­
titude to the Romans.—The Chagan of the Avars.—Revolt of
the Army against Maurice.—His Death.—Tyranny of Phocas,
Elevation of Heraclius.—The Persian War.—Chosroes sub­
dues Syria, Egypt, and Asia Minor.—Siege of Constantinople
by the Persians and Avars.—Persian Expeditions.—Victories
and Triumph of Heraclius.—Observations.


A. D.
Page
Contest of Rome and Persia .
316
570 Conquest of Yemen by Nushirvan
317
572 His last war with the Romans
318
579 His death .....
320
579—590. Tyranny and vices of his son Hormouz
ib.
590 Exploits of Bahram ....
. 322
His rebellion ....
324
Hormouz is deposed and imprisoned .
. ib.
Elevation of his son Chosroes
326
Death of Hormouz ....
. 327
Chosroes flies to the Romans .
ib.
His return and final victory .
329
Death of Bahram ....
. ib.
591—603. Restoration and policy of Chosroes
330
570—600. Pride, policy,, and power of the chagan of the
Avars .....
. 331
595—602. Wars of Maurice against the Avars
335
State of the Roman armies
338
Their discontent . '. . .
339
And rebellion ....
340
602 Election of Phocas . ...
. ib.
Revolt of Constantinople . . . ,
Death of Maurice and his children .
341
343
602—610. Phocas emperor .
ib.
His character ....
344
And tyranny ....
345
610 His fall and death .
346
610—642. Reign of Heraclius .
348
603 Chosroes invades the Roman empire
ib.
611 His conquest of Syria
350
614 Of Palestine
351
616 Of Egypt ......
352
Of Asia Minor ....
ib.
His reign and magnificence .
ib.







OCR Output








5i THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. horse, a bay, with a white face, which he rode onXXXIV- that memorable day. "Aim at the bay horse !" wasthe universal cry. Every bow was bent, every ja­velin was directed, against that fatal object, and thecommand was repeated and obeyed by thousands whowere ignorant of its real motive. The bolder Bar­barians advanced to the more honourable combat ofswords and spears; and the praise of an enemy hasgraced the fall of Visandus, the standard-bearer, whomaintained his foremost station, till he was piercedwith thirteen wounds, perhaps by the hand of Beli­sarius himself. The Roman general was strong,active, and dexterous: on every side he dischargedhis weighty and mortal strokes: his faithful guardsimitated his valour, and defended his person; andthe Goths, after the loss of a thousand men, fled be­fore the arms of a hero. They were rashly pursuedto their camp; and the Romans, oppressed by mul­titudes, made a gradual, and at length a precipitateretreat to the gates of the city: the gates were shutagainst the fugitives; and the public terror was in­creased, by the report, that Belisarius was slain.His countenance was indeed disfigured by sweat,dust, and blood; his voice was hoarse, his strengthwas almost exhausted; but his unconquerable spiritstill remained: he imparted that spirit to his de­sponding companions; and their last desperate chargewas felt by the flying Barbarians, as if a new army,vigorous and entire, had been poured from the city.The Flaminian gate Was thrown open to a real tri­umph; but it was not before Belisarius had visitedevery post, and provided for the public safety, thathe could be persuaded by his wife and friends totaste the needful refreshments of food and sleep. Inthe more improved state of the art of war, a generalis seldom required or even permitted to display the


Valour ofBelisarius.







OCR Output








70 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. was no longer remembered; the despair and death _ of that valiant officer were secretly imputed to the


revenge of Antonina; and each of his colleagues,conscious of the same rapine, was apprehensive of thesame fate. The fear of a common enemy suspendedthe effects of their envy and discontent; but, in theconfidence of approaching victory, they instigated apowerful rival to oppose the conqueror of Rome andThe eunuch Africa. From the domestic service of the palace, andthe administration of the private revenue, Narses theeunuch was suddenly exalted to the head of an army;and the spirit of a hero, who afterwards equalled themerit and glory of Belisarius, served only to perplexthe operations of the Gothic war. To his prudentcounsels the relief of Rimini was ascribed by theleaders of the discontented faction, who exhortedNarses to assume an independent and separate com­mand. The epistle of Justinian had indeed enjoinedhis obedience to the general; but the dangerous ex­ception, "as far as may be advantageous to the pub-_ "lie service," reserved some freedom of judgmentto the discreet favourite, who had so lately departedfrom the sacred and familiar conversation of his sove­reign. In the exercise of this doubtful right, theeunuch perpetually dissented from the opinions ofBelisarius; and, after yielding with reluctance to thesiege of Urbino, he deserted his colleague in thenight, and marched away to the conquest of theiEmelian province. The fierce and formidable bandsof the Heruli were attached to the person of Narses;ten thousand Romans and confederates were per­suaded to march under his banners; every malecon-tent embraced the fair opportunity of revenging hisprivate or imaginary wrongs; and the remainingtroops of Belisarius were divided and dispersed fromthe garrisons of Sicily to the shores of the Hadriatic.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 153


"in the use of weapons and the exercises of the camp. chap.
"The soldiers already stationed in the province are. _
"discontented, fearful, and dismayed; at the sound"of an enemy, they dismiss their horses, and cast"their arms on the ground. No taxes can be raised,"since Italy is in the hands of the Barbarians; the"failure of payment has deprived us of the right of"command, or even of admonition. Be assured,"dread sir, that the greater part of your troops have"already deserted to the Goths. If the war could"be achieved by the presence of Belisarius alone,"your wishes are satisfied; Belisarius is in the midst"of Italy. But if you desire to conquer, far other"preparations are requisite: without a military force,"the title of general is an empty name. It would be"expedient to restore to my service my own veterans"and domestic guards. Before I can take the field,"I must receive an adequate supply of light and"heavy armed troops; and it is only with ready"money that you can procure the indispensable aid"of a powerful body of the cavalry of the Huns*."An officer in whom Belisarius confided was sent fromRavenna to hasten and conduct the succours; butthe message was neglected, and the messenger wasdetained at Constantinople by an advantageous mar­riage. After his patience had been exhausted bydelay and disappointment, the Roman general re­passed the Hadriatic, and expected at Dyrrachiumthe arrival of the troops, which were slowly assembledamong the subjects and allies of the empire. Hispowers were still inadequate to the deliverance ofRome, which was closely besieged by the Gothicking. The Appian way, a march of forty days, wascovered by the Barbarians; and as the prudence of


* Procopiu8, 1. iii. c . 12. The soul of a hero is deeply impressed on theletter; nor can we confound such genuine and original acts with the elaborateand often empty speeches of the Byzantine historians.







OCR Output








19G THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. black pustules or carbuncles, the symptoms of im-XXXVL mediate death; and in the constitutions too feebleto produce an eruption, the vomiting of blood wasfollowed by a mortification of the bowels. To preg­nant women the plague was generally mortal: yetone infant was drawn alive from his dead mother,and three mothers survived the loss of their infectedfcetus. Youth was the most perilous season; andthe female sex was less susceptible than the male:but every rank and profession was attacked with in­discriminate rage, and many of those who escapedwere deprived of the use of their speech, withoutbeing secure from a return of the disorder. Thephysicians of Constantinople were zealous and skil­ful: but their art was baffled by the various symptomsand pertinacious vehemence of the disease: the sameremedies were productive of contrary effects, and theevent capriciously disappointed their prognostics ofdeath or recovery. The order of funerals, and theright of sepulchres, were confounded; those whowere left without friends or servants lay unburiedin the streets, or in their desolate houses; and amagistrate was authorized to collect the promiscuousheaps of dead bodies, to transport them by land orwater, and to inter them in deep pits beyond the pre­cincts of the city. Their own danger, and the pro­spect of public distress, awakened some remorse inthe minds of the most vicious of mankind; the con­fidence of health again revived their passions andhabits: but philosophy must disdain the observationof Procopius, that the lives of such men were guardedby the peculiar favour of fortune or providence. Heforgot, or perhaps he secretly recollected, that theplague had touched the person of Justinian himself;but the abstemious diet of the emperor may suggest,as in the case of Socrates, a more rational and honour­able cause for his recovery. During his sickness, the







OCR Output








CONTENTS


THE FOURTH VOLUME.


CHAP. XXXIV.


Conquests of Justinian in the West.—Character and first Cam­
paigns of Belisarius.—He invades and subdues the Vandal
Kingdom of Africa.—His Triumph.—The Gothic War.—He
recovers Sicily, Naples, and Rome.—Siege of Rome by the
Goths.—Their Retreat and Losses.—Surrender of Ravenna*—
Glory of Belisarius.—His domestic Shame and Misfortunes.


A.D.
533 Justinian resolves to invade Africa .
523—530. State of the Vandals. Hilderic
530—534. Gelimer
Debates on the African war . ,
Character and choice of Belisarius
529—532. His services in the Persian war
533 Preparations for the African war
Departure of the fleet
Belisarius lands on the coast of Africa
Defeats the Vandals in a first battle .
Reduction of Carthage
Final defeat of Gelimer and the Vandals
534 Conquest of Africa by Belisarius
Distress and captivity of Gelimer


Page
1
2
3
4
5
6
8
10
13
15
17
21
24
27


a3







OCR Output








382 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. princes and nations of the earth to the profession ofXL" Islam. On this foundation, the zeal of the Arabianshas supposed the secret conversion of the emperor;and the vanity of the Greeks has feigned a personalvisit to the prince of Medina, who accepted from theroyal bounty a rich domain, and a secure retreat inthe province of Syria. But the friendship of Hera-clius and Mahomet was of short continuance ; the newreligion having inflamed rather than assuaged therapacious spirit of the Saracens. The prophet ofArabia expired in the 632d year of the Christianera. His successor Abubeker, in the first year of hisreign, sent an army under the command of Caled toinvade Persia. The battle of Cadesia, and a seriesof successful sieges, in a short time rendered himmaster of that kingdom. Yesdegerd, the last of theSassanian kings, was slain, when he attempted, withthe assistance of his Eastern allies, to recover the pos­session of his lost dominions. The river Oxus thenseparated the territories of the Saracens and theTurks; but the former soon traversed that boundary,and the Mahometan banners were in a short timedisplayed on the banks of the Indus, and on theshores of the Caspian sea.
Syria * was also invaded by the lieutenants of


In addition to the writers, that are enumerated by Mr. Gibbon in the followingnotes, I may refer the reader to a publication of Mr. Mills, entitled a history ofMuhammedanism, &c. in one vol. 8vo. second edition.—Ed.
The private life of Mahomet, from his birth to his mission, is preserved byAbulfeda (in vit. c. 3. 7), and the Arabian writers of genuine or apocryphal notewho are alleged by Hottinger (in his Orient, p. 204—211), Maracci (tom. i. p.10 14), and Gagnier (Vie de Mahomet, tom. i. p. 97—134).
For the domestic life of Mahomet, consult G.ignier, and the correspondingchapters of Abulfeda; for his diet (tom. iii. p. '285—'288); his children (p. 189—J89); his wives (p. 390. 303); his marriage with Zeineb (tom. ii. p. 152—160); hU amour with Mary (p. 303—309); the false accusation of Aycsha,(p. 186—199;. The most original evidence of the three last transactions is con­tained in the xxiv. xxxiii. and Ixvi. chapters of the Koran, and Sale's Commentary.
The writers of the Modern Universal History (vol. i. and ii.) have compiled,in 850 folio pages, the life of Mahomet and the annals of the Caliphs. Theyenjoyed the advantage of reading and sometimes correcting the Arabic tex^, yet,notwithstanding their high sounding boasts, I cannot find, after the conclusion ofmy work, that they have afforded me much (if any) additional information.
* A separate history of the conquest of Syria has been composed by Al Wakidi,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 87


CHAP. XXXV.
State qf the Barbaric World.—Establishment of the Lom­bards on the Danube Tribes and Inroads of the Scla-
vonians—Origin, Empire, and Embassies of the Turks.—The Flight of the Avars.—Chosroes I. or NushirranKing of Persia.—His prosperous Reign and Warswith the Romans.—The Colchian or Lazic War.—The^Ethiopians.
Ouit estimate of personal merit is relative to the chap.
common faculties of mankind. The aspiring efforts'
of genius, or virtue, either in active or speculative Weaknesslife, are measured, not so much by their real eleva-pireoftion, as by the height to which they ascend above a"*d. 527the level of their age or country: and the same —565-stature, which in a people of giants would pass un­noticed, must appear conspicuous in a race of pygmies.Leonidas, and his three hundred companions, de­voted their lives at Thermopylae; but the educationof the infant, the boy, and the man, had prepared,and almost ensured, this memorable sacrifice; andeach Spartan would approve, rather than admire, anact of duty, of which himself and eight thousand ofhis fellow-citizens were equally capable. The greatPompey might inscribe on his trophies, that he haddefeated in battle two millions of enemies, and re­duced fifteen hundred cities from the lake Maeotisto the Red Sea: but the fortune of Rome flew be­fore his eagles; the nations were oppressed by theirown fears, and the invincible legions which he com­manded had been formed by the habits of conquestand the discipline of ages. In this view, the cha­racter of Belisarius may be deservedly placed abovethe heroes of the ancient republics. His imperfec-


r


g 4







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 101


The khan of the Ogors was slain with three hundred chap.thousand of his subjects, and their bodies were scat- xxxv-tered over the space of four days'journey; their sur­viving countrymen acknowledged the strength andmercy of the Turks; and a small portion, abouttwenty thousand warriors, preferred exile to servi­tude. They followed the well-known road of theVolga, cherished the error of the nations who con­founded them with the Avars, and spread the terrorof that false though famous appellation, which hadnot, however, saved its lawful proprietors from theyoke of the Turks. After a long and victoriousmarch, the new Avars arrived at the foot of mountCaucasus, in the country of the Alani and Circassians,where they first heard of the splendour and weaknessof the Roman empire." They humbly requested theirconfederate, the prince of the Alani, to lead them tothis source of riches; and their ambassador, with thepermission of the "governor of Lazica, was transportedby the Euxine sea to Constantinople. The wholecity was poured forth to behold with curiosity andterror the aspect of a strange people; their long hair,which hung in tresses down their backs, was grace­fully bound with ribbons, but the rest of their habitappeared to imitate the fashion of the Huns. When Their em-they were admitted to the audience of Justinian, coStan-Candish, the first of the ambassadors, addressed the An<g1<2Roman emperor in these terms: "You see before"you, O mighty prince, the representatives of the"strongest and most populous of nations, the in-"vincible, the irresistible Avars. We are willing"to devote ourselves to your service: we are able to"vanquish and destroy all the enemies who now"disturb your repose. But we expect, as the price of*' our alliance, as the reward of our valour, precious"gifts, annual subsidies, and fruitful possessions."At the time of this embassy, Justinian had reigned


h 3







OCR Output








S80 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. easily be repelled, he rushed forwards to encounterxxxviii. ^g imp]acable enemy of his name and family. Butthe courage of the Gepidae could secure them no morethan an honourable death. The bravest of the nationfell in the field of battle; the king of the Lombardscontemplated with delight the head of Cunimund,and his skull was fashioned into a cup to satiate thehatred of the conqueror, or, perhaps, to comply withthe savage custom of his country*. After this vic­tory, no farther obstacle could impede the progressof the confederates, and they faithfully executed theterms of their agreement t. The fair countries ofWalachia, Moldavia, Transylvania, and the parts ofHungary beyond the Danube, were occupied, with­out resistance, by a new colony of Scythians; andthe Dacian empire of the chagans subsisted withsplendour above two hundred and thirty years. Thenation of the Gepidae was dissolved; but in the dis­tribution of the captives, the slaves of the Avars wereless fortunate than the companions of the Lombards,whose generosity adopted a valiant foe, and whosefreedom was incompatible with cool and deliberatetyranny. One moiety of the spoil introduced intothe camp of Alboin more wealth than a Barbariancould readily compute. The fair Rosamond was per­suaded, or compelled, to acknowledge the rights ofher victorious lover; and the daughter of Cunimundappeared to forgive those crimes which might be im­puted to her own irresistible charms.Alboin The destruction of a mighty kingdom established
undertakes
the conquest the fame of Alboin. In the days of Charlemagne,A.DJ567. tne Bavarians, the Saxons, and the other tribes of the


* It appears from Strabo, Pliny, and Ammianus Marcellinus, that the samepractice was common among the Scythian tribes (Muratori, Scriptores Rer. Italic.tom. i. p. 424). The scalpt of North America are likewise trophies of valour.The skull of Cunimund was preserved above two hundred years among the Lom­bards; and Paul himself was one of the guests to whom duke Ratchis exhibitedthis cup on a high festival (1. ii. c. 2ft).
f Paul, 1. i. c. 27. Menander, in Excerpt. Legat. p. 110, 111.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 125


the Euxine; and the curled hair and swarthy com- chap.
XXXV.
plexion of Africa no longer disfigure the most per- !_
feet of the human race. It is in the adjacent climatesof Georgia, Mingrelia, and Circassia, that naturehas placed, at least to our eyes, the model of beauty,in the shape of the limbs, the colour of the skin, thesymmetry of the features, and the expression of thecountenance *. According to the destination of thetwo sexes, the men seem formed for action, the wo­men for love; and the perpetual supply of femalesfrom mount Caucasus has purified the blood, andimproved the breed, of the southern nations of Asia.The proper district of Mingrelia, a portion only ofthe ancient Colchos, has long sustained an exporta­tion of twelve thousand slaves. The number ofprisoners or criminals would be inadequate to theannual demand; but the common people are in astate of servitude to their lords; the exercise of fraudor rapine is unpunished in a lawless community; andthe market is continually replenished by the abuseof civil and paternal authority. Such a trade, whichreduces the human species to the level of cattle, maytend to encourage marriage and population; sincethe multitude of children enriches their sordid andinhuman parent. But this source of impure wealthmust inevitably poison the national manners, obli­terate the sense of honour and virtue, and almostextinguish the instincts of nature; the Christians ofGeorgia and Mingrelia are the most dissolute ofmankind; and their children, who, in a tender age,are sold into foreign slavery, have already learnt toimitate the rapine of the father and the prostitutionof the mother. Yet, amidst the rudest ignorance,the untaught natives discover a singular dexterity


* Buffon (Hist. Nat. tom. iii. p. 433—437) collects the unanimous suffrage ofnaturalists and travellers. If, in the time of Herodotus, they were in truth fit-KayXfoif and ouXo-rf >y if (and he had observed them with care), this precious fact isan example of the influence of climate on a foreign colony.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 273


CHAP. XXXVIII.
Reign of the younger Justin. —Embassy of the Apars.—
Their Settlement on the Danube Conquest of Italy by
the Lombards.—Adoption and Reign of Tiberius.—OfMaurice.—State of Italy under the Lombards and theExarchs.—Of Ravenna.—Distress of Rome.—Characterand Pontificate of Gregory the First.
During the last years of Justinian, his infirm chap.mind was devoted to heavenly contemplation, and he XXXVIILneglected the business of the lower world. His sub- Death ofjects were impatient of the long continuance of his aIeToCs,life and reign: yet all who were capable of reflection Nov-14-apprehended the moment of his death, which mightinvolve the capital in tumult, and the empire in civilwar. Seven nephews* of the childless monarch, thesons or grandsons of his brother and sister, had beeneducated in the splendour of a princely fortune; theyhad been shown in high commands to the provincesand armies; their characters were known, their fol­lowers were zealous, and as the jealousy of age post­poned the declaration of a successor, they might ex­pect with equal hopes the inheritance of their uncle.He expired in his palace after a reign of thirty-eightyears; and the decisive opportunity was embraced bythe friends of Justin, the son of Vigilantia-f. At thehour of midnight, his domestics were awakened by animportunate crowd, who thundered at his door, andobtained admittance by revealing themselves to be


* See the family of Justin and Justinian, in the Familiae Byzantinae of Du-cange, p. 89—fill. The devout civilians, Ludewig (in Vit. Justinian, p. 131),and Heineccius (Hist. Juris. Roman, p. 374), have since illustrated the genealogyof their favourite prince.
"f In the story of Justin's elevation I have translated into simple and conciseprose the eight hundred verses of the two first hooks of Corippus, De LaudibusJustini, Appendix, Hist . Byzant , p. 401—416. Rome, 1777.
VOL. IV. T







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. Ill


dexterity like their own, the abstruse and profound cha .
YVYV
questions which amused the leisure of the schools of'
Athens? Could they hope that the precepts ofphilosophy should direct the life, and control thepassions, of a despot, whose infancy had been taughtto consider his absolute and fluctuating will as theonly rule of moral obligation? The studies of Chos-roes were ostentatious and superficial: but.his ex­ample awakened the curiosity of an ingenious people,and the light of science was diffused over the do­minions of Persia. At Gondi Sapor, in the neighbour­hood of the royal city of Susa, an academy of physicwas founded, which insensibly became a liberal schoolof poetry, philosophy, and rhetoric *. The annals ofthe monarchy were composed; and while recent andauthentic history might afford some useful lessonsboth to the prince and people, the darkness of thefirst ages was embellished by the giants, the dragons,and the fabulous heroes of Oriental romance. Everylearned or confident stranger was enriched by thebounty, and flattered by the conversation, of themonarch: he nobly rewarded a Greek physician, bythe deliverance of three thousand captives; and thesophists who contended for his favour were ex­asperated by the wealth and insolence of Uranius,their more successful rival. Nushirvan believed, orat least respected, the religion of the Magi; andsome traces of persecution may be discovered in hisreign. Yet he allowed himself freely to compare thetenets of the various sects; and the theological dis­putes in which he frequently presided diminishedthe authority of the priest, and enlightened the mindsof the people. At his command, the most celebratedwriters of Greece and India were translated into thePersian language; a smooth and elegant idiom, re­commended by Mahomet to the use of paradise:
• Asscmlui. Bibliot. Orient. tom. iv. p. dccxlv. vi. vii.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 303


always on horseback and in the field. This favourite chap.
YYYVTTT
amusement of our ancestors was introduced by the'
Barbarians into the Roman provinces; and the lawsof Italy esteem the sword and the hawk as of equaldignity and importance in the hands of a noble Lom­bard.
So rapid was the influence of climate and example, Dress andthat the Lombards of the fourth generation surveyed ama"c'with curiosity and affright the portraits of theirsavage forefathers. Their heads were shaven behind,but the shaggy locks hung over their eyes and mouth,and a long beard represented the name and characterof the nation. Their dress consisted of loose linengarments, after the fashion of the Anglo-Saxons,which were decorated, in their opinion, with broadstripes of variegated colours. The legs and feetwere clothed in long hose, and open sandals; andeven in the security of peace a trusty sword wasconstantly girt to their side. Yet this strange apparel,and horrid aspect, often concealed a gentle and ge­nerous disposition; and as soon as the rage of battlehad subsided, the captives and subjects were some­times surprised by the humanity of the victor. Thevices of the Lombards were the effect of passion, ofignorance, of intoxication; their virtues are the morelaudable, as they were not affected by the hypocrisyof social manners, nor imposed by the rigid constraintof laws and education. I should not be apprehensiveof deviating from my subject, if it were in my powerto delineate the private life of the conquerors of Italy,and I shall relate with pleasure the adventurous gal­lantry of Autharis, which breathes the true spirit ofchivalry and romance*. After the loss of his pro­mised bride, a Merovingian princess, he sought in


* The story of Autharis and Theudelinda is related by Paul, 1. iii. c. 29. 34;and any fragment of Bavarian antiquity excites the indefatigable diligence of thecount de Buat, Hist, des Peuples de 1'Europe, tom. xi. p. 595—635. tom. xii.p. 1—53.







OCR Output








172 THE DECLINE AND -FALL


XXXVI.


chap. lance into the air; caught it with the right hand;shifted it to the left; threw himself backwards; re­covered his seat; and managed a fiery steed in allthe paces and evolutions of the equestrian school. Assoon as the succours had arrived, he retired to histent, assumed the dress and arms of a private soldier,and gave the signal of battle. The first line of cavalryadvanced with more courage than discretion, and leftbehind them the infantry of the second line. Theywere soon engaged between the horns of a crescent,into which the adverse wings had been insensiblycurved, and were saluted from either side by thevolleys of four thousand archers. Their ardour, andeven their distress, drove them forwards to a closeand unequal conflict, in which they could only usetheir lances against an enemy equally skilled in allthe instruments of war. A generous emulation in­spired the Romans and their Barbarian allies: andNarses, who calmly viewed and directed their efforts,doubted to whom he should adjudge the prize of su­perior bravery. The Gothic cavalry was astonishedand disordered, pressed and broken; and the litte ofinfantry, instead of presenting their spears, or open­ing their intervals, were trampled under the feet ofthe flying horse. Six thousand of the Goths wereslaughtered, without mercy, in the field of Tagina.Their prince, with five attendants, was overtaken byAsbad, of the race of the Gepidae; "Spare the king"of Italy," cried a loyal voice, and Asbad struck hislance through the body of Totila. The blow wasinstantly revenged by the faithful Goths; they trans­ported their dying monarch seven miles beyond thescene of his disgrace; and his last moments were notimbittered by the presence of an enemy. Compassionafforded him the shelter of an obscure tomb; but theRomans were not satisfied of their victory, till they







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 449


cred vessels of the altar in their bacchanalian feasts, chap.Nor were these impious spectacles concealed from'
the eyes of the city. On the day of a solemn festi­val, the emperor, with his bishops or buffoons, rodeon asses through the streets, encountered the true pa­triarch at the head of his clergy, and, by their licen­tious shouts and obscene gestures, disordered the gra­vity of the Christian procession.
The devotion of Michael appeared only in someoffence to reason or piety: he received his theatricalcrowns from the statue of the Virgin; and an Impe­rial tomb was violated for the sake of burning thebones of Constantine the Iconoclast. By this extra­vagant conduct, the son of Theophilus became ascontemptible as he was odious : every citizen was im­patient for the deliverance of his country; and eventhe favourites of the moment were apprehensive thata caprice might snatch away what a caprice had be­stowed. In the thirtieth year of his age, and in thehour of intoxication and sleep, Michael the thirdwas murdered in his chamber, by the founder of anew dynasty, whom the emperor had raised to anequality of rank and power.
The genealogy of Basil the Macedonian (if it be Basil i.not the spurious offspring of pride and flattery) ex-„jan,ahibits a genuine picture of the revolution of the most s' ^j^7'illustrious families. The Arsacides, the rivals ofRome, possessed the sceptre of the East near fourhundred years ; .a younger branch of these Parthiankings continued to reign in Armenia; and theirroyal descendants survived the partition and servitudeof that ancient monarchy. Two of these, Artabanusand Chlienes, escaped, or retired to the court of Leothe first; his bounty seated them in a safe and hos­pitable exile, in the province of Macedonia; Adrian-ople was their final settlement. During severalgenerations they maintained the dignity of their
VOL. iv. g o


 







OCR Output








OK THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 305


permitted to bestow, with her hand, the sceptre of chap.the Italian kingdom. xxxviii.
From this fact, as well as from similar events *, it Govern,is certain that the Lombards possessed freedom toment"elect their sovereign, and sense to decline the fre­quent use of that dangerous privilege. The publicrevenue arose from the produce of land, and theprofits of justice. When the independent dukesagreed that Autharis should ascend the throne ofhis father, they endowed the regal office with a fairmoiety of their respective domains. The proudestnobles aspired to the honours of servitude near theperson of their prince: he rewarded the fidelity ofhis vassals by the precarious gift of pensions andbenefices; and atoned for the injuries of war, by therich foundation of monasteries and churches. Inpeace a judge, a leader in war, he never usurped thepowers of a sole and absolute legislator. The kingof Italy convened the national assemblies in thepalace, or more probably in the fields, of Pavia: hisgreat council was composed of the persons mosteminent by their birth and dignities; but the va­lidity, as well as the execution of their decrees, de­pended on the approbation of the faithful people, thefortunate army of the Lombards. About fourscore Laws,years after the conquest of Italy, their traditional £*CD: 643,customs were transcribed in Teutonic Latin, andratified by the consent of the prince and people;some new regulations were introduced, more suitableto their present condition; the example of Rothariswas imitated by the wisest of his successors, and thelaws of the Lombards have been esteemed the leastimperfect of the Barbaric codes. Secure by theircourage in the possession of liberty, these rude andhasty legislators were incapable of balancing the


* Paul, 1. iii. c. 16. The first dissertations of Muratori, and the first volumeof Giannone's history, may be consulted for the state of the kingdom of Italy.
VOL. IV. X







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 493


the last of the Saracens, or Franks, could proudly chap.exhibit the medals of gold and silver which they


had extorted from the feeble sovereign of Constan -tinople.
The subjects of the last caliphs * had undoubtedly characterdegenerated from the zeal and faith of the companions ™^!Wof the prophet. Yet their martial creed still repre- as­sented the deity as the author of war: the vitalthough latent spark of fanaticism still glowed in theheart of their religion, and among the Saracens whodwelt on the Christian borders it was frequently re­kindled to a lively and active flame. Their regularforce was formed of the valiant slaves who had beeneducated to guard the person and accompany thestandard of their lord; but the Mussulman people ofSyria and Cilicia, of Africa and Spain, was awakenedby the trumpet which proclaimed a holy war againstthe infidels. The rich were ambitious of death orvictory in the cause of God; the poor were alluredby the hopes of plunder; and the old, the infirm,and the women, assumed their share of meritoriousservice by sending their substitutes, with arms andhorses, into the field. These offensive and defensivearms were similar in strength and temper to those ofthe Romans, whom they far excelled in the manage­ment of the horse and the bow; the massy silver oftheir belts, their bridles, and their swords, displayedthe magnificence of a prosperous nation, and, exceptsome black archers of the South, the Arabs disdainedthe naked bravery of their ancestors. Instead ofwaggons, they were attended by a long train ofcamels, mules, and asses; the multitude of these ani­mals, whom they bedecked with flags and streamers,


* The eighteenth chapter of the tactics of the different nations is the most hi -Btorical and useful of the whole collection of Leo. The manners and arms of theSaracens (Tactic, p. 809—817- and a fragment from the Medicean MS. in thepreface of the sixth volume of Mcursius) the Roman emperor was too frequentlycalled upon to study.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 123


is too soft to sustain the action of the plough; but chap.the gom, a small grain, not unlike the millet or co-.riander seed, supplies the ordinary food of the people;and the use of bread is confined to the prince andhis nobles. Yet the vintage is more plentiful thanthe harvest; and the bulk of the stems, as well asthe quality of the wine, display the unassisted powersof nature. The same powers continually tend toovershadow the face of the country with thick forests;the timber of the hills, and the flax of the plains,contribute to the abundance of naval stores; thewild and tame animals, the horse, the ox, and thehog, are remarkably prolific, and the name of thepheasant is expressive of his native habitation on thebanks of the Phasis. The gold mines to the southof Trebizond, which are still worked with sufficientprofit, were a subject of national dispute betweenJustinian and Chosroes; and it is not unreasonableto believe, that a vein of precious metal may beequally diffused through the circle of the hills, al­though these secret treasures are neglected by thelaziness, or concealed by the prudence, of the Min-grelians. The waters, impregnated with particlesof gold, are carefully strained through sheep-skins orfleeces; but this expedient, the ground-work per­haps of a marvellous fable, affords a faint image ofthe wealth extracted from a virgin earth by thepower and industry of ancient kings. Their silverpalaces and golden chambers surpass our belief; butthe fame of their riches is said to have excited theenterprising avarice of the Argonauts*. Traditionhas affirmed, with some colour of reason, that Egyptplanted on the Phasis a learned and polite colony,


XXXV.
* Pliny, Hist , Natur. 1 . xxxiii. 15. The gold and silver mines of Colchos at­tracted the Argonauts (Strab. 1. i. p. 77)- The sagacious Chardin could find nogold in mines, rivers, or elsewhere. Yet a Mingrelian lost his hand and foot forshowing some specimens at Constantinople of native gold.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 403


querors was soon interrupted by the appearance of a chap.powerful armament from Constantinople, under the'
command of the praefect John, a general of expe­rience. The Saracens were now compelled to retireto Cairoan or Tripoli; but, the following spring(698),a more numerous army was sent by the caliph, and thepraefect was in his turn compelled to evacuate Car­thage. A second and a decisive battle was fought nearUtica: Hassan was victorious; a timely embarkationpreserved the remains of the defeated army; and afinal period was put to the dominion of the Greeksin that part of Africa which had been subdued bythe arms of Justinian. Whatever yet remained ofCarthage was delivered to the flames, and the colonyof Dido lay desolate above two hundred years, till apart, perhaps a twentieth of the old circumference,was repeopled by the first of the Fatimite caliphs. Inthe beginning of the sixteenth century, the secondcapital of the West was represented by a mosch, acollege without students, twenty-five or thirty shops,and the huts of five hundred peasants; who, in theirabject poverty, displayed the arrogance of the Punicsenators. Even that paltry village was swept awayby the Spaniards whom Charles the Fifth had sta­tioned in the fortress of Goletta. The ruins of Car­thage have perished; and the place might be unknown,if some broken arches of an aqueduct did not guidethe footsteps of the inquisitive traveller.
The further progress of the Saracens to the west­ward can scarcely be considered as a part of thehistory of the Greek empire; but it may be satis­factory to state, in a few words, the important con­quests which they achieved in a short period. TheGreeks were now expelled, but the Saracens expe­rienced an obstinate resistance from the Moors, underthe standard of their queen Cahina, who assumed thecharacter of a prophetess. Hassan was defeated, and


d d 2







OCR Output








116 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. missed the ambassador of Justinian to inform hisxxxv- master in what place he had left the enemy of the Ro­mans. The conqueror still affected the praise of hu­manity and justice; and as he beheld a noble matronwith her infant rudely dragged along the ground, hesighed, he wept, and implored the divine justice topunish the author of these calamities. Yet the herdof twelve thousand captives was ransomed for twohundred pounds of gold; the neighbouring bishop ofSergioplis pledged his faith for the payment; and inthe subsequent year the unfeeling avarice of Chosroesexacted the penalty of an obligation which it was ge­nerous to contract and impossible to discharge. Headvanced into the heart of Syria; but a feeble ene­my, who vanished at his approach, disappointed himof the honour of victory; and as he could not hopeto establish his dominion, the Persian king displayedin this inroad the mean and rapacious vices of a rob­ber. Hierapolis, Berrhaea or Aleppo, Apamea, andChalcis, were successively besieged; they redeemedtheir safety by a ransom of gold or silver, proportionedto their respective strength and opulence; and theirnew master enforced, without observing, the termsand ruins of capitulation. No more than fourteen years hadelapsed since Antioch was ruined by an earthquake;but the queen of the East, the new Theopolis, hadbeen raised from the ground by the liberality of Jus­tinian; and the increasing greatness of the buildingsand the people already erased the memory of this re­cent disaster. On one side, the city was defendedby the mountain, on the other by the river Orontes;but the most accessible part was commanded by a su­perior eminence: the proper remedies were rejected,from the despicable fear of discovering its weaknessto the enemy; and Germanus, the emperor,s nephew,refused to trust his person and dignity within thewalls of a besieged city. The people of Antioch had


Antioch.







OCR Output








428 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. black standard of the Abassides. They swept the sur-XL" face of Asia Minor far beyond Tyana and Ancyra;and invested the Pontic Heraclea, once a nourishingstate, now a paltry town; at that time capable ofsustaining in her antique walls a month's siege againstthe forces of the East. The ruin was complete; thespoil was ample: but if Harun had been conversantwith Grecian story, he would have regretted thestatue of Hercules; whose attributes, the club, thebow, the quiver, and the lion's hide, were sculpturedin massy gold. The progress of desolation by seaand land, from the Euxine to the isle of Cyprus,compelled the emperor Nicephorus to retract hishaughty defiance. In the new treaty, the ruins ofHeraclea were left for ever as a lesson and a trophy;and the coin of the tribute was marked with thesuperscription of Harun and his three sons. Yet thisplurality of lords might contribute to remove the dis­honour of the Roman name. After the death oftheir father, the heirs of the caliph were involved incivil discord; and the conqueror, the liberal Alina-mon, was sufficiently engaged in the restoration ofdomestic peace, and the introduction of foreignscience.Nicepho- Many tyrants have reigned undoubtedly more
a. d. 802. criminal than Nicephorus; but none perhaps haveOctober 31. more deeply incurred the universal abhorrence oftheir people. His character was stained with thethree odious crimes of hypocrisy, ingratitude, andavarice; his want of virtue was not redeemed by anysuperior talents; nor his want of talents by anypleasing qualifications. Unskilful and unfortunatein war, Nicephorus was vanquished by the Saracens,and slain by the Bulgarians; and the advantage ofhis death overbalanced, in the public opinion, thedestruction of a Roman army. The warlike tribesof the Bulgarians in the next century embraced the







OCR Output








134 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. the river, the Euxine, and a fleet of galleys. Despairxxxv" united their counsels and invigorated their arms;they withstood the assault of the Persians; and theflight of Nacoragan preceded or followed the slaughterof ten thousand of his bravest soldiers. He escapedfrom the Romans to fall into the hands of an un­forgiving master, who severely chastised the error ofhis own choice; the unfortunate general was flayedalive. and his skin, stuffed into the human form, wasexposed on a mountain; a dreadful warning to thosewho might hereafter be intrusted with the fame andfortune of Persia. Yet the prudence of Chosroes in­sensibly relinquished the prosecution of the Colchianwar, in the just persuasion that it is impossible to re­duce, or, at least, to hold a distant country againstthe wishes and efforts of its inhabitants. The fidelityof Gubazes sustained the most rigorous trials. Hepatiently endured the hardships of a savage life, andrejected, with disdain, the specious temptations of thePersian court. The king of the Lazi had been edu­cated in the Christian religion; his mother was thedaughter of a senator; during his youth, he hadserved ten years a silentiary of the Byzantine palace,and the arrears of an unpaid salary were a motive ofattachment as well as of complaint. But the longcontinuance of his sufferings extorted from him anaked representation of the truth; and truth was anunpardonable libel on the lieutenants of Justinian, who,amidst the delays of a ruinous war, had spared hisenemies and trampled on his allies. Their maliciousinformation persuaded the emperor, that his faithlessvassal already meditated a second defection: an orderwas surprised to send him prisoner to Constantinople;a treacherous clause was inserted, that he might belawfully killed in case of resistance; and Gubazes,without arms, or suspicion of danger, was stabbed inthe security of a friendly interview. In the first mo­







OCR Output








414 THE DECLINE AND FAIX


chap. Not long after the second siege of Constantinople,XL' the power of the caliphs was torn by intestine divisions;Civil w»rs of and the widely extended empire of the Saracens wasand triple 'divided into three separate sovereignties, by the real orfteShfte. pretended descendants of Mahomet and his family.The Abbasides, who adopted the black colours, andderived their descent from Abbas, the uncle of Ma­homet, obtained, after a bloody contest, the dominionof the Asiatic provinces. Bagdad was founded bytheir caliph Almamon, and that city became the im­perial seat of their posterity during a period of fivehundred years. The Fatimites, who were descendedfrom the daughter of the Prophet, displayed the greenstandard, and ruled in Africa. The Ommiades, withthe white colours, after a long war, were driven fromthe East by the Abbasides, but found an asylum inSpain, where they continued to reign during two hun­dred and fifty years. In the tenth century, the chairof Mahomet was disputed by three caliphs, or com­manders of the faithful, who reigned at Bagdad,Cairoan, and Cordova. They excommunicated eachother, and agreed only in a principle of discord, thata sectary is more odious and criminal than an un­believer.Leo hi. the I shall now briefly represent the founder of a new
Isaurian, , i • 1 , 1
a. d. 718. dynasty, who is known to posterity by the invectivesMarch 25. 0f his enemies, and whose public and private life isinvolved in the ecclesiastical story of the Iconoclasts.Yet in spite of the clamours of superstition, a favour­able prejudice for the character of Leo the Isaurianmay be reasonably drawn from the obscurity of hisbirth, and the duration of his reign. 1. In an ageof manly spirit, the prospect of an imperial rewardwould have kindled every energy of the mind, andproduced a crowd of competitors as deserving, as theywere desirous to reign. Even in the corruption anddebility of the modern Greeks, the elevation of a







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. from the provinces of Europe and Asia, and increasedxu by the Christian Arabs of the tribe of Gassan. Theformer are said to have amounted to 80,000, the latterto 60,000. The most obstinate and bloody battleof the whole war was fought at Yermuk, in the year636. The Christians were at last defeated. The com­mander of the Saracens informs the Caliph that hisarmy had killed 150,000 of the infidels, and made40,000 captives. The reader will make what allow­ance he pleases for oriental expressions.
After this battle no army appeared in the field tooppose the Saracens. The siege of Jerusalem wasimmediately undertaken, and, after an obstinate de­fence of four months, the city was entered by theCaliph Omar, in the year 637. After the defeats ofAiziradin and Yermuk, Heraclius lost all hopes ofdefending Syria*. He abandoned the remaining un-conquered part of the province in the year 638; andAleppo, Antioch, and finally Cesarea, with the restof Syria, fell in a short time into the hands of thevictorious Moslems. The place of the first conquerorswas supplied by a new generation, and the Saracens,between the years 639 and 655, passed Mount Taurus,and subdued Cilicia with its capital Tarsus. Theyafterwards crossed a second ridge of the same moun­tains, and extended the flames of war as far as theshores of the Euxine and the neighbourhood of Con­stantinople. To the east they advanced to the sourcesof the Tigris and Euphrates; subdued Edessa andAmida, Dara, Nisibis, and the whole of that countrywhich for so long a period had been the disputedbarrier of Rome and Persia. Masters of Syria, theyemployed the forest of Libanus, and the marinersof Phenicia, in the construction of a powerful navy,


*In the Geography of Abulfeda, the description of Syria, his native country, isthe most interesting and authentic portion. Among the modern travels, Pocock'sdescription of the East, of Syria, and Mesopotamia, is a work of superior learningand dignity.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 138


troops of Justinian were more frequent and splendid; chap-but the forces of the great king were continually xxxv-supplied, till they amounted to eight elephants andseventy thousand men, including twelve thousandScythian allies, and above three thousand Dilemites,who descended by their free choice from the hills ofHyrcania, and were equally formidable in close or indistant combat. The siege of Archaeopolis, a nameimposed or corrupted by the Greeks, was raised withsome loss and precipitation; but the Persians oc­cupied the passes of Iberia: Colchos was enslaved bytheir forts and garrisons; they devoured the scantysustenance of the people; and the prince of the Lazifled into the mountains. In the Roman camp, faithand discipline were unknown; and the independentleaders, who were invested with equal power, disputedwith each other the pre-eminence of vice and cor­ruption. The Persians followed, without a murmur,the commands of a single chief, who implicitly obeyedthe instructions of their supreme lord. Their generalwas distinguished among the heroes of the East, byhis wisdom in council, and his valour in the field. Theadvanced age of Mermeroes, and the lameness of bothhis feet, could not diminish the activity of his mind,or even of his body; and whilst he was carried in alitter in the front of battle, he inspired terror to theenemy, and a just confidence to the troops, who,under his banners, were always successful. After hisdeath, the command devolved to Nacoragan, a proudsatrap, who, in conference with the Imperial chiefs,had presumed to declare that he disposed of victoryas absolutely as of the ring on his finger. Such pre­sumption was the natural cause and forerunner of ashameful defeat. The Romans had been graduallyrepulsed to the edge of the sea-shore; and their lastcamp, on the ruins of the Grecian colony of Phasis,was defended on all sides by strong intrenchments,


k 3''







OCR Output








9F THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 189


strength, as well as fervour, that he frequently passed chap. ,two days and as many nights, without tasting any XXXVI-food. The measure of his sleep was not less rigor­ous: after the repose of a single hour, the body wasawakened by the soul, and, to the astonishment ofhis chamberlains, Justinian walked or studied till themorning light. Such restless application prolongedhis time for the acquisition of knowledge * and thedespatch of business: and he might seriously deservethe reproach of confounding, by minute and pre­posterous diligence, the general order of his admini­stration. The emperor professed himself a musicianand architect, a poet and philosopher, a lawyer andtheologian; and if he failed in the enterprise of re­conciling the Christian sects, the review of the Ro­man jurisprudence is a noble monument of his spiritand industry. In the government of the empire,he was less wise or less successful: the age was un­fortunate; the people was oppressed and discontented;Theodora abused her power; a succession of badministers disgraced his judgment; and Justinian wasneither beloved in his life, nor regretted at his death.The love of fame was deeply implanted in his breast,but he condescended to the poor ambition of titles,honours, and contemporary praise; and while he la­boured to fix the admiration, ,he forfeited the esteemand affection of the Romans. The design of theAfrican and Italian wars was boldly conceived andexecuted: and his penetration discovered the talentsof Belisarius in the camp, of Narses in the palace.But the name of the emperor is eclipsed by the namesof his victorious generals; and Belisarius still lives,to upbraid the envy and ingratitude of his sovereign.The partial favour of mankind applauds the genius of


• The studies and rcience of Justinian are attested by the confession (Anecdot.c. 8. IS), still more than by the praises (Gothic . 1. iii. c. 31. dc Edific. 1. i. Proem,c. 7) of Procopius. Consult the copious index of Alemannus, and read the lifeof Justinian by Ludewig (p. 135—142).


r







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. that the fears of the Persians would be productive ofxxxix. hatred, and that their hatred must terminate in re­bellion: but he forgot that his own guilt and follyhad inspired the sentiments which he deplored, andprepared the event which he so justly apprehended.Exasperated by long and hopeless oppression, theprovinces of Babylon, Susa, and Carmania, erectedthe standard of revolt; and the princes of Arabia,India, and Scythia, refused the customary tribute tothe unworthy successor of Nushirvan. The arms ofthe Romans, in slow sieges and frequent inroads,afflicted the frontiers of Mesopotamia and Assyria.At the same time, the eastern provinces of Persiawere invaded by the great khan, who passed the Oxusat the head of three or four hundred thousand Turks.The imprudent Horm'ouz accepted their perfidiousand formidable aid; the cities of Khorasan or Bac-tariana were commanded to open their gates; themarch of the Barbarians towards the mountains ofHyrcania revealed the correspondence of the Turkishand Roman arms; and their union must have sub­verted the throne of the house of Sassan.Exploits of Persia had been lost by a king; it was saved by aa.d. 590. hero. After his revolt, Varanes or Bahram is stig­matised by the son of Hormouz as an ungratefulslave: the proud and ambiguous reproach of de­spotism, since he was truly descended from the an­cient princes of Rei, one of the seven families whosesplendid as well as substantial prerogatives exaltedthem above the heads of the Persian nobility. Atthe siege of Dara, the valour of Bahram was sig­nalized under the eyes of Nushirvan, and both thefather and son successively promoted him to the com­mand of armies, the government of Media, and thesuperintendence of the palace. The popular predic­tion which marked him as the deliverer of Persiamight be inspired by his past victories and extra­


 







OCR Output








118 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. who had too faithfully copied the rapine of the just 1 Nushirvan. At length, fatigued, though unsatiated,


with the spoil of Syria, he slowly moved to the Eu­phrates, formed a temporary bridge in the neigh­bourhood of Barbalissus, and denned the space ofthree days for the entire passage of his numerous host.After his return, he founded, at the distance of oneday's journey from the palace of Ctesiphon, a newcity, which perpetuated the joint names of Chosroesand of Antioch. The Syrian captives recognised theform and situation of their native abodes: baths anda stately circus were constructed for their use; anda colony of musicians and charioteers revived inAssyria the pleasures of a Greek capital. By themunificence of the royal founder, a liberal allowancewas assigned to these fortunate exiles; and they en­joyed the singular privilege of bestowing freedom onthe slaves whom they acknowledged as their kinsmen.Palestine, and the holy wealth of Jerusalem, were thenext objects that attracted the ambition, or ratherthe avarice, of Chosroes. Constantinople, and thepalace of the Caesars, no longer appeared impregnableor remote; and his aspiring fancy already coveredAsia Minor with the troops, and the Black Sea withthe navies, of Persia.^Eastif These hopes might have been realised, if the con-Beiisarfus, queror of Italy had not been seasonably recalled to'the defence of the East *. While Chosroes pursuedhis ambitious designs on the coast of the Euxine,Belisarius, at the head of an army without pay ordiscipline, encamped beyond the Euphrates, withinsix miles of Nisibis. He meditated, by a skilfuloperation, to draw the Persians from their impregna-
• In the public history of Procopius (Persic. 1. ii. c. 16. 18, 19, 20, 21. 24,25, 26, 27, 28); and, with some slight exceptions, we may reasonably shut ourears against the malevolent whisper of the Anecdotes (c. 2, 3, with the Notes, asusual, of Alcmunnus).







OCR Output








234 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. the interest or passions of an unworthy father: the* same crimes that flowed from the corruption, were
more sensibly felt by the humanity, of the Augustanage; and the cruel Erixo, who whipped his son till heexpired, was saved by the emperor from the just furyof the multitude*. The Roman father, from thelicence of servile dominion, was reduced to the gra­vity and moderation of a judge. The presence andopinion of Augustus confirmed the sentence of exilepronounced against an intentional parricide by thedomestic tribunal of Arius. Hadrian transported toan island the jealous parent, who, like a robber, hadseized the opportunity of hunting, to assassinate ayouth, the incestuous lover of his stepmother f. Aprivate jurisdiction is repugnant to the spirit of mon­archy; the parent was again reduced from a judgeto an accuser; and the magistrates were enjoined bySeverus Alexander to hear his complaints and executehis sentence. He could no longer take the life of ason without incurring the guilt and punishment ofmurder; and the pains of parricide, from which hehad been excepted by the Pompeian law, were finallyinflicted by the justice of Constantine J. The sameprotection was due to every period of existence; andreason must applaud the humanity of Paulus, forimputing the crime of murder to the father, whostrangles, or starves, or abandons his new-born in­fant; or exposes him in a public place to find themercy which he himself had denied. But the ex­position of children was the prevailing and stubborn


* The examples of Erixo and Arius are related by Seneca (de dementia, i.14, 15), the former with horror, the latter with applause.
•f Quod latronis magis quam patris jure eum interfecit, nam patria potestas inpietatc debet non in atrocitate consistere (Marcian, Institut . 1. xiv. in Pandect.1. xlviii. tit. is. leg. 6).
$ The Pompeian and Cornelian laws de sicariii and parricidu, are repeated,or rather abridged, with the last supplements of Alexander Severus, Constantino,and Valentinian, in the Pandects (1. xlviii. tit. viii, ix), and Code (1. ix. tit. xvi,xvii). See likewise the Theodosian Code (1 . ix. tit. xiv, xv), with Godefroy'sCommentary (tom. iii. p. 84—113), who pours a Hood of ancient and modernlearning over these penal laws.







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. the prudence of Gelimer compelled him to reject _ these requests, which were urged in the haughty


tone of menace and command; and he justified hisambition in a language rarely spoken in the By­zantine court, by alleging the right of a free peopleto remove or punish their chief magistrate, who hadfailed in the execution of the kingly office. Afterthis fruitless expostulation, the captive monarch wasmore rigorously treated, his nephew was deprivedof his eyes, and the cruel Vandal, confident in hisstrength and distance, derided the vain threats andslow preparations of the emperor of the East. Jus­tinian resolved to deliver or revenge his friend, Ge­limer to maintain his usurpation: and the war waspreceded, according to the practice of civilizednations, by the most solemn protestations that eachparty was sincerely desirous of peace.SebAfric°n '^'^e report of an African war was grateful only towar. the vain and idle populace of Constantinople, whose
poverty exempted them from tribute, and whosecowardice was seldom exposed to military service.But the wiser citizens, who judged of the future bythe past, revolved in their memory the immense loss,both of men and money, which the empire had sus­tained in the expedition of Basiliscus. The troopswhich, after five laborious campaigns, had been re­called from the Persian frontier, dreaded the sea, theclimate, and the arms of an unknown enemy. Theministers of the finances computed, as far as theymight compute, the demands of an African war ; thetaxes which must be found and levied to supply thoseinsatiate demands; and the danger, lest their ownlives, or at least their lucrative employments, shouldbe made responsible for the deficiency of the supply.Inspired by such selfish motives (for we may notsuspect him of any zeal for the public good), Johnof Cappadocia ventured to oppose in full council the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIKE. 441


pitch, or burnt alive in the hippodrome; and, as chap.these dreadful examples might be the effects of error XL"or caprice, they must have alienated from his servicethe best and wisest of the citizens. But the pride ofthe monarch was flattered in the exercise of power,or, as he thought, of virtue; and the people, safe intheir obscurity, applauded the danger and debase­ment of their superiors. This extraordinary rigourwas justified, in some measure, by its salutary conse­quences; since, after a scrutiny of seventeen days,not a complaint or abuse could be found in the courtor city; and it might be alleged that the Greekscould be ruled only with a rod of iron, and that thepublic interest is the motive and law of the supremejudge. Yet in the crime, or the suspicion of trea­son, that judge is, of all others, the most credulousand partial. Theophilus might inflict a tardy venge­ance on the assassins of Leo and the saviours ofhis father; but he enjoyed the fruits of their crime;and his jealous tyranny sacrificed a brother and aprince to the future safety of his life. A Persian ofthe race of the Sassanides died in poverty and exileat Constantinople, leaving an only son, the issue of aplebeian marriage. At the age of twelve years, theroyal birth of Theophobus was revealed, and hismerit was not unworthy of his birth. He was edu­cated in the Byzantine palace, a Christian and a sol­dier; advanced with rapid steps in the career of for­tune and glory; received the hand of the emperor'ssister; and was promoted to the command of thirtythousand Persians, who, like his father, had fled fromthe Mahometan conquerors. These troops, doublyinfected with mercenary and fanatic vices, were de­sirous of revolting against their benefactor, and erect­ing the standard of their native king; but the loyalTheophobus rejected their offers, disconcerted theirschemes', and escaped from their hands to the campor palace of his royal brother. A generous con-







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 823


ordinary figure: the epithet Giubin is expressive of chap.
the quality of dry wood; he had the strength and'
stature of a giant, and his savage countenance wasfancifully compared to that of a wild cat. While thenation trembled, while Hormouz disguised his terrorby the name of suspicion, and his servants concealedtheir disloyalty under the mask of fear, Bahram alonedisplayed his undaunted courage and apparent fidelity:and as soon as he found that no more than twelvethousand soldiers would follow him against the enemy,he prudently declared, that to this fatal numberheaven had reserved the honours of the triumph.The steep and narrow descent of the Pule Rudbar*,or Hyrcanian rock, is the only pass through whichan army can penetrate into the territory of Rei andthe plains of Media. From the commanding heights,a band of resolute men might overwhelm with stonesand darts the myriads of the Turkish host: theiremperor and his son were transpierced with arrows;and the fugitives were left, without council or pro­visions, to the revenge of an injured people. Thepatriotism of the Persian general was stimulated byhis affection for the city of his forefathers; in thehour of victory every peasant became a soldier, andevery soldier a hero; and their ardour was kindledby the gorgeous spectacle of beds, and thrones, andtables of massy gold, the spoils of Asia, and theluxury of the hostile camp. A prince of a less ma­lignant temper could not easily have forgiven hisbenefactor, and the secret hatred of Hormouz wasenvenomed by a malicious report, that Bahram hadprivately retained the most precious fruits of hisTurkish victory. But the approach of a Romanarmy on the side of the Araxes compelled the im-


• Sec an accurate description of this mountain by Olearius (Voyage en Perse,p. 997, 998), who ascended it with much difficulty and danger in his return fromI spahan to the Caspian sea.


r


Y 2







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 425


male; and as she moved through the streets of Con- chap.
stantinople, the reins of four milk-white steeds were XL-
held by as many patricians, who marched on foot be­fore the golden chariot of their queen. But thesepatridians were for the most part eunuchs; and theirblack ingratitude justified on this occasion the popularhatred and contempt. Raised, enriched, and in­trusted with the first dignities of the empire, theybasely conspired against their benefactress ; the greattreasurer Nicephorus was secretly invested with thepurple : her successor was introduced into the palace,and crowned at St. Sophia by the venal patriarch.In their first interview she recapitulated with dig­nity the revolutions of her life; gently accused theperfidy of Nicephorus; insinuated that he owed hislife to .her unsuspicious clemency ; and for the crownand treasures which she resigned, solicited a decentand honourable retreat. His avarice refused thismodest compensation; and, in her exile of the isleof Lesbos, the empress earned a scanty subsistenceby the labours of her distaff.
We must now turn to the progress of the Saracens. Wars ofIn the bloody conflict of the Ommiades and Abas- Autashidsides, the Greeks had stolen the opportunity of aveng- ^n^ theing their wrongs, and enlarging their limits. But a a. d. 78 isevere retribution was exacted by Mohadi, the third ~"805*caliph of the new dynasty; who seized the favour­able opportunity, while a woman and a child, Ireneand Constantine, were seated on the Byzantinethrone. An army of ninety-five thousand Persiansand Arabs was sent from the Tygris to the ThracianBosphorus, under .the command of Harun, or Aaron,the second son of the commander of the Faithful.His encampment on the opposite heights of Chryso-pholis, or Scutari, informed Irene, in her palace ofConstantinople, of the loss of her troops and pro­vinces. With the consent or connivance of their







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 341


the face of danger, "Alas!" cried the desponding chap.prince, " if he is a coward, he will surely be a mur- \


"derer."
Yet if Constantinople had been firm and faithful, Revolt ofthe murderer might have spent his fury against the tinopie."walls; and the rebel army would have been gra­dually consumed or reconciled by the prudence ofthe emperor. In the games of the circus, which herepeated with unusual pomp, Maurice disguised, withsmiles of confidence, the anxiety of his heart, con­descended to solicit the applause of Refactions, andflattered their pride by accepting from their re­spective tribunes a list of nine hundred blues andfifteen hundred greens, whom he affected to esteemas the solid pillars of his throne. Their treacherous orlanguid support betrayed his weakness and hastenedhis fall; the green faction were the secret accom­plices of the rebels, and the blues recommendedlenity and moderation in a contest with their Romanbrethren. The rigid and parsimonious virtues ofMaurice had long since alienated the hearts of hissubjects; as he walked barefoot in a religious pro-rcession, he was rudely assaulted with stones, and hisguards were compelled to present their iron macesin the defence of his person. A fanatic monk ranthrough the streets with a drawn sword, denouncingagainst him the wrath and the sentence of God; anda vile plebeian, who represented his countenance andapparel, was seated on an ass, and pursued by theimprecations of the multitude. The emperor sus­pected the popularity of Germanus with the soldiersand citizens; he feared, he threatened, but he de­layed to strike; the patrician fled to the sanctuaryof the church; the people rose in his defence, thewalls were deserted by the guards, and the lawlesscity was abandoned to the flames and rapine of anocturnal tumult. In a small bark, the unfortunate


z3







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 401


cause of his odious brother; the exiles of every pro- chap.


XL.


vince were assembled in Tauris ; and Bardanes, underthe name of Philippicus, was invested with the purple.The imperial troops, unwilling and unable to perpe­trate the revenge of Justinian, escaped his displeasureby abjuring his allegiance: the fleet, under their newsovereign, steered back, a more auspicious course,to the harbours of Sinope and Constantinople; andevery tongue was prompt to pronounce, every handto execute, the death of the tyrant. Destitute offriends, he was deserted by his Barbarian guards ; andthe stroke of the assassin was praised, as an act ofpatriotism and Roman virtue. His son Tiberius hadtaken refuge in a church: his aged grandmotherguarded the door; and the innocent youth embracedthe altar. But popular fury is deaf to the cries of hu­manity; and the race of Heraclius was extinguished,after a reign of one hundred years.
During * the distracted government of the second Conquest
t • • i n • i.-i/*iof Aft'03 l>y
Justinian, the Eastern empire was deprived of thetheSara-dominion of that part of Africa which had been con- a"d.647—quered by the arms of the first emperor of that name.709-In the year 647, the Saracens, by the order of thecaliph Othman, marched from Egypt to the west­ward, and advanced to the walls of Tripoli, underthe command of Abdallah. The city was courage­ously defended; and the approach of the prefectGregory with a powerful army induced the Saracensto raise the siege. Several bloody engagements en­sued, in the last of which Gregory was slain, andthe Saracens were victorious; but their losses, fa­tigues, and an epidemical disease, prevented themfrom making any permanent establishment, and Ab-


* My conquest of Africa is drawn from two French interpreters of Arabicliterature, Cardonne (Hist. de l'Afrique et de l'Espagne sous la domination desArabcs, tom. i. p. 8—5.')), and Otter (Hist. de I'Academie des Inscriptions, tom.xxi. pp. 111 — 125, and 1 3G). They derive their principal information from No.vairi, who composed, A. D. 1331, an Encyclopedia, in more than twenty volumes.
VOL. IV. U D
/







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 327


general of the Persian armies, and a. prince adorned chap.with the title of eleven virtues. He commands Chos- XXX1X-roes, the son of Hormouz, to shun the example andfate of his father, to confine the traitors who had beenreleased from their chains, to deposit in some holyplace the diadem which he had usurped, and to ac­cept from his gracious benefactor the pardon of hisfaults and the government of a province. The rebelmight not be proud, and the king most assuredly wasnot humble; but the one was conscious of his strength,the other was sensible of his weakness; and even themodest language of his reply still left room for treatyand reconciliation. Chosroes led into the field theslaves of the palace and the populace of the capital *they beheld with terror the banners of a veteranarmy; they were encompassed and surprised by theevolutions of the general; and the satraps who haddeposed Hormouz received the punishment of theirrevolt, or expiated their first treason by a second andmore criminal act of disloyalty. The life and libertyof Chosroes were saved, but he was reduced to thenecessity of imploring aid or refuge in some foreignland; and the implacable Bindoes, anxious to securean unquestionable title, hastily returned to the palace,and ended, with a bow-string, the wretched existence Death ofof the son of Nushirvan. a. d. sua.
While Chosroes despatched the preparations of his chosroesretreat, he deliberated with his remaining friends, Romans. °whether he should lurk in the valleys of Mount Cau­casus, or fly to the tents of the Turks, or solicit theprotection of the emperor. The long emulation ofthe successors of Artaxerxes and Constantine in­creased his reluctance to appear as a suppliant in arival court; but he weighed the forces of the Romans,and prudently considered, that the neighbourhood ofSyria would render his escape more easy and theirsuccours more effectual. Attended only by his con-


v4 j?~







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 409


the number betrays their inconsiderable size; and of chap.the twenty stout and capacious vessels, whose magni-'
tude impeded their progress, each was manned withno more than one hundred heavy armed soldiers.
This huge armada proceeded on a smooth sea,and with a gentle gale, towards the mouth of theBosphorus: the surface of the Strait was over­shadowed, in the language of the Greeks, with amoving forest; and the same fatal night had beenfixed by the Saracen chief for a general assault bysea and land. To allure the confidence of theenemy, the emperor had thrown aside the chain thatusually guarded the entrance of the harbour; butwhile they hesitated whether they should seize theopportunity, or apprehend the snare, the ministersof destruction were at hand. The fireships of theGreeks were launched against them: the Arabs, theirarms, and vessels, were involved in the same flames;the disorderly fugitives were dashed against eachother, or overwhelmed in the waves; and I nolonger find a vestige of the fleet that had threatenedto extirpate the Roman name. A still more fataland irreparable loss was that of the caliph Soliman,who died of an indigestion, in his camp, near Kin-nisrin or Chalcis, in Syria, as he was preparing tolead against Constantinople the remaining forces ofthe East. The brother of Mosjemah was succeededby a kinsman and an enemy; and the throne of anactive and able prince was degraded by the uselessand pernicious virtues of a bigot. While he startedand satisfied the scruples of a blind conscience, thesiege was continued through the winter, by the neg­lect rather than by the resolution of the caliphOmar. The winter proved uncommonly rigorous;above a hundred days the ground was covered withdeep snow; and the natives of the sultry climes of







OCR Output








4G0 THE DECLINE AND FALL


CHAP. XLI.


State qf the Eastern Empire in the Tenth Century.—Ex­tent and Division.— Wealth and Revenue.—Palace ofConstantinople.—Titles and Offices.—Pride and Power ofthe Emperors.—Tactics qf the Greeks, Arabs, and Franks.—Loss qf the Latin Tongue.—Studies and Solitude qfthe Greeks.
cha1"- A ray of historic light seems to beam from the
!— darkness of the tenth century. We open with cu-
rftteGrok riosity and respect the royal volumes of Constantineempire. Porphyrogenitus, which he composed at a mature agefor the instruction of his son, and which promise tounfold the state of the Eastern empire, both in peaceworks of and war, both at home and abroad. In the first ofPorpbyro- these works he minutely describes the pompous cere-genitus. monies of the church and palace of Constantinople,according to his own practice and that of his prede­cessors. In the second, he attempts an accurate sur­vey of the provinces, the themes, as they were thendenominated, both of Europe and Asia. The systemof Roman tactics, the discipline and order of thetroops, and the military operations by land and sea,are explained in the third of these didactic collections,which may be ascribed to Constantine, or his fatherLeo. In the fourth, of the administration of the em­pire, he reveals the secrets of the Byzantine policy,in friendly or hostile intercourse with the nationsof the earth. The literary labours of the age, thepractical systems of law, agriculture, and history,might redound to the benefit of the subject and thehonour of the Macedonian princes. The sixty booksof the Basilics *, the code and pandects of civil juris-


* On the subject of the Basilics, Fabricius (,13ibliot. Gra;c. tom. xii. p. 4>b
514), Heineecius (Hist. Juris Romani, p. 396—399), and Giannone (Istoria







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 55


personal prowess of a soldier; and the example of chap.Belisarius may be added to the rare examples of xxxtv-Henry IV. of Pyrrhus, and of Alexander.
After this first and unsuccessful trial of their ene- His defencemies, the whole army of the Goths passed the Tyber, ot Rome'and formed the siege of the city, which continuedabove a year, till their final departure. Whateverfancy may conceive, the severe compass of the geo­grapher defines the circumference of Rome within aline of twelve miles and three hundred and forty-fivepaces; and that circumference, except in the Vatican,has invariably been the same, from the triumph ofAurelian to the peaceful but obscure reign of themodern popes*. But in the day of her greatness,the space within her walls was crowded with habita­tions and inhabitants; and the populous suburbs, thatstretched along the public roads, were darted likeso many rays from one common centre. Adversityswept away these extraneous ornaments, and leftnaked and desolate a considerable part even of theseven hills. Yet Rome in its present state could sendinto the field above thirty thousand males of a militaryage; and, notwithstanding the want of discipline andexercise, the far greater part, inured to the hardshipsof poverty, might be capable of bearing arms for thedefence of their country and religion. The prudenceof Belisarius did not neglect this important resource.His soldiers were relieved by the zeal and diligenceof the people, who watched while they slept, andlaboured while they reposed: he accepted the volun­tary service of the bravest and most indigent of theRoman youth; and the companies of townsmen some-
• M. d'Anville has given, in the Memoirs of the Academy for the year 1756
(tom. xxx. p. 198 236), a plan of Rome on a smaller scale, but far more
accurate than that which he had delineated in 1738 for Rollin's history. Ex­perience had improved his knowledge; and, instead of Rossi's topography, heused the new and excellent map of Nolli. Pliny's old measure of xiii mustbe reduced to viii miles. It is easier to alter a text, than to remove hills orbuildings.


r


E 4







OCR Output








90 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. on the majesty of the empire. "So extensive, Oxxxv- "Caesar, are your dominions; so numerous are your


bards.


cities; that you are continually seeking for nations"to whom, either in peace or war, you may relin-"quish these useless possessions. The Gepidaj are"your brave and faithful allies; and if they have"anticipated your gifts, they have shown a just con-"fidence in your bounty." Their presumption wasexcused by the mode of revenge which Justinian em­braced. Instead of asserting the rights of a sove­reign for the protection of his subjects, the emperorinvited a strange people to invade and possess theRoman provinces between the Danube and the Alps;and the ambition of the Gepidae was checked by theThe Lom- rising power and fame of the Lombards. This cor­rupt appellation has been diffused in the thirteenthcentury by the merchants and bankers, the Italianposterity of these savage warriors: but the originalname of Langobards is expressive only of the peculiarlength and fashion of their beards. I am not dis­posed either to question or to justify their Scandi­navian origin; nor to pursue the migrations of theLombards through unknown regions and marvellousadventures. About the time of Augustus and Tra­jan, a ray of historic light breaks on the darkness oftheir antiquities, and they are discovered, for the firsttime, between the Elbe and the Oder. Fierce, be­yond the example of the Germans, they delighted topropagate the tremendous belief, that their headswere formed like the heads of dogs, and that theydrank the blood of their enemies whom they van­quished in battle. The smallness of their numberswas recruited by the adoption of their bravest slaves;and alone, amidst their powerful neighbours, theydefended by arms their high-spirited independence.In the tempests of the north, which overwhelmed somany names and nations, this little bark of the Lom­







OCR Output








OV THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 343


opposite side; and the indiscreet clamour of the blues chap*admonished and stimulated the cruelty of the tyrant.


The ministers of death were despatched to Chalcedon: Death ofthey dragged the emperor from 'his sanctuary: and and histhe five sons of Maurice were successively murdered ajdTwbbefore the eyes of their agonizing parent. At each Nov- 27-stroke which he felt in his heart, he found strengthto rehearse a pious ejaculation: "Thou art just, O"Lord! and thy judgments are righteous." Andsuch, in the last moments, was his rigid attachmentto truth and justice, that he revealed to the soldiersthe pious falsehood of a nurse who presented her ownchild in the place of a royal infant. The tragic scenewas finally closed by the execution of the emperorhimself, in the twentieth year of his reign, and thesixty-third of his age. The bodies of the father andhis five sons were cast into the sea, their heads wereexposed at Constantinople to the insults or pity ofthe multitude, and it was not till some signs of pu­trefaction had appeared that Phocas connived at theprivate burial of these venerable remains. In thatgrave, the faults and errors of Maurice were kindlyinterred. His fate alone was remembered; and atthe end of twenty years, in the recital of the historyof Theophylact, the mournful tale was interrupted bythe tears of the audience *.
Such tears must have flowed in secret, and such Phocascompassion would have been criminal, under the A^iTcire,reign of Phocas, who was peaceably acknowledged Nov-23-in the provinces of the East and West. The imagesof the emperor and his wife Leontia were exposedin the Lateran to the veneration of the clergy andsenate of Home, and afterwards deposited in thepalace of the Caesars, between those of Constantine


• The revolt of Phocas and death of Maurice are told by Theophylact Simo-catta (1. viii. c . 7—12), the Paschal Chronicle fp. 379, 380), Theophanes(Chronograph, p. 230-244), Zonaras (tom. ii. 1 . xiv. p. 77—80), and Ccdrenus(p. 390—404).
Z \>


r







OCR Output








OK THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 3^5


the conspiracy, the death of Chosroes, and the ele- chap.vation of his eldest son to the throne of Persia. The"


authors of the revolution, eager to display their me- a. d. 628.rits in the court or camp of Tauris, preceded theambassadors of Siroes, who delivered the letters oftheir master to his brother the emperor of the Ro­mans*. In the language of the usurpers of everyage, he imputes his own crimes to the Deity, and,without degrading his equal majesty, he offers to re­concile the long discord of the two nations, by a treatyof peace and alliance more durable than brass or iron.The conditions of the treaty were easily defined andfaithfully executed. In the recovery of the standardsand prisoners which had fallen into the hands of thePersians, the emperor imitated the example of Au­gustus: their care of the national dignity was cele­brated by the poets of the times, but the decay ofgenius may be measured by the distance betweenHorace and George of Pisidia; the subjects and bre­thren of Heraclius were redeemed from persecution,slavery, and exile; but instead of the Roman eagles,the true wood of the holy cross was restored to theimportunate demands of the successor of Constantine.The victor was not ambitious of enlarging the weak­ness of the empire; the son of Chosroes abandonedwithout regret the conquests of his father; the Per­sians who evacuated the cities of Syria and Egyptwere honourably conducted to the frontier; and awar which had wounded the vitals of the two mon­archies produced no change in their external andrelative situation. The return of Heraclius fromTauris to Constantinople was a perpetual triumph;and, after the exploits of six glorious campaigns, hepeaceably enjoyed the sabbath of his toils. After a


• The letter of Siroes in the Puschal Chronicle (p. 102) unfortunately endsbefore he proceed* to business. The treaty appears in its execution in the histo­ries of Thcoplunes and Nieephoras. ',.-
fill r f







OCR Output








456 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. plied the deficiency of his associate. It would have''" been imprudent in the Byzantine monarch to trans­


port his stationary troops of Asia to an Italian cam­paign; and the Latin arms would have been insuf­ficient, if his superior navy had not occupied themouth of the gulf. The fortress of Bari was in­vested by the infantry of the Franks, and by the ca­valry and galleys of the Greeks; and after a defenceConquest of four years, the Arabian emir submitted to theclemency of Lewis, who commanded in person theoperations of the siege. This important conquest hadbeen achieved by the concord of the East and West;'but their recent amity was soon embittered by themutual complaints of jealousy and pride. The Greeksassumed as their own the merits of the conquest andthe pomp of the triumph; extolled the greatness oftheir powers, and affected to deride the intemperanceand sloth of the handful of Barbarians who appearedunder the banners of the Carlovingian prince. His re­ply is expressed with the eloquence of indignation andtruth: "We confess the magnitude of your prepara-"tions," says the great-grandson of Charlemagne:"your armies were indeed as numerous as a cloud"of summer locusts, who darken the day, flap their"wings, and, after a short flight, tumble weary and"breathless to the ground. We were few in number,"and why were we few? because, after a tedious ex-"pectation of your arrival, I had dismissed my host,"and retained only a chosen band of warriors to con-"tinue the blockade of the city. Did not these va-"Kant Franks, diminished as they were by languor"and fatigue, intercept and vanquish the three most"powerful emirs of the Saracens? and did not their"defeat precipitate the fall of the city? Bari is now"fallen; Tarentum trembles; Calabria will be de-"livered; and, if we command the sea, the island•' of Sicily may be rescued from the hands of the in­







OCR Output








404 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. obliged to retire to the confines of Egypt, where he


XL.


waited five years for the promised succours of thecaliph. The Saracens were then successful, after abloody and destructive warfare, in which many citieswere burnt, and a fertile and populous garden waschanged into a desert: the royal prophetess was slainin battle; and the religion of Mahomet, and the do­minion of his successors, were established, from Arabiato the Atlantic Ocean. Musa, who at that time com­manded the army of the caliph, was now becomemaster of the whole of the north of Africa, with theexception of a small portion 'of Mauritania, and thetown of Ceuta, which was at that time, as it is at pre­sent, in the hands of the Spaniards. This importantfortress was surrendered to the Saracens by thetreachery of count Julian, who was the governor;and by the invitation of the same person, Musa wasConquest induced to attempt the conquest of Spain. The firsto^pam, jan(jing on the Peninsula was at Tariffa, in the month713- of July, 710, which still bears the name of the officer
who commanded the detachment. The followingspring, Tarik, a lieutenant of Musa, landed at Gib­raltar with a powerful army: Roderic, the last kingof the Goths, was defeated in a decisive battle atXeres, and perished in the waters of the Guadal-quiver. Musa then passed into Spain, and the dominionof the Saracens was in a short time extended to thePyrenean mountains*.
But the conquest of Spain was considered by Musaonly the footstep to the monarchy of Europe. Hewas preparing to extinguish in Gaul and Italy thedeclining kingdoms of the Franks and Lombards, to


* The fall and resurrection of the Gothic monarchy are related by Mariana(tom. i. p. 238—260,1. vi. c. 19—26,1. vii. c. I, 2). That historian has infusedinto his noble work (Historiae de Rebus Hispanice, lib. xxx. Hagae Comitum,1733, in four volumes in folio, with the continuation of Miniana) the style andspirit of a Roman classic; and after the twelfth century, his knowledge andjudgment may be safely trusted.







OCR Output








334 THE DECEIVE AND FALL


chap. "that I have neither falsehood on my tongue, norxxxix. '' treachery in my heart." As soon as he rose from* his knees, he accelerated the labour of the bridge,and despatched an envoy to proclaim what he nolonger wished to conceal. "Inform the emperor,"said the perfidious Baian, " that Sirmium is invested"on every side. Advise his prudence to withdraw"the citizens and their effects, and to resign a city"which it is now impossible to relieve or defend."Without the hope of relief, the defence of Sirmiumwas prolonged above three years: the walls werestill untouched; but famine was inclosed within thewalls, till a merciful capitulation allowed the escapeof the naked and hungry inhabitants. Singidunum,at the distance of fifty miles, experienced a morecruel fate: the buildings were razed, and the van­quished people was condemned to servitude andexile. Yet the ruins of Sirmium are no longervisible; the advantageous situation of Singidunumsoon attracted a new colony of Sclavonians, and theconflux of the Save and Danube is still guarded bythe fortifications of Belgrade, or the White City, sooften and so obstinately disputed by the Christianand Turkish arms*. From Belgrade to the wallsof Constantinople a line may be measured of sixhundred miles: that line was marked with flamesand with blood; the horses of the Avars were al­ternately bathed in the Euxine and the Adriatic;and the Roman pontiff, alarmed by the approach ofa more savage enemy, was reduced to cherish theLombards as the protectors of Italy. The despairof a captive, whom his country refused to ransom,disclosed to the Avars the invention and practice ofmilitary enginest, but in the first attempts, they


* See d'Anville, in the Memoires de l'Acad. des Inscriptions, tom, xxviii.
p. 412 443. The Sclavonic name of Belgrade is mentioned in the xth century
by Constantine Porphyrogenitus; the Latin appellation of Alba Grccca is used bythe Franks in the beginning of the ixth (p. 414).
■f Even the helepolis, or moveable turret. Theopliylact, 1. ii. 16, 17-







OCR Output








194 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. struction. The institution of great cities, which in-
YYYUT
, elude a nation within the limits of a wall, almost


realizes the wish of Caligula, that the Roman peoplea. d. 526, na(J but one neck. Two hundred and fifty thousandpersons are said to have perished in the earthquake ofAntioch, whose domestic multitudes were swelled bythe conflux of strangers to the festival of the As-a. d. 551, cension. The loss of Berytus was of smaller account,uIy 9' but of much greater value. That city, on the coastof Phoenicia, was illustrated by the study of the civil'law, which opened the surest road to wealth and dig­nity: the schools of Berytus were filled with therising spirits of the age, and many a youth was lostin the earthquake, who might have lived to be thescourge or the guardian of his country. In thesedisasters, the architect becomes the enemy of man­kind. The hut of a savage, or the tent of an Arab,may be thrown down without injury to the inhabit­ant; and the Peruvians had reason to deride the follyof their Spanish conquerors, who with so much costand labour erected their own sepulchres. The richmarbles of a patrician are dashed on his own head:a whole people is buried under the ruins of publicand private edifices, and the conflagration is kindledand propagated by the innumerable fires which arenecessary for the subsistence and manufactures of agreat city. Instead of the mutual sympathy whichmight comfort and assist the distressed, they dread­fully experience the vices and passions which are re­leased from the fear of punishment: the totteringhouses are pillaged by intrepid avarice; revenge em­braces the moment, and selects the victim; and theearth often swallows the assassin, or the ravisher, inthe consummation of their crimes.Plague- HI. ^Ethiopia and Egypt have been stigmatized
its origm . r &Jr ».
and nature, jn every age, as the original source and seminary ofthe plague. In a damp, hot, stagnating air, this







OCR Output








-A


 


, Pi


 


%»


 







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIBJE. 315


the mild eloquence and seasonable gifts of the pontiff, chap.
YYYVTTT
who commanded the respect of heretics and Bar-'
barians. The merits of Gregory were treated by the The saviourByzantine court with reproach and insult; but in theattachment of a grateful people, he found the purestreward of a citizen, and the best right of a sovereign*.
* The temporal reign of Gregory I. is ably exposed by Sigonius in the firstbook, de Regno Italia. See his works, tom. ii. p. 44—-if>.


r







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 369


rings to his new allies. In a secret interview, he chap.
XXXIX
produced the portrait of his daughter Eudocia, con


descended to flatter the Barbarian with the promiseof a fair and august bride, obtained an immediatesuccour of forty thousand horse, and negotiated astrong diversion of the Turkish arms on the side ofthe Oxus. The Persians, in their turn, retreatedwith precipitation; in the camp of Edessa, Heracliusreviewed an army of seventy thousand Romans andstrangers; and some months were successfully em­ployed in the recovery of the cities of Syria, Mesopo­tamia, and Armenia, whose fortifications had beenimperfectly restored. Sarbar still maintained the im­portant station of Chalcedon; but the jealousy ofChosroes, or the artifice of Heraclius, soon alienatedthe mind of that powerful satrap from the service ofhis king and country. A messenger was interceptedwith a real or fictitious mandate to the cadarigan, orsecond in command, directing him to send, withoutdelay, to the throne, the head of a guilty or unfor­tunate general. The despatches were transmitted toSarbar himself; and as soon as he read the sentenceof his own death, he dexterously inserted the namesof four hundred officers, assembled a military council,and asked the cadarigan, whether he was preparedto execute the commands of their tyrant? The Per­sians unanimously declared, that Chosroes had for­feited the sceptre; a separate treaty was concludedwith the government of Constantinople; and if someconsiderations of honour or policy restrained Sarbarfrom joining the standard of Heraclius, the emperorwas assured, that he might prosecute, without inter­ruption, his designs of victory and peace.
Deprived of his firmest support, and doubtful of His thirdthe fidelity of his subjects, the greatness of Chosroes a7d.G27,was still conspicuous in its ruins. The number oflive hundred thousand may be interpreted as an
VOL. IV. u li







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 191


and calamities from the baleful influence; and these chap.expectations were abundantly fulfilled. The astro- xxx'nomers dissembled their ignorance of the nature ofthese blazing stars, which they affected to representas the floating meteors of the air; and few amongthem embraced the simple notion of Seneca and theChaldaeans, that they are only planets of a longerperiod and more eccentric motion*. Time andscience have justified the conjectures and predictionsof the Roman sage: the telescope has opened newworlds to the eyes of astronomers!; and, in the nar­row space of history and fable, one and the samecomet is already found to have revisited the earth inseven equal revolutions of five hundred and seventy-five years. The first, which ascends beyond theChristian aera one thousand seven hundred and sixty-seven years, is coeval with Ogyges, the father ofGrecian antiquity. And this appearance explainsthe tradition which Varro has preserved, that underhis reign the planet Venus changed her colour, size,figure, and course; a prodigy without example eitherin past or succeeding ages J. The second visit, inthe year eleven hundred and ninety-three, is darklyimplied in the fable of Electra the seventh of thePleiads, who have been reduced to six since the timeof the Trojan war. That nymph, the wife of Dar-danus, was unable to support the ruin of her country;she abandoned the dances of her sister orbs, fled fromthe zodiac to the north pole, and obtained, from herdishevelled locks, the name of the comet. The third


• Seneca's viith book of Natural Questions displays, in the theory of comets,a philosophic mind. Yet should we not too candidly confound a vague prediction,a veniet tempus, &c. with the merit of real discoveries.
f Astronomers may study Newton and Halley. I draw my humble sciencefrom the article Oomete, in the French Encyclopedic by M. d'Alembert.
X A dissertation of Freret (Memoires de 1'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. x.p. 357—377), affords a happy union of philosophy and erudition. The phae-nomenon in the time of Ogyges was preserved by Varro (apud Augustin. deCivitate Dei, xxi. 8.), who quotes Castor, Dion of Naples, and Adrastus ofCyzicus—nobiles mathematici. The two subsequent periods are preserved by theUreek mycologists and the spurious books of Sibylline verses.







OCR Output








504 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. neral knowledge of the age may be deduced from theXLL example of two learned females, the empress Eudoeia,and the princess Anna Comnena, who cultivated, inthe purple, the arts of rhetoric and philosophy *.The vulgar dialect of the city was gross and bar­barous: a more correct and elaborate style distin­guished the discourse, or at least the compositions,of the church and palace, which sometimes affectedto copy the purity of the Attic models.Decay of In our modern education, the painful though ne-genLrd cessary attainment of two languages, which are nolonger living, may consume the time and damp theardour of the youthful student. The poets and ora­tors were long imprisoned in the barbarous dialectsof our Western ancestors, devoid of harmony or grace;and their genius, without precept or example, wasabandoned to the rude and native powers of theirjudgment and fancy. But the Greeks of Constan­tinople, after purging away the impurities of theirvulgar speech, acquired the free use of their ancientlanguage, the most happy composition of human art,and a familiar knowledge of the sublime masters whohad pleased or instructed the first of nations. Butthese advantages only tend to aggravate the reproachand shame of a degenerate people. They held intheir lifeless hands the riches of their fathers, withoutinheriting the spirit which had created and improvedthat sacred patrimony: they read, they praised, theycompiled, but their languid souls seemed alike in­capable of thought and action. In the revolution often centuries, not a single discovery was made toexalt the dignity or promote the happiness of man­kind. Not a single idea has been added to the spe-
• Anna Comnena may boast of her Greek style (to EWnt^m i; «xpviro-ouSaxuia), and Zonaras, her contemporary, but not her flatterer, may addwith truth, y\wr7«v nx« "xpi^ws At7ixi?ouo-«v. The princess was conversant withthe artful dialogues of Plato; and had studied the Ttrfaxut, or qnadriuium ofastrelogy, geometry, arithmetic, and music (see her preface to the Alexiad, withDucange's notes).







OCR Output








"86 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. Amrou was inclined to gratify the wish of the gram-'XLl 'marian; but his rigid integrity refused to alienatethe minutest object without the consent of the Caliph,and the well known answer of Omar was inspired bythe ignorance of a fanatic: "If these writings of"the Greeks agree with the book of God, they are"useless, and need not be preserved; if they disagree,"they are pernicious, and ought to be destroyed."The sentence was executed with blind obedience:the volumes of paper, or parchment, were distributedamong the four thousand baths of the city; and suchwas their incredible multitude, that six months werebarely sufficient for the consumption of this preciousfuel. Since the dynasties of Abulpharagius havebeen given to the world in a Latin version, the talehas been repeatedly transcribed; and every scholar,with pious indignation, has deplored the irreparableshipwreck of the learning, the arts, and the genius ofantiquity. For my own part I am strongly temptedto deny both the fact and the consequences. Thefact is indeed marvellous: "Read and wonder !" saysthe historian himself; and the solitary report of astranger, who wrote, at the end of 600 years, on theconfines of Media, is overbalanced by the silence of twoannalists of a more early date, both Christians, bothnatives of Egypt; and the most ancient of whom, thepatriarch Eutychius, has amply described the conquestof Alexandria. The rigid sentence of Omar is re­pugnant to the sound find orthodox precept of theMahometan casuists: they expressly declare, that thereligious books of the Jews and Christians, which areacquired by the right of war, should never be com­mitted to the flames; and that the works of profanescience, historians or poets, physicians or philosophers,may be lawfully applied to the use of the faithful.A more destructive zeal may perhaps be attributedto the first successors of Mahomet; yet in this in.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 121


escape 5 but the African and Gothic triumphs are chap.less glorious than this safe and bloodless victory, in xxxv-which neither fortune, nor the valour of the soldiers,can subtract any part of the general's renown. The a. d. 543,second removal of Belisarius from the Persian to the &c-Italian war revealed the extent of his personal merit,which had corrected or supplied the want of disci­pline and courage. Fifteen generals, without con­cert or skill, led through the mountains of Armeniaan army of thirty thousand Romans, inattentive totheir signals, their ranks, and their ensigns. Fourthousand Persians, entrenched in the camp of Dubis,vanquished, almost without a combat, this disorderlymultitude; their useless arms were scattered alongthe road, and their horses sunk under the fatigueof their rapid flight. But the Arabs of the Romanparty prevailed over their brethren; the Armeniansreturned to their allegiance; the cities of Dara andEdessa resisted a sudden assault and a regular siege,and the calamities of war were suspended by those ofpestilence. A tacit or formal agreement betweenthe two sovereigns protected the tranquillity of theeastern frontier; and the anns of Chosroes wereconfined to the Colchian or Lazic war, which hasbeen too minutely described by the historians of thetimes*.
The extreme length of the Euxine sea-!-, from Description
of Colchos,Lazica, or* The Lazic war, the contest of Rome and Persia on the Phasis, is tediously Mingrelia.spun through many a page of Procopius (Persic. 1. ii. c. 15. 17- 28, 29,30. Go­thic. 1. iv. c. 7—16), and Agathias (1. ii. hi. and iv. p. 55—132. 141).
f The Periplut, or circumnavigation of the Euxine sea, was described in Latinby Sallust, and in Greek by Arrian. 1. The former work, which no longer exists,has been restored by the singular diligence of M. de Brosses, first president ofthe parliament of Dijon (Hist. de la Republique Romaine, tom. ii. 1. iii. p. 199—298) who ventures to assume the character ot the Roman historian. His descrip­tion of the Euxine is ingeniously formed of all the Fragments of the original, andof all the Greeks and Latins whom Sallust might copy, or by whom he might becopied; and the merit of the execution atones for the whimsical design. 2. ThePeriplus of Arrian is addressed to the emperor Adrian (in Geograph. Minor. Hud­son, tom, i.), and contains whatever the governor of Pontus had seen, from Tre-bizond to Dioscurias; whatever he had heard from Dioscurias to the Danube;and whatever he knew from the Danube to Trcbizond.


r







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 289


When the nephew of Justinian ascended the chap.throne, he proclaimed a new aera of happiness and xxxvin-glory. The annals of the second Justin* are marked Weaknessofwith disgrace abroad and misery at home. In the justi™1*""west, the Roman empire was afflicted by the loss ofItaly, the desolation of Africa, and the conquests ofthe Persians. Injustice prevailed both in the capitaland the provinces; the rich trembled for their pro­perty, the poor for their safety, the ordinary ma­gistrates were ignorant or venal, the occasional re­medies appear to have been arbitrary and violent,and the complaints of the people could no longerbe silenced by the splendid names of a legislatorand a conqueror. The opinion which imputes tothe prince all the calamities of his times may becountenanced by the historian as a serious truth ora salutary prejudice. Yet a candid suspicion willarise, that the sentiments of Justin were pure andbenevolent, and that he might have filled his stationwithout reproach, if the faculties of his mind had notbeen impaired by disease, which deprived the em­peror of the use of his feet, and confined him to thepalace, a stranger to the complaints of the people andthe vices of the government. The tardy knowledgeof his own impotence determined him to lay downthe weight of the diadem; and in the choice of aworthy substitute, he showed some symptoms of adiscerning and even magnanimous spirit. The onlyson of Justin and Sophia died in his infancy: theirdaughter Arabia was the wife of Baduarius, superin­tendent of the palace, and afterwards commander ofthe Italian armies, who vainly aspired to confirm therights of marriage by those of adoption. While theempire appeared an object of desire, Justin was ac-
• The original authors for the reign of Justin the younger are Evagrius, Hist.Eccles. 1. v. c . 1—12. Theophanes, in Chronograph, p. 204—210. Zonaras,tom. ii. 1 . xiv. p. 70—72. Cedrenus, in Compend. p. 388—392.
VOL. IV. U







OCR Output








162 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. cept the bold and repeated challenge of Totila. YetXXXVL in the judgment of the few who could discriminate.counsels from events, and compare the instrumentswith the execution, he appeared a more consummatemaster of the art of war than in the season of hisprosperity, when he presented two captive kings be­fore the throne of Justinian. The valour of Beli-sarius was not chilled by age; his prudence wasmatured by experience, but the moral virtues of hu­manity and justice seem to have yielded to the hardnecessity of the times. The parsimony or povertyof the emperor compelled him to deviate from therule of conduct which had deserved the love and con­fidence of the Italians. The war was maintained bythe oppression of Ravenna, Sicily, and all the faith­ful subjects of the empire; and the rigorous• prose­cution of Herodian provoked that injured or guiltyofficer to deliver Spoleto into the hands of the enemy.The avarice of Antonina, which had been sometimesdiverted by love, now reigned without a rival in herbreast. Belisarius himself had always understood,that riches, in a corrupt age, are the support and or­nament of personal merit. And it cannot be pre­sumed that he should stain his honour for the publicservice, without applying a part of the spoil to hisprivate emolument. The hero had escaped the swordof the Barbarians, but the dagger of conspiracy*awaited his return. In the midst of wealth and ho­nours, Artaban, who had chastised the African tyrant,complained of the ingratitude of courts. He aspiredto Praejecta, the emperor's niece, who wished to re­ward her deliverer; but the impediment of his pre­vious marriage was asserted by the piety of Theodora.The pride of royal descent was irritated by flattery;and the service in which he gloried had proved him
• This conspiracy is related by Procopius (Gothic. I. iii. c. 31, 32) with suchfreedom and candour, that the liberty of the Anecdotes gives him nothing to add.







OCR Output








164 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. perhaps her happiness, were sacrificed to the revenge
_ of an unfeeling mother, who dissolved the imperfect
nuptials before they had been ratified by the cere­monies of the church.Rome again Before the departure of Belisarius, Perusia wasthe Goths, besieged, and few cities were impregnable to theGothic arms. Ravenna, Ancona, and Crotona stillresisted the Barbarians; and when Totila asked inmarriage one of the daughters of France, he wasstung by the just reproach that the king of Italywas unworthy of his title till it was acknowledged bythe Roman people. Three thousand of the bravestsoldiers had been left to defend the capital. Onthe suspicion of a monopoly, they massacred the go­vernor, and announced to Justinian, by a deputationof the clergy, that unless their offence was pardonedand their arrears were satisfied, they should instantlyaccept the tempting offers of Totila; But the officerwho succeeded to the command (his name was Dio­genes) deserved their esteem and confidence; andthe Goths, instead of finding an easy conquest, en­countered a vigorous resistance from the soldiers andpeople, who patiently endured the loss of the port,and of all maritime supplies. The siege of Romewould perhaps have been raised, if the liberality ofTotila to the Isaurians had not encouraged some oftheir venal countrymen to copy the example of trea­son. In a dark night, while the Gothic trumpetssounded on another side, they silently opened thegate of St. Paul: the Barbarians rushed into thecity; and the flying garrison was intercepted beforethey could reach the harbour of Centuincella?. Asoldier trained in the school of Belisarius, Paul ofCilicia, retired with four hundred men to the moleof Hadrian. They repelled the Goths; but theyfelt the approach of famine; and their aversion tothe taste of horse-flesh confirmed their resolution to







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 313


or vexatious lawsuits; to preserve the integrity of chap.
YYYVIIT'
weights and measures; to grant every reasonable de- *
lay; and to reduce the capitation of the slaves of theglebe, who purchased the right of marriage by thepayment of an arbitrary fine. The rent or the pro-,duce of these estates was transported to the mouth ofthe Tyber, at the risk and expense of the pope; inthe use of wealth he acted like a faithful steward ofthe church and the poor, and liberally applied to theirwants the inexhaustible resources of abstinence andorder. The voluminous account of his receipts anddisbursements was kept above three hundred years inthe Lateran, as the model of Christian economy. Onthe four great festivals, he divided their quarterlyallowance to the clergy, to his domestics, to themonasteries, the churches, the places of burial, thealms-houses, and the hospitals of Rome, and the restof the diocese. On the first day of every month, hedistributed to the poor, according to the season, theirstated portion of corn, wine, cheese, vegetables, oil,fish, fresh provisions, clothes, and money; and histreasurers were continually summoned to satisfy, inhis name, the extraordinary demands of indigenceand merit. The instant distress of the sick andhelpless, of strangers and pilgrims, was relieved bythe bounty of each day, and of every hour; norwould the pontiff indulge himself in a frugal repast,till he had sent the dishes from his own table to someobjects deserving of his compassion. The misery ofthe times had reduced the nobles and matrons ofRome to accept, without a blush, the benevolence ofthe church: three thousand virgins received theirfood and raiment from the hand of their benefactor;and many bishops of Italy escaped from the Bar­barians to the hospitable threshold of the Vatican.Gregory might justly be styled the father of his







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 377


same taxes; and the arrears of a simple citizen, the chap.treasurer of Damascus, were commuted to a fine of XXXIX-one hundred thousand pieces of gold. The loss oftwo hundred thousand soldiers* who had fallen bythe sword was of less fatal importance than the de­cay of arts, agriculture, and population, in this longand destructive war; and although a victorious armyhad been formed under the standard of Heraclius,the unnatural effort appears to have exhausted, ratherthan exercised, their strength. While the emperortriumphed at Constantinople or Jerusalem, an ob­scure town on the confines of Syria was pillaged bythe Saracens, and they cut in pieces some troopswho advanced to its relief; an ordinary and triflingoccurrence, had it not been the prelude of a mightyrevolution. These robbers were the apostles of Ma­homet; their fanatic valour had emerged from thedesert; and, in the last eight years of his reign, He­raclius lost to the Arabs the same provinces whichhe had rescued from the Persians.


The history of the important reign of Heraclius is hereinterrupted by Mr. Gibbon, in order to introduce a chapterconsisting of no less than one hundred and sixteen pages, inwhich he describes many sects and various opinions, respect­ing the tenets of the Christian religion. The chapter beginswith the Incarnation of our Saviour, and ends with anaccount of the proceedings of the Jesuits in Abyssinia, inthe sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. It is not my inten­tion to lay before my reader any thing more than the Tablcof Contents of this long chapter. It is as follows:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Of'Chapter Forty-seven of the original History.Theological History of the Doctrine of the Incarnation.—The Human and Divine Nature of Christ.—Enmity of the


* Suidas (in Excerpt. Hist. Byzant. p. 46) gives this number; but either thePeriutn must be read for the Isaurian war, or this passage does not belong to theemperor Heraclius.







OCR Output








100 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. degrees, of the polar circle. Among their southernxxxv> conquests, the most splendid was that of the Neptha-lites or white Huns, a polite and warlike people, whopossessed the commercial cities of Bochara and Sa-marcand, who had vanquished the Persian monarch,and carried their victorious arms along the banks,and perhaps to the mouth, of the Indus. On theside of the west, the Turkish cavalry advanced to thelake Maeotis. They passed that lake on the ice. Thekhan, who dwelt at the foot of mount Altai, issuedhis commands for the siege of Bosphorus, a city, thevoluntary subject of Rome, and whose princes hadformerly been the friends of Athens. To the east,the Turks invaded China, as often as the vigour ofthe government was relaxed: and I am taught toread in the history of the times, that they moweddown their patient enemies like hemp or grass; andthat the mandarins applauded the wisdom of an em­peror who repulsed these Barbarians with goldenlances. This extent of savage empire compelled theTurkish monarch to establish three subordinateprinces of his own blood, who soon forgot their gra­titude and allegiance. The conquerors were ener­vated by luxury, which is always fatal except to anindustrious people; the policy of China solicited thevanquished nations to resume their independence;and the power of the Turks was limited to a periodof two hundred years. The revival of their nameand dominion in the southern countries of Asia, arethe events of a later age; and the dynasties, whichsucceeded to their native realms, may sleep in obli­vion; since their history bears no relation to thedecline and fall of the Roman empire.The Avars In the rapid career of conquest, the Turks attackedthe Turks, and subdued the nation of the Ogors or VarchonitesS^Xthe on the banks of the river Til, which derived the epi-empire. thet of black from its dark water or gloomy forests.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 277


disappointments had chilled the spirit of the Avars, chap.and their power would have dissolved away in the XXXVIILSarmatian desert, if the alliance of Alboin, king of theLombards, had not given a new object to their arms,* and a lasting settlement to their wearied fortunes.
While Alboin served under his father's standard, Alboin,he encountered in battle, and transpierced with his tX!om-lance, the rival prince of the Gepidae. The Lom- h"tjourbards, who applauded such early prowess, requested love, andhis father, with unanimous acclamations, that the re"nt,e'heroic youth who had shared the dangers of thefield might be admitted to the feast of victory. "You"are not unmindful," replied the inflexible Audoin,"of the wise customs of our ancestors. Whatever"may be his merit, a prince is incapable of sitting at"table with his father till he has received his arms"from a foreign and royal hand." Alboin bowedwith reverence to the institutions of his country;selected forty companions, and boldly visited the courtof Turisund king of the Gepidae, who embraced andentertained, according to the laws of hospitality, themurderer of his son. At the banquet, whilst Alboinoccupied the seat of the youth whom he had slain, atender remembrance arose in the mind of Turisund."How dear is that place-r—how hateful is that per-"son!" were the words that escaped, with a sigh,from the indignant father. His grief exasperatedthe national resentment of the Gepidae; and Cuni-mund, his surviving son, was provoked^ by wine, orfraternal affection, to the desire of vengeance. "The"Lombards," said the rude Barbarian, " resemble,"in figure and in smell, the mares of our Sarmatian"plains." And this insult was a coarse allusion tothe white bands which enveloped their legs. "Add"another resemblance," replied an audacious Lom­bard; "you have felt how strongly they kick. Visit*' the plain of Asfeld, and seek for the bones of thy


T 3







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 159


torious Goths, and to reproach the senate, as the chap.vilest of slaves, with their perjury, folly, and ingra- XXXVLtitude; sternly declaring, that their estates and ho­nours were justly forfeited to the companions of hisarms. Yet he consented to forgive their revolt; andthe senators repaid his clemency by despatching cir­cular letters to their tenants and vassals in the pro­vinces of Italy, strictly to enjoin them to desert thestandard of the Greeks, to cultivate their lands inpeace, and to learn from their masters the duty ofobedience to a Gothic sovereign. Against the citywhich had so long delayed the course of his victorieshe appeared inexorable: one-third of the walls, indifferent parts, were demolished by his command;fire and engines prepared to consume or subvert themost stately works of antiquity: and the world wasastonished by the fatal decree, that Rome should bechanged into a pasture for cattle. The firm andtemperate remonstrance of Belisarius suspended theexecution; he warned the Barbarian not to sully hisfame by the destruction of those monuments whichwere the glory of the dead, and the delight of theliving; and Totila was persuaded by the advice ofan enemy to preserve Rome as the ornament of hiskingdom, or the fairest pledge of peace and recon­ciliation. When he had signified to the ambassadorsof Belisarius his intention of sparing the city, hestationed an army at the distance of one hundredand twenty furlongs, to observe the motions of theRoman general. With the remainder of his forces,he marched into Lucania and Apulia, and occupiedon the summit of mount Garganus one of the campsof Hannibal *. The senators were dragged in his


* I cannot ascertain this particular camp of Hannibal; but the Punic quarterswere long and often in the neighbourhood of Arpi (T. Liv. xxii. 9. 12. xxiv.3, &c ).







OCR Output








78 THE DECLINE AND FALL


XXXIV.


chap. private expense, of the general *. Their prowess wasalways conspicuous in single combats, or in the fore­most ranks; and both parties confessed, that in thesiege of Rome the guards of Belisarius had alonevanquished the Barbarian host. Their numbers werecontinually augmented by the bravest and most faith­ful of the enemy; and his fortunate captives, theVandals, the Moors, and the Goths, emulated theattachment of his domestic followers. By the unionof liberality and justice, he acquired the love of thesoldiers, without alienating the affections of the people.The sick and wounded were relieved with medicinesand money; and still more efficaciously by the heal­ing visits and smiles of their commander. The lossof a weapon or a horse was instantly repaired, andeach deed of valour was rewarded by the rich andhonourable gifts of a bracelet or a collar, which wererendered more precious by the judgment of Belisarius.He was endeared to the husbandmen, by the peaceand plenty which they enjoyed under the shadow ofhis standard. Instead of being injured, the countrywas enriched by the march of the Roman armies;and such was the rigid discipline of their camp, thatnot an apple was gathered from the tree, not a pathcould be traced in the fields of corn. Belisarius waschaste and sober. In the licence of a military life,none could boast that they had seen him intoxicatedwith wine: the most beautiful captives of Gothic orVandal race were offered to his embraces: but heturned aside from their charms, and the husband ofAntonina was never suspected of violating the laws ofconjugal fidelity. The spectator and historian of hisexploits has observed, that amidst the perils of war,he was daring without rashness, prudent without fear,slow or rapid according to the exigences of the
• Procopius, Gotb. 1. iii. c. 1.







OCR Output








394 THE DECLINE AND FALL


XL.


chap, of light to the evening, the line of assault was ex­tended from the Golden Gate to the eastern promon­tory; and the foremost warriors were impelled by theweight and effort of the succeeding columns. Butthe besieg-ers had formed an insufficient estimate ofthe strength and resources of Constantinople. Thesolid and lofty walls were guarded by numbers anddiscipline; the spirit of the Romans was rekindledby the last danger of their religion and empire; thefugitives from the conquered provinces more success­fully renewed the defence of Damascus and Alexan­dria; and the Saracens were dismayed by the strangeand prodigious effects of artificial fire. This firmand effectual resistance diverted their arms to themore easy attempts of plundering the European andAsiatic coasts of the Propontis; and, after keepingthe sea from the month of April to that of Septem­ber, on the approach of winter they retreated four­score miles from the capital, to the isle of Cyzicus.in which they had established their magazine of spoiland provisions. So patient was their perseverance,or so languid were their operations, that they re­peated, in the six following summers, the same attackand retreat, with a gradual abatement of hope andvigour, till the mischances of shipwreck and disease,of the sword and of fire, compelled them to relin­quish the fruitless enterprise. They might bewailthe loss, or commemorate the martyrdom, of thirtythousand Moslems, who fell in the siege of Constan­tinople.
The event of that siege revived, both in the Eastand West, the reputation of the Roman arms, andcast a momentary shade over the glories of the Sara­cens. The Greek ambassador was favourably re­ceived at Damascus, in a general council of the emirsor Koreish; a peace or truce of thirty years was rati­fied between the two empires; and the stipulation







OCR Output








82 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. ward for the Persian war, that Theodosius could be
XXXIV- tempted to return to Constantinople; and the short
interval before the departure of Antonina herself was
boldly devoted to love and pleasure.
Resentment ^ philosopher may pity and forgive the infirmities
ofBelisarius r r n i • % i • I
and her son of female nature, from which he receives no realPhotius. injurv. Dut contemptible is the husband who feels,and yet endures, his own infamy in that of his wife.Antonina pursued her son with implacable hatred;and the gallant Photius was exposed to her secretpersecutions in the camp beyond the Tigris. En­raged by his own wrongs, and by the dishonour ofhis blood, he cast away in his turn the sentiments ofnature, and revealed to Belisarius the turpitude of awoman who had violated all the duties of a motherand a wife. From the surprise and indignation ofthe Roman general, his former credulity appears tohave been sincere: he embraced the knees of the sonof Antonina, adjured him to remember his obliga­tions rather than his birth, and confirmed at thealtar their holy vows of revenge and mutual defence.The dominion of Antonina was impaired by absence;and when she met her husband, on his return fromthe Persian confines, Belisarius, in his first and tran­sient emotions, confined her person, and threatenedher life. Photius was more resolved to punish, andless prompt to pardon ; he flew to Ephesus; extortedfrom a trusty eunuch of his mother the full confes­sion of her guilt; arrested Theodosius and his trea­sures in the church of St. John the Apostle, andconcealed his captives, whose execution was onlydelayed, in a secure and sequestered fortress of Ci-licia. Such a daring outrage against public justicecould not pass with impunity; and the cause of An­tonina was espoused by the empress, whose favourshe had deserved by the recent services of the dis­grace of a praefect, and the exile and murder of a







OCR Output








114 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. general peace, and still waged an obscure war against- his rival Arethas, the chief of the tribe of Gassan,
and confederate of the empire. The subject of theirdispute was an extensive sheep-walk in the desert tothe south of Palmyra. An immemorial tribute forthe licence of pasture appeared to attest the rights ofAlmondar, while the Gassanite appealed to the Latinname of strata, a paved road, as an unquestionableevidence of the sovereignty and labours of the Ro­mans. The two monarchs supported the cause oftheir respective vassals; and the Persian Arab, with­out expecting the event of a slow and doubtful arbi­tration, enriched his flying camp with the spoil andcaptives of Syria. Instead of repelling the arms,Justinian attempted to seduce the fidelity of Almon­dar, while he called from the extremities of the earththe nations of Ethiopia and Scythia to invade thedominions of his rival. But the aid of such allieswas distant and precarious, and the discovery of thishostile correspondence justified the complaints of theGoths and Armenians, who implored, almost at thesame time, the protection of Chosroes. The descend­ants of Arsaces, who were still numerous in Armenia,had been provoked to assert the last relics of nationalfreedom and hereditary rank; and the ambassadors ofVitiges had secretly traversed the empire to exposethe instant, and almost inevitable, danger of the king­dom of Italy. Their representations were uniform,weighty, and effectual. "We stand before your"throne, the advocates of your interest as well as of"our own. The ambitious and faithless Justinian'.' aspires to be the sole master of the world. Since"the endless peace, which betrayed the common free-"dom of mankind, that prince, your ally in words,"your enemy in actions, has alike insulted his friends"and foes, and has filled the earth with blood and"confusion. Has he not violated the privileges of







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 177


counsels of the court: two brothers, Lothaire and chap.Buccelin, the dukes of the Alemanni, stood forth as XXXVLthe leaders of the Italian war; and seventy-five thou­sand Germans descended in the autumn from theRhaetian alps into the plain of Milan. The vanguardof the Roman army was stationed near the Po, underthe conduct of Fulcaris, a bold Herulian, who rashlyconceived, that personal bravery was the sole dutyand merit of a commander. As he marched withoutorder or precaution along the iEmilian way, an am­buscade of Franks suddenly rose from the amphi­theatre of Parma: his troops were surprised androuted; but their leader refused to fly, declaring tothe last moment that death was less terrible than theangry countenance of Narses. The death of Fulcaris,and the retreat of the surviving chiefs, decided thefluctuating and rebellious temper of the Goths; theyflew to the standard of their deliverers, and admittedthem into the cities which still resisted the arms ofthe Roman general. The conqueror of Italy openeda free passage to the irresistible torrent of Barbarians.They passed under the walls of Cesena, and answeredby threats and reproaches the advice of Aligern, thatthe Gothic treasures could no longer repay the labourof an invasion. Two thousand Franks were destroyedby the skill and valour of Narses himself, who salliedfrom Rimini at the head of three hundred horse, tochastise the licentious rapine of their march. On theconfines of Samnium, the two brothers divided theirforces. With the right wing, Buccelin assumed thespoil of Campania, Lucania, and Bruttium: with theleft, Lothaire accepted the plunder of Apulia andCalabria. They followed the coast of the Mediter­ranean and the Hadriatic, as far as Rhegium andOtranto, and the extreme lands of Italy were theterm of their destructive progress. The Franks, whowere Christians and Catholics, contented themselves
VOL. IV. N







OCR Output








490 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. beaks against the feeble sides of their antagonists.XL|1' A machine for casting stones and darts was built ofstrong timbers in the midst of the deck; and theoperation of boarding was effected by a crane thathoisted baskets of armed men. The language ofsignals, so clear and copious in the naval grammar ofthe moderns, was imperfectly expressed by the vari­ous positions and colours of a commanding flag. Inthe darkness of the night the same orders to chase,to attack, to halt, to retreat, to break, to form, wereconveyed by the lights of the leading galley. Byland, the fire-signals were repeated from one moun­tain to another; a chain of eight stations commandeda space of five hundred miles; and Constantinoplein a few hours was apprised of the hostile motions ofthe Saracens of Tarsus. Some estimate may be formedof the power of the Greek emperors, by the curiousand minute detail of the armament which was preparedfor the reduction of Crete. A fleet of one hundredand twelve galleys and seventy-five vessels of thePamphylian style was equipped in the capital, theislands of the iEgean sea, and the sea-ports of Asia,Macedonia, and Greece. It carried thirty-four thou­sand mariners, seven thousand three hundred andforty soldiers, seven hundred Russians, and five thou­sand and eighty-seven Mardaites, whose fathers hadbeen transplanted from the mountains of Libanus.Their pay, most probably of a month, was computedat thirty-four centenaries of gold, about one hundredand thirty-six thousand pounds sterling. Our fancyis bewildered by the endless recapitulation of armsand engines, of clothes and linen, of bread for themen, and forage for the horses, and of stores andutensils of every description, inadequate to the con­quest of a petty island, but amply sufficient for theestablishment of a flourishing colony.
The invention of the Greek fire did not, like that







OCR Output








S68 THE DECLINE AND FALL


CHAP.XXXIX.


art and success in the defence of Constantinople; and, the galleys, with two and three ranks of oars, command­ed the Bosphorus, and rendered the Persians the idlespectators of the defeat of their allies. The Avars wererepulsed; a fleet of Sclavonian canoes was destroyedin the harbour; the vassals of the chagan threatenedto desert, his provisions were exhausted, and afterburning his engines, he gave the signal of a slow andformidable retreat *.
After the division of his army, Heraclius prudentlyretired to the banks- of the Phasis, from whence hemaintained a defensive war against the fifty thousandgold spears of Persia. His anxiety was relieved bythe deliverance of Constantinople; his hopes wereconfirmed by a victory of his brother Theodorus; andto the hostile league of Chosroes with the Avars theRoman emperor opposed the useful and honourablealliance of the Turks. At his liberal invitation, thehorde of Chozars transported their tents from the plainsof the Volga to the mountains of Georgia; Hera­clius received them in the neighbourhood of Teflis;and the khan with his nobles dismounted from theirhorses, if we may credit the Greeks, and fell pro­strate on the ground, to adore the purple of the Caesar.Such voluntary homage and important aid were en­titled to the warmest acknowledgments; and the em­peror, taking off his own diadem, placed it on thehead of the Turkish prince, whom he saluted with atender embrace and the appellation of son. Aftera sumptuous banquet, he presented Ziebel with theplate and ornaments, the gold, the gems, and thesilk, which had been used at the Imperial table, and,with his own hand, distributed rich jewels and ear­


Alliancesand con­quests ofHeraclius.
* The Paschal Chronicle (p. 392—397) gives a minute and authentic narrativeof the siege and deliverance of Constantinople. Theophanes (p. 2G4) adds somecircumstances; and a faint light may be obtained from the smoke of George ofPisidia, who has composed a poem (de Bello Abarico, p. 45—54) to comme­morate this auspicious event.







OCR Output








360 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. the confines of Syria and Cilicia, in the gulf of'J'''1 Scanderoon, where the coast suddenly turns to thesouth*; and his discernment was expressed in thechoice of this important post \. From all sides, thescattered garrisons of the maritime cities and themountains might repair with speed and safety to hisImperial standard. The natural fortifications of Ci­licia protected, and even concealed, the camp of He-raclius, which was pitched near Issus, on the sameground where Alexander had vanquished the host ofDarius. The angle which the emperor occupiedwas deeply indented into a vast semicircle of theAsiatic, Armenian, and Syrian provinces; and towhatsoever point of the circumference he shoulddirect his attack, it was easy for him to dissemble hisown motions, and to prevent those of the enemy. Inthe camp of Issus, the Roman general reformed thesloth and disorder of the veterans, and educated thenew recruits in the knowledge and practice of militaryvirtue. Unfolding the image of Christ, he urgedthem to revenge the holy altars which had been pro­faned by the worshippers of fire; addressing them bythe endearing appellations of sons and brethren, hedeplored the public and private wrongs of the re­public. The subjects of a monarch were persuadedthat they fought in the cause of freedom; and a


* George of Pisidia (Acroas. ii. 10, p. 8) has fixed this important point of theSyrian and Cilician gates. They are elegantly described by Xenophon, whomarched through them a thousand years before. A narrow pass of three stadiabetween steep high rocks (nixjai liXiSorrai) and the Mediterranean was closed ateach end by strong gates, impregnable to the land (nrafi\0eiv ux i:v fiiy), ac­cessible by sea (Anabasis, 1. i. p. 35, 36, with Hutchinson's Geographical Dis­sertation, p. vi.). The gates were thirty-five parasangs, or leagues, from Tarsus(Anabasis, 1. i. p. 33, 34), and eight or ten from Antioch. (CompareItinerar. Wesseling. p. 580, 581. Schultens, Index. Geograph. ad calcemVit. Saladin. p. 9. Voyage en Turquie et en Perse, par M. Otter, tom. i.p- 78, 79).
.f- HeracKus might write to a friend in the modest words of Cicero: "Castra"habuimus ea ipsa qua; contra Darium habuerat apud Issum Alexander, io"peratpr haud paulo melior quani aut tu aut ego." Ad Atticum, v. 20. Issus,a rich and flourishing city in the time of Xenophon, was ruined by the prosperityof Alexandria or Scandaroon, on the other side of the bay.







OCR Output








356 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. and the Roman empire was reduced to the walls ofXXXIX- Constantinople, with the remnant of Greece, Italy,and Africa, and some maritime cities, from Tyre toTrebizond, of the Asiatic coast. After the loss ofEgypt, the capital was afflicted by famine and pes­tilence; and the emperor, incapable of resistance,and hopeless of relief, had resolved to transfer hisperson and government to the more secure residenceof Carthage. His ships were already laden with thetreasures of the palace, but his flight was arrested bythe patriarch, who armed the powers of religion inthe defence of his country, led Heraclius to the altarof St. Sophia, and extorted a solemn oath, that hewould live and die with the people whom God hadintrusted to his care. The chagan was encamped inthe plains of Thrace, but he dissembled his perfidiousdesigns, and solicited an interview with the emperornear the town of Heraclia. Their reconciliation wascelebrated with equestrian games; the senate andpeople, in their gayest apparel, resorted to the festivalof peace; and the Avars beheld, with envy and desire,the spectacle of Roman luxury. On a sudden, thehippodrome was encompassed by the Scythian ca­valry, who had pressed their secret and nocturnalmarch: the tremendous sound of the chagan's whipgave the signal of the assault; and Heraclius, wrap­ping his diadem round his arm, was saved, with ex­treme hazard, by the fleetness of his horse. So rapidwas the pursuit, that the Avars almost entered thegolden gate of Constantinople with the flying crowds:but the plunder of the suburbs rewarded their treason,and they transported beyond the Danube two hun­dred and seventy thousand captives. On the shoreof Chalcedon, the emperor held a safer conferencewith a more honourable foe, who, before Heracliusdescended from his galley, saluted with reverenceHe^soiicit. and pity the majesty of the pm.ple- The friendly







OCR Output








250 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. children, might distribute their respective shares ac-, cording to the degrees of their merit or his affection:
his arbitrary displeasure chastised an unworthy sonby the loss of his inheritance and the mortifying pre­ference of a stranger. But the experience of un­natural parents recommended some limitations oftheir testamentary powers. A son, or, by the lawsof Justinian, even a daughter, could no longer bedisinherited by their silence: they were compelledto name the criminal, and to specify the offence; andthe justice of the emperor enumerated the sole causesthat could justify such a violation of the first prin­ciples of nature and society. Unless a legitimateportion, a fourth part, had been reserved for thechildren, they were entitled to institute an action orcomplaint of inofficious testament, to suppose thattheir father,s understanding was impaired by sicknessor age; and respectfully to appeal from his rigoroussentence to the deliberate wisdom of the magistrate.Legacies. Jn the Roman jurisprudence, an essential distinctionwas admitted between the inheritance and the legacies.The heirs who succeeded to the entire unity, or toany of the twelve fractions of the substance of thetestator, represented his civil and religious character,asserted his rights, fulfilled his obligations, and dis­charged the gifts of friendship or liberality which hislast will had bequeathed under the name of legacies.But as the imprudence or prodigality of a dying manmight exhaust the inheritance, and leave only riskand labour to his successor, he was empowered toretain the Falcidian portion; to deduct, before thepayment of the legacies, a clear fourth for his ownemolument. A reasonable time was allowed to ex­amine the proportion between the debts and theestate, to decide whether he should accept or refusethe testament; and if he used the benefit of an in­ventory, the demands of the creditors could not exceed







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 211


the veil of mystery; and in more enlightened times, chap.the freedom of inquiry established the general prin- XXXVILciples of jurisprudence. Subtle and intricate caseswere elucidated by the disputes of the forum: rules,axioms, and definitions, were admitted as the genuinedictates of reason; and the consent of the legal pro­fessors was interwoven into the practice of the tri­bunals. But these interpreters could neither enactnor execute the laws of the republic; and the judgesmight disregard the authority of the Scaevolas them­selves, which was often overthrown by the eloquenceor sophistry of an ingenious pleader. Augustus andTiberius were the first to adopt, as a useful engine,the science of the civilians; and their servile laboursaccommodated the old system to the spirit and viewsof despotism. Under the fair pretence of securingthe dignity of the art, the privilege of subscribing legaland valid opinions was confined to the sages of sena-torian or equestrian rank, who had been previouslyapproved by the judgment of the prince; and thismonopoly prevailed, till Hadrian restored the free­dom of the profession to every citizen conscious of hisabilities and knowledge. The discretion of the prae­tor was now governed by the lessons of his teachers;the judges were enjoined to obey the comment as wellas the text of the law; and the use of codicils was amemorable innovation, which Augustus ratified bythe advice of the civilians.
The most absolute mandate could only require that Sects.the judges should agree wjth the civilians, if thecivilians agreed among themselves. But positive in­stitutions are often the result of custom and preju­dice; laws and language are ambiguous and arbitrary;where reason is incapable of pronouncing, the love ofargument is inflamed by the envy of rivals, the vanityof masters, the blind attachment of their disciples;and the Roman jurisprudence was divided by the once







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 293


services of Justinian were not considered by that ex- chap.cellent prince as an aggravation of his offences : after xxxvm-a mild reproof, his treason and ingratitude were for­given; and it was commonly believed, that the em­peror entertained some thoughts of contracting adouble alliance with the rival of his throne. Tibe­rius derived firm assurance from the innocence andgenerosity of his own mind.
With the odious name of Tiberius, he assumed His virtues.the more popular appellation of Constantine, andimitated the purer virtues of the Antonines. Afterrecording the vice or folly of so many Roman princes,it is pleasing to repose, for a moment, on a characterconspicuous by the qualities of humanity, justice*temperance, and fortitude; to contemplate a soveTreign affable in his palace, pious in the church, im­partial on the seat of judgment, and victorious, atleast by his generals, in the Persian war. The mostglorious trophy of his victory consisted in a mul­titude of captives, whom Tiberius entertained, re­deemed, and dismissed to their native homes, withthe charitable spirit of a Christian hero. The meritor misfortunes of his own subjects had a dearer claimto his beneficence, and he measured his bounty not somuch by their expectations as by his own dignity.This maxim, however dangerous in a trustee of thepublic wealth, was balanced by a principle of hu­manity and justice, which taught him to abhor, as ofthe basest alloy, the gold that was extracted fromthe tears of the people. For their relief, as often asthey had suffered by natural or hostile calamities, hewas impatient to remit the arrears of the past, or thedemands of future taxes: he sternly rejected theservile offerings of his ministers, which were com­pensated by tenfold oppression; and the wise andequitable laws of Tiberius excited the praise and re-


v3







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 259


but the want could never be felt, till the middle of chap.the sixth century first revealed the guilt of a par- xxxvn-ricide*. 4. The malice of an incendiary. Afterthe previous ceremony of whipping, he himself wasdelivered to the flames; and in this example aloneour reason is tempted to approve the justice of re­taliation. 5. Judicial perjury. The corrupt andmalicious witness was thrown headlong from theTarpeian rock to expiate his falsehood, which wasrendered still more fatal by the severity of the penallaws, and the deficiency of written evidence. 6. Thecorruption of a judge, who accepted bribes, to pro­nounce an iniquitous sentence. 7. Libels and sa­tires, whose rude strains sometimes disturbed thepeace of an illiterate city. The author was beatenwith clubs, a worthy chastisement, but it is not cer­tain that he was left to expire under the blows ofthe executioner t. 8. The nocturnal mischief ofdamaging or destroying a neighbour,s corn. Thecriminal was suspended as a grateful victim to Ceres.But the sylvan deities were less implacable, and theextirpation of a more valuable tree was compensatedby the moderate fine of twenty-five pounds of copper.9. Magical incantations; which had power, in theopinion of the Latian shepherds, to exhaust thestrength of an enemy, to extinguish his life, andremove from their seats his deep-rooted plantations.The cruelty of the twelve tables against insolventdebtors still remains to be told; and I shall dare toprefer the literal sense of antiquity to the speciousrefinements of modern criticism. After the judicialproof or confession of the debt, thirty days of grace
• The first parricide at Rome was L. Ostius, after the second Punic war (Plu­tarch in Uomulo, tom. i. p. 57). During the Cimbric, P. Malleolus was guiltyof the first matricide (Liv. Epitom. 1. Ixviii.).
+ Horace talks of the formidine fustis (1 . ii. epist. ii. 154); but Cicero (de Re-publica, 1. iv. apud Augustiru de Civitat. Dei, ix. 6. in Fragment. PhUosoph.tom. iii. p. :t!»3. edit. Olivet) affirms that the decemvirs made libels a capitaloffence: cum pcrpaucas res capite fauxistent—perpaucat!


s 2







OCR Output








254 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. the civilians with the epithet of real*. A gratefulxxxvn- return is due to the author of a benefit; and who­ever is intrusted with the property of another hasbound himself to the sacred duty of restitution. Inthe case of a friendly loan, the merit of generosity ison the side of the lender only; in a deposit, on theside of the receiver: but in a pledge, and the rest ofthe selfish commerce of ordinary life, the benefit iscompensated by an equivalent, and the obligation torestore is variously modified by the nature of thetransaction. The Latin language very happily ex­presses the fundamental difference between the com-modatum and the mutuum, which our poverty is re­duced to confound under the vague and commonappellation of a loan. In the former, the borrowerwas obliged to restore the same individual thing withwhich he had been accommodated for the temporarysupply of his wants; in the latter, it was destinedfor his use and consumption, and he discharged thismutual engagement, by substituting the same specificvalue, according to a just estimation of number, ofweight, and of measure. In the contract of sale,the absolute dominion is transferred to the purchaser,and he repays the benefit with an adequate sum ofgold or silver, the price or universal standard of allearthly possessions. The obligation of another con­tract, that of location, is of a more complicated kind.Lands or houses, labour or talents, may be hired fora definite term; at the expiration of the time, thething itself must be restored to the owner with anadditional reward for the beneficial occupation andemployment. In these lucrative contracts, to whichmay be added those of partnership and commissions,


* The nice and various subject of contracts by consent is spread over fourbooks (xvii.—xx.) of the Pandects, and is one of the parts best deserving of theattention of an English student.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 163


capable of bold and sanguinary deeds. Tlie death of chap.
Justinian was resolved, but the conspirators delayed _
the execution till they could surprise Belisarius dis­armed, and naked, in the palace of Constantinople.Not a hope could be entertained of shaking his long-tried fidelity; and they justly dreaded the revenge,or rather justice, of the veteran general, who mightspeedily assemble an army in Thrace to punish theassassins, and perhaps to enjoy the fruits of their crime.Delay afforded time for rash communications andhonest confessions: Artaban and his accomplices werecondemned by the senate, but the extreme clemencyof Justinian detained them in the gentle confinementof the palace, till he pardoned their flagitious attemptagainst his throne and life. If the emperor forgavehis enemies, he must cordially embrace a friend whosevictories were alone remembered, and who was en­deared to his prince by the recent circumstance oftheir common danger. Belisarius reposed from histoils, in the high station of general of the East andcount of the domestics; and the older consuls andpatricians respectfully yielded the precedency of rankto the peerless merit of the first of the Romans *.The first of the Romans still submitted to be theslave of his wife; but the servitude of habit and af­fection became less disgraceful when the death ofTheodora had removed the baser influence of fear.Joannina their daughter, and the sole heiress of theirfortunes, was betrothed to Anastasius, the grandson,or rather the nephew, of the empress, whose kindinterposition forwarded the consummation of theiryouthful loves. But the power of Theodora expired,the parents of Joannina returned, and her honour,


* The honours of Belisarius are gladly commemorated by his secretary (Pro-cop. Goth. 1. iii. c . 36.1. iv. c. 21). The title of Zi-paTiiyof is ill translated, atleast in this instance, by praefectus praetorio; and to a military character, ma-gister militum is more proper and applicable (Ducange, Gloss. Grsc. p. 1458,1459).


M 2







OCR Output








OF THi? ROMAN EMPIRE. 433


A memorable reverse of fortune was displayed in chap.Michael the Second, who, from a defect in his speech,


was surnamedthe Stammerer. He was snatched from MMudii.the fiery furnace to the sovereignty of an empire ; merer,and, as in the tumult a smith could not readily be A-,D" 8mfound, the fetters remained on his legs several hoursafter he was seated on the throne of the Ca?sars.The royal blood which had been the price of his ele­vation was unprofitably spent: in the purple he re­tained the ignoble vices of his origin; and Michaellost his provinces with as supine indifference as if theyhad been the inheritance of his fathers. His titlewas disputed by Thomas, the last of the militarytriumvirate, who transported into Europe fourscorethousand Barbarians from the banks of the Tigris,and the shores of the Caspian. He formed the siegeof Constantinople; but the capital was defended withspiritual and carnal weapons; a Bulgarian king as­saulted the camp of the Orientals, and Thomas hadthe misfortune or the weakness to fall alive into thepower of the conqueror. The hands and feet of therebel were amputated; he was placed on an ass, and,amidst the insults of the people, was led through thestreets, which he sprinkled with his blood. The de­pravation of manners, as savage as they were corrupt,is marked by the presence of the emperor himself.Deaf to the lamentations of a fellow-soldier, he in­cessantly pressed the discovery of more accomplices,till his curiosity was checked by the question of anhonest or guilty minister: "Would you give credit"to an enemy against the most faithful of your"friends?" After the death of his first wife, theemperor, at the request of the senate, drew from hermonastery Euphrosyne, the daughter of Constantinethe Sixth. Her august birth might justify a stipu­lation in the marriage contract, that her childrenshould equally share the empire with their elder bro-
VOL. IV. F F







OCR Output








32 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. shoulders of captive Vandals; and the spoils of war, 1 gold cups, and rich girdles, were profusely scattered


End ofGelimer


among the populace.
But the purest reward of Belisarius was in theand the faithful execution of a treaty for which his honourhad been pledged to the king of the Vandals. Thereligious scruples of Gelimer, who adhered to theArian heresy, were incompatible with the dignity ofsenator or patrician: but he received from the em­peror an ample estate in the province of Galatia,where the abdicated monarch retired with his familyand friends, to a life of peace, of affluence, and per­haps of content. The daughters of Hilderic wereentertained with the respectful tenderness due totheir age and misfortune; and Justinian and Theo­dora accepted the honour of educating and enrichingthe female descendants of the great Theodosius.The bravest of the Vandal youth were distributedinto five squadrons of cavalry, which adopted thename of their benefactor, and supported in the Per­sian wars the glory of their ancestors. But theserare exceptions, the reward of birth or valour, areinsufficient to explain the fate of a nation, whosenumbers, before a short and bloodless war, amountedto more than six hundred thousand persons. Afterthe exile of their king and nobles, the servile crowdmight purchase their safety, by abjuring their cha­racter, religion, and language; and their degenerateposterity would be insensibly mingled with the com­mon herd of African subjects. Yet even in thepresent age, and in the heart of the Moorish tribes,a curious traveller has discovered the white com­plexion and long flaxen hair of a northern race; andit was formerly believed, that the boldest of theVandals fled beyond the power, or even the know­ledge, of the Romans, to enjoy their solitary freedomon the shores of the Atlantic ocean. Africa had







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. contained, since the time of Hadrian, in the Grego-XXVI' rian, Hermogenian, and Theodosian codes; to purgethe errors and contradictions, to retrench whateverwas obsolete or superfluous, and to select the wiseand salutary laws best adapted to the practice of thetribunals and the use of his subjects. The work wasaccomplished in fourteen months; and the twelvebooks or tables, which the new decemvirs produced,might be designed to imitate the labours of theirRoman predecessors. The new code of Justinianwas honoured with his name, and confirmed by hisroyal signature: authentic transcripts were multi­plied by the pens of notaries and scribes; they weretransmitted to the magistrates of the European, theThe Pan- Asiatic, and afterwards the African provirices: and
dccts or
Digest, the law of the empire was proclaimed on solemn fes-Dec. is; ' tivals at the doors of churches. A more arduousa. d. 533, operation was still behind: to extract the spirit ofjurisprudence from the decisions and conjectures, thequestions and disputes, of the Roman civilians. Se­venteen lawyers, with Tribonian at their head, wereappointed by the emperor to exercise an absolute ju­risdiction over the works of their predecessors. Ifthey had obeyed his commands in ten years, Justinianwould have been satisfied with their diligence; andthe rapid composition of the digest or pandects,in three years, will deserve praise or censure, accord­ing to the merit of the execution. From the libraryof Tribonian, they chose forty, the most eminentcivilians of former times: two thousand treatiseswere comprised in an abridgment of fifty books; andit has been carefully recorded, that three millions oflines, or sentences, were reduced, in this abstract, tothe moderate number of one hundred and fifty thou­sand. The edition of this great work was delayed amonth after that of the institutes; and it seemedreasonable that the elements should precede the digest







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 225


jU.


ments. The changes and interpolations of Tribonian chap.and his colleagues are excused by the pretence of XXXVIT-uniformity: but their cares have been insufficient,and the antinomies, or contradictions of the Codeand Pandects, still exercise the patience and subtletyof modern civilians.
A rumour devoid of evidence has been propagated Loss of theby the enemies of Justinian; that the jurisprudence JE^Vof ancient Rome was reduced to ashes by the authorof the Pandects, from the vain persuasion, that it wasnow either false or superfluous. Without usurpingan office so invidious, the emperor might safely com­mit to ignorance and time the accomplishment ofthis destructive wish. Before the invention of print­ing and paper, the labour and the materials of writingcould be purchased only by the rich; and it mayreasonably be computed, that the price of books wasa hundred fold their present value. Copies wereslowly multiplied and cautiously renewed: the hopesof profit tempted the sacrilegious scribes to erase thecharacters of antiquity, and Sophocles or Tacitus wereobliged to resign the parchment to missals, homilies,and the golden legend. If such was the fate of themost beautiful compositions of genius, what stabilitycould be expected for the dull and barren works ofan obsolete science? The books of jurisprudencewere interesting to few, and entertaining to none:their value was connected with present use, and theysunk for ever as soon as that use was superseded bythe innovations of fashion, superior merit, or publicauthority. In the age of peace and learning, betweenCicero and the last of the Antonines, many losseshad been already sustained, and some luminaries ofthe school, or forum, were known only to the curiousby tradition and report. Three hundred and sixtyyears of disorder and decay accelerated the progressof oblivion; and it may fairly be presumed, that of


ence.
VOL. IV. d







OCR Output








OP THE EOMAN EMPIRE. 491


of gunpowder, produce a total revolution in the art chap.of war. To these liquid combustibles the. city and


empire of Constantinople owed their deliverance; Tactics andand they were employed in sieges and sea-fights with the Greeks.terrible effect. But they were either less improved,or less susceptible of improvements: the engines ofantiquity, the catapultae, balistae, and battering-rams,were still of most frequent and powerful use in theattack and defence of fortifications; nor was the de­cision of battles reduced to the quick and heavy fire ofa line of infantry, whom it were fruitless to protectwith armour against a similar fire of their enemies.Steel and iron were still the common instruments ofdestruction and safety; and the helmets, cuirasses,and shields of the tenth century did not, eitherin form or substance, essentially differ from thosewhich had covered the companions of Alexander orAchilles*. But instead of accustoming the modernGreeks, like the legionaries of old, to the constantand easy use of this salutary weight, their armourwas laid aside in light chariots, which followed themarch, till on the approach of an enemy they re­sumed with haste and reluctance the unusual encum­brance. Their offensive weapons consisted of swords,battle-axes, and spears: but the Macedonian pikewas shortened a fourth of its length, and reduced tothe more convenient measure of twelve cubits or feet.The sharpness of the Scythian and Arabian arrowshad been severely felt; and the emperors lament thedecay of archery as a cause of the public misfortunes,and recommend, as an advice and a command, thatthe military youth, till the age of forty, should assi­duously practise the exercise of the bow. The bands,or regiments, were usually three hundred strong;


* See the fifth, sixth, and seventh chapters, mpi oxXwv, irif< oishiauus andr.ifi -jvmisi /,', in the Tactics of Leo, with the corresponding passages in those ofConstantino.
/







OCR Output








182 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. usurpation of Totila. A moderate theory was framedXXXVI- to reconcile the rights of property with the safety ofprescription, the claims of the state with the povertyof the people, and the pardon of offences with theinterest of virtue and order of society. Under theexarchs of Ravenna, Rome was degraded to the se­cond rank. Yet the senators were gratified by thepermission of visiting their estates in Italy, and ofapproaching without obstacle the throne of Con­stantinople: the regulation of weights and measureswas delegated to the pope and senate; and the sa­laries of lawyers and physicians, of orators and gram­marians, were destined to preserve or rekindle thelight of science in the ancient capital. Justinianmight dictate benevolent edicts*, and Narses mightsecond his wishes by the restoration of cities, andmore especially of churches; but the twenty years ofthe Gothic war had consummated the distress anddepopulation of Italy. As early as the fourth cam­paign, under the discipline of Belisarius himself, fiftythousand labourers died of hunger in the narrowregion of Picenum; and a strict interpretation ofthe evidence of Procopius would swell the loss ofItaly above the total sum of her present inhabitants.invasion I desire to believe, but I dare not affirm, that
Bulgarians, Belisarius sincerely rejoiced in the triumph of Narses.. 559. yet the consciousness of his own exploits might teachhim to esteem without jealousy the merit of a rival;and the repose of the aged warrior was crowned bya last victory which saved the emperor and the capital.The Barbarians who annually visited the provincesof Europe were less discouraged by some accidental


* The Pragmatic Sanction of Justinian, which restores and regulates the civilstate of Italy, consists of xxvii articles: it is dated August 15, A. D. 554; isaddressed to Narses, V. J. Propositus Sacri Cubiculi, and to Antiochus, Pr«-fectus PraHorio Italiae; and has been preserved by Julian Antecessor, and inthe Corpus Juris Civilis, after the novels and edicts of Justinian, Justin, andTiberius.







OCR Output








274 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. the principal members of the senate. These welcomexxxviii. depute announced the recent and momentous secretof the emperor's decease: reported, or perhaps in­vented, his dying choice of the best beloved and mostdeserving of his nephews, and conjured" Justin toprevent the disorders of the multitude, if they shouldperceive, with the return of light, that they were leftwithout a master. After composing his countenanceto surprise, sorrow, and decent modesty, Justin, bythe advice of his wife Sophia, submitted to the au­thority of the senate. He was conducted with speedand silence to the palace; the guards saluted theirnew sovereign, and the martial and religious rites ofhis coronation were diligently accomplished. By thehands of the proper officers he was invested with theImperial garments, the red buskins, white tunic, andpurple robe. A fortunate soldier, whom he instantlypromoted to the rank of tribune, encircled his neckwith a military collar: four robust youths exaltedhim on a shield; he stood firm and erect to receivethe adoration of his subjects; and their choice wassanctified by the benediction of the patriarch, whoimposed the diadem on the head of an orthodoxReign of prince. The hippodrome was already filled with, in-orUthe numerable multitudes; and no sooner did the em-A.UDf 565 peror appear on his throne, than the voices of the
Nov. is— blue and the green factions were confounded in thea. D.574, 11 r - ti 1 i-iT-
December, same loyal acclamations. In the speeches which Justin
addressed to the senate and people, he promised tocorrect the abuses which had disgraced the age of hispredecessor, displayed the maxims of a just and be-Hiscon. neficent government, and declared, that on the ap-a. d. 566, proaching calends of January, he would revive in hisJanuary 1. (Jwn person tne name and liberality of a Roman con­sul. The immediate discharge of his uncle's debtsexhibited a solid pledge of his faith and generosity;a train of porters laden with bags of gold advanced







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 485


malice insensibly betrayed the fraud or error of the chap.Imperial court. The patrimonial estate of Hugo.


was reduced from the monarchy of France to thesimple county of Aries; though it was not denied,that, in the confusion of the times, he had usurpedthe sovereignty of Provence, and invaded the king­dom of Italy. His father, was a private noble; andif Bertha derived her female descent from the Carlo-vingian line, every step was polluted with illegitimacyor vice. The grandmother of Hugo was the famousValdrada, the concubine, rather than the wife, of thesecond Lothair; whose adultery, divorce, and secondnuptials, had provoked against him the thunders ofthe Vatican. His mother, as she was styled, thegreat Bertha, was successively the wife of the countof Aries and of the marquis of Tuscany: France andItaly were scandalized by her gallantries; and, tillthe age of threescore, her lovers, of every degree,were the zealous servants of her ambition. The ex­ample of maternal incontinence was copied by theking of Italy; and the three favourite concubinesof Hugo were decorated with the classic names ofVenus, Juno, and Semele. The daughter of Venuswas granted to the solicitations of the Byzantinecourt: her name of Bertha was changed to that ofEudoxia; and she was wedded, or rather betrothed,to young Romanus, the future heir of the empire ofthe East. The consummation of this foreign alliancewas suspended by the tender age of the two parties;and, at the end of five years, the union was dissolvedby the death of the virgin spouse. The second wifeof the emperor Romanus was a maiden of plebeian,but of Roman, birth; and their two daughters,Theophano and Anne, were given in marriage to theprinces of the earth. The eldest was bestowed, as otho ofthe pledge of peace, on the eldest son of the great AJDUKra.Otho, who had solicited this alliance with arms and


 


i i 3







OCR Output








502 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap, his nephew was sometimes diverted from the indul-XLI- gence of vice and folly; a school was opened in thepalace of Magnaura; and the presence of Bardas ex­cited the emulation of the masters and students. Attheir head was the philosopher Leo, archbishop ofThessalonica; his profound skill in astronomy andthe mathematics was admired by the strangers of theEast; and this occult science was magnified by vul-% gar credulity, which modestly supposes that all know­
ledge superior to its own must be the effect of in­spiration or magic. At the pressing entreaty of theCaesar, his friend, the celebrated Photius, renouncedthe freedom of a secular and studious life, ascendedthe patriarchal throne, and was alternately excom­municated and absolved by the synods of the Eastand West. No art or science, except poetry, wasforeign to this universal scholar, who was deep inthought, indefatigable in reading, and eloquent indiction. Whilst he exercised the office of proto-spathaire, or captain of the guards, Photius was sentambassador to the caliph of Bagdad. The tedioushours of exile, perhaps of confinement, were be­guiled by the hasty composition of his Library, aliving monument of erudition and criticism. Twohundred and fourscore writers, historians, orators,philosophers, theologians, are reviewed without anyregular method: he abridges their narrative or doc­trine, appreciates their style and character, and judgeseven the fathers of the church with a discreet free­dom, which often breaks through the superstition ofthe times. The emperor Basil, who lamented thedefects of his own education, intrusted to the care ofPhotius his son and successor Leo the philosopher;and the reign of that prince and of his son Constan-tine Porphyrogenitus fornjs one of the most prosper­ous aeras of the Byzantine literature. By their mu­nificence the treasures of antiquity were deposited in







OCR Output








130 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. Roman garrison prevented by a capitulation the im-xxxv- pending fury of the last assault. But the Lazi soondiscovered, that their impatience had urged them tochoose an evil more intolerable than the calamitieswhich they strove to escape. The monopoly of saltand corn was effectually removed by the loss of thosevaluable commodities. The authority of a Romanlegislator was succeeded by the pride of an Orientaldespot, who beheld, with equal disdain, the slaveswhom he had exalted, and the kings whom he hadhumbled before the footstool of *his throne. Theadoration of fire was introduced into Colchos by thezeal of the Magi: their intolerant spirit provoked thefervour of a Christian people: and the prejudice ofnature or education was wounded by the impiouspractice of exposing the dead bodies of their parents,on the summit of a lofty tower, to the crows and vul­tures of the air. Conscious of the increasing hatred,which retarded the execution of his great designs, thejust Nushirvan had secretly given orders to assassinatethe king of the Lazi, to transplant the people intosome distant land, and to fix a faithful and warlikecolony on the banks of the Phasis. The watchfuljealousy of the Colchians foresaw and averted theapproaching ruin. Their repentance was acceptedat Constantinople by the prudence, rather than theclemency, of Justinian; and he commanded Da-gisteus, with seven thousand Romans, and one thou­sand of the Zani, to expel the Persians from thecoast of the Euxine.para°f ^ne sieSe °f Petra, which the Roman general,a.d.'549 with the aid of the Lazi, immediately undertook, isone of the most remarkable actions of the age. Thecity was seated on a craggy rock, which hung overthe sea, and communicated by a steep and narrowpath with the land. Since the approach was difficult,the attack might be deemed impossible; the Persian


—551.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 361


similar enthusiasm was communicated to the foreign chap.
mercenaries, who must have viewed with equal indif- '_
ference the interest of Rome and of Persia. Hera-clius himself, with the skill and patience of a centu­rion, inculcated the lessons of the school of tactics,and the soldiers were assiduously trained in the useof their weapons, and the exercises and evolutions ofthe field. The cavalry and infantry in light or heavyarmour were divided into two parties; the trumpetswere fixed in the centre, and their signals directedthe march, the charge, the retreat, or pursuit; thedirect or oblique order, the deep or extended phalanx;to represent in fictitious combat the operations ofgenuine war. Whatever hardship the emperor im­posed on the troops, he inflicted with equal severityon himself; their labour, their diet, their sleep,were measured by the inflexible rules of discipline;and, without despising the enemy, they were taughtto repose an implicit confidence in their own va­lour and the wisdom of their leader. Cilicia wassoon encompassed with the Persian arms; but theircavalry hesitated to enter the defiles of mount Tau­rus, till they were circumvented by the evolutionsof Heraclius, who insensibly gained their rear, whilsthe appeared to present his front in order of battle.By a false motion, which seemed to threaten Armenia,he drew them, against their wishes, to a general action.They were tempted by the artful disorder of hiscamp; but when they advanced to combat, the ground,the sun, and the expectation of both armies, wereunpropitious to the Barbarians; the Romans success­fully repeated their tactics in a field of battle*, and theevent of the day declared to the world, that the Per-
"Foggini (Annotat. p. 31) suspects that the Persians were deceived by the^aXavf irmXtiyf*iv>i of .Elian (Tactic . c. 48), an intricate spiral motion of the army.He observed (p. 28.) that the military descriptions of George of Pisidia are tran­scribed in the Tactics of the emperor Leo.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 241


children in the infinite series of ascending and de- chap.scending generations. Concerning the oblique and xxxvu-collateral branches, nature is indifferent, reason mute,and custom various and arbitrary. In Egypt, themarriage of brothers and sisters was admitted with­out scruple or exception: a Spartan might espousethe daughter of his father, an Athenian that of hismother; and the nuptials of an uncle with his niecewere applauded at Athens as a happy union of thedearest relations. The profane lawgivers of Romewere never tempted by interest or superstition tomultiply the forbidden degrees: but they inflexiblycondemned the marriage of sisters and brothers ; he­sitated whether first cousins should be touched bythe same interdict; revered the parental character ofaunts and uncles, and treated affinity and adoptionas a just imitation of the ties of blood. Accordingto the proud maxims of the republic, a legal marriagecould only be contracted by free citizens; an honour­able, at least an ingenuous birth, was required forthe spouse of a senator: but the blood of kings couldnever mingle in legitimate nuptials with the blood ofa Roman; and the name of Stranger degraded Cleo­patra and Berenice, to live the concubines of MarkAntony and Titus. This appellation, indeed so in­jurious to the majesty, cannot without indulgence beapplied to the manners of these Oriental queens. Aconcubine, in the strict sense of the civilians, was awoman of servile or plebeian extraction, the sole andfaithful companion of a Roman citizen, who con­tinued in a state of celibacy. Her modest stationbelow the honours of a wife, above the infamy of a •prostitute, was acknowledged and approved by thelaws: from the age of Augustus to the tenth century,the use of this secondary marriage prevailed both in theWest and East, and the humble virtues of a concubinewere often preferred to the pomp and insolence of aVOL. iv. n







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 19


caution along the coast, till they reached the Her- chap.msean promontory, and obtained the first intelligence XX1V-of the victory of Belisarius. Faithful to his in­structions, they would have cast anchor about twentymiles from Carthage, if the more skilful seamen hadnot represented the perils of the shore, and the signsof an impending tempest. Still ignorant of the revo­lution, they declined, however, the rash attempt offorcing the chain of the port; and the adjacentharbour and suburb of Mandracium were insultedonly by the rapine of a private officer who disobeyedand deserted his leaders. But the Imperial fleet,advancing with a fair wind, steered through thenarrow entrance of the Goletta, and occupied in thedeep and capacious lake of Tunis a secure stationabout five miles from the capital *. No sooner wasBelisarius informed of their arrival, than he de­spatched orders that the greatest part of the marinersshould be immediately landed to join the triumph,and to swell the apparent numbers of the Romans.Before he allowed them to enter the gates of Car­thage, he exhorted them, in a discourse worthy ofhimself and the occasion, not to disgrace the gloryof their arms; and to remember that the Vandalshad been the tyrants, but that they were the de­liverers of the Africans, who must now be respectedas the voluntary and affectionate subjects of theircommon sovereign. The Romans marched throughthe streets in close ranks, prepared for battle if anenemy had appeared; the strict order maintainedby the general imprinted on their minds the duty of


• The neighbourhood of Carthage, the sea, the land, and the rivers, arcchanged almost as much as the works of man. The isthmus, or neck, of thecity is now confounded with the continent; the harbour is a dry plain; and thelake, or stagnum, no more than a morass, with six or seven feet water in themid-channel. See d'Anville (Geographie Ancienne, tom. iii. p. 82.), Shaw
(Travels, p. 77 84.), Marmol (Description de l'Afrique, tom. ii. p. 465.), and
Thuanus (Iviii. 12. tom. iii. p. 334.)


C 2







OCR Output








OV THE ROMAN EMPIRK. 391


disqualified for the purple; but this ceremony, which chap.seemed to profane the sacraments of the church, was _insufficient to appease the suspicions of the tyrant,and the death of the deacon Theodosius could aloneexpiate the crime of his royal birth. His murderwas avenged by the imprecations of the people, andthe assassin, in the fulness of power, was driven fromhis capital into voluntary and perpetual exile. Con­stans embarked for Greece; and, as if he meant toretort the abhorrence which he deserved, he is saidfrom the Imperial galley to have spit against the wallsof his native city. After passing the winter at Athens,he sailed to Tarentum in Italy, visited Rome, andconcluded a long pilgrimage of disgrace and sacri­legious rapine, by fixing his residence at Syracuse.Odious to himself and to mankind, Constans perishedby domestic, perhaps by episcopal treason, in thecapital of Sicily. A servant who waited in the bath,after pouring warm water on his head, struck himviolently with the vase. He fell stunned by the blovv^and suffocated by the water; and his attendants, whowondered at the tedious delay, beheld with indiffer­ence the corpse of their lifeless emperor. The troopsof Sicily invested with the purple an obscure youth,whose inimitable beauty eluded, and it might easilyelude, the declining art of the painters and sculptorsof the age.
Constans had left in the Byzantine palace three Constantinesons, the eldest of whom had been clothed in his in- natus.°80"fancy with the purple. When the father summoned Ag- ^Jj^'them to attend his person in Sicily, these precioushostages were detained by the Greeks, and a firmrefusal informed him that they were the children ofthe state. The news of his murder was conveyed,with almost supernatural speed, from Syracuse toConstantinople; and Constantine, the eldest of hissons, inherited his throne, without being the heir of


c c 4







OCR Output








440 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. Abbassides, the glory of his family and nation expired.XL" The character of Theophilus is a rare example inwhich religious zeal has allowed, and perhaps magni­fied, the virtues of a heretic and a persecutor. Hisvalour was often felt by the enemies, and his justiceby the subjects, of the monarchy; but the valour ofTheophilus was rash and fruitless, and his justicearbitrary and cruel. He displayed the banner of thecross against the Saracens; but his five expeditionswere concluded by a signal overthrow; Amorium,the native city of his ancestors, was levelled with theground; and, from his military toils, he derived onlythe surname of the Unfortunate. The wisdom of asovereign is comprised in the institution of laws andthe choice of magistrates; and, while he seems with­out action, his civil government revolves round hiscentre with the silence and order of the planetarysystem. But the justice of Theophilus was fashionedon the model of the Oriental despots, who, in per­sonal and irregular acts of authority, consult the rea­son or passion of the moment, without measuring thesentence by the law, or the penalty by the offence.A poor woman threw herself at the emperor's feet tocomplain of a powerful neighbour, the brother of theempress, who had raised his palace wall to such aninconvenient height, that her humble dwelling wasexcluded from light and air! On the proof of thefact, instead of granting, like an ordinary judge, suf­ficient or ample damages to the plaintiff, the sove­reign adjudged to her use and benefit the palace andthe ground. Nor was Theophilus content with thisextravagant satisfaction; his zeal converted a civiltrespass into a criminal act; and the unfortunatepatrician was stripped and scourged in the publicplace of Constantinople. For some venial offences,some defect of equity or vigilance, the principal mi­nisters, a prefect, a quaestor, a captain of the guardswere banished, or mutilated, or scalded with boiling







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 295


years, and lie reigned above twenty years over the chap.East and over himself*; expelling from his mind the xxxvm-wild democracy of passions, and establishing (accord­ing to the quaint expression of Evagrius) a perfectaristocracy of reason and virtue. Some suspicion willdegrade the testimony of a subject, though he pro­tests that his secret praise should never reach the earof his sovereign, and some failings seem to place thecharacter of Maurice below the purer merit of hispredecessor. His cold and reserved demeanour mightbe imputed to arrogance; his justice was not alwaysexempt from cruelty, nor his clemency from weak­ness; and his rigid economy too often exposed himto the reproach of avarice. But the rational wishesof an absolute monarch must tend to the happiness ofhis people; Maurice was endowed with sense andcourage to promote that happiness, and his admini­stration was directed by the principles and example ofTiberius. The pusillanimity of the Greeks had in­troduced so complete a separation between the officesof king and of general, that a private soldier who haddeserved and obtained the purple seldom or neverappeared at the head of his armies. Yet the emperorMaurice enjoyed the glory of restoring the Persianmonarch to his throne: his lieutenants waged adoubtful war against the Avars of the Danube, and hecast an eye of pity, of ineffectual pity, on the abjectand distressful state of his Italian provinces.
From Italy the emperors were incessantly tor- Distress ofmented by tales of misery and demands of succour, Italy-which extorted the humiliating confession of their ownweakness. The expiring dignity of Rome was onlymarked by the freedom and energy of her complaints:"If you are incapable," she said, "of delivering us
• Consult, for the character and reign of Maurice, the fifth and sixth books ofEvagrius, particularly 1. vi. c. 1; the eight books of his prolix and florid historyby Theopliylact Simocatta. Theophanes, p. 213, &c. Zonaras, tom. ii. 1. xiv.p. 73. Cedrenus, p. 394.


U 4







OCR Output








OF THE B.OMAN EMPIRE. 207


provinces, the duties of the subject, and the intentions chap.of the governor, were proclaimed; and the civil ju- xxxviLrisprudence was reformed by the annual edicts of thesupreme judge, the praetor of the city. As soon ashe ascended his tribunal, he announced by the voiceof the crier, and afterwards inscribed on a white wall,the rules which he proposed to follow in the decisionof doubtful cases, and the relief which his equitywould afford from the precise rigour of ancient sta­tutes. A principle of discretion more congenial tomonarchy was introduced into the republic: the artof respecting the name, and eluding the efficacy, ofthe laws, was improved by successive praetors; sub­tleties and fictions were invented to defeat the plainestmeaning of the Decemvirs, and where the end wassalutary, the means were frequently absurd. Thesecret or probable wish of the dead was suffered toprevail over the order of succession and the forms oftestaments; and the claimant, who was excluded fromthe character of heir, accepted with equal pleasurefrom an indulgent praetor the possession of the goodsof his late kinsman or benefactor. In the redress ofprivate wrongs, compensations and fines were sub­stituted to the obsolete rigour of the twelve tables;time and space were annihilated by fanciful supposi­tions; and the plea of youth, or fraud, or violence,annulled the obligation, or excused the performance,of an inconvenient contract. A jurisdiction thusvague and arbitrary was exposed to the most dan­gerous abuse; the substance, as well as the form of'justice, were often sacrificed to the prejudices ofvirtue, the bias of laudable affection, and the grosserseductions of interest or resentment. But the errorsor vices of each praetor expired with his annual office;such maxims alone as had been approved by reasonand practice were copied by suceeding judges; therule of proceeding was defined by the solution of new







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. Gl


From the moment that Belisarius had determined chap.to sustain a siege, his assiduous care provided Rome XXXIv-against the danger of famine, more dreadful than the Distress ofGothic arms. An extraordinary supply of corn was ' e aty-imported from Sicily: the harvests of Campania andTuscany were forcibly swept for the use of the city:and the rights of private property were infringed bythe strong plea of the public safety. It might easilybe foreseen that the enemy would intercept the aque­ducts; and the cessation of the water-mills was thefirst inconvenience, which was speedily removed bymooring large vessels, and fixing mill-stones in thecurrent of the river. The stream was soon em­barrassed by the trunks of trees, and polluted withdead bodies; yet so effectual were the precautions ofthe Roman general, that the waters of the Tyber stillcontinued to give motion to the mills and drink tothe inhabitants: the more distant quarters were sup­plied from domestic wells; and a besieged city mightsupport, without impatience, the privation of herpublic baths. A large portion of Rome, from thePraenestine gate to the church of St. Paul, was neverinvested by the Goths; their excursions were re­strained by the activity of the Moorish troops: thenavigation of the Tyber, and the Latin, Appian, andOstian ways, were left free and unmolested for theintroduction of corn and cattle, or the retreat of theinhabitants, who sought a refuge in Campania orSicily. Anxious to relieve himself from an uselessand devouring multitude, Belisarius issued his pe­remptory orders for the instant departure of the wo­men, the children, and slaves; required his soldiersto dismiss their male and female attendants, and re­gulated their allowance, that one moiety should begiven in provisions, and the other in money. Hisforesight was justified by the increase of the publicdistress, as soon as the Goths had occupied two im-







OCR Output








170 THE DECLINE AND BALL


chap. should cautiously advance along the sea-shore, while |_^the fleet preceded their march, and successively cast


a bridge of boats over the mouths of the rivers, theTimavus, the Brenta, the Adige, and the Po, thatfall into the Hadriatic to the north of Ravenna.Nine days he reposed in the city, collected the frag­ments of the Italian army, and marched towardsRimini to meet the defiance of an insulting enemy.Defeat and The prudence of Narses impelled him to speedyTodia, and decisive action. His powers were the last effortJuly. 552, °ftne state: the cost of each day accumulated theenormous account; and the nations, untrained to dis­cipline or fatigue, might be rashly provoked to turntheir arms against each other, or against their bene­factor. The same considerations might have tem­pered the ardour of Totila. But he was consciousthat the clergy and people of Italy aspired to a secondrevolution: he felt or suspected the rapid progress oftreason, and he resolved to risk the Gothic kingdomon the chance of a day, in which the valiant wouldbe animated by instant danger, and the disaffectedmight be awed by mutual ignorance. In his marchfrom Ravenna, the Roman general chastised the gar­rison of Rimini, traversed in a direct line the hills ofUrbino, and re-entered the Flaminian way, nine milesbeyond the perforated rock, an obstacle of art andnature which might have stopped or retarded his pro­gress*. The Goths were assembled in the neighbour­hood of Rome; they advanced without delay to seeka superior enemy, and the two armies approachedeach other at the distance of one hundred furlongs,between Tagina and the sepulchres of the Gauls.


* The Flaminian way, as it is corrected from the Itineraries, and the bestmodern maps, by d'Anville (Analyse de I'ltalie, p. 147—162), may be thusstated: Rome to Nami, 51 Roman miles; Tcrni, 57; Spoleto, 75 ; Foligno, 88;Nocera, 103; Cagli, 142; Intercisa, 157; Fossombrone, 160; Fano, I76; Pc-saro, 184; Rimini, 208—about 189 English miles. He takes no notice of thedeath of Totila; but Wesseling (Itinerar. p. 614.) exchanges for the field ofTaginas the unknown appellation of Ptanius, eight miles from Nocera.







OCR Output








286 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. companions of his arms; intoxication was the rewardxxxviii. o£ vajour, an(j the ji;ng himself was tempted by ap­petite, or vanity, to exceed the ordinary measure ofhis intemperance. After draining many capaciousbowls of Rhsetian or, Falernian wine, he called forthe skull of Cunimund, the noblest and most preciousornament of his sideboard. The cup of victory wasaccepted, with horrid applause, by the circle of theLombard chiefs. "Fill it again with wine," ex­claimed the inhuman conqueror, " fill it to the brim;"carry this goblet to the queen, and request in my"name that she would rejoice with her father." Inan agony of grief and rage, Rosamond had strength'to utter, " Let the will of my lord be obeyed!" and
touching it with her lips, pronounced a silent impre­cation, that the insult should be washed away in theblood of Alboin. Some indulgence might be due tothe resentment of a daughter, if she had not alreadyviolated the duties of a wife. Implacable in herenmity, or inconstant in her love, the queen of Italyhad stooped from the throne to the arms of a subject,and Helmichis, the king's armour-bearer, was thesecret minister of her pleasure and revenge. Againstthe proposal of the murder he could no longer urgethe scruples of fidelity or gratitude; but Helmichistrembled, when he revolved the danger as well as theguilt, when he recollected the matchless strengthand intrepidity of a warrior, whom he had so oftenattended in the field of battle. He pressed andobtained, that one of the bravest champions of theLombards should be associated to the enterprise, butno more than a promise of secrecy could be drawnfrom the gallant Peredeus; and the mode of seductionemployed by Rosamond betrays her shameless insen­sibility both to honour and love. She supplied theplace of one of her female attendants who was be­loved by Peredeus, and contrived some excuse for







OCR Output








321 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. placable tyrant to smile and to applaud; and the_'___ toils of Bahram were rewarded with the permissionof encountering a new enemy, by their skill anddiscipline more formidable than a Scythian multitude.Elated by his recent success, he despatched a heraldwith a bold defiance to the camp of the Romans, re­questing them to fix a day of battle, and to choosewhether they would pass the river themselves, or allowa free passage to the arms of the great king. Thelieutenant of the emperor Maurice preferred the saferalternative, and this local circumstance, which wouldhave enhanced the victory of the Persians, renderedtheir defeat more bloody and their escape more dif­ficult. But the loss of his subjects, and the dangerof his kingdom, were overbalanced in the mind ofHormouz by the disgrace of his personal enemy;and no sooner had Bahram collected and reviewedhis forces, than he received from a royal messengerthe insulting gift of a distaff, a spinning-wheel, anda complete suit of female apparel. Obedient to thewill ofJiis sovereign, he showed himself to the soldiersin this unworthy disguise: they resented his ignominyand their own; a shout of rebellion ran through theranks, and the general accepted their oath of fidelityand vows of revenge. A second messenger, who hadbeen commanded to bring the rebel in chains, wasHis rebel- trampled under the feet of an elephant, and mani­festos were diligently circulated, exhorting the Per­sians to assert their freedom against an odious andcontemptible tyrant. The defection was rapid anduniversal: his loyal slaves were sacrificed to thepublic fury; the troops deserted to the standard ofBahram; and the provinces again saluted the de­liverer of his country.
dcposecTaVd As the passes were faithfully guarded, Hormouz
imprisoned, could only compute the number of his enemies by
the testimony of a guilty conscience, and the daily







OCR Output








132 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. transported and worked by the hands of forty sol- 1' diers; and as the stones were loosened by its repeated


strokes, they were torn with long iron hooks from thewall. From those walls, a shower of darts was in­cessantly poured on the heads of the assailants, butthey were most dangerously annoyed by a fiery com­position of sulphur and bitumen, which in Colchosmight with some propriety be named the oil of Medea.Of six thousand Romans who mounted the scaling-ladders, their general, Bessas, was the first, a gallantveteran of seventy years of age: the courage of theirleader, his fall, and extreme danger, animated theirresistible effort of his troops; and their prevailingnumbers oppressed the strength, without subduingthe spirit, of the Persian garrison. The fate of thesevaliant men deserves to be more distinctly noticed.Seven hundred had perished in the siege, two thou­sand three hundred survived to defend the breach.One thousand and seventy were destroyed with fireand sword in the last assault; and if seven hundredand thirty were made prisoners, only eighteen amongthem were found without the marks of honourablewounds. The remaining five hundred escaped intothe citadel, which they maintained without any hopesof relief, rejecting the fairest terms of capitulationand service, till they were lost in the flames. Theydied in obedience to the commands of their prince;and such examples of loyalty and valour might excitetheir countrymen to deeds of equal despair and moreprosperous event. The instant demolition of theworks of Petra confessed the astonishment and ap­prehension of the conqueror.The Coi- A Spartan would have praised and pitied the vir-Lazic war, tue of these heroic slaves; but the tedious warfare—556. aQd alternate success of the Roman and Persian armscannot detain the attention of posterity at the foot ofmount Caucasus. The advantages obtained by the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 288


"the maidens of the palace, where a distaff should be chap."again placed in the hand of the eunuch." "I will XXXVIIL** spin her such a thread, as she shall not easily un-"ravel!" is said to have been the reply which in­dignation and conscious virtue extorted from thehero. Instead of attending, a slave and a victim, atthe gate of the Byzantine palace, he retired to Naples,from whence (if any credit is due to the belief of thetimes) Narses invited the Lombards to chastise theingratitude of the prince and people. But the pas­sions of the people are furious and changeable, andthe Romans soon recollected the merits, or dreadedthe resentment, of their victorious general. By the me­diation of the pope, who undertook a special pilgrim­age to Naples, their repentance was accepted; andNarses, assuming a milder aspect and a more dutifullanguage, consented to fix his residence in the Capitol.His death*, though in the extreme period of old age,was unseasonable and premature, since his geniusalone could have repaired the last and fatal error ofhis life. The reality, or the suspicion of a conspiracy,disarmed and disunited the Italians. The soldiersresented the disgrace, and bewailed the loss, of theirgeneral. They were ignorant of their new exarch;and Longinus was himself ignorant of the state ofthe army and the province. In the preceding yearsItaly had been desolated by pestilence and famine,and a disaffected people ascribed the calamities ofnature to the guilt or folly of their rulers f.
Whatever might be the grounds of his security, ConqucstofAlboin neither expected nor encountered a Roman oMtSyby


the Lom­bards,
* The death of Narses is mentioned by Paul, 1 . ii. c. II, Anastas. in Vit. A. D. 568Julian, in. p. 43, Agnellus, Liber Pontifical. Raven in Script. Rer. Italicarum, —570.tom. ii. part i. p. 114.124. Yet I cannot believe with Agnellus that Narses wasninety-five years of age: is it probable that all his exploits were performed atfourscore?
+ The designs of Narses and of the Lombards for the invasion of Italy areexposed in the last chapter of the first book, and the seven first chapters of thesecond book of Paul the deacon.







OCR Output








470 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. and more costly workmanship. Among the eolours,XL1, he celebrates, with affectation of eloquence, the fieryblaze of the scarlet, and the softer lustre of the green.The embroidery was raised either in silk or gold: themore simple ornament of stripes or circles was sur­passed by the nicer imitation of flowers: the vest­ments that were fabricated for the palace or the altaroften glittered with precious stones; and the figureswere delineated in strings of oriental pearls. Till thetwelfth century, Greece alone, of all the countries ofChristendom, was possessed of the insect which istaught by nature, and of the workmen who are in­structed by art, to prepare this elegant luxury. Butthe secret had been stolen by the dexterity and dili­gence of the Arabs: the caliphs of the East andWest scorned to borrow from the unbelievers theirfurniture and apparel: and two cities of Spain, Al-meria and Lisbon, were famous for the manufacture,transported the use, and perhaps the exportation, of silk. It wastoTatyT06 first introduced into Sicily by the Normans: and thisemigration of trade distinguishes the victory of Rogerfrom the uniform and fruitless hostilities of every age.After the sack of Corinth, Athens, and Thebes, hislieutenant embarked with a captive train of weaversand artificers of both sexes, a trophy glorious to theirmaster and disgraceful to the Greek emperor. Theking of Sicily was not insensible of the value of thepresent; and, in the restitution of the prisoners, heexcepted only the male and female manufacturers ofThebes and Corinth, who labour, says the Byzantinehistorian, under a barbarous lord, like the old Ere-trians in the service of Darius. A stately edifice, inthe palace of Palermo, was erected for, the use of thisindustrious colony*; and the art was propagated by


* Hugo Falcandus styles them nobiles ofHcinas. The Arabs had not intro­duced silk, though they had planted canes and made sugar in the plain ofPalermo.







OCR Output








OF THE EOMAN EMPIRE. 367


the standard of the chasran; a month was spent in chap.
• XXXIX
marches and negotiations, but the whole city was in-
vested on the thirty^first of July, from the suburbs ofPera and Galata to the Blachernae and seven towers;and the inhabitants descried with terror the flamingsignals of the European and Asiatic shores. In themean while the magistrates of Constantinople repeat­edly strove to purchase the retreat of the chagan:but their deputies were rejected and insulted; andhe suffered the patricians to stand before his throne,while the Persian envoys, in silk robes, were seatedby his side. "You see," said the haughty Barbarian,"the proofs of my perfect union with the great king;"and his lieutenant is ready to send into my camp a"select band of three thousand warriors. Presume"no longer to tempt your master with a partial and"inadequate ransom: your wealth and your city are"the only presents worthy of my acceptance. For"yourselves, I shall permit you to depart, each with"an under garment and a shirt; and, at my entreaty,"my friend Sarbar will not refuse a passage through"his lines. Your absent prince, even now a captive"or a fugitive, has left Constantinople to its fate;"nor can you escape the arms of the Avars and Per-"sians, unless you could soar into air like birds, un-"less like fishes you could dive into the waves."During ten successive days, the capital was assaultedby the Avars, who had made some progress in thescience of attack; they advanced to sap or batter thewall, under the cover of the impenetrable tortoise;their engines discharged a perpetual volley of stonesand darts; and twelve lofty towers of wood exaltedthe combatants to the height of the neighbouringramparts. But the senate and people were animatedby the spirit of Heraclius, who had detached to theirrelief a body of twelve thousand cuirassiers; thepowers of fire and mechanics were used with superior







OCR Output








206 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. resigned all political liberty; they defended thexxxvii. freeclom of domestic life. A law which enforced theobligation, and strengthened the bonds of marriage,was clamorously rejected: Propertius, in the arms ofDelia, applauded the victory of licentious love; andthe project of reform was suspended till a new andmore tractable generation had arisen in the world.Such an example was not necessary to instruct a pru­dent usurper, of the mischief of popular assemblies;and their abolition, which Augustus had silently pre­pared, was accomplished without resistance, and al­most without notice, on the accession of his successor.Sixty thousand plebeian legislators, whom numbersmade formidable, and poverty secure, were supplantedby six hundred senators, who held their honours,their fortunes, and their lives, by the clemency of theDecrees of emperor. The loss of executive power was alleviated
the sciiiitc
by the gift of legislative authority; and Ulpian mightassert, after the practice of two hundred years, thatthe decrees of the senate obtained the force and vali­dity of laws. In the times of freedom, the resolvesof the people had often been dictated by the passionor error of the moment: the Cornelian, Pompeian,and Julian laws, were adapted by a single hand tothe prevailing disorders: but the senate, under thereign of the Caesars, was composed of magistratesand lawyers, and in questions of private jurispru­dence, the integrity of their judgment was seldomperverted by fear or interest.Edicts of The silence or ambiguity of the laws was suppliedby the occasional edicts of those magistrates whowere invested with the honours of the state. Thisancient prerogative of the Roman kings was trans­ferred, in their respective offices, to the consuls anddictators, the censors and praetors; and a similarright was assumed by the tribunes of the people, theediles, and the proconsuls. At Rome, and in the







OCR Output








244- THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. II. The original right of property can only bexxxvii. i^stified by the accident or merit of prior occupancy;ii. Or and on this foundation it is wisely established by theRight of' philosophy of the civilians. The savage who hollowsproperty. a tree, inserts a sharp stone into a wooden handle, orapplies a string to an elastic branch, becomes in astate of nature the just proprietor of the canoe, thebow, or the hatchet. The materials were common toall, the new form, the produce of his time and simpleindustry, belongs solely to himself. His hungrybrethren cannot, without a sense of their own in­justice, extort from the hunter the game of the forestovertaken or slain by his personal strength and dex­terity. If his provident care preserves and multipliesthe tame animals, whose nature is tractable to thearts of education, he acquires a perpetual title to theuse and service of their numerous progeny, whichderives its existence from him alone. If he inclosesand cultivates a field for their sustenance and hisown, a barren waste is converted into a fertile soil;the seed, the manure, the labour, create a new value,and the rewards of harvest are painfully earned bythe fatigues of the revolving year. In the successivestates of society, the hunter, the shepherd, the hus­bandman, may defend their possessions by two rea­sons which forcibly appeal to the feelings of the humanmind: that whatever they enjoy is the fruit of theirown industry; and, that every man who envies theirfelicity may purchase similar acquisitions by the exer­cise of similar diligence. Such, in truth, may bethe freedom and plenty of a small colony cast on afruitful island. But the colony multiplies, while thespace still continues the same: the common rights,the equal inheritance of mankind, are engrossed bythe bold and crafty; each field and forest, is circum­scribed by the land-marks of a jealous master; and







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. fidence might have secured a faithful and able guardianXL" for his wife and his infant son, to whom Theophilus,in the flower of his age, was compelled to leave theinheritance of the empire. But his jealousy was ex­asperated by envy and disease; he feared the dan­gerous virtues which might either support or oppresstheir infancy and weakness; and the dying emperordemanded the head of the Persian prince. Withsavage delight he recognised the familiar features ofhis brother: "Thou art no longer Theophobus," hesaid; and sinking on his couch he added, with afaltering voice, "Soon, too soon, I shall be no more"Theophilus."
The Russians, who have borrowed from the Greeksthe greatest part of their civil and ecclesiastical policy,preserved till the last century a singular institutionin the marriage of the Czar. They collected, notthe virgins of every rank and of every province, avain and romantic idea, but the daughters of theprincipal nobles, who awaited in the palace the choiceof their sovereign. It is affirmed that a similar me­thod was adopted in the nuptials of Theophilus.With a golden apple in his hand he slowly walkedbetween two lines of contending beauties; his eyewas detained by the charms of Icasia, and, in theawkwardness of a first declaration, the prince couldonly observe, that in this world women had been thecause of much evil: "And surely, sir," she pertlyreplied, "they have likewise been the occasion of"much good." This affectation of unseasonable witdispleased the Imperial lover; he turned aside indisgust; Icasia concealed her mortification in a con­vent; and the modest silence of Theodora was re­warded with the golden apple. She deserved thelove, but did not escape the severity, of her lord.From the palace-garden he beheld a vessel, deeplyladen, and steering into the port; on the discoverythat the precious cargo of Syrian luxury was the
\







OCR Output








OF THE KOMAN EMPIRE. 407


and reluctant officer of the revenue was forcibly in- chap.vested with the purple: after some months of a naval'
war, Anastasius resigned the sceptre*; and the con- Theodosiusqueror, Theodosius the Third, submitted in his turn 716, j'an.'to the superior ascendant of Leo, the general andemperor of the oriental troops.
Whilst the caliph Waled sat idle on the throne of SecondDamascus, while his lieutenants achieved the con- conttan-quest of Transoxiana and Spain, a third army of Sa- Ano£le'716racens overspread the provinces of Asia Minor, and —7i8.approached the borders of the Byzantine capital. Butthe attempt and disgrace of the second siege were re­served for his brother Soliman, whose ambition ap­pears to have been quickened by a more active andmartial spirit. The Anastasius the Second just nowmentioned by me was alarmed by the sound of war;and his ambassador returned from Damascus with thetremendous news that the Saracens were preparingan armament by sea and land, such as would tran­scend the experience of the past or the belief of thepresent age. The precautions of Anastasius werenot unworthy of his station, or of the impendingdanger. He issued a peremptory mandate, that allpersons who were not provided with the means ofsubsistence for a three years' siege should evacuatethe city; the public granaries and arsenals wereabundantly replenished; the walls were restored andstrengthened; and the engines for casting stones ordarts, or fire, were stationed along the ramparts or inthe brigantines of war, of which an additional num­ber was hastily constructed. To prevent is safer,as well as more honourable, than to repel an attack;and a design was meditated* above the usual spirit ofthe Greeks, of burning the naval stores of the enemy,the cypress timber that had been hewn in Mount


(ribbon, vol. ix. c. 48.


D D 4







OCR Output








40G THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. Between the fall of the Heraclian and the rise of
"X-T
, the Isaurian dynasty, a short interval of six years is


a"dPP7iT' divided into three reigns. Bardanes, or Philippicus,December.' was hailed at Constantinople as a hero who had de­livered his country from a tyrant; and he might tastesome moments of happiness in the first transports ofsincere and universal joy. Justinian had left behindan ample treasure, the fruit of cruelty and rapine:but this useful fund was soon and idly dissipated byhis successor. On the festival of his birth-day, Philip­picus entertained the multitude with the games ofthe hippodrome; from thence he paraded throughthe streets, with a thousand banners and a thousandtrumpets; refreshed himself in the baths of Zeuxip-pus; and, returning to the palace, entertained hisnobles with a sumptuous banquet. At the meridianhour he withdrew to his chamber, intoxicated withflattery and wine, and forgetful that his example hadmade every subject ambitious, and that every ambi­tious subject was his secret enemy. Some bold con­spirators introduced themselves, in the disorder of thefeast; and the slumbering monarch was surprised,bound, blinded, and deposed, before he was sensible ofAnastasius ^is danger. Yet the traitors were deprived of theirH- A-D- reward, and the free voice of the senate and people4th.' promoted Artemius from the office of secretary to thatof emperor: he assumed the title of Anastasius theSecond, and displayed, in a short and troubled reign,the virtues both of peace and war. But after the ex­tinction of the Imperial line, the rule of obediencewas violated, and every change diffused the seeds ofnew revolutions. In a mutiny of the fleet, an obscure


presses of one of the consequences of such an event. He observes, that "theArabian fleet might have sailed, without a naval combat, into the mouth of theThames; and perhaps the interpretation of the Koran would now be taught in theschools of Oxford, and her pulpits might demonstrate, to a circumcised people, thesanctity and truth of the revelation of Mahomet."
I return from this digression to the transactions at Constantinople.—Ed.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 157


was left without protection to the mercy or indigna- chap.tion of Totila. The continuance of hostilities had XXXVLembittered the national hatred, the Arian clergywas ignominiously driven from Rome; Pelagius, thearchdeacon, returned without success from an em­bassy to the Gothic camp; and a Sicilian bishop,the envoy or nuncio of the pope, was deprived ofboth his hands, for daring to utter falsehoods in theservice of the church and state.
Famine had relaxed the strength and discipline of Romethe garrison of Rome. They could derive no effectual the Goths,service from a dying people; and the inhuman avarice Dec?!?.46'of the merchant at length absorbed the vigilance ofthe governor. Four Isaurian centinels, while theircompanions slept, and their officers were absent, de­scended by a rope from the wall, and secretly pro­posed to the Gothic king to introduce his troops intothe city. The offer was entertained with coldnessand suspicion; they returned in safety; they twicerepeated their visit; the place was twice examined;the conspiracy was known and disregarded; and nosooner had Totila consented to the attempt, thanthey unbarred the Asinarian gate, and gave admit­tance to the Goths. Till the dawn of day theyhalted in order of battle, apprehensive of treacheryor ambush; but the troops of Bessas, with theirleader, had already escaped; and when the kingwas pressed to disturb their retreat, he prudentlyreplied, that no sight could be more grateful thanthat of a flying enemy. The patricians, who werestill possessed of horses, Decius, Basilius, &c. accom­panied the governor; their brethren, among whomOlybrius, Orestes, and Maximus, are named by thehistorian, took refuge in the church of St. Peter;but the assertion, that only five hundred persons re­mained in the capital, inspires some doubt of thefidelity either of his narrative or of his text. As







OCR Output








Of THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 299


Vecchia to Terracina, and with the course of the chap.Tyber from Ameria and Narni to the port of Ostia. XXXVIILThe numerous islands, from Grado to Chiozza, com­posed the infant dominion of Venice; but the moreaccessible towns on the continent were overthrownby the Lombards, who beheld with impotent fury anew capital rising from the waves. The power ofthe dukes of Naples was circumscribed by the bayand the adjacent isles, by the hostile territory ofCapua, and by the Roman colony of Amalphi*,whose industrious citizens, by the invention of themariner's compass, have unveiled the face of theglobe. The three islands of Sardinia, Corsica, andSicily, still adhered to the empire; and the acquisi­tion of the farther Calabria removed the land-markof Autharis from the shore of Rhegium to the isthmusof Consentia. In Sardinia, the savage mountaineerspreserved the liberty and religion of their ancestors;but the husbandmen of Sicily were chained to theirrich and cultivated soil; Rome was oppressed by theiron sceptre of the exarchs, and a Greek, perhaps aneunuch, insulted with impunity the ruins of the Ca­pitol. But Naples soon acquired the privilege ofelecting her own dukes t; the independence of Amal­phi was the fruit of commerce; and the voluntaryattachment of Venice was finally ennobled by anequal alliance with the eastern empire. On the mapof Italy, the measure of the exarchate occupies avery inadequate space, but it included an ample pro­portion of wealth, industry, and population. Themost faithful and valuable subjects escaped from theBarbarian yoke; and the banners of Pavia and Ve­rona, of Milan and Padua, were displayed in theirrespective quarters by the new inhabitants of Ra-


* See Brencmarin, Dissert, prima de Republica Amalphitana, p. 1—42, adcakem Hist. Pandect. Florcnt.
f Oregor. Magn. I. iii. cpist. 23. 25, 26, 27-







OCR Output








218 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. famous sects of the Proculians and Sabinians. Twoxxxvii. sages 0f ^e laW, Ateius Capito and Antistius Labeo,adorned the peace of the Augustan age: the formerdistinguished by the favour of his sovereign; the lat­ter more illustrious by his contempt of that favour,and his stern though harmless opposition to the tyrantof Rome. Their legal studies were influenced by thevarious colours of their temper and principles. Labeowas attached to the form of the old republic; hisrival embraced the more profitable substance of therising monarchy. But the disposition of a courtieris tame and submissive; and Capito seldom presumedto deviate from the sentiments, or at least from thewords, of his predecessors: while the bold republicanpursued his independent ideas without fear of paradoxor innovations. The freedom of Labeo was enslaved,however, by the rigour of his own conclusions; and hedecided, according to the letter of the law, the samequestions which his indulgent competitor resolvedwith a latitude of equity more suitable to the commonsense and feelings of mankind. If a fair exchangehad been substituted to the payment of money, Capitostill considered the transaction as a legal sale; and heconsulted nature for, the age of puberty, without con­fining his definition to the precise period of twelve orfourteen years. This opposition of sentiments waspropagated in the writings and lessons of the twofounders; the schools of Capito and Labeo maintainedtheir inveterate conflict from the age of Augustus tothat of Hadrian; and the two sects derived their ap­pellations from Sabinus and Proculus, their most cele­brated teachers. The names of Cassiatis and Pega-sians were likewise applied to the same parties; but,by a strange reverse, the popular cause was in thehands of Pegasus, a timid slave of Domitian, whilethe favourite of the Caesars was represented by Cassius,who gloried in his descent from the patriot assassin.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 108


they loudly complained of the timid, though jealous chap.policy, of detaining their ambassadors, and denying xxxv-the arms which they had been allowed to purchase inthe capital of the empire*.
Perhaps the apparent change in the dispositions of Embassiesthe emperors may be ascribed to the embassy which Turks andwas received from the conquerors of the Avars. The A°rT569immense distance which eluded their arms could not —582-extinguish their resentment: the Turkish ambassa­dors pursued the footsteps of the vanquished to theJaik, the Volga, mount Caucasus, the Euxine, andConstantinople, and at length appeared before thesuccessor of Constantine, to request that he wouldnot espouse the cause of rebels and fugitives. Evencommerce had some share in this remarkable negotia­tion: and the Sogdoites, who were now the tributariesof the Turks, embraced the fair occasion of opening,by the north of the Caspian, a new road for the im­portation of Chinese silk into the Roman empire.The Persian, who preferred the navigation of Ceylon,had stopped the caravans of Bochara and Samarcand:their silk was contemptuously burnt: some Turkishambassadors died in Persia, with a suspicion of poison;and the great khan permitted his faithful vassal Ma-niach, the prince of the Sogdoites,. to propose, at theByzantine court, a treaty of alliance against theircommon enemies. Their splendid apparel and richpresents, the fruit of Oriental luxury, distinguishedManiach and his colleagues from the rude savagesof the north: their letters, in the Scythian characterand language, announced a people who had attainedthe rudiments of science t: they enumerated the con-


• The embassies and first conquests of the Avars may be read in Menander(Excerpt. Legat . p. 99, 100, 101. 154, 155), Theophanes (p. 196), theHistoriaMiscella (1 . xvi. p. 109), and Gregory of Tours (1. iv. c. 23.29, in the Historiansof France, tom. ii. p. 214. 217).
f The Russians have found characters, rude hieroglyphics, on the Irtish andYenisei, on medals, tombs, idols, rocks, obelisks, &e. (Strahlenberg, Hist, ofSiberia, p. 324. 346. 406. 429). Dr. Hyde (de Religione Veterum Persarum,


H 4







OCR Output








26 . THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. may not be presumed that many orthodox prelates
'were absent; but the comparative smallness of their
number, which in ancient councils had been twice oreven thrice multiplied, most clearly indicates thedecay both of the church and state. While Jus­tinian approved himself the defender of the faith, heentertained an ambitious hope, that his victoriouslieutenant would speedily enlarge the narrow limitsof his dominion to the space which they occupiedbefore the invasion of the Moors and Vandals; andBelisarius was instructed to establish five dukes orcommanders in the convenient stations of Tripoli,Leptis, Cirta, Caesarea, and Sardinia, and to computethe military force of palatines or borderers that mightbe sufficient for the defence of Africa. The kingdomof the Vandals was not unworthy of the presence ofa praetorian prefect; and four consulars, three pre­sidents, were appointed to administer the seven pro­vinces under his civil jurisdiction. The number oftheir subordinate officers, clerks, messengers, or as­sistants, was minutely expressed ; three hundred andninety-six for the prefect himself, fifty for each ofhis vicegerents; and the rigid definition of their feesand salaries was more effectual to confirm the right,than to prevent the abuse. These magistrates mightbe oppressive, but they were not idle: and the subtlequestions of justice and revenue were infinitely pro­pagated under the new government, which professedto revive the freedom and equity of the Roman re­public. The conqueror was solicitous to exact aprompt and plentiful supply from his African sub­jects; and he allowed them to claim, even in thethird degree, and from the collateral line, the housesand lands of which their families had been unjustlydespoiled by the Vandals. After the departure ofBelisarius, who acted by a high and special com­mission, no ordinary provision was made for a master­







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 291


"member what you have been, remember what you chap.
"are. You see around us your slaves and your \
"children; with the authority, assume the tender-"ness, of a parent. Love your people like yourself;"cultivate the affections, maintain the discipline, of"the army: protect the fortunes of the rich, relieve"the necessities of the poor." The assembly, insilence and in tears, applauded the counsels, andsympathised with the repentance, of their prince:the patriarch rehearsed the prayers of the church;Tiberius received the diadem on his knees, and Jus­tin, who in his abdication appeared most worthy toreign, addressed the new monarch in the followingwords: "If you consent, I live; if you command,"I die: may the God of heaven and earth infuse"into your heart whatever I have neglected or for-"gotten." The last four years of the emperor Jus- Death oftin were passed in tranquil obscurity: his conscience a!d. 578,was no longer tormented by the remembrance of0ctober5-those duties which he was incapable of discharging;and his choice was justified by the filial reverenceand gratitude of Tiberius.
Among the virtues of Tiberius*, his beauty (heReignofwas one of the tallest and most comely of the Ro- ^wii.mans) might introduce him to the favour of Sophia ; a. d. 578,and the widow of Justin was persuaded, that she a. d. 582,should preserve her station and influence under the Aug-14,reign of a second and more youthful husband. Butif the ambitious candidate had been tempted to flatterand dissemble, it was no longer in his power to fulfilher expectations, or his own promise. The factionsof the hippodrome demanded, with some impatience,the name of their new eTnpress; both the people and
"For the character and reign of Tiberius, see Evagrius, 1 . v. c . 13. Theo-phylact, 1 . iii. c . 12, &c . Theophanes, in Chron. p. 210—218. Zonaras, tom.ti. I. xiv. p. 72. Cedrenus, p. 392. Paul Warneftid, de Gestis Langobard. Uiii. c 11,12. The deacon of Forum Julii appears to have possessed some curiousand authentic facts-


U 2







OCR Output








480 THE DECLINE AND FAIX


chap. free people; and the code was almost perfect whenXLL this baseless fabric, the monument of pride and servi­tude, was for ever buried in the ruins of the empire *.
rfStH. t^ most lofty titles» and tne most humble pos"peror. tures, which devotion has applied to the SupremeBeing, have been prostituted by flattery and fear tocreatures of the same nature with ourselves. Themode of adoration t, of falling prostrate on the ground,and kissing the feet of the emperor, was borrowedby Diocletian from Persian servitude; but it wascontinued and aggravated till the last age of theGreek monarchy. Excepting only on Sundays, whenit was waved, from a motive of religious pride, thishumiliating reverence was exacted from all who en­tered the royal presence, from the princes investedwith the diadem and purple, and from the ambassa­dors who represented their independent sovereigns,the caliphs of Asia, Egypt, or Spain, the kings ofFrance and Italy, and the Latin emperors of ancientRome. In his transaction of business, Liutprand,bishop of Cremona, asserted the free spirit of a Frank,and the dignity of his master Otho. Yet his sin­cerity cannot disguise the abasement of his first au-Reception dience. When he approached the throne, the birdssadors." of the golden tree began to warble their notes, whichwere accompanied by the roarings of the two lionsof gold. With his two companions, Liutprand wascompelled to bow and to fall prostrate; and thricehe touched the ground with his forehead. He arose;but in the short interval, the throne had been hoistedby an engine from the floor to the ceiling, the Iin­


* This sketch of honours and officers is drawn from George Codinus Curopa-lata, who survived the taking of Cons antinople by the Turks. His elaboratethough trifling work (de Officiis Ecclesise et Aula; C. P.) has been illustrated bythe notes of Goar, and the three books of Ureiser, a learned Jesuit.
•f The respectful salutation of carrying the hand to the mouth, ad oi, is theroot of the Latin word, adoro, adorare. See our learned Selden (vol. iii. p. I -43—145—942), in his Titles of Honour. It seems, from the 1st books of Hero­dotus, to be of Persian origin.







OCR Output








150 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. from the Roman church, and either starved or mur-xxXvr- dered on a desolate island. The virtues of Belisariuswere replaced by the various or uniform vices ofeleven chiefs, at Rome, Ravenna, Florence, Perugia,Spoleto, &c, who abused their authority for the in­dulgence of lust or avarice. The improvement of therevenue was committed to Alexander, a subtle scribe,long practised in the fraud and oppression of the By­zantine schools; and whose name of Psallicton, thescissors, was drawn from the dexterous artifice withwhich he reduced the size, without defacing thefigure, of the gold coin. Instead of expecting therestoration of peace and industry, he imposed a heavyassessment on the fortunes of the Italians. Yet hispresent or future demands were less odious than aprosecution of arbitrary rigour against the personsand property of all those who, under the Gothickings, had been concerned in the receipt and ex­penditure of the public money. The subjects of Jus­tinian, who escaped these partial vexations, were op­pressed by the irregular maintenance of the soldiers,whom Alexander defrauded and despised; and theirhasty sallies in quest of wealth, or subsistence, pro­voked the inhabitants of the country to await or im­plore their deliverance from the virtues of a Barba­rian. Totila* was chaste and temperate; and nonewere deceived, either friends or enemies, who de­pended on his faith or his clemency. To the hus­bandmen of Italy the Gothic king issued a welcomeproclamation, enjoining them to pursue their im­portant labours, and to rest assured, that, on the pay­ment of the ordinary taxes, they should be defendedby his valour and discipline from the injuries of war.The strong towns he successively attacked; and as


* Procopius (J. iii. c. 2. 8, &c.) does ample and willing justice to the merit ofTotila. The Roman historians, from Sallust and Tacitus, were happy to forgetthe vices of their countrymen in the contemplation of Barbaric virtue.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 219


By the perpetual edict, the controversies of the sects chap.
were in a great measure determined. Fpr that im- 1
portant work, the emperor Hadrian preferred the chiefof the Sabinians: the friends of monarchy prevailed;but the moderation of Salvius Julian insensibly recon­ciled the victors and the vanquished. Like the con­temporary philosophers, the lawyers of the age of theAntonines disclaimed the authority of a master, andadopted from every system the most probable doc­trines. But their writings would have been lessvoluminous, had their choice been more unanimous.The conscience of the judge was perplexed by thenumber and weight of discordant testimonies, andevery sentence that his passion or interest mightpronounce was justified by the sanction of some ve­nerable name. An indulgent edict of the youngerTheodosius excused him from the labour of com­paring and weighing their arguments. Five civilians,Caius, Papinian, Paul, Ulpian, and Modestinus, wereestablished as the oracles of jurisprudence: a majoritywas decisive; but if their opinions were equallydivided, a casting vote was ascribed to the superiorwisdom of Papinian.
When Justinian ascended the throne, the reforma- Reforma­tion of the Roman jurisprudence was an arduous but Rommtawindispensable task. In the space of ten centuries, the b? Ju^-Dinfinite variety of laws and legal opinions had filled 527,'&c.many thousand volumes, which no fortune could pur­chase and no capacity could digest. Books could noteasily be found; and the judges, poor in the midst ofriches, were reduced to the exercise of their illiteratediscretion. The subjects of the Greek provinceswere ignorant of the language that disposed of theirlives and properties; and the barbarous dialect of theLatins was imperfectly studied in the academies ofBerytus and Constantinople. As an Illyrian soldier,that idiom was familiar to the infancy of Justinian;


r







OCR Output








388 THE DECLINE AND FAIX


chap. the doors were thrown open, they were hailed hy the. tumultuary but important voice of the soldiers. After
a. d. 639, an interval of five months, the pompous ceremonieswhich formed the essence of the Byzantine state werecelebrated in the cathedral and the hippodrome: theconcord of the royal brothers was affectedly displayedby the younger leaning on the arm of the elder; andthe name of Martina was mingled in the reluctanta.d. 64i, or venal acclamations of the people. Heraclius sur-vived this association about two years: his last testi­mony declared his two sons the equal heirs of theEastern empire, and commanded them to honour hiswidow Martina, as their mother and their sovereign.mnSAnr>ne When Martina first appeared on the throne with64i, Feb. the name and attributes of royalty, she was checkedby a firm, though respectful, opposition; and thedying embers of freedom were kindled by the breathof superstitious prejudice. "We reverence," ex­claimed the voice of a citizen, "we reverence the"mother of our princes; but to those princes alone"our obedience is due; and Constantine, the elder"emperor, is of an age to sustain, in his own hands,"the weight of the sceptre. Your sex is excluded by"nature from the toils of government. How could"you combat,—how could you answer, the Barba-"rians, who with hostile or friendly intentions may"approach the royal city? May Heaven avert from"the Roman republic this national disgrace! which"would provoke the patience of the slaves of Persia."Martina descended from the throne with indignation,and sought a refuge in the female apartment of thepalace. The reign of Constantine the Third lastedonly one hundred and three days: he expired in thethirtieth year of his age, and, although his life hadbeen a long malady, a belief was entertained thatpoison had been the means, and his cruel stepmotherthe author, of his untimely fate. Martina reaped,







OCR Output








34 THK DKCLINE AND FALL


chap. were transported with the same ease as their arras,
_ their families, and their cattle, which consisted of
sheep, dxen, and camels. During the vigour of theRoman power, they observed a respectful distancefrom Carthage and the sea-shore; under the feeblereign of the Vandals, they invaded the cities ofNumidia, occupied the sea-coast from Tangier toCaesarea, and pitched their camps, with impunity,in the fertile province of Byzacium. The formidablestrength and artful conduct of Belisarius securedthe neutrality of the Moorish princes, whose vanityaspired to receive, in the emperor's name, the ensignsof their regal dignity. They were astonished by therapid event, and trembled in the presence of theirconqueror. But his approaching departure soon re­lieved the apprehensions of a savage and superstitiouspeople: the number of their wives allowed them todisregard the safety of their infant hostages; andwhen the Roman general hoisted sail in the port ofCarthage, he heard the cries, and almost beheld theflames, of the desolated province. Yet he persistedin his resolution; and leaving only a part of hisguards to reinforce the feeble garrisons, he intrustedthe command of Africa to the eunuch Solomon, whoproved himself not unworthy to be the successor ofBelisarius. In the first invasion, some detachments,with two officers of merit, were surprised and in­tercepted; but Solomon speedily assembled histroops, marched from Carthage into the heart ofthe country, and in two great battles destroyed sixtythousand of the Barbarians. The Moors dependedon their multitude, their swiftness, and their inac­cessible mountains; and the aspect and smell oftheir camels are said to have produced some con­fusion in the Roman cavalry. But as soon as theywere commanded to dismount, they derided thiscontemptible obstacle; as soon as the columns







OCR Output








»4G THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. hands and feet were amputated; some expired underxxxix. tke lg^ otners m ^g flames, others again were
transfixed with arrows; and a simple speedy deathwas mercy which they could rarely obtain. Thehippodrome, the sacred asylum of the pleasures andthe liberty of the Romans, was polluted with headsand limbs, and mangled bodies; and the companionsof Phocas were the most sensible, that neither hisfavour, nor their services, could protect them froma tyrant, the worthy rival of the Caligulas and Do-mitians of the first age of the empire.His fail . A daughter of Phocas, his only child, was givenA.D.610'. in marriage to the patrician Crispus, and the royalOctober 4. images 0f the bride and bridegroom were indiscreetlyplaced in the circus, by the side of the emperor.The father must desire that his posterity should in­herit the fruit of his crimes, but the monarch wasoffended by this premature and popular association:the tribunes of the green faction, who accused theofficious error of their sculptors, were condemned toinstant death: their lives were granted to the prayersof the people; but Crispus might reasonably doubtwhether a jealous usurper could forget and pardonhis involuntary competition. The green faction Wasalienated by the ingratitude of Phocas and the lossof their privileges; every province of the empire wasripe for rebellion; and Heraclius, exarch of Africa,persisted above two years in refusing all tribute andobedience to the centurion who disgraced the throneof Constantinople. By the secret emissaries of Crispusand the senate, the independent exarch was solicitedto save and to govern his country: but his ambitionwas chilled by age, and he resigned the dangerousenterprise to his son Heraclius, and to Nicetas, theson of Gregory his friend and lieutenant. Thepowers of Africa were armed by the two adventurousyouths ;. they agreed that the one should navigate







OCR Output








108 THE DECLINE AND l-'ALL


chap. inheritance ofhis Roman parent. But the future mis-xxxv- chief was diverted by the advice of the quaestor Pro-


clus: a difficulty was started, whether the adoptionshould be performed as a civil or military rite; thetreaty was abruptly dissolved; and -the sense of thisindignity sunk deep into the mind of Chosroes, whohad already advanced to the Tigris on his road toConstantinople. His father did not long survive thedisappointment of his wishes: the testament of theirdeceased sovereign was read in the assembly of thenobles; and a powerful faction, prepared for theevent, and regardless of the priority of age, exaltedChosroes to .the throne of Persia. He filled thatthrone during a prosperous period of forty-eightyears; and the Justice of Nushirvan is celebratedas the theme of immortal praise by the nations of theEast.Reign of The virtue of Chosroes was that of a conqueror,
Nushirvan, , •.?
or chosroes, who, in the measures or peace and war, is excited by'!o79. ambition and restrained by prudence; who confoundsthe greatness with the happiness of a nation, andcalmly devotes the lives of thousands to the fame, oreven the amusement, of a single man. In his do­mestic administration, the just Nushirvan would meritin our feelings the appellation of a tyrant. His twoelder brothers had been deprived of their fair ex­pectations of the diadem: their future life, betweenthe supreme rank and the condition of subjects, wasanxious to themselves and formidable to their master:fear as well as revenge might tempt them to rebel;the slightest evidence of a conspiracy satisfied theauthor of their wrongs; and the repose of Chosroeswas secured by the death of these unhappy princes,with their families and adherents. One guiltlessyouth was saved and dismissed by the compassion ofa veteran general; and this act of humanity, whichwas revealed by his son, overbalanced the merit of







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 479


alone. The introductor and interpreter of foreign chap.ambassadors were the great Chiatiss and the Drago- .man, two names of Turkish origin, and which arestill familiar to the Sublime Porte. 3. From thehumble style and service of guards, the Domesticsinsensibly rose to the station of generals; the militarythemes of the East and West, the legions of Europeand Asia, were often divided, till the great Domesticwas finally invested with the universal and absolutecommand of the land forces. The Protostrator, inhis original functions, was the assistant of the em­peror when he mounted on horseback: he graduallybecame the lieutenant of the great Domestic in thefield; and his jurisdiction extended over the stables,the cavalry, and the royal train of hunting and hawk­ing. The Stratopedarch was the great judge of thecamp; the Protospathaire commanded the guards;the Constable *, the great JEteriarch, and the Acolyih,were the separate chiefs of the Franks, the Barbarians,and the Varangi, or English, the mercenary strangers,who, in the decay of the national spirit, fonned thenerve of the Byzantine armies. 4. The naval powerswere under the command of the great Duke; in hisabsence they obeyed the great Drungaire of thefleet; and in his place the Emir, or admiral,/a nameof Saracen extraction t, but which has been na­turalized in all the modern languages of Europe. Ofthese officers, and of many more whom it would beuseless to enumerate, the civil and military hierarchywas framed. Their honours and emoluments, theirdress and titles, their mutual salutations and respect­ive pre-eminence, were balanced with more exquisitelabour than would have fixed the constitution of a


XLI.
• Ko»oTTortAof,or xovTocTaiAor, a corruption from the Latin Conies stabuli, orthe French Connetable. In a military sense, it was used by the Greeks in theeleventh century, at least as early as in France.
f It was directly borrowed from the Normans. In the twelfth century, Gian.none reckons the admiral of Sicily among the great officers.







OCR Output








226 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. the writings, which Justinian is accused of neglect-xxxvIL ing, many were no longer to be found in the librariesof the East. The copies of Papinian or Ulpian,which the reformer had proscribed, were deemedunworthy of future notice; the twelve tables andpraetorian edict insensibly vanished, and the monu­ments of ancient Rome were neglected or destroyedby the envy and ignorance of the Greeks. Even thePandects themselves have escaped with difficulty anddanger from the common shipwreck, and criticismhas pronounced, that all the editions and manuscriptsof the West are derived from one original*. It wastranscribed at Constantinople in the beginning of theseventh century t, was successively transported by theaccidents of war and commerce to Amalphi t, Pisa§,and Florence ||, and is now deposited as a sacred relic ^[in the ancient palace of the republic**.


* All, in several instances, repeat the errors of the scribe and the transposi­tions of some leaves in the Florentine Pandects. This fact, if it be true, is de.cisive. Yet the Pandects are quoted by Ivo of Chartres (who died in 1117), byTheobald, archbishop of Canterbury, and by Vacarius, our first professor, in theyear 1140 (Selden ad Fletam, c. 7. tom, ii p. 1080—1085). Have our BritishMSS. of the Pandects been collated?
•y See the description of this original in Brenckman (Hist. Pandect. Florent.1. i. c. 2, 3. p. 4—17. and 1. ii.). Politian, an enthusiast, revered it as the au­thentic standard of Justinian himself (p. 407, 408); but this paradox is refutedby the abbreviations of the Florentine MS. (1- ii. c . 3. p. 117—130). It is com­posed of two quarto volumes with large margins, on a thin parchment, and theLatin characters betray the hand of a Greek scribe.
$ Brenckman, at the end of his history, has inserted two dissertations on therepublic of Amalphi, and the Pisan war in the year 1135, &c.
§ The discovery of the Pandects at Amalphi (A. D. 1137) is first noticed (in1501) by Ludovicus Bologninus (Brenckman, 1. i. c. 11. p. 73, 74. 1 . iv. c. 2.p. 417—425), on the faith of a Pisan chronicle (p. 409, 410), without a nameor a date. The whole story, though unknown to the xiith century, embellishedby ignorant ages, and suspected by rigid criticism, is not, however, destitute of
much internal probability (1. i. c. 4 8. p. 17—50). The Liber Pandectarum
of Pisa was undoubtedly consulted in the xivth century by the great Bartolus(p. 406, 407. See 1 . i. c 9. p. 50—62).
U Pisa was taken by the Florentines in the year 1406; and in 1411 thePandects were transported to the capital. These events are authentic and famous.
51 They were new bound in purple, deposited in a rich casket, and shown tocurious travellers by the monks and magistrates bareheaded, and with lightedtapers (Brenckman, 1. i. c. 10, 11, 12. p. 62—93).
** After the collations of Politian, Bologninus, and Antoninus Augustinus, andthe splendid edition of the Pandects by Taurellus (in 1551), Henry Brenckman,a Dutchman, undertook a pilgrimage to Florence, where he employed severalyears in the study of a single manuscript. His Historia Pandectarum Florcn-tinorum (Utrecht, 1722, in 4to), though a monument of industry, is a small por­tion of his original design.







OCR Output








281 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. army in the field. He ascended the Julian Alps,XXXVIU" and looked down with contempt and desire on thefruitful plains to which his victory communicatedthe perpetual appellation of Lombardy. A faithfulchieftain, and a select band, were stationed at ForumJulii, the modern Friuli, to guard' the passes of themountains. The Lombards respected the strengthof Pavia, and listened to the prayers of the Trevisans:their slow and heavy multitudes proceeded to occupythe palace and city of Verona; and Milan, nowrising from her ashes, was invested by the powers ofAlboin, five months after his departure from Pan-nonia. Terror preceded his march; he found everywhere, or he left, a dreary solitude; and the pusil­lanimous Italians presumed, without a trial, that thestranger was invincible. Escaping to lakes, or rocks,or morasses, the affrighted crowds concealed somefragments of their wealth, and delayed the moment oftheir servitude. Paulinus, the patriarch of Aquileia,removed his treasures, sacred and profane, to the isleof Grado, and his successors were adopted by theinfant republic of Venice, which was continually en­riched by the public calamities. Honoratus, whofilled the chair of St. Ambrose, had credulously ac­cepted the faithless offers of a capitulation; and thearchbishop, with the clergy and nobles of Milan,were driven by the perfidy of Alboin to seek a refugein the less accessible ramparts of Genoa. Along themaritime coast, the courage of the inhabitants wassupported by the facility of supply, the hopes of relief,and the power of escape; but from the Trentine hillsto the gates of Ravenna and Rome, the inland re­gions of Italy became, without a battle or a siege, thelasting patrimony of the Lombards. The submissionof the people invited the Barbarian to assume thecharacter of a lawful sovereign, and the helpless ex­arch was confined to the office of announcing to the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 501


all to the royal college of Constantinople, which was chap.burnt in the reign of Leo the Isaurian *. In the XLI-pompous style of the age, the president of that founda­tion was named the Sun of Science; his twelve as­sociates, the professors in the different arts and facul­ties, were the twelve signs of the zodiac; a libraryof thirty-six thousand five hundred volumes was opento their inquiries; and they could show an ancientmanuscript of Homer, on a roll of parchment onehundred and twenty feet in length, the intestines, asit was fabled, of a prodigious serpent t. But theseventh and eighth centuries were a period of discordand darkness; the library was burnt, the college wasabolished, the Iconoclasts are represented as the foesof antiquity; and a savage ignorance and contemptof letters has disgraced the princes of the Heracleanand Isaurian dynasties t.
In the ninth century, we trace the first dawnings Revival 0fof the restoration of science. After the fanaticism wiling.of the Arabs had subsided, the caliphs aspired toconquer the arts, rather than the provinces, of theempire: their liberal curiosity rekindled the emula­tion of the Greeks, brushed away the dust from theirancient libraries, and taught them to know andreward the philosophers, whose labours had beenhitherto repaid by the pleasure of study and the pur­suit of truth. The Caesar Bardas, the uncle of Mi­chael the third, was the generous protector of letters,a title which alone has preserved his memory andexcused his ambition. A particle of the treasures of


• See Ducange (C. P. Christiana, I. ii. p. 150, 151.), who collects the testi­monies, not of Theophanes, but at least of Zonaras (tom. ii. 1. xv. p. 104.).Cedrenus (p. 454.), Michael Glydas (p. 281.), Constantine Manasses (p. 87.).After refuting the absurd charge against the emperor, Spanheim (Hist. Imagi-num, p. 99—111.), like a true advocate, proceeds to doubt or deny the realityof the fire, and almost of the library.
t According to Malchus (apud Zonar. 1. xiv. p. 53.), this Homer was burntin the time of Basiliscus. The MS. might be renewed—But on a serpent's skin?Most strange and incredible!
X The axoyia of Zonaras, the «ypm xai x/ixStx of Cedrenus, are strong words,perhaps not ill-suiud to those reigns.
r
>







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 213


public institutions of their country. The revolution chap.of almost one thousand years, from the twelve tables XXXVILto the reign of Justinian, may be divided into threeperiods almost equal in duration, and distinguishedfrom each other by the mode of instruction and thecharacter of the civilians*. Pride and ignorancecontributed, during the first period, to confine within The fastnarrow limits the science of the Roman law. On the ATufc.public days of market or assembly, the masters of the 303—648-art were seen walking in the forum, ready to impartthe needful advice to the meanest of their fellow-citizens, from whose votes, on a future occasion, theymight solicit a grateful return. As their years andhonours increased, they seated themselves at home ona chair or throne, to expect with patient gravity thevisits of their clients, who at the dawn of day, fromthe town and country, began to thunder at their door.The duties of social life, and the incidents of judicialproceeding, were the ordinary subject of these con­sultations, and the verbal or written opinion of thejurisconsults was framed according to the rules ofprudence and law. The youths of their own orderand family were permitted to listen; their childrenenjoyed the benefit of more private lessons, and theMucian race was long renowned for the hereditaryknowledge of the civil law. The second period, the Secondlearned and splendid age of jurisprudence, may be aTu/c.extended from the birth of Cicero to the reign of 648~988-


* The series of the civil lawyers is deduced by Pomponius (de Origine JurisPandect. 1. i. tit. ii.). The moderns have discussed, with learning and criticism,this branch of literary history; and among these I have chiefly been guided byGravina (p. 41—79) and Heineccius (Hist . J. B. No. 113—351). Cicero, moreespecially in his books de Oratore, de Claris Oratoribus, de Legibus, and theClavis Ciceroniana of Ernesti (under the names of Mucius, &c.) afford muchgenuine and pleasing information. Horace often alludes to the morning laboursof the civilians (Serm. I. i. 10. Epist. II. i. 103, &c.).
Agricolam laudat juris legumque peritusSub galli cantum, consultor ubi ostia pulsat.
Romae duke diu f'uii et solemne, reclusaMane domo vigilare, clienti proinere jura.


p3







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIJIK. 477


XLI.


without giving himself an equal, to reward the piety chap.of his brother Isaac, the crafty Alexius interposed .a new and supereminent dignity. The happy flexi­bility of the Greek tongue allowed him to compoundthe names of Augustus and emperor (Sebastos andAutocrator), and the union produced the sonoroustitle of Sebastocrator. He was exalted above theCaesar on the first step of the throne: the publicacclamations repeated his name; and he was onlydistinguished from the sovereign by some peculiarornament of the head and feet. The emperor alonecould assume the purple or red buskins, and theclose diadem or tiara, which imitated the fashion ofthe Persian kings. It was a high pyramidal cap ofcloth or silk, almost concealed by a profusion of pearlsand jewels: the crown was formed by an horizontalcircle and two arches of gold: at the summit, thepoint of their intersection, was placed a globe or cross,and two strings or lappets of pearl depended on eithercheek. Instead of red, the buskins of the Sebasto­crator and Caesar were green; and on their opencoronets or crowns, the precious gems were moresparingly distributed. Beside and below the Caesar,the fancy of Alexius created the Panhypersebastosand the Protosebastos, whose sound and significationwill satisfy,a Grecian ear. They imply a superiorityand a priority above the simple name of Augustus;and this sacred and primitive title of the Roman princewas degraded to the kinsman and servants of the By­zantine court. The daughter of Alexius applauds,with fond complacency, this artful gradation of hopesand honours; but the science of words is accessibleto the meanest capacity; and this vain dictionary waseasily enriched by the pride of his successors. Totheir favourite sons or brothers they imparted themore lofty appellation of Lord or Despot, which wasillustrated with new ornaments and prerogatives, and







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 91


bards still floated on the surface: they gradually de- chap.
scended towards the south and the Danube; and at _
the end of four hundred years they again appear withtheir ancient valour and renown. Their mannerswere not less ferocious. The assassination of a royalguest was executed in the presence, and by the com­mand, of the king's daughter, who had been pro­voked by some words of insult, and disappointed byhis diminutive stature; and a tribute, the price ofblood, was imposed on the Lombards, by his brotherthe king of the Heruli. Adversity revived a senseof moderation and justice, and the insolence of con­quest was chastised by the signal defeat and irre­parable dispersion of the Heruli, who were seated inthe southern provinces of Poland. The victories ofthe Lombards recommended them to the friendshipof the emperors: and at the solicitation of Justinian,they passed the Danube, to reduce, according to theirtreaty, the cities of Noricum and the fortresses ofPannonia. But the spirit of rapine soon temptedthem beyond these ample limits; they wanderedalong the coast of the Hadriatic as far as Dyrra-chium, and presumed, with familiar rudeness, toenter the towns and houses of their Roman allies,and to seize the captives who had escaped from theiraudacious hands. These acts of hostility, the sallies,as it might be pretended, of some loose adventurers,were disowned by the nation, and excused by theemperor; but the arms of the Lombards were moreseriously engaged by a contest of thirty years, whichwas terminated only by the extirpation of the Gepidse.The hostile nations often pleaded their cause beforethe throne of Constantinople; and the crafty Jus­tinian, to whom the Barbarians were almost equallyodious, pronounced a partial and ambiguous sentence,and dexterously protracted the war by slow and in­effectual succours. Their strength was formidable,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 23


the Massagetae, who secretly reserved their aid for chap.the conquerors. The historian has inserted, and the"reader may easily supply, the speeches of the com­manders, who, by arguments the most apposite totheir situation, inculcated the importance of victoryand the contempt of life. Zano, with the troopswhich had followed him to the conquest of Sardinia,was placed in the centre; and the throne of Gensericmight have stood, if the multitude of Vandals hadimitated their intrepid resolution. Casting awaytheir lances and missile weapons, they drew theirswords and expected the charge : the Roman cavalrythrice passed the rivulet; they were thrice repulsed;and the conflict was firmly maintained, till Zano fell,and the standard of Belisarius was displayed. Ge-limer retreated to his camp; the Huns joined thepursuit; and the victors despoiled the bodies of theslain. Yet no more than fifty Romans, and eighthundred Vandals, were found on the field of battle;so inconsiderable was the carnage of a day, whichextinguished a nation, and transferred the empire ofAfrica. In the evening, Belisarius led his infantryto the attack of the camp; and the pusillanimousflight of Gelhner exposed the vanity of his recentdeclarations, that, to the vanquished, death was arelief, life a burthen, and infamy the only object ofterror. His departure was secret; but as soon asthe Vandals discovered that their king had desertedthem, they hastily dispersed, anxious only for theirpersonal safety, and careless of every object that isdear or valuable to mankind. The Romans enteredthe camp without resistance; and the wildest scenesof disorder were veiled in the darkness and confusionof the night. Every Barbarian who met their swordswas inhumanly massacred; their widows and daugh­ters, as rich heirs, or beautiful concubines, were em­braced by the licentious soldiers; and avarice itself


c4







OCR Output








448 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap, thirteen years, the richest of sovereigns was compelledxu to strip the palace and churches of their precious fur­niture. Like Nero, he delighted in the amusementsof the theatre, and sighed to be surpassed in the ac­complishments in which he should have blushed toexcel. Yet the studies of Nero, in music and poetry,betrayed some symptoms of a liberal taste; the moreignoble arts of the son of Theophilus were confinedto the chariot race of the Hippodrome. The fourfactions which had agitated the peace, still amusedthe idleness, of the capital: for himself, the emperorassumed the blue livery ; the three rival colours weredistributed to his favourites ; and, in the vile thougheager contention, he forgot the dignity of his personand the safety of his dominions. He silenced themessenger of an invasion, who presumed to diverthis attention in the most critical moment of the race;and, by his command, the importunate beacons wereextinguished that too frequently spread the alarmfrom Tarsus to Constantinople. The most skilfulcharioteers obtained the first place in his confidenceand esteem; their merit was profusely rewarded : theemperor feasted in their houses, and presented theirchildren at the baptismal font; and, while he ap­plauded his own popularity, he affected to blame thecold and stately reserve of his predecessors. In hismidnight revels, when his passions were inflamed bywine, he was provoked to issue the most sanguinarycommands; and if any feelings of humanity wereleft, he was reduced, with the return of sense, to ap­prove the salutary disobedience of his servants. Butthe most extraordinary feature in the character ofMichael is the profane mockery of the religion of hiscountry.* A buffoon of the court was invested withthe robes of the patriarch; the twelve metropolitans,among whom the emperor was ranked, assumed theirecclesiastical garments: they used or abused the sa­







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 49


later period, the circumference of Naples measured chap.only two thousand three hundred and sixty-three .paces*: the fortifications were defended by pre­cipices or the sea; when the aqueducts were inter­cepted, a supply of water might be drawn from wellsand fountains; and the stock of provisions was suf­ficient to consume the patience of the besiegers. Atthe end of twenty days, that of Belisarius was almostexhausted, and he had reconciled himself to the dis­grace of abandoning the siege, that he might march,before the winter season, against Rome and the Go­thic king. But his anxiety was relieved by the boldcuriosity of an Isaurian, who explored the dry chan­nel of an aqueduct, and secretly reported, that a pas­sage might be perforated to introduce a file of armedsoldiers into the heart of the city. When the workhad been silently executed, the humane generalrisked the discovery of his secret, by a last and fruit­less admonition of the impending danger. In thedarkness of the night, four hundred Romans enteredthe aqueduct, raised themselves by a rope, which theyfastened to an olive tree, into the house or garden ofa solitary matron, sounded their trumpets, surprisedthe centinels, and gave admittance to their com­panions, who on all sides scaled the walls, and burstopen the gates of the city. Every crime which ispunished by social justice was practised as the rightsof war; the Huns were distinguished by cruelty andsacrilege, and Belisarius alone appeared in the streetsand churches of Naples, to moderate the calamitieswhich he predicted. "The gold and silver," he re­peatedly exclaimed, " are the just rewards of your"valour. But spare the inhabitants; they are Chris-"tians, they are suppliants, they are now yourfellow-"subjects. Restore the children to their parents,
• Not geometrical, but common, paces or steps, of 22 French inches (d'An.ville, Mesures Itineraires, p. 7, 8): the 2363 do not make an English mile.
VOL. IV. E







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 897


crimes, and of their patience. In a dark dungeon chap.Leontius, a general of reputation, had groaned above'
three years, with some of the noblest and most de­serving of the patricians: he was suddenly drawnforth to assume the government of Greece; and thispromotion of an injured man was a mark of the con­tempt, rather than of the confidence, of his prince.As he was followed to the port by the kind offices ofhis friends, Leontius observed, with a sigh, that hewas a victim adorned for sacrifice, and that inevitabledeath would pursue his footsteps. They ventured toreply, that glory and empire might be the recompenseof a generous resolution; that every order of menabhorred the reign of a monster; and that the handsof two hundred thousand patriots expected only thevoice of a leader. The night was chosen for theirdeliverance; and in the first effort of the conspirators,the praefect was slain, and the prisons were forcedopen: the emissaries of Leontius proclaimed in everystreet, " Christians! to St. Sophia;" and the season­able text of the patriarch, " This is the day of the"Lord," was the prelude of an inflammatory ser­mon. From the church the people adjourned to thehippodrome: Justinian, in whose cause not a swordhad been drawn, was dragged before these tumultuaryjudges, and their clamours demanded the instant deathof the tyrant. But Leontius, who was already clothedwith the purple, cast an eye of pity on the prostrateson of his own benefactor, and of so many emperors.The life of Justinian was spared; the amputation ofhis nose, perhaps of his tongue, was imperfectly per­formed: the happy flexibility of the Greek languagecould impose the name of Rhinotmetus; and themutilated tyrant was banished to Chersonae, in CrimTartary: a lonely settlement, where corn, wine, andoil were imported as foreign luxuries. a^d^os
On the edge of the Scythian wilderness, Justinian -Voi.


f







OCR Output








E>«


Thei;
ractc
tacti,


 


 


..-.• de.
-'*« the
** *■ with
;'*4 to the
**;• it
:-»their** only
* They
f™"** reside^
T ***** ^ uS) afld
*^«^eTdedb^ie
- ** ^ -STidt^* Justinia«
* Ae doaiaion of ancient Bo*/***** re-sgk of conquest, tie _Z I*0* ■■*rted.
-» «* of Mi successors, ConllZ S*™*0' so~- * Tfcracian Bosphoru, u S *"fflB* to^» of the Tyber • m1/ ^ the
A. '-' - . ..*


J. ■


.(iI-,P- '57.),— — -fvuiic title of emnn«»"n*


TfW,f P„


and







OCR Output








278 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. "brother: they are mingled with those of the vilestXXXVIIL " animals." The Gepida?, a nation of warriors,started from their seats, and the fearless Alboin, withhis forty companions, laid their hands on their swords.The tumult was appeased by the venerable inter­position of Turisund. He saved his own honour, andthe life of his guest: and after the solemn rites ofinvestiture, dismissed the stranger in the bloody armsof his son; the gift of a weeping parent. Alboinreturned in triumph; and the Lombards, who cele­brated his matchless intrepidity, were compelled topraise the virtues of an enemy. In this extraordinaryvisit he had probably seen the daughter of Cunimund,who soon after ascended the throne of the Gepidae.Her name was Rosamond, an appellation expressiveof female beauty, and which our own history or ro­mance has consecrated to amorous tales. The kingof the Lombards (the father of Alboin no longerlived) was contracted to the grand-daughter of Clo-vis; but the restraints of faith and policy soon yieldedto the hope of possessing the fair Rosamond, and ofinsulting her family and nation. The arts of per­suasion were tried without success; and the impatientlover, by force and stratagem, obtained the object ofhis desires. War was the consequence which he fore­saw and solicited; but the Lombards could not longwithstand the furious assaults of the Gepidae, whowere sustained by a Roman army. And as the offerof marriage was rejected with contempt, Alboin wascompelled to relinquish his prey, and to partake ofthe disgrace which he had inflicted on the house ofCunimund.bhaLoid When a public quarrel is envenomed by privateAvarsde- injuries, a blow that is not mortal or decisive can beking and productive only of a short truce, which allows thethe Ge^d* unsuccessful combatant to sharpen his arms for a newA. D. 566.' encounter. The strength of Alboin had been found







OCR Output








176 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. and his military conduct defended Cumae* above a _ year against the forces of the Romans. Their in­dustry had scooped the Sibyl's cavet into a pro­digious mine ; combustible materials were introducedto consume the temporary props: the wall and thegate of Cumae sunk into the cavern, but the ruinsformed a deep and inaccessible precipice. On thefragment of a rock, Aligern stood alone and un­shaken, till he calmly surveyed the hopeless condition .of his country, and judged it more honourable to bethe friend of Narses than the slave of the Franks.After the death of Teias, the Roman general se­parated his troops to reduce the cities of Italy; Luccasustained a long and vigorous siege: and such wasthe humanity or the prudence of Narses, that the re­peated perfidy of the inhabitants could not provokehim to exact the forfeit lives of their hostages. Thesehostages were dismissed in safety; and their grate­ful zeal at length subdued the obstinacy of theircountrymen t.invasion of Before Lucca had surrendered, Italy was over-Franks and whelmed by a new deluge of Barbarians. A feebleaId"."553 youth, the grandson of Clovis, reigned over the Aus-August. trasians or oriental Franks. The guardians of Theo-debald entertained with coldness and reluctance themagnificent promises of the Gothic ambassadors. Butthe spirit of a martial people outstripped the timid


* I leave Scaliger (Animadvers. in Euseb. p. 59), and Salmasius, Excrcitat.Plinian. p. 51, 52, to quarrel about the origin of Cumae, the oldest of the Greekcolonies in Italy (Strab. 1. v. p. 372; Velleius Paterculus, 1. i. c. 4), alreadyvacant in Juvenal's time (Satir. iii.), and now in ruins.
■f Agathias (1. i. c. 21) settles the Sibyl's cave under the walls of Cumae; heagrees with Servius (ad. 1. vi.-jEneid.); nor can I perceive why their opinionshould be rejected by Heyne, the excellent editor of Virgil (tom. ii. p. 650, 651).In urbe media secreta religio! But Cumae was not yet built; and the lines(1. vi. 96, 97) would become ridiculous, if JEneas were actually in a Greek city.
$ There is some difficulty in connecting the 35th chapter of the ivth book ofthe Gothic war of Procopius with the first book of the history of Agathias. Wemust now relinquish a statesman and soldier, to attend the footsteps of a poetand rhetorician (1. i. p. 11. 1. ii. p. 51. edit. Louvre).







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 363


blushed at their easy victory over the natives of Ar- chap.
VYYTV
menia. But the long experience of war had hardened
the minds and bodies of that effeminate people; theirzeal and bravery were approved in the service of adeclining empire; they abhorred and feared the usurpa­tion of the house of Sassan, and the memory of per­secution envenomed their pious hatred of the ene­mies of Christ. The limits of Armenia, as it hadbeen ceded to the emperor Maurice, extended as faras the Araxes; the river submitted to the indignityof a bridge *, and Heraclius, in the footsteps of MarkAntony, advanced towards the city of Tauris orGandzaca, the ancient and modern capital of one ofthe provinces of Media. At the head of forty thou­sand men, Chosroes himself had returned from somedistant expedition to oppose the progress of the Ro­man arms; but he retreated on the approach of Hera­clius, declining the generous alternative of peace or ofbattle. Instead of half a million of inhabitants, whichhave been ascribed to Tauris under the reign of theSophys, the city contained no more than three thou­sand houses; but the value of the royal treasures wasenhanced by a tradition, that they were the spoils ofCrcesus, which had been transported by Cyrus fromthe citadel of Sardes. The rapid conquests of Hera­clius were suspended only by the winter season; amotive of prudence determined his retreat into theprovince of Albania, along the shores of the Caspian;and his tents were most probably pitched in the plainsof Mogan, the favourite encampment of orientalprinces. In the course of this successful inroad, hesignalized the zeal and revenge of a Christian em­peror: at his command, the soldiers extinguished the


* Etpontem indignatus Araxes. Virgil, jEneid, viii. 728.
The river Araxes is noisy, rapid, vehement, and, with the meeting of the snows,irresistible: the strongest and most massy bridges are swept away by the current;and its indignation is attested by the ruins of many arches near the old town ofZulfa. Voyages de Chardin, tom. i. p. 252.







OCR Output








THE
HISTORY
OP THE
DECLINE AND FALL
OF THE
ROMAN EMPIRE.


CHAPTER XXXIV.


Conquests of Justinian in the West.—Character and firstCampaigns of Belisarius.—He invades and subdues theVandal Kingdom of Africa.—His Triumph.—The GothicWar.—He recovers Sicily, Naples, and Rome.—Siege ofRome by the Goths.—Their Retreat and Losses.—Sur­render of Ravenna.— Glory of Belisarius.—His domesticShnme and Misfortunes,
When Justinian ascended the throne, about fifty chap.years after the fall of the Western empire, the king­


doms of the Goths and Vandals had obtained a solid, Justinianand as it might seem, a legal establishment both in invadeEurope and Africa. The titles which Roman victory A.r;a'533.had inscribed were erazed with equal justice by thesword of the Barbarians; and their successful rapinederived a more venerable sanction from time, fromtreaties, and from the oaths of fidelity, already re­peated by a second or third generation of obedientsubjects. Experience and Christianity had refutedthe superstitious hope, that Rome was founded bythe gods to reign for ever over the nations of the
VOL. IV. b







OCR Output








XIV CONTENTS.


A. D. Page
641 ConstansII. 390
668 Constantine IV. Pogonatus .... 391
668—675. First siege of Constantinople by the Arabs . 392
685 Justinian II. ..... 396
695—705. His exile . . . . . .397
705—711. His restoration and death . . . 399
647—709. Conquest of Africa by the Saracens . . 401
712—713. Conquest of Spain . . . .404
718 Empire of the Saracens .... 405
721—731. They invade France . . . . ib.
732 Defeated by Charles Martel . . . . ib.
711 Philippicus . . . .406
713 Anastasius II. .... ib.
716 Theodosius III. . . . . .407
716—718. Second siege of Constantinople . . ib.
Failure and retreat of the Saracens . . .411
Invention and use of the Greek fire . . . ib.
Civil wars of the Saracens, and triple division of the
Caliphate ..... 414
718 Leo III. the Isaurian . . . . ib.
741 Constantine V. Copronymus . . . .417
Ravenna taken by the Lombards . • . ib.
Italy conquered by Charlemagne . • » . 418
775 Leo IV. . . . 419
780 Constantine VI. and Irene . . . 421
800 Coronation of Charlemagne .... 423
Separation of Italy from the Greeks . . ib.
781—805. Wars of Harun al Rashid against the Romans 425
802 Nicephorus I. . . . .428
811 Stauracius . . . . . . 429 -
811 Michael I. Rhangabe . . . . ib.
813 Leo V. the Armenian . . . .430
820 Michael II. the Stammerer . . • . .433
823 The Arabs subdue the isle of Crete . . . 434
827—828. And Sicily 435
829 Theophilus . . . * . 436
838 The Amorium war between Theophilus and Motasscm 438
842 Michael III. 443
846 Invasion of Rome by the Saracens . . . ib.
849 Victory and reign of Pope Leo IV. . . . 445
867 Basil I. the Macedonian .... 449
State of Italy in the ninth century . . 454
Conquest of Bari . . . . 456
890 New province of the Greeks in Italy • • 457
983 Defeat of Otho III. . . . . ib.
886 Leo VI. the philosopher .... 458







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 233


the oppression was tempered by the assurance, that chap.each generation must succeed in its turn to the awful xxxv'dignity of parent and master.
The first limitation of paternal power is ascribed ^^atfoni'to the justice and humanity of Numa: and the maid temai au-who, with his father's consent, had espoused a free- n y-man, was protected from the disgrace of becomingthe wife of a slave. In the first ages, when the citywas pressed, and often famished by her Latin andTuscan neighbours, the sale of children might be afrequent practice; but as a Roman could not legallypurchase the liberty of his fellow-citizen, the marketmust gradually fail, and the trade would be destroyedby the conquests of the republic. An imperfect rightof property was at length communicated to sons;and the threefold distinction of prqfeclitious, ad­ventitious, and professional, was ascertained by thejurisprudence of the Code and Pandects*. Of allthat proceeded from the father, he imparted onlythe use, and reserved the absolute dominion; yet ifhis goods were sold, the filial portion was excepted,by a favourable interpretation, from the demands ofthe creditors. In whatever accrued by marriage, gift,or collateral succession, the property was secured tothe son; but the father, unless he had been speciallyexcluded, enjoyed the usufruct during his life. As ajust and prudent reward of military virtue, the spoilsof the enemy were acquired, possessed, and bequeathedby the soldier alone; and the fair analogy was ex­tended to the emoluments of any liberal profession,the salary of public service, and the sacred liberalityof the emperor or the empress. The life of a citizenwas less exposed than his fortune to the abuse ofpaternal power. Yet his life might be adverse to


* .See the gradual enlargement and security of the filial peiulium in the In­stitutes (1 . ii. tit. ix), the Pandects (1. xv. tit. i. 1. xli. tit. i), and the Code (1 . iv.lit. xxvi, xxvii).







OCR Output








370 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. oriental metaphor, to describe the men and arms,XXXIX- the horses and elephants, ,that covered Media andAssyria against the invasion of Heraclius. Yet theRomans boldly advanced from the Araxes to theTigris, and the timid prudence of Rhazates was con­tent to follow them by forced marches through a de­solate country, till he received a peremptory mandateto risk the fate of Persia in a decisive battle. East­ward of the Tigris, at the end of the bridge of Mosal,the great Nineveh had formerly been erected: thecity, and even the ruins of the city, had long sincedisappeared; the vacant space afforded a spaciousfield for the operations of the two armies. But theseoperations are neglected by the Byzantine historians;and, like the authors of epic poetry and romance,they ascribe the victory, not to the military conduct,but to the personal valour, of their favourite hero.advkto- On this memorable day, Heraclius, on his horse"embe/i, Phallas, surpassed the bravest of his warriors: his&c- lip was pierced with a spear; the steed was wounded
in the thigh; but he carried his master safe and vic­torious through the triple phalanx of the Barbarians.In the heat of the action, three valiant chiefs weresuccessively slain by the sword and lance of the em­peror; among these was Rhazates himself; he felllike a soldier, but the sight of his head scattered griefand despair through the fainting ranks of the Per­sians. His armour of pure and massy gold, the shieldof one hundred and twenty plates, the sword andbelt, the saddle and cuirass, adorned the triumph ofHeraclius, and the champion of Rome might haveoffered the fourth up/me spoils to the Jupiter of thecapitol. In the battle of Nineveh, which was fiercelyfought from daybreak to the eleventh hour, twenty-eiglit standards, beside those which might be brokenor torn, were taken from the Persians; the greatestpart of their army was cut in pieces, and the victors,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 355


power, he received an epistle from an obscure citizen chap.
of Mecca, inviting him to acknowledge Mahomet as _
the apostle of God. He rejected the invitation, andtore the epistle. "It is thus," exclaimed the Arabianprophet, "that God will tear the kingdom, and re-"ject the supplications of Chosroes." Placed on theverge of the two great empires of the East, Mahometobserved with secret joy the progress of their mutualdestruction; and in the midst of the Persian triumphs,he ventured to foretell, that before many years shouldelapse, victory would again return to the banners ofthe Romans.
At the time when this prediction is said to have Distress ofbeen delivered, no prophecy could be more distant a!d? eiofrom its accomplishment, since the first twelve years ~622-of Heraclius announced the approaching dissolutionof the empire. If the motives of Chosroes had beenpure and honourable, he must have ended the quarrelwith the death of Phocas, and he would have em­braced, as his best ally, the fortunate African whohad so generously avenged the injuries of his bene­factor Maurice. The prosecution of the war revealedthe true character of the Barbarian; and the sup­pliant embassies of Heraclius to beseech his clemency,that he would spare the innocent, accept a tribute,and give peace to the world, were rejected with con­temptuous silence or insolent menace. Syria, Egypt,and the provinces of Asia, were subdued by the Per­sian arms; while Europe, from the confines of Istriato the long wall of Thrace, was oppressed by theAvars, unsatiated with the blood and rapine of theItalian war. They had coolly massacred their malecaptives in the sacred field of Pannonia; the womenand children were reduced to servitude, and thenoblest virgins were abandoned to the promiscuouslust of the Barbarians. By these implacable enemies,Heraclius, on either side, was insulted and besieged:


aa 2







OCR Output








CONTENTS. xv


CHAP. XLI.


Slate of the Eastern Empire in the Tenth Century.—Extent and
Division.—Wealth and Revenue.—Palace of Constantinople.—
Titles and Offices.—Pride and Power of the Emperors.— Tac­
tics of the Greeks, Arabs, and Franks.—Loss of the Latin
Tongue.—Studies and Solitude of the Greeks.


A.D.
Page
Memorials of the Greek empire
. 460
Works of Constantine Porphyrogenitus
ib.
Their imperfections ....
461
Embassy of Liutprand
463
The themes, or provinces of the empire, and its limits
in every age ....
ib.
General wealth and populousness
465
State of Peloponnesus: Sclavonians .
. 466
Freemen of Laconia ....
468
Cities and revenue of Peloponnesus .
ib.
Manufactures—especially of silk
469
Transported from Greece to Sicily . . .
470
Revenue of the Greek empire
471
Pomp and luxury of the emperors
The palace of Constantinople
473
ib.
Furniture and attendants
475
Honours and titles of the Imperial family
476
Offices of the palaces, the state, and the army
478
Adoration of the emperor
480
Reception of ambassadors
ib.
Processions and acclamations
481
Marriage of the Caesars with foreign nations .
483
Imaginary law of Constantine
ib.
733 The first exception ....
484
941 The second .....
ib.
943 The third .....
ib.
972 Otho of Germany ....
485
988 Wolodomir of Russia
486
Despotic power .
ib.
Coronation oath ....
487
Military force of the Greeks, the Saracens, and the
Franks .....
488
Navy of the Greeks . . . .
ib.
Tactics and character of the Greeks .
491







OCR Output








276 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. ship of a grateful monarch, and the enemies of Rome
XXXVIII to *
'had respected the allies of the Avars. The sameprudence would instruct the nephew of Justinian toimitate the liberality of his uncle, and to purchasethe blessings of peace from an invincible people, whodelighted and excelled in the exercise of war. Thereply of the emperor was delivered in the same strainof haughty defiance, and he derived his confidencefrom the God of the Christians, the ancient glory ofRome, and the recent triumphs of Justinian. "The"empire," said he, " abounds with men and horses,"and arms sufficient to defend our frontiers, and to"chastise the Barbarians. You offer aid; you threaten"hostilities: we despise your enmity and your aid."The conquerors of the Avars solicit our alliance;"shall we dread their fugitives and exiles? The"bounty of our uncle was granted to your misery, to"your humble prayers. From us you shall receive"a more important obligation, the knowledge of your"own weakness. Retire from our presence; the lives"of ambassadors are safe; and if you return to im-"plore our pardon, perhaps you will taste of our"benevolence*." On the report of his ambassadors,the chagan was awed by the apparent firmness of aRoman emperor, of whose character and resourceshe was ignorant. Instead of executing his threatsagainst the eastern empire, he marched into the poorand savage countries of Germany, which were subjectto the dominion of the Franks. After two doubtfulbattles, he consented to retire, and the Austrasianking relieved the distress of his camp with an im­mediate supply of corn and cattle f. Such repeated


* For these characteristic speeches, compare the verse of Corippus (I. iii . 251—401) with the prose of Menander (Excerpt. Legation, p. 102, 103). Their di-.versity proves that they did not copy each other; their resemblance, that thtydrew from a common original.
f For the Austrasian war, see Menander (Excerpt. Legat. p. 110), Gregoryof Tours (Hist . Franc. 1. iv. c. 29), and Paul the deacon (de Gest. Langobanl1. ii. c. 10).







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. common attachment to a chief, who excelled in allxxxviii. £jie virtues and vices of a savage hero; and the
vigilance of Alboin provided an ample magazine ofoffensive and defensive arms for the use of the ex­pedition. The portable wealth of the Lombardsattended the march; their lands they cheerfully re­linquished to the Avars, on the solemn promise, whichwas made and accepted without a smile, that if theyfailed in the conquest of Italy, these voluntary exilesshould be reinstated in their former possessions.Mddeath'" They might have failed, if Narses had been theof Narses. antagonist of the Lombards; and the veteran war­riors, the associates of his Gothic victory, would haveencountered with reluctance an enemy whom theydreaded and esteemed. But the weakness of the By­zantine court was subservient to the Barbarian cause;and it was for the ruin of Italy, that the emperor oncelistened to the complaints of his subjects. The virtuesof Narses were stained with avarice; and in his pro­vincial reign of fifteen years he accumulated a trea­sure of gold and silver which surpassed the modestyof a private fortune. His government was oppressiveor unpopular, and the general discontent was ex­pressed with freedom by the deputies of Rome. Be­fore the throne of Justin they boldly declared, thattheir Gothic servitude had been more tolerable thanthe despotism of a Greek e'unuch; and that, unlesstheir tyrant were instantly removed, they would con­sult their own happiness in the choice of a master.The apprehension of a revolt was urged by the voiceof envy and detraction, which had so recentlytriumphed over the merit of Belisarius. A new ex­arch, Longinus, was appointed to supersede the con­queror of Italy, and the base motives of his recalwere revealed in the insulting mandate of the em­press Sophia, "that he should leave to men the exer-"cise of arms, and return to his proper station among







OCR Output








498 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. reigners. An ambassador of the great Otho de-XLt' clared, in the palace of Constantinople, that theSaxons could dispute with swords better than withpens; and that they peferred inevitable death to thedishonour of turning their backs to an enemy. Itwas the glory of the nobles of France, that, in theirhumble dwellings, war and rapine were the onlypleasure, the sole occupation, of their lives. Theyaffected to deride the palaces, the banquets, the po­lished manners, of the Italians, who, in the estimate• of the Greeks themselves, had degenerated from theliberty and valour of the ancient Lombards.Oblivion of By the well-known edict of Caracalla, his subjects,language, from Britain to Egypt, were entitled to the nameand privileges of Romans, and their national sove­reign might fix his occasional or permanent residencein any province of their common country. In thedivision of the East and West, an ideal unity wasscrupulously preserved, and in their titles, laws, andstatutes, the successors of Arcadius and Honoriusannounced themselves as the inseparable colleaguesof the same office, as the joint sovereigns of the Ro­man world and city, which were bounded by thesame limits. After the fall of the Western mon­archy, the majesty of the purple resided solely in theprinces of Constantinople; and of these Justinianwas the first, who, after a divorce of sixty years, re­gained the dominion of ancient Rome, and asserted,by the right of conquest, the august title of emperorof Romans*. A motive of vanity or discontent so­licited one of his successors, Constans the second, toabandon the Thracian Bosphorus, and to restore thepristine honours of the Tyber: an extravagant pro­ject (exclaims the malicious Byzantine), as if he had
"Justinian, say* the historian Agathias (1. v. p. 157-)i »fwr»f PaiftmutttUTwpxTwp ovo/iari xaw irpxy/ixn. Yet the specific title of emperor of the Romanswas not used at Constantinople till it had been claimed by the French andGerman emperors of old Rome.


X







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 201


were debated in the senate, and finally ratified or chap.
rejected by a majority of votes in the thirty curice or _
parishes of the city. Romulus, Numa, and ServiusTullius, are celebrated as the most ancient legis­lators; and each of th em claims his peculiar part inthe threefold division of Jurisprudence. The lawsof marriage, the education of children, and the au­thority of parents, which may seem to draw theirorigin from nature itself, are ascribed to the untu­tored wisdom of Romulus. The law of nations andof religious worship, which Numa introduced, wasderived from his nocturnal converse with the nymphEgeria. The civil law is attributed to the experienceof Servius: he balanced the rights and fortunes ofthe seven classes of citizens; and guarded, by fiftynew regulations, the observance of contracts and thepunishment of crimes. The state, which he hadinclined towards a democracy, was changed by thelast Tarquin into lawless despotism; and when thekingly office was abolished, the patricians engrossedthe benefits of freedom. The royal laws becameodious or obsolete; the mysterious deposit was si­lently preserved by the priests and nobles; and, atthe end of sixty years, the citizens of Rome stillcomplained that they were ruled by the arbitrarysentence of the magistrates. Yet the positive in­stitutions of the kings had blended themselves withthe public and private manners of the city; somefragments of that venerable jurisprudence were com­piled by the diligence of antiquarians, and abovetwenty texts still speak the rudeness of the Pelasgicidiom of the Latins*.


* In the year 1444, seven or eight tables of brass were dug up between Cor-tona and Gubio. A part of these, for the rest is Etruscan, represents the pri­mitive state of the Pelasgic letters and language, which are ascribed by Herodotusto that district of Italy (I i. c. 56, 57, 58); though this difficult passage may beexplained of a Crestona in Thrace (Notes de Larcher, tom. i. p. 25(5—261).The savage dialect of the Eugubine tables has exercised, and may still elude, thedivination of criticism; but the root is undoubtedly Latin, of the same age and







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 413


XL.


the mouths of savage monsters, that seemed to vomit chap.a stream of liquid and consuming fire. This im- _portant art was preserved at Constantinople, as thepalladium of the state: the galleys and artillery mightoccasionally be lent to the allies of Rome; but thecomposition of the Greek fire was concealed with themost jealous scruple; and the terror of the enemieswas increased and prolonged by their ignorance andsurprise. In the treatise of the administration of theempire, the royal author suggests the answers andexcuses that might best elude the indiscreet curiosityand importunate demands of the Barbarians. Bythese precautions, the secret was confined above fourhundred years to the Romans of the East; and atthe end of the eleventh century, the Pisans, to whomevery sea and every art were familiar, suffered theeffects, without understanding the composition, of theGreek fire. It was at length either discovered orstolen by the Mahometans; and in the holy wars ofSyria and Egypt, they retorted an invention, con­trived against themselves, on the heads of the Chris­tians. A knight, who despised the swords and lancesof the Saracens, relates with heartfelt sincerity hisown fears, and those of his companions, at the sightand sound of the mischievous engine that dischargeda torrent of Greek fire,—thejeu Gregeois, as it is styledby the more' early of the French writers. It cameflying through the air, says Joinville, like a wingedlong-tailed dragon, about the thickness of a hogs-. head, with the report of thunder, and the velocity oflightning; and the darkness of the night was dis­pelled by this deadly illumination. The use of theGreek, or as it might now be called, of the Saracenfire, was continued to the middle of the fourteenthcentury; when the scientific, or casual, compound ofnitre, sulphur, and charcoal, effected a new revolu­tion in the art of war and the history of mankind.







OCR Output








476 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. her age or indolence declined the fatigue of a horseXLL or carriage: the soft litter or bed of Danielis wastransported on the shoulders of ten robust slaves;and as they were relieved at easy distances, a bandof three hundred was selected for the performance ofthis service. She was entertained in the Byzantinepalace with filial reverence, and the honours of aqueen; and whatever might be the origin of herwealth, her gifts were not unworthy of the regal dig­nity. I have already described the fine and curiousmanufactures of Peloponnesus of linen, silk, and wool­len. During her lifetime, she bestowed the greaterpart of her estates in Peloponnesus, and her testamentinstituted Leo the son of Basil her universal heir.After the payment of the legacies, fourscore villas orfarms were added to the Imperial domain; and threethousand slaves of Danielis were enfranchised by theirnew lord, and transplanted as a colony to the Italiancoast. From this example of a private matron, wemay estimate the wealth and magnificence of theemperors. Yet our enjoyments are confined by a nar­row circle; and, whatsoever may be its value, theluxury of life is possessed with more innocence andsafety by the master of his own, than by the stewardof the public, fortune.Honouw jn an absolute government, which levels the di-
and titles of . . ° .' .
the imperial stinctions of noble and plebeian birth, the sovereignam y' is the sole fountain of honour; and the rank, bothin the palace and the empire, depends on the titlesand offices which are bestowed and resumed by his• arbitrary will. Above a thousand years, from Vespa­
sian to Alexius Comnenus, the Caesar was the secondperson, or at least the second degree, after the su­preme title of Augustus was more freely communi­cated to the sons and brothers of the reigning mon­arch. To elude without violating his promise to apowerful associate, the husband of his sister; and,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 93


disputed the friendship or rather the gifts of the em- chap.
- YVYlf
peror; and the distinction which nature had fixed *
between the faithful dog and the rapacious wolf wasapplied by an ambassador who received only verbalinstructions from the mouth of his illiterate prince*.The Bulgarians, of whatsoever species, were equallyattracted by Roman wealth: they assumed* a vaguedominion over the Sclavonian name, and their rapidmarches could only be stopped by the Baltic sea, orthe extreme cold and poverty of the north. But thesame race of Sclavonians appears to have maintained,in every age, the possession of the same countries.Their numerous tribes, however distant or adverse,used one common language (it was harsh and irre­gular), and were known by the resemblance of theirform, which deviated from the swarthy Tartar, andapproached without attaining the lofty stature andfair complexion of the German. Four thousand sixhundred villages f were scattered over the provincesof Russia and Poland, and their huts were hastilybuilt of rough timber, in a country deficient both instone and iron. Erected, or rather concealed, in thedepth of forests, on the banks of rivers, or the edgeof morasses, we may not perhaps, without flattery,compare them to the architecture of the beaver;which they resembled in a double issue, to the landand water, for the escape of the savage inhabitant, ananimal less cleanly, less diligent, and less social, thanthat marvellous quadruped. The fertility of thesoil, rather than the labour of the natives, suppliedthe rustic plenty of the Sclavonians. Their sheepand horned cattle were large and numerous, and thefields which they sowed with millet and panic af-


* Procopius (Goth. 1. iv. c. 19). His verbal message (he owns himself anilliterate Barbarian) is delivered as an epistle. The style is savage, figurative,and original.'
f This sum is the result of a particular list, in a curious MS. fragment of theyear 550, found in the library of Milan.







OCR Output








200 THE DECLINE AND FALL


CHAP.XXXVII.


Laws ofthe kingsof Rome.


They piously commemorate his virtues; dissembleor deny his failings; and fiercely chastise the guiltor folly of the rebels who presume to sully the ma­jesty of the purple. The idolatry of love has pro­voked, as it usually happens, the rancour of opposi­tion; the character of Justinian has been exposed tothe blind vehemence of flattery and invective, andthe injustice of a sect (the Anti-Tribonians) has re­fused all praise and merit to the prince, his ministers,and his laws. Attached to no party, interested onlyfor the truth and candour of history, and directedby the most temperate and skilful guides*, I enterwith just diffidence on the subject of civil law, whichhas exhausted so many learned lives, and clothed thewalls of such spacious libraries. In a single, if pos­sible, in a short chapter, I shall trace the Romanjurisprudence from Romulus to Justinian, appreciatethe labours of that emperor, and pause to contemplatethe principles of a science so important to the peaceand happiness of society. The laws of a nation formthe most instructive portion of its history; and, al­though I have devoted myself to write the annals ofa declining monarchy, I shall embrace the occasionto breathe the pure and invigorating air of the re­public.
The primitive government of Rome was composedwith some political skill, of an elective king, a coun­cil of nobles, and a general assembly of the people.War and religion were administered by the suprememagistrate; and he alone proposed the laws, which


• At the head of these guides I shall respectfully place the learned and per­spicuous Heineccius, a German professor, who died at Halle in the year 1741
(see his Eloge, in the Nouvelle Bibliotheque Gerraanique, tom. ii. p. 51 64).
His ample works have been collected in eight volumes in 4to. Geneva, 1743
1748. The treatises which I have separately used are, 1. Historia Juris Romaniet Germanici, Ludg. Batav. 1740, in 8vo. 2. Syntagma Antiquitatum Homa-nam Jurisprudentiam illustrantiam, 2 vols, in 8vo. Traject. ad Rhcnum. 3. Ele­ments Juris Civilis secundum Ordinem Institutionum, Ludg. Bat . 1751, in 8to.4. Eleraenta J. C. secundum Ordinem Pandectarum, Traject. 1772, in 8vo. 2vols.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 181


ministered above fifteen years the entire kingdom of chap.Italy. Like Belisarius, he had deserved the honours xxxvr-of envy, calumny, and disgrace: but the favouriteeunuch still enjoyed the confidence of Justinian, orthe leader of a victorious army awed and repressedthe ingratitude of a timid court. Yet it was not byweak and mischievous indulgence that Narses securedthe attachment of his troops. Forgetful of the past,and regardless of the future, they abused the presenthour of prosperity and peace. The cities of Italyresounded with the noise of drinking and dancing:the spoils of victory were wasted in sensual pleasures;and nothing (says Agathias) remained, unless to ex­change their shields and helmets for the soft lute andthe capacious hogshead. In a manly oration, not un­worthy of a Roman censor, the eunuch reproved thesedisorderly vices, which sullied their fame and en­dangered their safety. The soldiers blushed andobeyed: discipline was confirmed, the fortificationswere restored; a duke was stationed for the defenceand military command of each of the principal cities;and the eye of Narses pervaded the ample prospectfrom Calabria to the Alps. The remains of the Go­thic nation evacuated the country, or mingled withthe people: the Franks, instead of revenging thedeath of Buccelin, abandoned, without a struggle,their Italian conquests: arid the rebellious Sindbal,chief of the Heruli, was subdued, taken, and hungon a lofty gallows by the inflexible justice of theexarch. The civil state of Italy, after the agitationof a long tempest, was fixed by a pragmatic sanction,which the emperor promulgated at the request of thepope. Justinian introduced his own jurisprudenceinto the schools and tribunals of the West: he ratifiedthe acts of Theodoric and his immediate successors,but every deed was rescinded and abolished whichforce had extorted, or fear had subscribed, under the


n3







OCR Output








52 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. emperor as a new aera of freedom and prosperity.XXXIV' The deputies of the pope and clergy, of the senateand people, invited the lieutenant of Justinian toaccept their voluntary allegiance, and to enter thecity, whose gates would be thrown open for his re­ception. As soon as Belisarius had fortified his newconquests, Naples and Cumae, he advanced abouttwenty miles to the banks of the Vulturnus, con­templated the decayed grandeur of Capua, andhalted at the separation of the Latin and Appianways. The work of the censor, after the incessantuse of nine centuries, still preserved its primaevalbeauty, and not a flaw could be discovered in thelarge polished stones, of which that solid, thoughnarrow, road was so firmly compacted. Belisarius,however, preferred the Latin way, which, at a di­stance from the sea and the marshes, skirted in aspace of one hundred and twenty miles along the footBelisarius of the mountains. His enemies had disappeared:Rome, when he made his entrance through the AsinarianDe? io36' Sa'e,tne garris<>n departed without molestation alongthe Flaminian way; and the city, after sixty years'servitude, was delivered from the yoke of the Bar­barians. Leuderis alone, from a motive of pride ordiscontent, refused to accompany the fugitives; andthe Gothic chief, himself a trophy of the victory,was sent with the keys of Rome to the throne of theemperor Justinian.siege of The first days, which coincided with the old Sa-
the Goths, turnalia, were devoted to mutual congratulation andMarch? ' *ne public joy; and the Catholics prepared to cele­brate, without a rival, the approaching festival of thenativity of Christ. In the familiar conversation ofa hero, the Romans acquired some notion of the vir­tues which history ascribed to their ancestors; theywere edified by the apparent respect of Belisarius forthe successor of St. Peter, and his rigid discipline







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


XXXV.


The Scla-vonians.


chap. since the Lombards, who sent into the field severalmyriads of soldiers, still claimed, as the weaker side,the protection of the Romans. Their spirit wasintrepid; yet such is the uncertainty of courage,that the two armies were suddenly struck with apanic; they fled from each other, and the rival kingsremained with their guards in the midst of an emptyplain. A short truce was obtained; but their mu­tual resentment again kindled; and the remembranceof their shame rendered the next encounter moredesperate and bloody. Forty thousand of the Bar­barians perished in the decisive battle, which brokethe power of the Gepidae, transferred the fears andwishes of Justinian, and first displayed the characterof Alboin, the youthful prince of the Lombards, andthe future conqueror of Italy *.
The wild people who dwelt or wandered in theplains of Russia, Lithuania, and Poland, might bereduced, in the age of Justinian, under the two greatfamilies of the Bulgarians and the Sclavonians.According to the Greek writers, the former, whotouched the Euxine and the lake Maeotis, derivedfrom the Huns their name or descent; and it isneedless to renew the simple and well-known pictureof Tartar manners. They were bold and dexterousarchers, who drank the milk and feasted on the fleshof their fleet and indefatigable horses; whose flocksand herds followed, or rather guided, the motions oftheir roving camps; to whose inroads no country wasremote or impervious, and who were practised inflight, though incapable of fear. The nation wasdivided into two powerful and hostile tribes, who pur­sued each other with fraternal hatred. They eagerly


* I have used, without undertaking to reconcile, the facts in Procopius (Goth.1. ii. c . 14. 1. iii. c . 33, 34. 1. iv. c. 18. 25), Paul Diaconus (de Gestis Lango-bard. 1. i. c. 1—23. in Muratori, Script. Kerum Italicarum, tom. i. p. 405—419),and Jornandes (de Success. Regnorum, p. 242). The patient reader may drawsome light from Mascou (Hist, of the Germans, and Annotat. xxiii.) and de Buat(Hist, des Peuplcs, &c. tom. ix. x. xi.).







OCR Output








486 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. embassies. It might legally be questioned how far aXL1, Saxon was entitled to the privileges of the Frenchnation: but every scruple was silenced by the fameand piety of a hero who had restored the empire ofthe West. After the death of her father-in-law andhusband, Theophano governed Rome, Italy, and Ger­many, during the minority of her son, the thirdOtho; and the Latins have praised the virtues of anempress, who sacrificed to a superior duty the re­membrance of her country. In the nuptials of hersister Anne, every prejudice was lost, and every con­sideration of dignity was superseded, by the strongerWoiodomir argument of necessity and fear. A Pagan of thea. d!^88. North, Wolodomir, great prince of Russia, aspiredto a daughter of the Roman people; and his claimwas enforced by the threats of war, the promise ofconversion, and the offer of a powerful succour againsta domestic rebel. A victim of her religion and coun­try, the Grecian princess was torn from the palace ofher fathers, and condemned to a savage reign and ahopeless exile on the banks of the Borysthenes, or inthe neighbourhood of the Polar circle. Yet the mar­riage of Anne was fortunate and fruitful: the daugh­ter of her grandson Jeroslaus was recommended by herImperial descent; and the king of France, Henry I.,sought a wife on the last borders of Europe andChristendom.Despotic In the Byzantine palace the emperor was the first
power* slave of the ceremonies which he imposed, of the rigidforms which regulated each word and gesture, besiegedhim in the palace, and violated the leisure of his ruralsolitude. But the lives and fortunes of millions hungon his arbitrary will, and the firmest minds, superior tothe allurements of pomp and luxury, may be seducedby the more active pleasure of commanding theirequals. The legislative and executive powers were cen­tred in the person of the monarch, and the last re­







OCR Output








London:
Printed by A. & It. Spottiswoude,
New- Street Square.


» •







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 817


the insolence of the Barbarians, and the servile temper chap.of the tributary Greeks. Lamenting the barren su- XXXIX-perfluity of materials, I have studied to compress thenarrative of these uninteresting transactions: butthe just Nushirvan is still applauded as the model oforiental kings, and the ambition of his grandsonChosroes prepared the revolution of the East, whichwas speedily accomplished by the arms and the reli­gion of the successors of Mahomet.
In the useless altercations, that precede and justify Conquest ofthe quarrels of princes, the Greeks and the Barba- NudSvan,rians accused each other of violating the peace which &jD-57°'had been concluded between the two empires aboutfour years before the death of Justinian. The sove­reign of Persia and India aspired to reduce underhis obedience the province of Yemen or ArabiaFelix; the distant land of myrrh and frankincense,which had escaped, rather than opposed, the con­querors of the East. After the defeat of Abrahahunder the walls of Mecca, the discord of his sons andbrothers gave an easy entrance to the Persians: theychased the strangers of Abyssinia beyond the RedSea; and a native prince of the ancient Homeriteswas restored to the throne as the vassal or viceroy ofthe great Nushirvan *. But the nephew of Justiniandeclared his resolution to avenge the injuries of hisChristian ally the prince of Abyssinia, as they sug­gested a decent pretence to discontinue the annualtribute, which was poorly disguised by the name ofpension. The churches of Persarmenia were op­pressed by the intolerant spirit of the Magi; theysecretly invoked the protector of the Christians, andafter the murder of their satraps, the rebels were
• D'Herbelot, Biblioth. Orient, p. 477- Pocock, Specimen Hist. Arabum,p. 64, 65. Father Pagi (Critica, tom. ii. p. 646) has proved that after tenyears' peace, the Persian war, which continued twenty years, was renewedA. D. 571. Mahomet was born-A. D. 569, in the year of the elephant, or thedefeat of Abrahah (Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet, tom. i. p. 89, 90. 98); and thisaccount allows two years for the conquest of Yemen.







OCR Output








482 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. and silken hangings, were displayed from the windows
!_ and balconies, and a severe discipline restrained and
silenced the tumult of the populace. The march wasopened by the military officers at the head of theirtroops: they were followed in long order by the ma­gistrates and ministers of the civil government: theperson of the emperor was guarded by his eunuchsand domestics, and at the church-door he was solemnlyreceived by the patriarch and his clergy. The taskof applause was not abandoned to the rude and spon­taneous voices of the crowd. The most convenientstations were occupied by the bands of the blue andgreen factions of the circus; and their furious conflicts,which had shaken the capital, were insensibly sunkto an emulation of servitude. From either side theyechoed in responsive melody the praises of the em­peror; their poets and musicians directed the choir,and long life and victory were the burden of everysong. The same acclamations were performed at theaudience, the banquet, and the church; and as anevidence of boundless sway, they were repeated inthe Latin, Gothic, Persian, French, and even Englishlanguage, by the mercenaries who sustained the realor fictitious character of those nations. By the penof Constantine Porphyrogenitus, this science of formand flattery has been reduced into a pompous andtrifling volume, which the vanity of succeeding timesmight enrich with an ample supplement. Yet thecalmer reflection of a prince would surely suggest,that the same acclamations were applied to everycharacter and every reign: and if he had risen froma private rank, he might remember, that his ownvoice had been the loudest and most eager in applause,at the very moment when he envied the fortune, orconspired against the life, of his predecessor *.
• For all these ceremonies, see the professed work of Constantine Porphyrogeni­tus, with the notes, or rather dissertations, of his German editors, Leich andReiske.







OCR Output








848 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. to their entreaties. His coronation was accompaniedxxxix. foy t|la(. of his wife EudoXia; and their posterity, till
Reign of the fourth generation, continued to reign over thea!d!cio, empire of the East. The voyage of Heraclius hadAC'b5642 been easy and prosperous; the tedious march of Ni-Feb. 11. cetas was not accomplished before the decision ofthe contest: but he submitted without a murmur tothe fortune of his friend, and his laudable intentionswere rewarded with an equestrian statue, and adaughter of the emperor. It was more difficult totrust the fidelity of Crispus, whose recent serviceswere recompensed by the command of the Cappa-docian army. His arrogance soon provoked, andseemed to excuse, the ingratitude of his new sove­reign.- In the presence of the senate, the son-in-lawof Phocas was condemned to embrace the monasticlife; and the sentence was justified by the weightyobservation of Heraclius, that the man who hadbetrayed his father could never be faithful to hisfriend.chosroes Even after his death the republic was afflicted by
invades
the Roman the crimes of Phocas, which armed with a pious causea?d?603 tne most formidable of her enemies. According to&c- the friendly and equal forms of the Byzantine and
Persian courts, he announced his exaltation to thethrone; and his ambassador Lilius, who had pre­sented him with the heads of Maurice and his sons,was the best qualified to describe the circumstancesof the tragic scene*. However it might be var­nished by fiction or sophistry, Chosroes turned withhorror from the assassin, imprisoned the pretendedenvoy, disclaimed the usurper, and declared himselfthe avenger of his father and benefactor. The sen­timents of grief and resentment which humanity
• Theophylact, 1. viii. c. 15. The life of Maurice was composed about theyear 628 (1. viii. c. 13) by Theophylact Simocatta, ex-prefect, a native ofEgypt.







OCR Output








446 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. Christians were sheltered in a friendly harbour, whileXL- the Africans were scattered and dashed in piecesamong the rocks and islands of a hostile shore.Those who escaped from shipwreck and hungerneither found nor deserved mercy, at the hands oftheir implacable pursuers. The sword and the gibbetreduced the dangerous multitude of captives, and theremainder were more usefully employed to restorethe sacred edifices which they had attempted to sub­vert. The pontiff, at the head of the citizens andallies, paid his grateful devotion at the shrines of theapostles; and, among the spoils of this naval victory,thirteen Arabian bows of pure and massy silver weresuspended round the altar of St. Peter. The reign ofLeo the Fourth was employed in the defence and orna­ment of the Roman state. The churches were renewedand embellished: near four thousand pounds of silverwere consecrated to repair the losses of St. Peter;and his sanctuary was decorated with a plate of goldthe weight of two hundred and sixteen pounds, em­bossed with the portraits of the pope and emperor,and encircled with a string of pearls. Yet this vainmagnificence reflects less glory on the character ofLeo than the paternal care with which he rebuilt thewalls of Horta and Ameria; and transported thewandering inhabitants of Centumcellae to his newfoundation of Leopolis, twelve miles from the sea­shore. By his liberality, a colony of Corsicans, withtheir wives and children, was planted in the stationof Porto, at the mouth of the Tyber: the fallingcity was restored for their use; the fields and vine­yards were divided among the new settlers; their firstefforts were assisted by a gift of horses and cattle;and the hardy exiles, who breathed revenge againstthe Saracens, swore to live and die under the standardof St. Peter. The nations of the West and North,who visited the threshold of the apostles, had gra­







OCR Output








188 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. favour, as a strange example of the vicissitudes ofXXXVL fortune*.
Death and If the emperor could rejoice in the death of Beli-justinian, sarius, he enjoyed the base satisfaction only eightNov?'i465' months, the last period of a reign of thirty-eight,and a life of eighty-three years. It would be difficultto trace the character of a prince who is not the mostconspicuous object of his own times: but the con­fessions of an enemy may be received as the safestevidence of his virtues. The resemblance of Jus­tinian to the bust of Domitian is maliciously urged;with the acknowledgment, however, of a well-pro­portioned figure, a ruddy complexion, and a pleasingcountenance. The emperor was easy of access, pa­tient of hearing, courteous and affable in discourse,and a master of the angry passions, which rage withsuch destructive violence in the breast of a despot.Procopius praises his temper to reproach him withcalm and deliberate cruelty; but in the conspiracieswhich attacked his authority and person, a more can­did judge will approve the justice or admire theclemency of Justinian. He excelled in the privatevirtues of chastity and temperance. His repasts wereshort and frugal: on solemn fasts, he contented him­self with water and vegetables; and such was his


blindness and beggary of Belisarius in ten vulgar or political verses (Chiliad iii.No. 88. 339—348. in Corp. Poet. Grac . tom. ii. p. 311):
Ov TUyrl uik iSo^afflt, atfCT^Xoi -8* 6 <f 0ovOf.
This moral or romantic tale was imported into Italy with the language and manu­scripts of Greece; repeated before the end of the xvth century by Crinitus, Pon-tanus, and Volaterranus; attacked by Alciat, for the honour of the law; anddefended by Baronius (A. D. 561, No. 2, &&), for the honour of the church.Yet Tzetzes himself had read in other chronicles, that Belisarius did not lose hissight, and that he recovered his fame and fortunes.
* The statue in the villa Borghese at Rome, in a sitting posture, with an openhand, which is vulgarly given to Belisarius, may be ascribed with more dignity toAugustus in the act of propitiating Nemesis (Winkelman, Hist. de l'Art, tom. iii.p. 206). Ex nocturno visu etiam stipem, quotannis, die certo, emendicabat apopulo, cavam manum asses porrigentibus pra;bens (Sueton. in August. c . 91,with an excellent note of Casaubon).







OCR Output








146 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. "chastisement of perjury and the vindication of theirXXXV1, "own honour." Their honour was vindicated in thefield of Tebeste, by the death of Solomon, and thetotal loss of his army. The arrival of fresh troopsand more skilful commanders soon checked the in­solence of the Moors; seventeen of their princeswere slain in the same battle; and the doubtful andtransient submission of their tribes was celebratedwith lavish applause by the people of Constantinople.Successive inroads had reduced the province of Africato one third of the measure of Italy; yet the Romanemperors continued to reign above a century overCarthage, and the fruitful coast of the Mediterranean.But the victories and the losses of Justinian werealike pernicious to mankind; and such was the de­solation of Africa, that in many parts a strangermight wander whole days without meeting the faceeither of a friend or an enemy. The nation of theVandals had disappeared; they once amounted to ahundred and sixty thousand warriors, without in­cluding the children, the women, or the slaves.Their numbers were infinitely surpassed by the num­ber of the Moorish families extirpated in a relentlesswar; and the same destruction was retaliated on theRomans and their allies, who perished by the cli­mate, their mutual quarrels, and the rage of theBarbarians. When Procopius first landed, he ad­mired the populousness of the cities and country,strenuously exercised in the labours of commerceand agriculture. In less than twenty years, thatbusy scene was converted into a silent solitude; thewealthy citizens escaped to Sicily and Constantinople;and the secret historian has confidently affirmed, thatfive millions of Africans were consumed by the warsand government of the emperor Justinian *.


* Procopius, Anecdot. c. 18. The series of the African history attests thismelancholy truth.







OCR Output








126 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. both of mind and hand; and although the want ofxxxv- union and discipline exposes them to their morepowerful neighbours, a bold and intrepid spirit hasanimated the Colchians of every age. In the hostof Xerxes, they served on foot; and their arms were,a dagger or a javelin, a wooden casque, and a bucklerof raw hides. But in their own country the use ofcavalry has more generally prevailed: the meanestof the peasants disdain to walk; the martial noblesare possessed, perhaps, of two hundred horses; andabove five thousand are numbered in the train of theprince of Mingrelia. The Colchian government hasbeen always a pure and hereditary kingdom; andthe authority of the sovereign is only restrained bythe turbulence of his subjects. Whenever they wereobedient, he could lead a numerous army into thefield; but some faith is requisite to believe, that thesingle tribe of the Suanians was composed of two hun­dred thousand soldiers, or that the population of Min­grelia now amounts to four millions of inhabitants *.Revolutions It was the boast of the Colchians, that their an­cestors had checked the victories of Sesostris; andthe defeat of the Egyptian is less incredible than hissuccessful progress as far as the foot of mount Cau­casus. They sunk, without any memorable effort,under the arms of Cyrus; followed in distant warsthe standard of the great king, and presented himevery fifth year with one hundred boys and as manyunder the virgins, the fairest produce of the land-)-. Yet hebefore"8' accepted this gift like the gold and ebony of India,christ 500' the frankincense of the Arabs, or the negroes andivory of ^Ethiopia: the Colchians were not subjectto the dominion of a satrap, and they continued toenjoy the name as well as substance of national in­dependence. After the fall of the Persian empire,


* Strabo, 1. xi. p. 705- Lamberti, Relation de la Mingrelie.+ Herodot . 1. iii. c. 97- See, in 1. vii. c- 79, their arms and service in the ex­pedition of Xerxes against Greece.







OCR Output








248 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. mon name and domestic rites; the various cognomens
XXXVII
1 or surnames of Scipio, or Marcellus, distinguished
from each other the subordinate branches or familiesof the Cornelian or Claudian race: the default of theagnats, of the same surname, was supplied by the largerdenomination of gentiles; and the vigilance of thelaws maintained, in the same name, the perpetualdescent of religion and property. A similar prin­ciple dictated the Voconian law*, which abolished theright of female inheritance. As long as virgins weregiven or sold in marriage, the adoption of the wifeextinguished the hopes of the daughter. But theequal succession of independent matrons supportedtheir pride and luxury, and might transport into aforeign house the riches of their fathers. While themaxims of Cato were revered, they tended to per­petuate in each family a just and virtuous mediocrity:till female blandishments insensibly triumphed; andevery salutary restraint was lost in the dissolute great­ness of the republic. The rigour of the decemvirswas tempered by the equity of the praetors. Theiredicts restored emancipated and posthumous childrento the rights of nature; and upon the failure of theagnats, they preferred the blood of the cognats to thename of the gentiles, whose title and character wereinsensibly covered with oblivion. The reciprocal in­heritance of mothers and sons was established in theTertullian and Orphitian decrees by the humanity ofthe senate. A new and more impartial order wasintroduced by the novels of Justinian, who affectedto revive the jurisprudence of the twelve tables.The lines of masculine and female kindred were con­founded: the descending, ascending, and collateralseries, was accurately defined; and each degree,according to the proximity of blood and affection,


* Enacted in the year of Rome, 584.







OCR Output








462 THE DECLINE AND FALL


XLI.


chap. But the Taclics of Leo and Constantine are mingledwith the baser alloy of the age in which they lived.It was destitute- of original genius; they implicitlytranscribe the rules and maxims which had been con­firmed by victories. It was unskilled in the proprietyof style and method; they blindly confound themost distant and discordant institutions, the phalanxof Sparta and that of Macedon, the legions of Catoand Trajan, of Augustus and Theodosius. Even theuse, or at least the importance, of these militaryj-udi-ments may be fairly questioned :"their general theoryis dictated by reason; but the'merit, as well asdifficulty, consists in the application. The disciplineof a soldier is formed by exercise rather than bystudy: the talents of a commander are appropriatedto those calm though rapid minds, which nature pro­duces to decide the fate of armies and nations: theformer is the habit of a life, the latter the glance of amoment; and the battles won by lessons of tacticsmay be numbered with the epic poems created fromthe rules of criticism. The book of ceremonies is arecital, tedious yet imperfect, of the despicable pa­geantry which had infected the church and state sincethe gradual decay of the purity of the one and thepower of the other. A review of the themes or pro­vinces might promise such authentic and useful in­formation, as the curiosity of government only canobtain, instead of traditionary fables on the origin ofthe cities, and malicious epigrams on the vices of theirinhabitants. Such information the historian wouldhave been pleased to record; nor should his silencebe condemned if the most interesting objects, thepopulation of the capital and provinces, the amountof the taxes and revenues, the numbers of subjectsand strangers who served under the Imperial standard,have been unnoticed by Leo the philosopher and hisson Constantine. His treatise of the public admini­







OCR Output








302 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. soldier of his king and his duke; and the civil as-xxxviii. semblies of the nation displayed the banners, andassumed the appellation, of a regular army. Of thisarmy, the pay and the rewards were drawn from theconquered provinces; and the distribution, which■ was not effected till after the death of Alboin, isdisgraced by the foul marks of injustice and rapine.Many of the most wealthy Italians were slain orbanished; the remainder were divided among thestrangers; and a tributary obligation was imposed(under the name of hospitality), of paying to theLombards a third part of the fruits of the earth.Within less than seventy years, this artificial systemwas abolished by a more simple and solid tenure.Either the Roman landlord was expelled by his strongand insolent guest; or the annual payment, a thirdof the produce, was exchanged, by a more equitabletransaction, for an adequate proportion of landedproperty. Under these foreign masters, the businessof agriculture, in the cultivation of corn, vines, andolives, was exercised with degenerate skill and in­dustry by the labour of the slaves and natives. Butthe occupations of a pastoral life were more pleasingto the idleness of the Barbarians. In the rich mea­dows of Venetia, they restored and improved thebreed of horses for which that province had once beenillustrious; and the Italians beheld with astonishmenta foreign race of oxen or buffaloes. The depopulationof Lombardy, and the increase of forests, afforded anample range for the pleasures of the chase*. Thatmarvellous art which teaches the birds of the air toacknowledge the voice and execute the commandsof their master had been unknown to the ingenuityof the Greeks and Romans. Scandinavia and Scythiaproduce the boldest and most tractable falcons; theywere tamed and educated by the roving inhabitants,
• Consult the xxist Dissertation of Muratori,







OCR Output








96 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. panions, laden with the spoils of Asia. Anotherxxxv- party, which seemed a multitude in the eyes of theRomans, penetrated, without opposition, from thestraits of Thermopylae to the isthmus of Corinth;and the last ruin of Greece has appeared an objecttoo minute for the attention of history. The workswhich the emperor raised for the protection, but atthe expense, of his subjects, served only to disclosethe weakness of some neglected part; and the walls,which by flattery had been deemed impregnable, wereeither deserted by the garrison, or scaled by the Bar­barians. Three thpusand Sclavonians, who insolentlydivided themselves into two bands, • discovered theweakness and misery of a triumphant reign. Theypassed the Danube and the Hebrus, vanquished theRoman generals who dared to oppose their progress,and plundered, with impunity, the cities of Illyricumand Thrace, each of which had arms and numbersto overwhelm their contemptible assailants. What­ever praise the boldness of the Sclavonians may de­serve, it is sullied by the wanton and deliberate crueltywhich they are accused of exercising on their pri­soners. Without distinction of rank, or age, or sex,the captives were impaled or flayed alive, or sus­pended between four posts, and beaten with clubstill they expired, or inclosed in some spacious build­ing, and left to perish in the flames with the spoiland cattle which might impede the march of thesesavage victors. Perhaps a more impartial narrativewould reduce the number, and qualify the nature, ofthese horrid acts; and they might sometimes be ex­cused by the cruel laws of retaliation. In the siegeof Topirus, whose obstinate defence had enraged theSclavonians, they massacred fifteen thousand males;but they spared the women and children; the mostvaluable captives were always reserved for labour orransom; the servitude was not rigorous, and the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 235


vice of antiquity: it was sometimes prescribed, often chap.
• • VYYVIl
permitted, almost always practised with impunity, by *the nations who never entertained the Roman ideasof paternal power; and the dramatic poets, whoappeal to the human heart, represent with indiffer­ence a popular custom which was palliated by themotives of economy and compassion. If the fathercould subdue his own feelings, he might escape,though not the censure, at least the chastisement ofthe laws; and the Roman empire was stained withthe blood of infants, till such murders were included,by Valentinian and his colleagues, in the letter andspirit of the Cornelian law. The lessons of juris­prudence and Christianity had been insufficient toeradicate this inhuman practice, till their gentle in­fluence was fortified by the terrors of capital punish­ment.
Experience has proved, that savages are the tyrants Husbandsof the female sex, and that the condition of womenand w,ves'is usually softened by the refinements of social life.In the hope of a robust progeny, Lycurgus had de­layed the season of marriage; it was fixed by Numaat the tender age of twelve years, that the Romanhusband might educate to his will a pure and obe­dient virgin *. According to the custom of antiquity, The mK-he bought his bride of her parents, and she fulfilled £Sj£rfthe coemption, by purchasing, with three pieces ofcopper, a just introduction to his house and house­hold deities. A sacrifice of fruits was offered by thepontiffs in the presence of ten witnesses; the con­tracting parties were seated on the same sheepskin;they tasted a salt cake of jar or rice; and this con-farreadon, which denoted the ancient food of Italy,served as an emblem of their mystic union of mindand body. But this union on the side of the woman


* Dionyt. Hid. 1. ii. p. 92, 93. Plutarch, in Numa, p. 140, 141. To ao/yua


/







OCR Output








OV THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 243


failure was supplied by the nomination of the praetor chap.of the city, or the president of the province. Butthe person whom they named to this public officemight be legally excused by insanity or blindness, byignorance or inability, by previous enmity or adverseinterest, by the number of children or guardianshipswith which he was already burthened, and by theimmunities which were granted to the useful laboursof magistrates, lawyers, physicians, and professors.Till the infant could speak and think, he was re­presented by the tutor, whose authority was finallydetermined by the age of puberty. Without his con­sent, no act of the pupil could bind himself to hisown prejudice, though it might oblige others for hispersonal benefit. It is needless to observe, that thetutor often gave security, and always rendered anaccount, and that the want of diligence or integrityexposed him to a civil and almost criminal action forthe violation of his sacred trust. The age of pubertyhad been rashly fixed by the civilians at fourteen;but as the faculties of the mind ripen more slowlythan those of the body, a curator was interposed toguard the fortunes of the Roman youth from his owninexperience and headstrong passions. Such a trusteehad been first instituted by the praetor, to save afamily from the blind havoc of a prodigal or madman:and the minor was compelled by the laws to solicitthe same protection, to give validity to his acts tillhe accomplished the full period of twenty-five years.Women were condemned to the perpetual tutelage ofparents, husbands, or guardians; a sex created toplease and obey was never supposed to have attainedthe age of reason and experience. Such at least wasthe stern and haughty spirit of the ancient law, whichhad been insensibly mollified before the time of Jus­tinian. ■:


11 2







OCR Output








56 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. times represented, in a vacant post, the presence ofXXXIv- the troops which had been drawn away to more es­sential duties. But his just confidence was placed inthe veterans who had fought under his banner in thePersian and African wars; and although that gallantband was reduced to five thousand men, he under­took, with such contemptible numbers, to defend acircle of twelve miles, against an army of one hun­dred and fifty thousand Barbarians. In the walls ofRome, which Belisarius constructed or restored, thematerials of ancient architecture maybe discerned*;and the whole fortification was completed, except ina chasm still extant between the Pincian and Fla-minian gates, which the prejudices of the Goths andRomans left under the guard of St. Peter the apostle t.The battlements or bastions were shaped in sharpangles; a ditch, broad and deep, protected the footof the rampart; and the arches on the rampart wereassisted by military engines; the balista, a powerfulcross-bow, which darted short but massy arrows; theonagri, or wild asses, which, on the principle of asling, threw stones and bullets of an enormous size.A chain was drawn across the Tyber; the arches ofthe aqueducts were made impervious, and the moleor sepulchre of Hadrian t was converted, for the firsttime, to the uses of a citadel. That venerable struc­ture, which contained the ashes of the Antonines,was a circular turret rising from a quadrangular basis:it was covered with the white marble of Paros, anddecorated by the statues of gods and heroes; and thelover of the arts must read with a sigh, that the works


* The accurate eye of Nardini (Roma Antica, 1. i. c. viii. p. 31) coulddistinguish the tumultuaric opeia di Belisario.
-f The fissure and leaning in the upper part of the wall, which Procopius ob­served (Goth. 1. i. c. 13.), is visible to the present hour. (Donat. Roma Vetus,1. i. c. 17- p- 53, 54).
% The description of this mausoleum, or mole, in Procopius (I. i . c . 25.), isthe first and best. The height above the walls ayjhi i; K/Ja [ii\m. On Nolli'sgreat plan, the aides measure 260 English feet.







OCR Output








124 THE DECLINE AND TALL


chap. which manufactured linen, built navies, and inventedXv- geographical maps. The ingenuity of the modernshas peopled, with flourishing cities and nations, theisthmus between the Euxine and the Caspian *; anda lively writer, observing the resemblance of climate,and, in his apprehension, of trade, has not hesitatedto pronounce Colchos the Holland of antiquity f.Ae"If But the riches of Colchos shine only through thedarkness of conjecture or tradition; and its genuinehistory presents an uniform scene of rudeness andpoverty. If one hundred and thirty languages werespoken in the market of Dioscurias, they were theimperfect idioms of so many savage tribes or families,sequestered from each other in the valleys of MountCaucasus; and their separation, which diminishedthe importance, must have multiplied the number,of their rustic capitals. In the present state of Min-grelia, a village is an assemblage of huts within awooden fence; the fortresses are seated in the depthsof forests; the princely town of Cyta, or Cotatis,consists of two hundred houses, and a stone edificeappertains only to the magnificence of kings. Twelveships from Constantinople, and about sixty barks,laden with the fruits of industry, annually cast an­chor on the coast; and the list of Colchian exportsis much increased, since the natives had only slavesand hides to offer in exchange for the corn and saltwhich they purchased from the subjects of Justinian.Not a vestige can be found of the art, the knowledge,or the navigation, of the ancient Colchians: fewGreeks desired or dared to pursue the footsteps ofthe Argonauts; and even the marks of an Egyptiancolony are lost on a nearer approach. The rite ofcircumcision is practised only by the Mahometans of
• Montesquieu, Esprit des Loix, 1. xxi. c . 6. L'Isthme .... couvert de villesct nations qui ne font plus.
■f Bougainville, Memoires de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xxvi. p. 33, onthe African voyage of Hanno and the commerce of antiquity.







OCR Output








264 THE DECLINE AND FALL


CHAP.XXXVII.


Unnaturalvice.


agree, they corroborate each other; but as often asthey differ, a prudent legislator appreciates the guiltand punishment according to the measure of socialinjury. On this principle, the most daring attack onthe life and property of a private citizen is judgedless atrocious than the crime of treason or rebellion,which invades the majesty of the republic: the ob­sequious civilians unanimously pronounced, that therepublic is contained in the person of its chief: andthe edge of the Julian law was sharpened by the in­cessant diligence of the emperors. The licentiouscommerce of the sexes may be tolerated as an impulseof nature, or forbidden as a source of disorder andcorruption: but the fame, the fortunes, the family ofthe husband, are seriously injured by the adultery ofthe wife. The wisdom of Augustus, after curbingthe freedom of revenge, applied to this domesticoffence the animadversion of the laws: and theguilty parties, after the payment of heavy forfeituresand fines, were condemned to long or perpetual exilein two separate islands*. Religion pronounces anequal censure against the infidelity of the husband:but as it is not accompanied by the same civil effects,the wife was never permitted to vindicate herwrongst;and the distinction of simple or double adultery, sofamiliar and so important in the canon law, is un­known to the jurisprudence of the Code and Pan­dects. I touch with reluctance, and despatch withimpatience, a more odious vice, of which modestyrejects the name, and nature abominates the idea.The primitive Romans were infected by the example


• Till the publication of the Julius Paulus of Schulting (I. ii. tit. xxvi.p. 317—323), it was affirmed and believed, that the Julian laws punished adul­tery with death; and the mistake arose from the fraud or error of Tribonian.Yet Lipsius had suspected the truth from the narratives of Tacitus (A mini. ii. 50.iii. 24. iv. 42), and even from the practice of Augustus, who distinguished thetreasonable frailties of his female kindred.
•f-In cases of adultery, Severus confined to the husband the right of public ac-lcusation (Cod. Justinian. 1. ix. tit . ix. leg. 1).







OCR Output








 


600010679T


 


16.3U


•I:


\


 







OCR Output








CONTENTS.


A.D.


Fathers and children
Limitations of the paternal authority
Husbands and wives
The religious rites of marriage
Freedom of the matrimonial contract
Liberty and abuse of divorce .
Limitations of the liberty of divorce
Incest, concubines, and bastards
Guardians and wards
II. Op things. Right of property
Of inheritance and succession
Civil degrees of kindred
Introduction and liberty of testaments
Legacies
Codicils and trusts
III. Of actions
Promises
Benefits
Interest of money
Injuries
IV. Of crimes and punishments
Severity of the twelve tables
Abolition or oblivion of penal laws
Revival of capital punishments
Measure of guilt
Unnatural vice
Rigour of the Christian emperors
Judgments of the people
Select judges
Assessors
Voluntary exile and death .
Abuses of civil jurisprudence


Page
231
233
235
ib.
236
237
239
240
242
244
246
247
249
250
251
252
ib.
253
255
256
257
258
260
262
263
264
265
266
268
269
ib.
270


CHAP. XXXVIII.


Reign of the younger Justin.—Embassy of the Avars.—Their Set­
tlement on the Danube—Conquest of Italy by the Lombards.
Adoption and Reign of Tiberius—Of Maurice.—State of Italy
under the Lombards and the Exarchs.—Of Ravenna.—Distress
of Rome.—Character and Pontificate of Gregory the First.


A. D.
565 Death of Justinian .
565—574, Reign of Justin II. or the Younger


Page
273
274







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 445


of Gayeta had been raised, and that a part of the chap.enemy, with their sacrilegious plunder, had perished'
in the waves.
But the storm which had been delayed soon burst victory andupon them with redoubled violence. The Aglabite, YlSiv.who reigned in Africa, had inherited from his father A- D- 849-a treasure and an army: a fleet of Arabs and Moors,after a short refreshment in the harbours of Sardinia,cast anchor before the mouth of the Tyber, sixteenmiles from the city; and their discipline and numbersappeared to threaten, not a transient inroad, but a seri­ous design of conquest and dominion. But the vigi­lance of Leo had formed an alliance with the vassalsof the Greek empire, the free and maritime states ofGayeta, Naples, and Amalfi; and, in the hour of dan­ger, their galleys appeared in the port of Ostia, underthe command of Caesarius,- the son of the Neapolitanduke, a noble and valiant youth, who had alreadyvanquished the fleets of the Saracens. With his prin­cipal companions, Caesarius was invited to the Lateranpalace, and the dexterous pontiff affected to inquiretheir errand, and to accept with joy and surprisetheir providential succour. The city bands, in arms,attended their father to Ostia, where he reviewedand blessed his generous deliverers. They kissed hisfeet, received the communion with martial devotion,and listened to the prayer of Leo, that the same Godwho had supported St. Peter and St. Paul on thewaves of the sea would strengthen the hands of hischampions against the adversaries of his holy name.After a similar prayer, and with equal resolution, theMoslems advanced to the attack of the Christiangalleys, which preserved their advantageous stationalong the coast. The victory inclined to the side ofthe allies ; when it was less gloriously decided in theirfavour by a sudden tempest, which confounded theskill and courage of the stoutest mariners. The







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 461


prudence, were gradually framed in the three first chap.reigns of that prosperous dynasty. The art of agri- XLLculture had amused the leisure, and exercised thepens, of the best and wisest of the ancients; and theirchosen precepts are comprised in the twenty books ofthe Geoponics * of Constantine. At his command,the historical examples of vice and virtue were me­thodised in fifty-three books t, and every citizen mightapply to his contemporaries or himself the lesson orthe warning of past times. From the august charac­ter of a legislator, the sovereign of the East descends'to the more humble office of a teacher and a scribe;and if his successors and subjects were regardless ofhis paternal cares, tee may inherit and enjoy the.ever­lasting legacy.
A closer survey will indeed reduce the value of the Their jm-gift, and the gratitude of posterity: in the possession peof these Imperial treasures we may still implore ourpoverty and ignorance; and the fading glories oftheir authors will be obliterated by indifference orcontempt. The Basilics will sink to a broken copy,a partial and mutilated version in the Greek lan­guage, of the laws of Justinian; but the sense of theold civilians is often superseded by the influence ofbigotry. The royal authors of the Geoponics weremore seriously employed in expounding the preceptsof the destroying art, which has been taught, sincethe days of Xenophon, as the art of heroes and kings.


Civile di Napoli, tom. i. p. 450—458), as historical civilians, may be usefullyconsulted. Forty-one hooks of this Greek code have been published, with a Latinversion, by Charles Annibal Fabrottus (Paris, 1647), in seven tomes in folio ; fourother books have since been discovered, and are inserted in Gerard Meerman'sNovus Thesaurus Juris Civ. et Canon, tom. v. Of the whole work, the sixtybooks, John Leunclavius has printed (Basil, 1575), an eclogue or synopsis. Thehundred and thirteen novels, or new laws, of Leo, may be found in the CorpusJuris Civilis.
• I have used the last and best edition of the Geoponics (by Nicolas Niclas,Leipsic, 1781, 2 vols, in octavo). I read in the preface*, that the same emperorrestored the long-forgotten systems of rhetoric and philosophy.
f Of these fifty three books, or titles, only two have been preserved and printed: deLegationibus (by Fulvius Ursinus, Antwerp, 1582, and Daniel Hseschelius, August.Vindel. 1603), and de Virtutibus etVitiis(by Henry Valesius, or de Valois,Paris, 1634).







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 849


would feel, and honour would dictate, promoted, on chav.
YYYIY
this occasion, the interest of the Persian king; and \
his interest was powerfully magnified by the nationaland religious prejudices of the Magi and satraps.In a strain of artful adulation, which assumed thelanguage of freedom, they presumed to censure theexcess of his gratitude and friendship for the Greeks;a nation with whom it was dangerous to concludeeither peace or alliance; whose superstition was de­void of truth and justice, and who must be incapableof any virtue, since they could perpetrate the mostatrocious of crimes, the impious murder of their sove­reign. For the crime of an ambitious centurion,the nation which he oppressed was chastised with thecalamities of war; and the same calamities, at theend of twenty years, were retaliated and redoubledon the heads of the Persians *. The general whohad restored Chosroes to the throne still commandedin the East y and the name of Narses was the for­midable sound with which the Assyrian motherswere accustomed to terrify their infants. It is notimprobable, that a native subject of Persia shouldencourage his master and his friend to deliver andpossess the provinces of Asia. It is still more pro­bable, that Chosroes should animate his troops bythe assurance that the sword which they dreaded themost would remain in its scabbard, or be drawn intheir favour. The hero could not depend on thefaith of a tyrant; and the tyrant was conscious howlittle he deserved the obedience of an hero: Narseswas removed from his military command; he reared


* We must now, for some ages, take our leave of contemporary historians, anddescend, if it be a descent, from the affectation of rhetoric to the rude simplicityof chronicles and abridgments. Those of Theophanes (Chronograph, p. 244—279) and Nicephorus (p. 3—16) supply a regular, but imperfect, series of thePersian war; and for any additional facts I quote my special authorities. Theo­phanes, a courtier who became a monk, was bom A. D. 748; Nicephorus, patri­arch of Constantinople, who died A. D. 829, was somewhat younger: Hankiusde Scriptoribus Byzantinis, p. 200—246,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 79


moment; that in the deepest distress, he was ani- chap.mated by real or apparent hope, but that he was xxxiv-modest and humble in the most prosperous fortune.By these virtues, he equalled or excelled the ancientmasters of the military art. Victory, by sea and land,attended his arms. He subdued Africa, Italy, andthe adjacent islands, led away captives the successorsofGenseric andTheodoric, filled Constantinople withthe spoils of their palaces, and in the space of six yearsrecovered half the provinces of the AVestern empire.In his fame and merit, in wealth and power, he re­mained, without a rival, the first of the Roman sub­jects: the voice of envy could only magnify his dan­gerous importance; and the emperor might applaudhis own discerning spirit which had discovered andraised the genius of Belisarius.
It was the custom of the Roman triumphs, that a secret hi-slave should be placed behind the chariot to remind wife An-the conqueror of the instability of fortune, and the in-tonma"firmities of human nature. Procopius, in his Anec­dotes, has assumed that servile and ungrateful office.The generous reader may cast away the libel, butthe evidence of facts will adhere to his memory; andhe will reluctantly confess, that the fame, and eventhe virtue of Belisarius, were polluted by the lustand cruelty of his wife; and that the hero deservedan appellation which may not drop from the pen ofthe decent historian. The mother of Antonina* wasa theatrical prostitute, and both her father and grand­father exercised at Thessalonica and Constantinoplethe vile, though lucrative, profession of charioteers.In the various situations of their fortune, she becamethe companion, the enemy,, the servant, and the fa-


* The diligence of Alemannus could add but little to the four first and mostcurious chapters of the Anecdotes. Of these strange Anecdotes, a part may betrue, because probable—and a part true, because improbable. Procopius musthave known the former, and the latter he could scarcely invent.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 321


and docility of Hormouz, who acknowledged himself chap.
more indebted to his preceptor than to his parent: £
but when age and labour had impaired the strengthand perhaps the faculties of this prudent counsellor,he retired from court, and abandoned the youthfulmonarch to his own passions and those of his favourites.By the fatal vicissitude of human affairs, the samescenes were renewed at Ctesiphon, which had beenexhibited in Rome after the death of Marcus An­toninus. The ministers of flattery and corruption,who had been banished by the father, were recalledand cherished by the son; the disgrace and exile ofthe friends of Nushirvan established their tyranny;and virtue was driven by degrees from the mind ofHormouz, from his palace, and from the governmentof the state. The faithful agents, the eyes and earsof the king, informed him of the progress of disorder,that the provincial governors flew to their prey withthe fierceness of lions and eagles, and that their ra­pine and injustice would teach the most loyal of hissubjects to abhor the name and authority of theirsovereign. The sincerity of this advice was punishedwith death, the murmurs of the cities were despised,their tumults were quelled by military execution;the intermediate powers between the throne and thepeople were abolished; and the childish vanity ofHormouz, who affected the daily use of the tiara,was fond of declaring, that he alone would be thejudge as well as the master of his kingdom. In everyword, and in every action, the son of Nushirvan de­generated from the virtues of his father. His avaricedefrauded the troops; his jealous caprice degradedthe satraps: the palace, the tribunals, the waters ofthe Tigris, were stained with the blood Of the in­nocent, and the tyrant exulted in the sufferings andexecution of thirteen thousand victims. As the excuseof his cruelty, he sometimes condescended to observe,
VOL.IV. y







OCR Output








242 THE DECLINE AND FALL


XXXVII.


chap. noble matron. In this connexion, the two Antonines,the best of princes and of men, enjoyed the comfortsof domestic love: the example was imitated by manycitizens impatient of celibacy, but regardful of theirfamilies. If at any time they desired to legitimatetheir natural children, the conversion was instantlyperformed by the celebration of their nuptials with apartner whose fruitfulness and fidelity they had al­ready tried. By this epithet of natural, the offspringof the concubine were distinguished from the spuriousbrood of adultery, prostitution, and incest, to whomJustinian reluctantly grants the necessary aliments oflife; and these natural children alone were capableof succeeding to a sixth part of the inheritance oftheir reputed father. According to the rigour oflaw, bastards were entitled only to the name andcondition of their mother, from whom they mightderive the character of a slave, a stranger, or a citizen.The outcasts of every family were adopted withoutreproach as the children of the state.
The relation of guardian and ward, or in Romanwords, of tutor and pupil, which covers so many titlesof the Institutes and Pandects*, is of a very simpleand uniform nature. The person and property of anorphan must always be trusted to the custody of somediscreet friend. If the deceased father had not sig­nified his choice, the agnats, or paternal kindred ofthe nearest degree, were compelled to act as thenatural guardians: the Athenians were apprehensiveof exposing the infant to the power of those mostinterested in his death; but an axiom of Romanjurisprudence has pronounced, that the charge oftutelage should constantly attend the emolument ofsuccession. If the choice of the father, and the lineof consanguinity, afforded no efficient guardian, the


* See the article of guardians and wards in the Institutes (1. i. tit. xiii—xxvL),the Pandects (1. xxvi. xxvii.), and the Code (1. v. tit. xxviii—lxx).


Guardiansand wards.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. S47


order has been variously established by convenience chap.or caprice, by the spirit of national institutions, or by XXXVILsome partial example, which was originally decidedby fraud or violence. The jurisprudence of the Ro­mans appears to have deviated from the equality ofnature much less than the Jewish, the Athenian*,or the English institutions. On the death of a citi­zen, all his descendants, unless they were alreadyfreed from his paternal power, were called to the in­heritance of his possessions. The insolent prerogativeof primogeniture was unknown; the two sexes wereplaced on a just level; all the sons and daughterswere entitled to an equal portion of the patrimonialestate: and if any of the sons had been interceptedby a premature death, his person was represented, andhis share was divided, by his surviving children. Onthe failure of the direct line, the right of successionmust diverge to the collateral branches. The de- Civil de­grees of kindred are numbered by the civilians, kindred.ascending from the last possessor to a common parent,and descending from the common parent to the nextheir: my father stands in the first degree, my brotherin the second, his children in the third, and the re­mainder of the series may be conceived by fancy, orpictured in a genealogical table. In this computation,a distinction was made, essential to the laws and eventhe constitution of Rome; the agnats, or personsconnected by a line of males, were called as they stoodin the nearest degree, to an equal partition; but afemale was incapable of transmitting any legal claims;and the cognats of every rank, without excepting thedear relation of a mother and a son, were disinheritedby the twelve tables, as strangers and aliens. Amongthe Romans, a gens or lineage was united by a com-


* At Athens the sons were equal, but the poor daughters were endowed at thediscretion of their brothers. See the x\<i?ixu pleadings of Isaeus (in the viithvolume of the Greek Orators), illustrated by the version and comment of SirWilliam Jones, a scholar, a lawyer, and a man of genius.


R 4







OCR Output








412 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. own ignorance; and that of the Byzantine guides, soXL|- prone to the marvellous, so careless, and in this in­stance so jealous of the truth. From their obscure andperhaps fallacious hints, it should seem that the prin­cipal ingredient of the Greek fire was naphtha, or li­quid bitumen ; a light, tenacious, and inflammable oil,which springs from the earth, and catches fire as soonas it comes,in contact with the air. The naphtha wasmingled, I know not by what methods, or in whatproportions, with sulphur and with the pitch that isextracted from evergreen firs *. From this mixture,which produced a thick smoke and loud explosion,proceeded a fierce and obstinate flame, which notonly rose in perpendicular ascent, but likewise burntwith equal vehemence in descent, or lateral progress:instead of being extinguished, it was nourished andquickened, by the element of water; and sand, urine,or vinegar, were the only remedies that could dampthe fury of this powerful agent, which was justly de­nominated by the Greeks the liquid, or the maritimefire. For the annoyance of the enemy it was employed with equal effect by sea and land, in battlesor in sieges. It was either poured from the rampartin large boilers, or launched in red hot balls of stoneand iron, or darted in arrows and javelins, twistedround with flax and tow which had deeply imbibedthe inflammable oil. Sometimes it was deposited infire-ships, the victims and instruments of a moreample revenge; and was most commonly blownthrough long tubes of copper, which were plantedon the prow of a galley, and fancifully shaped into


* AnnaComnena has partly drawn aside the curtain: Airo T»f miuxtit, x« «**«TUwv ToioiiTwy $e>%pwj atiQtxXwv ouvaytTttt Zaxpvoy axauttTW. TajrofxtTa 0«ioo TfilSoan''^ujSa^XeTctf elf auXiz-xouf xahapw* xat t/xipuaxTat tsrapa tou arat&vTOs Xa#pw"'a\»BX" nmi/.utm (Alexiad. lxiii. p. 383). Elsewhere (lxi. p. 336') she mention!the property of burning, xotrx to oyanc xai of' ixaripa. Leo, in. the xixth chapterof his Tactics (Opera Meursii, tom. vi. p. 843. edit. Lami. Florent. 1745), speaksof the new invention of vrup pura l8^ovt>j; xai xgffpou. These are genuine and i'«-pcrial testimonies.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 5


inclinations of his master. He confessed, that a chap.victory of such importance could not be too dearly'
purchased; but he represented in a grave discoursethe certain difficulties and the uncertain event. "You"undertake," said the prafect, " to besiege Carthage"by land, the distance is not less than one hundred"and forty days journey; on the sea, a whole year"must elapse before you can receive any intelligence"from your fleet. If Africa should be reduced, it"cannot be preserved without the additional conquest"of Sicily and Italy. Success will impose the obli-"gation of new labours; a single misfortune will"attract the Barbarians into the heart of your ex-"hausted empire." Justinian felt the weight of thissalutary advice; he was confounded by the unwontedfreedom of an obsequious servant; and the designof the war would perhaps have been relinquished,but he derived more rational hope from the revolt,which the adherents' of Hilderic or Athanasius hadalready excited on the borders of the Vandal mon­archy. Pudentius, an African subject, had privatelysignified his loyal intentions, and a small military aidrestored the province of Tripoli to the obedience ofthe Romans. The government of Sardinia had beenintrusted to Godas, a valiant Barbarian; he sus­pended the payment of tribute, disclaimed his alle­giance to the usurper, and gave audience to theemissaries of Justinian, who found him master ofthat fruitful island, at the head of his guards, andproudly invested with the ensigns of royalty. Theforces of the Vandals were diminished by discordand suspicion; the Roman armies were animatedby the spirit of Belisarius, one of those heroicnames which are familiar to every age and to everynation.
The Africanus of new Rome was born, and per- characterhaps educated, among the Thracian peasants, without Sf b^"
15 3 «us.







OCR Output








192 THE DECLINE AND FALL


xxxvr.


chap. period expires in the year six hundred and eighteen;a date that exactly agrees with the tremendous cometof the Sibyl, and perhaps of Pliny, which arose inthe West two generations before the reign of Cyrus.The fourth apparition, forty-four years before thebirth of Christ, is of all others the most splendid andimportant. After the death of Caesar, a long-hairedstar was conspicuous to Rome and to the nations,during the games which were exhibited by youngOctavian in honour of Venus and his uncle. Thevulgar opinion, that it conveyed to heaven the divinesoul of the dictator, was cherished and consecratedby the piety of a statesman: while his secret su­perstition referred the comet to the glory of his owntimes. The Jiflh visit has been already ascribed tothe fifth year of Justinian, which coincides with thefive hundred and thirty-first of the Christian sera.And it may deserve notice, that in this, as in thepreceding instance, the comet was followed, thoughat a longer interval, by a remarkable paleness of thesun. The sixth return, in the year eleven hundredand six, is recorded by the chronicles of Europe andChina; and in the first fervour of the Crusades, theChristians and the Mahometans might surmise, withequal reason, that it portended the destruction of theInfidels. The seventh phenomenon of one thousandsix hundred and eighty was presented to the eyes ofan enlightened age. The philosophy of Bayle dis­pelled a prejudice which Milton,s muse had so re­cently adorned, that the comet, " from its horrid hair"shakes pestilence and war." Its road in the heavenswas observed with exquisite skill by Flamstead andCassini; and the mathematical science of Bernoulli,Newton, and Halley, investigated the laws of its re­volutions. At the eighth period, in the year twothousand two hundred and fifty-five, their calcula­tions may perhaps be verified by the astronomers of







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 267


principles of justice: the pride of despotism was en- chap.venomed by plebeian envy, and the heroes of Athens xxxvILmight sometimes applaud the happiness of the Per­sian, whose fate depended on the caprice of a singletyrant. Some salutary restraints, imposed by thepeople on their Own passions, were at once the causeand effect of the gravity and temperance of the Ro­mans. The right of accusation was confined to themagistrates. A vote of the thirty-five tribes couldinflict a fine: but the cognizance of all capital crimeswas reserved by a fundamental law to the assembly ofthe centuries, in which the weight of influence andproperty was sure to preponderate. Repeated pro­clamations and adjournments were interposed, to allowtime for prejudice and resentment to subside; thewhole proceeding might be annulled by a seasonableomen, or the opposition of a tribune; and such po­pular trials were commonly less formidable to inno­cence than they were favourable to guilt. But thisunion of the judicial and legislative powers left itdoubtful whether the accused party was pardoned oracquitted; and in the defence of an illustrious client,the orators of Rome and Athens addressed their argu­ments to the policy and benevolence, as well as to thejustice, of their sovereign. 2. The task of conveningthe citizens for the trial of each offender became moredifficult, as the citizens and the offenders continuallymultiplied; and the ready expedient was adopted ofdelegating the jurisdiction of the people to the or­dinary magistrates, or to extraordinary inquisitors.In the first ages these questions were rare and oc­casional. In the beginning of the seventh century ofRome they were made perpetual; four praetors wereannually empowered to sit in judgment on the stateoffences of treason, extortion, peculation, and bribery;and Sylla added new praetors and new questions forthose crimes which more directly injure the safety of







OCR Output








402 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. dallah returned with the spoils of the war to theXL- confines of Egypt.
The progress of the Saracens to the westward wassuspended by their own dissensions till the year 665,when the caliph Moawiyah sent a powerful army forthe conquest of Africa. Thirty thousand Greeks weredefeated, and an important city was taken by thefirst of his lieutenants; but the title of conqueror ofAfrica is justly due to his successor, Akbah. It wouldbe difficult to trace the accurate line of his progress.Some allowance must be made for exaggeration, whenwe read of eighty thousand Numidians being assem­bled in that province. Akbah plunged into the heartof the country: he founded the city of Cairoan, tra­versed the wilderness in which his successors erectedthe splendid capitals of Fez and Morocco, and atlength penetrated to the Great Desert, and the vergeof the Atlantic Ocean. He spurred his horse-intothe waves and exclaimed, with the tone of a fanatic,"If I were not stopped by this sea, I would still go on"to the unknown kingdoms of the West!" but Akbahwas unable to preserve his recent conquests, and he fellin an obstinate engagement. His successor, Zuheir,avenged his fall, and gained many battles against thenative Africans ; but was at last defeated by a powerfularmy which was sent from Constantinople to the reliefof Carthage. After a long continuance of internaldissensions, the return of domestic peace allowed thecaliph Abdalmalek to resume the conquest of Africa,and the standard was delivered to Hassan, governor ofEgypt. The interior provinces had been alternatelywon and lost by the Saracens, but the sea-coast stillremained in the hands of the Greeks, and the pre­decessors of Hassan had respected the fortificationsof Carthage; but the arms of this commander werebolder and more fortunate: he reduced and pillagedthe metropolis of Africa. But the joy of the con­







OCR Output








180 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. stance. The flower of the Roman archers, on horse-'back, and in -complete armour, skirmished withoutperil round this immoveable phalanx; supplied byactive speed the deficiency of number; and aimedtheir arrows against a crowd of Barbarians, who, in­stead of a cuirass and helmet, were covered by aloose garment of fur or linen. They paused, theytrembled, their ranks were confounded, and in thedecisive moment the Heruli, preferring glory to re­venge, charged with rapid violence the head of thecolumn. Their leader, Sindbal, and Aligern, theGothic prince, deserved the prize of superior valour;and their example incited the victorious troops toachieve with swords and spears the destruction ofthe enemy. Buccelin, and the greatest part of hisarmy, perished on the field of battle, in the waters ofthe Vulturnus, or by the hands of the enraged pea­sants: but it may seem incredible that a victory,which no more than five of the Alemanni survived,could be purchased with the loss of fourscore Romans.Seven thousand Goths, the relics of the war, defendedthe fortress of Campsa till the ensuing spring; andevery messenger of Narses announced the reductionof the Italian cities, whose names were corrupted bythe ignorance or vanity of the Greeks. After thebattle of Casilinum, Narses entered the capital; thearms and treasures of the Goths, the Franks, andAlemanni, were displayed; his soldiers, with gar­lands in their hands, chanted the praises of the con­queror; and Rome, for the last time, beheld thesemblance of a triumph.o( iiSjr' After a reign of- sixty years, the throne of thea. d. 554 Gothic kings was filled by the exarchs of Ravenna,the representatives in peace and war of the emperorof the Romans. Their jurisdiction was soon reducedto the limits of a narrow province: but Narses him­self, the first and most powerful of the exarchs, ad­







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


The princes of the nations of the North, says chap.Constantine, without faith or fame, were ambitious, xu'


of mingling their blood with the blood of the Caesars, Marriage ofby their marriage with a royal virgin, or by the nup- with fordg'ntials of their daughters with a Roman prince. The nations'aged monarch, in his instructions to his son, revealsthe secret maxims of policy and pride; and suggeststhe most decent reasons for refusing these insolentand unreasonable demands. Every animal, says thediscreet emperor, is prompted by nature to seek amate among the animals of his own species; and thehuman species is divided into various tribes, by thedistinction of language, religion, and manners. Ajust regard to the purity of descent preserves the har­mony of public and private life; but the mixture offoreign blood is the fruitful source of disorder and dis­cord. Such had ever been the opinion and practice ofthe sage Romans: their jurisprudence proscribed themarriageof a citizen and a stranger: in the days of free­dom and virtue, a senator would have scorned to matchhis daughter with a king: the glory of Mark Antonywas sullied by an Egyptian wife; and the emperorTitus was compelled, by popular censure, to dismisswith reluctance the reluctant Berenice. This perpe­tual interdict was ratified by the fabulous sanction ofthe great Constantine. The ambassadors of the na­tions, more especially of the unbelieving nations,were solemnly admonished, that such strange allianceshad been condemned by the founder of the churchand city. The irrevocable law was inscribed on thealtar of St. Sophia; and the impious prince whoshould stain the majesty of the purple was excluded imaginilfrom the civil and ecclesiastical communion of thelaw °.f Con-Romans. If the ambassadors were instructed by anyfalse brethren in the Byzantine history, they mightproduce three memorable examples of the violation
i i2


/•


•'







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 431


and the secret author of the mutiny. As he affected chap.to hesitate, "With this sword," said his companion '.
Michael, "I will open the gates of Constantinople"to your Imperial sway; or instantly plunge it into"your bosom, if you obstinately resist the just de-"sires of your fellow-soldiers." The compliance ofthe Armenian was rewarded with the empire, andhe reigned seven years and a half, under the nameof Leo the Fifth. Educated in a camp, and ignorantboth of laws and letters, he introduced into his civilgovernment the rigour, and even the cruelty of mili­tary discipline; but if his severity was sometimesdangerous to the innocent, it was always formidableto the guilty. His religious inconstancy was taxedby the epithet of Chameleon; but the Catholics haveacknowledged by the voice of a saint and confessor,that the life of the Iconoclast was useful to the re­public. The zeal of his companion Michael was re­paid with riches, honours, and military command;and his subordinate talents were beneficially em­ployed in the public service. Yet the Phrygian wasdissatisfied at receiving as a favour a scanty portionof the Imperial prize, which he had bestowed on hisequal; and his discontent, which sometimes evapo­rated in a hasty discourse, at length assumed a morethreatening and hostile aspect against a prince, whomhe represented as a cruel tyrant. That tyrant, how­ever, repeatedly detected, warned, and dismissed, theold companion of his arms, till fear and resentment pre­vailed over gratitude; and Michael, after a scrutinyinto his actions and designs, was convicted of treason,and sentenced to be burnt alive in the furnace of theprivate baths. The devout humanity of the empressTheophano was fatal to her husband and family. Asolemn day, the twenty-fifth of December, had beenfixed for the execution: she urged that the anniver­sary of the Saviour,s birth would be profaned by this







OCR Output








112 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. though it is branded with the epithets of savage andxxxv- unmusical, by the ignorance and presumption ofAgathias. Yet the Greek historian might reasonablywonder, that it should be found possible to .executean entire version of Plato and Aristotle in a foreigndialect, which had not been framed to express thespirit of freedom and the subtleties of philosophicdisquisition. And, if the reason of the Stagyritemight be equally dark or equally intelligible in everytongue, the dramatic art and verbal argumentationof the disciple of Socrates appear to be indissolublymingled with the grace and perfection of his Atticstyle. In the search of universal knowledge, Nu-shirvan was informed, that the moral and politicalfables of Pilpay, an ancient Brachman, were preservedwith jealous reverence, among the treasures of thekings of India. The physician Perozes was secretlydespatched to the banks of the Ganges, with in­structions to procure, at any price, the communica­tion of this valuable work. His dexterity obtaineda transcript, his learned diligence accomplished thetranslation; and the fables of Pilpay were read andadmired in the assembly of Nushirvan and his nobles.The Indian original and the Persian copy have longsince disappeared: but this venerable monument hasbeen saved by the curiosity of the Arabian caliphs,revived in the modern Persic, the Turkish, the Syriac,the Hebrew, and the Greek idioms, and transfusedthrough successive versions into the modern languagesof Europe. In their present form, the peculiar cha­racter, the manners and religion of the Hindoos, arecompletely obliterated; and the intrinsic merit of thefables of Pilpay is far inferior to the concise eleganceof Phaedrus and the native graces of La Fontaine.Fifteen moral and political sentences are illustratedin a series of apologues: but the composition is in­tricate, the narrative prolix, and the precept obvious







OCR Output








398 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. still cherished the pride of his birth, and the hope ofXL- his restoration. After three years' exile, he receivedthe pleasing intelligence that his injury was avengedby a second revolution; and that Leontius in histurn had been dethroned and mutilated by the rebelApsimar, who assumed the more respectable name ofTiberius. But the claim of lineal succession was stillformidable to a plebeian usurper; and his jealousywas stimulated by the complaints and charges of theChersonites, who beheld the vices of the tyrant in thespirit of the exile. With a band of followers, attachedto his person by common hope or common despair,Justinian fled from the inhospitable shore to the hordeof the Chozars, who pitched their tents between theTanais and Borysthenes. The khan entertainedwith pity and respect the royal suppliant. Phana-goria, once an opulent city on the Asiatic side of thelake Maoris, was assigned for his residence; andevery Roman prejudice was stifled in his marriagewith the sister of the Barbarian, who seems, however,from the name of Theodora, to have received the sa­crament of baptism. But the faithless Chozar wassoon tempted by the gold of Constantinople; andhad not the design been revealed by the conjugallove of Theodora, her husband must have been assas­sinated, or betrayed into the power of his enemies.After strangling, with his own hands, the two emis­saries of the khan, Justinian sent back his wife toher brother, and embarked on the Euxine, in searchof new and more faithful allies. His vessel wasassaulted by a violent tempest; and one of his piouscompanions advised him to deserve the mercy ofGod by a vow of general forgiveness, if he should berestored to the throne. "Of forgiveness!" repliedthe intrepid tyrant; "may I perish this instant!"may the Almighty whelm me in the waves, if I"consent to spare a single head of my enemies!"







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 345


of the young prince were soothed by the comforts of chap.religion and the consciousness of innocence. Yet XXXIX-his phantom disturbed the repose of the usurper: awhisper was circulated through the East, that theson of Maurice was still alive: the people expectedtheir avenger, and the widow and daughters of thelate emperor would have adopted as their son andbrother the vilest of mankind. In the massacre ofthe Imperial family, the mercy, or rather the dis­cretion, of Phocas had spared these unhappy females,and they were decently confined to a private house.But the spirit of the empress Constantina, still mind­ful of her father, her husband, and her sons, aspiredto freedom and revenge. At the dead of night, sheescaped to the sanctuary of St. Sophia; but her tears,and the gold of her associate Germanus, were in­sufficient to provoke an insurrection. Her life wasforfeited to revenge, and even to justice: but thepatriarch obtained and pledged an oath for hersafety; a monastery was allotted for her prison, andthe widow of Maurice accepted and abused the lenityof his assassin. The discovery or the suspicion of asecond conspiracy dissolved the engagements andrekindled the fury of Phocas. A matron who com­manded the respect and pity of mankind, the daugh­ter, wife, and mother of emperors, was tortured likethe vilest malefactor, to force a confession of her de­signs and associates; and the empress Constantina,with her three innocent daughters, was beheaded atChalcedon, on the same ground which had been andty-stained with the blood of her husband and five sons. ranny"After such an example, it would be superfluous toenumerate the names and sufferings of meaner vic­tims. Their condemnation was seldom preceded bythe forms of trial, and their punishment was embit­tered by the refinements of cruelty: their eyes werepierced, their tongues were torn from the root, the







OCR Output








400 THE DECLINE AND FALL


XL.


chap. would have been extinguished by a single blow, in-, stead of the slow variety of tortures which Justinianinflicted on the victims of his anger. His pleasureswere inexhaustible: neither private virtue nor publicservice could expiate the guilt of active or even pas­sive obedience to an established government; andduring the six years of his new reign, he consideredthe axe, the cord, and the rack, as the only instru­ments of royalty. But his most implacable hatredwas pointed against the Chersonites, who had in­sulted his exile and violated the laws of hospitality.Their remote situation afforded some means of de­fence, or at least of escape; and a grievous tax wasimposed on Constantinople to supply the preparationsof a fleet and army. "All are guilty, and all"must perish," was the mandate of Justinian; andthe bloody execution was intrusted to his favouriteStephen, who was recommended by the epithet ofthe Savage. Yet even the savage Stephen imperfectlyaccomplished the intentions of his sovereign: theslowness of his attack allowed the greater part of theinhabitants to withdraw into the country, and theminister of vengeance contented himself with reducingthe youth of both sexes to a state of servitude, withroasting alive seven of the principal citizens, withdrowning twenty in the sea, and with reserving forty-two in chains, to receive their doom from the mouthof the emperor. In their return the fleet was drivenon the rocky shores of Anatolia; and Justinian ap­plauded the obedience of the Euxine, which had in­volved so many thousands of his subjects and enemiesin a common shipwreck: but the tyrant was still in­satiate of blood; and a second expedition was com­manded, to extirpate the remains of the proscribedcolony. In the short interval, the Chersonites hadreturned to their city, and were prepared to die inarms; the khan of the Chozars had renounced the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 507


XLL


radius. Alone in the universe, the self-satisfied chap.pride of the Greeks was not disturbed by the com­parison of foreign merit; and it is no wonder if theyfainted in the race, since they had neither competi­tors to urge their speed, nor judges to crown theirvictory. The nations of Europe and Asia weremingled by the expeditions to the Holy Land; andit is under the Coranenian dynasty that a faint emu­lation of knowledge and military virtue was re-kindledin the Byzantine empire.


END OF VOL. IV.


'







OCR Output








40 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. and ease in the Greek, the Latin, and the GothicIV' tongue, the daughter of Theodoric maintained in hercounsels a discreet and impenetrable silence. By afaithful imitation of the virtues, she revived the pros­perity of his reign: while she strove, with piouscare, to expiate the faults, and to obliterate thedarker memory of his declining age. The childrenof Boethius and Symmachus were restored to theirpaternal inheritance: her extreme lenity never con­sented to inflict any corporal or pecuniary penalties-on her Roman subjects; and she generously despisedthe clamours of the Goths, who, at the end of fortyyears, still considered the people of Italy as theirslaves or their enemies. Her salutary measures weredirected by the wisdom, and celebrated by the elo­quence, of Cassiodorius; she solicited and deservedthe friendship of the emperor; and the kingdoms ofEurope respected, both in peace and war, the majestyof the Gothic throne. But the future happiness ofthe queen and of Italy depended on the education ofher son, who was destined, by his birth, to supportthe different and almost incompatible characters ofthe chief of a Barbarian camp, and the first magi­strate of a civilized nation. From the age of tenyears, Athalaric was diligently instructed in the artsand sciences, either useful or ornamental for a Ro­man prince; and three venerable Goths were chosento instil the principles of honour and virtue into themind of their young king. But the pupil who is in­sensible of the benefit's, must abhor the restraints, ofeducation; and the solicitude of the queen, whichaffection rendered anxious and severe, offended theuntractable nature of her son and his subjects. On asolemn festival, when the Goths were assembled inthe palace of Ravenna, the royal youth escaped fromhis mother's apartment, and, with tears of pride andanger, complained of a blow which his stubborn dis­







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL,


chap. i'al orders of the state, and the act of their engage-xu merit was deposited on the altar of St. Sophia. _ Thefirst to swear, and the first to violate their oath, werethe five sons of Copronymus, by a second marriage;and the story of these princes is singular and tragic.The right of primogeniture excluded them from thethrone; the injustice of their elder brother defraudedthem of a legacy of about two millions sterling;some vain titles were not deemed a sufficient com­pensation for wealth and power; and they repeatedlyconspired against their nephew, before and after thedeath of his father. Their first attempt was par­doned; for the second offence they were condemnedto the ecclesiastical state; and for the third treason,Nicephorus, the eldest and most guilty, was deprivedof his eyes, and his four brothers, Christopher, Nice-tas, Anthemeus, and Eudoxas, were punished, as amilder sentence, by the amputation of their tongues.After five years confinement, they escaped to thechurch of St. Sophia, and displayed a pathetic spec­tacle to the people. "Countrymen and Christians,"cried Nicephorus, for himself and his mute brethren,"behold the sons of your emperor, if you can still"recognise our features in this miserable state. A"life, an imperfect life, is all that the malice of our"enemies has spared. It is now threatened, and we"now throw ourselves on your compassion." Therising murmur might have produced a revolution,had it not been checked by the presence of a minister,who soothed the unhappy princes with flattery andhope, and gently drew them from the sanctuaryto the palace. They were speedily embarked forGreece, and Athens was allotted for the place oftheir exile. In this calm retreat, and in theirhopeless condition, Nicephorus and his brotherswere tormented by the thirst of power, and temptedby a Sclavonian, who offered to break their prison,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 89


times, laboured only to prevent the success, or to chap.sully the reputation, of their colleagues; and they xxxv-had been taught by experience, that if merit some­times provoked the jealousy, error, or even guilt,would obtain the indulgence, of a gracious emperor.In such an age the triumphs of Belisarius, and after­wards of Narses, shine with incomparable lustre ; butthey are encompassed with the darkest shades of dis­grace and calamity. While the lieutenant of Jus­tinian subdued the kingdoms of the Goths andVandals, the emperor, timid, though ambitious, ba­lanced the forces of the Barbarians, fomented theirdivisions by flattery and falsehood, and invited byhis patience and liberality the repetition of injuries.The keys of Carthage, Rome, and Ravenna, werepresented to their conqueror, while Antioch was de­stroyed by the Persians, and Justinian trembled forthe safety of Constantinople.
Even the Gothic victories of Belisarius were pre-state of thejudicial to the state since they abolished the import­ant barrier of the Upper Danube, which had beenso faithfully guarded by Theodoric and his daughter.For the defence of Italy, the Goths evacuated Pan-nonia and Noricum, which they left in a peaceful andflourishing condition: the sovereignty was claimed bythe emperor of the Romans; the actual possessionwas abandoned to the boldness of the first invader.On the opposite banks of the Danube, the plains ofUpper Hungary and the Transylvanian hills werepossessed, since the death of Attila, by the tribes ofthe Gepidae, who respected the Gothic arms, and The Ge-despised, not indeed the gold of the Romans, butF *'the secret motive of their annual subsidies. The va­cant fortifications of the river were instantly occupiedby these Barbarians: their standards were plantedon the walls of" Sirmium and Belgrade; and theironical tone of their apology aggravated this insult







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 39


"of all the provinces which you unjustly withhold chap."from their lawful sovereign." A nation of two XXXIV-hundred thousand soldiers might have smiled at thevain menace of Justinian and his lieutenant; but aspirit of discord and disaffection prevailed in Italy,and the Goths supported, with reluctance, the in­dignity of a female reign *.
The birth of Amalasontha, the regent and queen Governmentof Italy t, united the two most illustrious families of Amail"n-the Barbarians. Her mother, the sister of Clovis, *";Aueen
''of Italy,
was descended from the long-haired kings of theAD-&22Merovingian race; and the regal succession of theAmali was illustrated, in the eleventh generation, byher father, the great Theodoric, whose merit mighthave ennobled a plebeian origin. The sex of hisdaughter excluded her from the Gothic throne; buthis vigilant tenderness for his family and his peoplediscovered the last heir of the royal line, whose an­cestors had taken refuge in Spain; and the fortunateEutharic was suddenly exalted to the rank of a con­sul and a prince. He enjoyed only a short time thecharms of Amalasontha, and the hopes of the succes­sion; and his widow, after the death of her husbandand father, was left the guardian of her son Atha-laric, and the kingdom of Italy. At the age of abouttwenty-eight years, the endowments of her mind andperson had attained their perfect maturity. Herbeauty, which, in the apprehension of Theodora her­self, might have disputed the conquest of an emperor,was animated by manly sense, activity, and resolution.Education and experience had cultivated her talents;her philosophic studies were exempt from vanity;and, though she expressed herself with equal elegance
* Compare the different passages of Procopius (Vandal. 1. ii. c. 5. Gothic.1. i. c . 3).
•T For the reign and character of Amalasontha, see Procopius (Gothic. 1. i.c. 2, 3, 4, and Anecdot. c . 10. with the Notes of Alemannus), Cassiodorius(Var. vii. ix. x. and xi. 1), and Jornandes (de Rebus Geticis, c. 59. and DoSuccesione Regnoruui, in Muralori, tom. i. p. 241).


/-


I


D 4







OCR Output








216 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. he mildly excludes the sceptics who refuse to believe,
'L and the epicureans who are unwilling to act. The
latter disdain the care of the republic; he advisesthem to slumber in their shady gardens. But hehumbly entreats that the new academy would be silent,since her bold objections would too soon destroy thefair and well-ordered structure of his lofty system.Plato, Aristotle, and Zeno, he represents as the onlyteachers who arm and instruct a citizen for the dutiesof social life. Of these, the armour of the stoics *was found to be of the firmest temper; and it waschiefly worn, both for use and ornament, in the schoolsof jurisprudence. From the portico, the Romancivilians learned to live, to reason, and to die: butthey imbibed in some degree the prejudices of thesect; the love of paradox, the pertinacious habits ofdispute, and a minute attachment to words and verbaldistinctions. The superiority of form to matter wasintroduced to ascertain the right to property: and theequality of crimes is countenanced by an opinion ofTrebatius, that he who touches the ear touches thewhole body; and that he who steals from a heap ofcorn, or a hogshead of wine, is guilty of the entiretheft.Authority. Arms, eloquence, and the study of the civil law,promoted a citizen to the honours of the Roman state;and the three professions were sometimes more con­spicuous by their union in the same character. Inthe composition of the edict, a learned praetor gave asanction and preference to his private sentiments; theopinion of a censor, or a consul, was entertained withrespect; and a doubtful interpretation of the lawsmight be supported by the virtues or triumphs of thecivilian. The patrician arts were long protected by


* The stoic philosophy was first taught at Rome by Fanaetius, the friend ofthe younger Scipio (see his life in the Mem. de l'Academie des Inscription.,tom. x. p. 75—89).







OCR Output








98 THE DKCLINE AND FALL


XXXV.


chap. arise, to persuade his countrymen that the same armswhich they forged for their masters might become,in their own hands, the instruments of freedom andvictory. They sallied from the mountain; a sceptrewas the reward of his advice; and the annual cere­mony, in which a piece of iron was heated in the fire,and a smith,s hammer was successively handled bythe prince and his nobles, recorded for ages the hum­ble profession and rational pride of the Turkish na­tion. Bertezena, their first leader, signalized theirvalour and his own in successful combats against theneighbouring tribes; but when he presumed to askin marriage the daughter of the great khan, the in­solent demand of a slave and a mechanic was con­temptuously rejected. The disgrace was expiatedby a more noble alliance with a princess of China;and the decisive battle which almost extirpated thenation of the Geougen established in Tartary thenew and more powerful empire of the Turks. Theyreigned over the north; but they confessed the va­nity of conquest, by their faithful attachment to themountain of their fathers. The royal encampmentseldom lost sight of mount Altai, from whence theriver Irtish descends to water the rich pastures of theCalmucks, which nourish the largest sheep and oxenin the world. The soil is fruitful, and the climatemild and temperate: the happy region was ignorantof earthquake and pestilence; the emperor,s thronewas turned towards the east, and a golden wolf onthe top of a spear seemed to guard the entrance ofhis tent. One of the successors of Bertezena wastempted by the luxury and superstition of China ,but his design of building cities and temples was de­feated by the simple wisdom of a Barbarian counsellor."The Turks," he said, " are not equal in number"to one hundredth part of the inhabitants of China."If we balance their power, and elude their armies,







OCR Output








426 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. sovereign, her ministers subscribed an ignominious'peace: and the exchange of some royal gifts couldnot disguise the annual tribute of seventy thousanddinars of gold, which was imposed on the Romanempire. The Saracens had too rashly advanced intothe midst of a distant and hostile land: their retreatwas solicited by the promise of faithful guides andplentiful markets; and not a Greek had courage towhisper, that their weary forces might be surroundedand destroyed in their necessary passage between aslippery mountain and the river Singarius. Five yearsafter this expedition, Harun ascended the throne ofhis father and his elder brother; the most powerfuland vigorous monarch of his race; illustrious in theWest, as the ally of Charlemagne; and familiar tothe most childish readers, as the perpetual hero ofthe Arabian tales. His title to the name of AlRashid (the Just) is sullied by the extirpation ofthe generous, perhaps'the innocent, Barmecides; yethe could listen to the complaint of a poor widow,who had been pillaged by his troops ; and who dared,in a passage of the Koran, to threaten the inattentivedespot with the judgment of God and posterity. Hiscourt was adorned with luxury and science; but in areign of three-and-twenty years, Harun repeatedlyvisited his provinces from Chorasan to Egypt; ninetimes he performed the pilgrimage of Mecca; eighttimes he invaded the territories of the Romans ; andas often as they declined the payment of the tribute,they were taught to feel that a month of depredationwas more costly than a year of submission. But whenthe unnatural mother of Constantine was deposed andbanished, her successor Nicephorus resolved to ob­literate this badge of servitude and disgrace. Theepistle of the emperor to the caliph was pointed withan allusion to the game of chess, which had alreadyspread from Persia to Greece. "The queen (he







OCR Output








478 THE BKCL1NE AND FALL


chap. placed immediately after the person of the emperor. XLT- himself. The five titles of 1. Despot; 2. Sebasto-crator; 3. Ccesar; 4. Panhypersebastor; and, 5.Protosebastos; were usually confined to the princesof Ms blood: they were the emanations of his ma­jesty, but as they exercised no regular functions,their existence was useless, and their authority pre­carious.tfi^pakcc But in every monarchy the substantial powers ofthe state, government must be divided and exercised by thearmy. ministers of the palace and treasury, the fleet andarmy. The titles alone can differ; and in the revo­lution of ages, the counts and praefects, the praatorand quaestor, insensibly descended, while their servantsrose above their heads to the first honours of the state.1. In a monarchy, which refers every object to theperson of the prince, the care and ceremonies of thepalace form the most respectable department. TheCuropalata, so illustrious in the age of Justinian, wassupplanted by the Protovestiare, whose primitive func­tions were limited to the custody of the wardrobe.From thence his jurisdiction was extended over thenumerous menials of pomp and luxury; and he pre­sided with his silver wand at the public and privateaudience. 2. In the ancient system of Constantino,the name of Logothete, or accountant, was appliedto the receivers of the finances: the principal officerswere distinguished as the Logothetes of the domain,of the posts, the army, the private and public trea­sure; and the great Logothete, the supreme guardianof the laws and revenues, is compared with the chan­cellor of the Latin monarchies. His discerning eyepervaded the civil administration; and he was assisted,in due subordination, by the eparch or praefect ofthe city, the first secretary, and the keepers of theprivyseal, the archives, and the red or purple ink whichwas reserved for the sacred signature of the emperor







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 137


persuaded to renounce his dangerous claim to the chap.possession or sovereignty of Colchos and its de- XXXv-pendent states. Rich in the accumulated treasuresof the East, he extorted from the Romans an an­nual payment of thirty thousand pieces of gold;and the smallness of the sum revealed the disgrace ofa tribute in its naked deformity. In a previous de­bate, the chariot of Sesostris, and the wheel of for­tune, were applied by one of the ministers of Jus­tinian, who observed that the reduction of Antioch,and some Syrian cities, had elevated beyond measurethe vain and ambitious spirit of the Barbarian. "You"are mistaken," replied the modest Persian: "the"king of kings, the lord of mankind, looks down"with contempt on such petty acquisitions; and of"the ten nations, vanquished by his invincible arms,"he esteems the Romans as the least formidable."According to the Orientals, the empire of Nushirvanextended from Ferganah, in Transoxiana, to Yemenor Arabia Felix. He subdued the rebels of Hyrcania,reduced the provinces of Cabul and Zablestan on thebanks of the Indus, broke the power of the Euthalites,terminated by an honourable treaty the Turkish war,and admitted the daughter of the great khan into thenumber of his lawful wives. Victorious and respectedamong the princes of Asia, he gave audience, in hispalace of Madain, or Ctesiphon, to the ambassadorsof the world. Their gifts or tributes, arms, rich gar­ments, gems, slaves, or aromatics, were humbly pre­sented at the foot of his throne; and he condescendedto accept from the king of India ten quintals of thewood of aloes, a maid seven cubits in height, and acarpet softer than silk, the skin, as it was reported,of an extraordinary serpent*.
Justinian had been reproached for his alliance with Conquest ofthe ^Ethiopians, as if he attempted to introduce a sinians,ys"
A. D. 522.* D'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orient, p. G80, 081. 294, 295.







OCR Output








158 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. soon as daylight had displayed the entire victory ofXXXVL the Goths, their monarch devoutly visited the tombof the prince of the apostles; but while he prayedat the altar, twenty-five soldiers, and sixty citizens,were put to the sword in the vestibule of the temple.The archdeacon Pelagius stood before him with thegospels in his hand. "O Lord, be merciful to your"servant." "Pelagius," said Totila with an insult­ing smile, " your pride now condescends to become"a suppliant." "I am a suppliant," replied theprudent archdeacon; "God has now made us your"subjects, and, as your subjects, we are entitled to"your clemency." At his humble prayer, the livesof the Romans were spared; and the chastity of themaids and matrons was preserved inviolate from thepassions of the hungry soldiers. But they were re­warded by the freedom of pillage, after the most pre­cious spoils had been reserved for the royal treasury.The houses of the senators were plentifully storedwith gold and silver; and the avarice of Bessas hadlaboured with so much guilt and shame for the be­nefit of the conqueror. In this revolution, the sonsand daughters of Roman consuls tasted the miserywhich they had spurned or relieved, wandered intattered garments through the streets of the city, andbegged their bread, perhaps without success, beforethe gates of their hereditary mansions. The richesof Rusticiana, the daughter of Symmachus and widowof Boethius, had been generously devoted to alleviatethe calamities of famine. But the Barbarians wereexasperated by the report, that she had prompted thepeople to overthrow the statues of the great Theo-doric; and the life of that venerable matron wouldhave been sacrificed to his memory, if Totila had notrespected her birth, her virtues, and even the piousmotive of her revenge. The next day he pronouncedtwo orations, to congratulate and admonish his vie-







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. BOB


XLI.


culative systems of antiquity, and a succession of pa- chap.tient disciples became in their turn the dogmatic'teachers of the next servile generation. Not a singlecomposition of history, philosophy, or literature, hasbeen saved from oblivion by the intrinsic beauties ofstyle or sentiment, of original fancy, or even of suc­cessful imitation. In prose, the least offensive of theByzantine writers are absolved from censure by theirnaked and unpresuming simplicity; but the orators,most eloquent in their own conceit, are the farthestremoved from the models whom they affect to emu­late. In every page our taste and reason are woundedby the choice of gigantic and obsolete words, a stiffand intricate phraseology, the discord of images, thechildish play of false or unseasonable ornament, andthe painful attempt to elevate themselves, to astonishthe reader, and to involve a trivial meaning in thesmoke of obscurity and exaggeration. Their prose issoaring to the vicious affectation of poetry: theirpoetry is sinking below the flatness and insipidity ofprose. The tragic, epic, and lyric muses, were silentand inglorious: the bards of Constantinople seldomrose above a riddle or epigram, a panegyric or tale;they forgot even the rules of prosody; and with themelody of Homer yet sounding in their ears, theyconfound all measure of feet and syllables in the im­potent strains which have received the name of-po­litical or city verses. The minds of the Greeks werebound in the fetters of a base and imperious super­stition, which extends her dominion round the circleof profane science. Their understandings were be­wildered in metaphysical controversy: in the beliefof visions and miracles they had lost all principlesof moral evidence, and their taste was vitiated by thehomilies of the monks. Even these contemptiblestudies were no longer dignified by the abuse of su­perior talents: the leaders of the Greek church were
VOL. IV. L L







OCR Output








CONTENTS. XI


A. D. Page
566 His consulship ..... 274
Embassy of the Avars .... 275
Alboin, king of the Lombards—his valour, love, and
revenge ...... 277
The Lombards and Avars destroy the king and king­
dom of the Gepidae ." . . . 278
567 Alboin undertakes the conquest of Italy . . 280
Disaffection and death of Narses . . . 282
568—570. Conquest of a great part of Italy by the Lom­
bards . . . . . .283
573 Alboin is murdered by his wife Rosamond . . 285
Her flight and death . . . .287
Clepho, king of the Lombards . . . 288
Weakness of the emperor Justin . . . 289
574 Association of Tiberius .... 290
578 Death of Justin II. . . . . .291
578—582. Reign of Tiberius II ib.
His virtues ...... 293
582—602. The reign of Maurice . . . .294
Distress of Italy ..... 295
584—590. Autharis, king of the Lombards . . 297
The exarchate of Ravenna . . . 298
The kingdom of the Lombards . . ■ 300
Language and manners of the Lombards . . ib.
Dress and marriage . . . . 303
Government ...... 305
643 Laws . . . . . . ib.
Misery of Rome . . ... .307
The tombs and relics of the apostles . . . 308
Birth and profession of Gregory the Roman . . 309
590—604. Pontificate of Gregory the Great, or First . 310
His spiritual office . . . . .311
And temporal government . . • . 312
His estates- . . . . . ib.
And arms ...... 314
The saviour of Rome .... 315







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 311


of simplicity and cunning, of pride and humility, of chap.sense and superstition, were happily suited to his sta- XXXVIir-tion and to the temper of the times. In his rivalsthe patriarch of Constantinople, he condemned theantichristian title of universal bishop, which the suc­cessor of St. Peter was too haughty to concede, andtoo feeble to assume; and the ecclesiastical juris- Hisspi-diction of Gregory was confined to the triple cha-ritUid office>racter of bishop of Rome, primate of Italy, and apostleof the West. He frequently ascended the pulpit, andkindled, by his rude, though pathetic eloquence, thecongenial passions of his audience: the language ofthe Jewish prophets was interpreted and applied, andthe minds of the people, depressed by their presentcalamities, were directed to the hopes and fears ofthe invisible world. His precepts and example de­fined the model of the Roman liturgy; the dis­tribution of the parishes, the calendar of festivals, theorder of processions, the service of the priests anddeacons, the variety and change of sacerdotal gar­ments. Till the last days of his life, he officiated inthe canon of the mass, which continued above threehours; the Gregorian chant has preserved the vocaland instrumental music of the theatre, and the roughvoices of the Barbarians attempted to imitate themelody of the Roman school. Experience had shownhim the efficacy of these solemn and pompous rites,to soothe the distress, to confirm the faith, to mitigatethe fierceness, and to dispel the dark enthusiasm ofthe vulgar, and he readily forgave their tendency to,promote the reign of priesthood and superstition.The bishops of Italy and the adjacent islands ac­knowledged the Roman pontiff as their special me­tropolitan. Even the existence, the union, or thetranslation of episcopal seats, was decided by hisabsolute discretion: and his successful inroads into


x4







OCR Output








312 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. the provinces of Greece, of Spain, and of Gaul, might
. countenance the more lofty pretensions of succeeding
popes. He interposed to prevent the abuses of po­pular elections; his jealous care maintained the purityof faith and discipline; and the apostolic shepherdassiduously watched over the faith and discipline ofthe subordinate pastors. Under his reign, the Ariansof Italy and Spain were reconciled to the catholicchurch, and the conquest of Britain reflects less gloryon the name of Caesar than on that of Gregory theFirst. Instead of six legions, forty monks wereembarked for that distant island; and the pontifflamented the austere duties which forbade him topartake the perils of then- spiritual warfare. In lessthan two years he could announce to the archbishopof Alexandria, that they had baptized the king ofKent, with ten thousand of his Anglo-Saxons, and thatthe Roman missionaries, like those of the primitivechurch, were armed only with spiritual powers. Thecelestial honours have been liberally bestowed by theauthority of the popes, but Gregory is the last of theirown order whom they have presumed to inscribe inthe calendar of saints,and tem- Their temporal power insensibly arose from thevemment; calamities of the times; and the Roman bishops, whohave deluged Europe and Asia with blood, were com­pelled to reign as the ministers of charity and peace.his estates, I, The church of Rome, as it has been formerly ob­served, was endowed with ample possessions in Italy,Sicily, and the more distant provinces; and her agents,who were commonly subdeacons, had acquired a civil,and even criminal, jurisdiction over their tenants andhusbandmen. The successor of St. Peter administeredhis patrimony with the temper of a vigilant and mo­derate landlord; and the epistles of Gregory are filledwith salutary instructions to abstain from doubtful







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 419


generals and magistrates, who are said to have suf- chap.fered under his reign, the numbers are recorded, the XL'names were conspicuous, the execution was public,the mutilation visible and permanent. The Catholicshated the person and government of Copronymus;but even their hatred is a proof of their oppression.They dissemble the provocations which might excuseor justify his rigour, but even these provocationsmust gradually inflame his resentment, and hardenhis temper, in the use or abuse of despotism. Yetthe character of the fifth Constantine was not devoidof merit, nor did his government always deserve thecurses or contempt of the Greeks. From the con­fession of his enemies, I am informed of the restora­tion of an ancient aqueduct, of the redemption oftwo thousand five hundred captives, of the uncom­mon plenty of the times, and of the new colonies withwhich he repeopled Constantinople and the Thraciaflcities. They reluctantlypraise his activity and courage;he was on horseback in the field at the head of hislegions; and although the fortune of his arms was va­rious, he triumphed by sea and land, on the Euphratesand the Danube, in civil and barbarian war.
Leo* the Fourth, the son of the fifth, and the father Leo rv.of the sixth Constantine, was of a feeble constitution £'D* IP'
toept. 14.
both of mind and body; and the principal care of hisreign was the settlement of the succession. Theassociation of the young Constantine was urged bythe officious zeal of his subjects; and the emperor,conscious of his decay, complied, after a prudenthesitation, with their unanimous wishes. The royalinfant, at the age of five years, was crowned with hismother Irene; and the national consent was ratifiedby every circumstance of pomp and solemnity, thatcould dazzle the eyes, or blind the conscience, of theGreeks. An oath of fidelity was administered in thepalace, the church, and the hippodrome, to the seve-


E E 2







OCR Output








408 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. Libanus, and was piled along the sea-shore of Phce-'nicia, for the service of the Egyptian fleet. This ge­nerous enterprise was defeated by the cowardice ortreachery of the troops. They murdered their chief*and deserted their standard in the Isle of Rhodes,dispersed themselves over the adjacent continent, anddeserved pardon or reward by investing with the pur­ple a simple officer of the revenue. The name ofTheodosius might recommend him to the senateand people; but, after some months, he sank into acloister, and resigned, to the firmer hand of Leo theIsaurian, the urgent defence of the capital and. empire.The most formidable of the Saracens, Moslemah, thebrother of the caliph, was advancing at the head ofone hundred and twenty thousand Arabs and Per­sians, the greater part mounted on horses or camels;and the successful sieges of Tyana, Amorium, and Per-gamus, were of sufficient duration to exercise theirskill and to elevate their hopes. At the well knownpassage of Abydos, on the Hellespont, the Maho­metan arms were transported, for the first time, fromAsia to Europe. From thence, wheeling round theThracian cities of the Propontis, Moslemah investedConstantinople on the land side, surrounded his campwith a ditch and rampart, prepared and planted hisengines of assault, and declared, by words and actions,a patient resolution of expecting the return of theseedtime and harvest, should the obstinacy of the be­sieged prove equal to his own. The Greeks wouldgladly have ransomed their religion and empire, by afine or assessment of a piece of gold on the head ofeach inhabitant of the city; but the liberal offer wasrejected with disdain, and the presumption of Mos­lemah was exalted by the speedy approach and invin­cible force of the navies of Egypt and Syria. Theyare said to have amounted to eighteen hundred ships:


* Gibbon, vol. x. c . 02.







OCR Output








CONTENTS. IX


CHAP. XXXVII.


Idea of the Roman Jurisprudence.—The Lams of the Kings.—
The Twelve Tables of the Decemvirs.—The Laws of the People.
—The Decrees of the Senate.—The Edicts of the Magistrates
and Emperors.—Authority of the Civilians.—Code, Pandects,
Novels, and Institutes of Justinian :—I. Rights of Persons.—
II. Rights of Things.—III. Private Injuries and Actions.—
IV. Crimes and Punishments.


Page
The civil or Roman law
. 199
Laws of the kings of Rome .
. 200
The twelve tables of the decemvirs .
. 202
Their character and influence
. 204
Laws of the people .
. 205
Decrees of the senate
. 206
Edicts of the prators
. ib.
The perpetual edict .
. 208
Constitutions of the emperors
. ib.
The legislative power
. 209
Their rescripts
. 210
Forms of the Roman law
. 211
Succession of the civil lawyers
. 212
A. U. C.
303—648. The first period
. 213
648—988. Second period
. ib.
988—1230. Third period
Their philosophy
. 214
. 215
Authority ....
. 216
Sects •
. 217
A.D.
527 Reformation of the Roman law by Justinian
. 219
527—546. Tribonian . . .
. 220
528—-529. The code of Justinian
. 221
530—533. The pandects or digest
. 222
Praise and censure of the code and pandects
.223
Loss of the ancient jurisprudence
. 225
Legal inconstancy of Justinian
534 Second edition of the code
. 227
. ib.
534—565. The novels .
. ib.
533 The institutes . ...
. 228
I. Of persons. Freemen and slaves
. 229







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 263


laws, introduced a new system of criminal jurispru- chap.
i YYYVTI
dence *; and the emperors, from Augustus to Jus-'
tinian, disguised their increasing rigour under thenames of the original authors. But the invention andfrequent use of extraordinary pains proceeded fromthe desire to extend and conceal the progress of de­spotism. In the condemnation of illustrious Romans,the senate was always prepared to confound, at thewill of their masters, the judicial and legislativepowers. It was the duty of the governors to maintainthe peace of their province, by the arbitrary and rigidadministration of justice; the freedom of the cityevaporated in the extent of empire, and the Spanishmalefactor, who claimed the privilege of a Roman,was elevated by the command of Galba on a fairerand more lofty cross. Occasional rescripts issuedfrom the throne to decide the questions which, bytheir novelty or importance, appeared to surpass theauthority and discernment of a proconsul. Trans­portation and beheading were reserved for honourablepersons; meaner criminals were either hanged, orburnt, or buried in the mines, or exposed to the wildbeasts of the amphitheatre. Armed robbers werepursued and extirpated as the enemies of society;the driving away horses or cattle was made a capitaloffence; but simple theft was uniformly consideredas a mere civil and private injury. The degrees ofguilt, and the modes of punishment, were too oftendetermined by the discretion of the rulers, and thesubject was left in ignorance of the legal dangerwhich he might incur by every action of his life.
A sin, a vice, a crime, are the objects of theology, Measure ofethics, and jurisprudence. Whenever their judgments gult"


* For the penal law (Leges Cornelia), Pompeiae, Julia!, of Sylla, Pompey, andthe Casars), see the sentences of Paulus (1. iv. tit xviii—xxx. p. 497—328.edit. Schulting), the Gregorian Code (Fragment. 1. xix. p. 705, 706, in Schult-ing), the Collatio Legum Mosaicarum et Romanarum (tit. i—xv), the Theodosian(.'ode (1. ix), the Code of Justinian (1. ix), the Pandects (xlviii), the Institutes(1. iv. tit. xviii), and the Greek version of Theophilus (p. 917—950').


s4







OCR Output








148 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. late king, was tempted, by revenge, to deliver himselfXXXVL and the garrison of Trevigo into the hands of theRomans. But the gallant and accomplished youthwas easily persuaded to prefer the Gothic throne be­fore the service of Justinian; and as soon as thepalace of Pavia had been purified from the Rugianusurper, he reviewed the national force of five thou­sand soldiers, and generously undertook the restora­tion of the kingdom of Italy.victories of The successors of Belisarius, eleven generals of
Totila, king '° j v
of Italy, -equal rank, neglected to crush the feeble and dis-—544. united Goths, till they were roused to action by theprogress of Totila and the reproaches of Justinian.The gates of"Verona were secretly opened to Arta-bazus, at the head of one hundred Persians in theservice of the empire. The Goths fled from the city.At the distance of sixty furlongs the Roman generalshalted to regulate the division of the spoil. Whilethey disputed, the enemy discovered the real numberof the victors: the Persians were instantly over­powered, and it was by leaping from the wall thatArtabazus preserved a life which he lost in a fewdays by the lance of a Barbarian, who had defied himto single combat. Twenty thousand Romans en­countered the forces of Totila, near Faenza, and onthe hills of Mugello, of the Florentine territory. Theardour of freedmen, who fought to regain their coun­try, was opposed to the languid temper of mercenarytroops, who were even destitute of the merits of strongand well-disciplined servitude. On the first attackthey abandoned their ensigns, threw down their arms,and dispersed on all sides with an active speed, whichabated the loss, whilst it aggravated the shame, oftheir defeat. The king of the Goths, who blushedfor the baseness of his enemies, pursued with rapidsteps the path of honour and victory. Totila passedthe Po, traversed the Apennine, suspended the im­







OCR Output








418 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. had reigned with a subordinate power since the timeXL" of Justinian, and the ruin of the Gothic kingdom.


Rome was now threatened by Astolphus; butamidst the tears of the citizens, the pope, Stephen theThird, embraced the generous resolution of visitingthe courts of Lombardy and France, to deprecatethe injustice of his enemy, or to excite the pity ofhis friend. The king of the Lombards was inexor­able; but Pepin, the son of Charles Martel, at thehead of a French army, accompanied the pope inhis return to Italy. The Lombards, after a weak re­sistance, obtained an ignominious peace, which wasviolated by Astolphus as soon as the French armywas withdrawn. Rome was again encompassed byhis arms, and again delivered by Pepin. After thisdouble chastisement, the Lombards continued abouttwenty years in a state of languor and decay, tilltheir expiring monarchy was pressed by the zeal andprudence of pope Adrian the First, and the genius, for-itaiy con- tune, and greatness of Charlemagne, the son of Pepin.Charie-7 That monarch surprised the passes of the Alps; and,magne. after a blockade of two years, Desiderius, the last ofthe native princes of the Lombards, surrendered hissceptre and his capital, in 774.
In the East, the long reign of Constantine the Fifthwas distracted with seditions and conspiracies, ofwhich the persecution of images was the motive orpretence. These seditions were suppressed by force,and punished with severity. Without adopting thepernicious maxim, -that where much is alleged some­thing must be true, I can, however, discern, thatConstantine the Fifth was dissolute and cruel. Ca­lumny is more prone to exaggerate than to invent;and her licentious tongue is checked in some mea­sure by the experience of the age and country towhich she appeals. Of the bishops and monks, the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 255


the civilians sometimes imagine the delivery of the chap.object, and sometimes presume the consent of the xxxvn'parties. The substantial pledge has been refinedinto the invisible rights of a mortgage or hypotheca;and the agreement of sale, for a certain price, im­putes, from that moment, the chances of gain or lossto the account of the purchaser. It may be fairlysupposed, that every man will obey the dictates ofhis interest: and if he accepts the benefit, he isobliged to sustain the expense, of the transaction.In this boundless subject, the historian will observethe location of land and money, the rent of the oneand the interest of the other, as they materially affectthe prosperity of agriculture and commerce. Thelandlord was often obliged to advance the stock andinstruments of husbandry, and to content himselfwith a partition of the fruits. If the feeble tenantwas oppressed by accident, contagion, or hostile vio­lence, he claimed a proportionable relief from theequity of the laws: five years were the customaryterm, and no solid or costly improvements could beexpected from a farmer, who, at each moment, mightbe ejected by the sale of the estate. Usury, the in- interest ofveterate grievance of the city, had been discouraged money-by the twelve tables, and abolished by the clamoursof the people. It was revived by their wants andidleness, tolerated by the discretion of the praetors,and finally determined by the Code of Justinian.Persons of illustrious rank were confined to the mo­derate profit of four per cent.; six was pronouncedto be the ordinary and legal standard of interest;eight was allowed for the convenience of manufac­turers and merchants; twelve was granted to nauticalinsurance, which the wiser ancients had not attemptedto define; but except in this perilous adventure, thepractice of exorbitant usury was severely restrained*.
• Justinian has not condescended to give usury a place in his Institutes ;. but







OCR Output








270 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. sentence, was admitted as a confession of guilt, andxxxvn. ^e Spoils of the deceased were seized by the inhumanclaims of the treasury. Yet the civilians have alwaysrespected the natural right of a citizen to dispose ofhis life; and the posthumous disgrace invented byTarquin to check the despair of his subjects was neverrevived or imitated by succeeding tyrants. The powersof this world have indeed lost their dominion overhim who is resolved on death; and his arm can onlybe restrained by the religious apprehension of a fu­ture state. Suicides are enumerated by Virgil amongthe unfortunate, rather than the guilty; and thepoetical fables of the infernal shades could not se­riously influence the faith or practice of mankind.But the precepts of the gospel, or the church, haveat length imposed a pious servitude on the minds ofChristians, and condemn them to expect, without amurmur, the last stroke of disease or the executioner.Abuses of The penal statutes form a very small proportion of
civil juris-
prudence, the sixty-two books of the Code and Pandects; and,in all judicial proceeding, the life or death of a citi­zen is determined with less caution and delay thanthe most ordinary question of covenantor inheritance.This singular distinction, though something may beallowed for the urgent necessity of defending thepeace of society, is derived from the nature of cri­minal and civil jurisprudence. Our duties to thestate are simple and uniform; the law by which heis condemned is inscribed not only on brass or marble,but on the conscience of the offender; and his guilt iscommonly proved by the testimony of a single fact.But our relations to each other are various and in­finite: our obligations are created, annulled, andmodified, by injuries, benefits, and promises; andthe interpretation of voluntary contracts and testa­ments, which are often dictated by fraud or ignorance,affords a long and laborious exercise to the sagacity







OCR Output








eONTENTS. vii


CHAP. XXXV.
State of the Barbaric World.—Establishment of the Lombards on
the Danube.—Tribes and Inroads of the Sclavonians.— Origin,
Empire, and Embassies of the Turks.—The Flight of the Avars.
—Chosroes I. or Nushirvan King of Persia.—His prosperous
Reign and Wars with the Romans.—The Colchian or Lazic
War.—The ^Ethiopians.
A. D. Page
527—565. Weakness of the empire of Justinian . . 87
State of the Barbarians . . .89
The Gepidae . . .' . ib.
The Lombards . . . . .90
The Sclavonians . . . . .92
Their, inroads . . . .94
545 Origin and monarchy of the Turks in Asia . . 97
The Avars fly before the Turks, and approach the
empire .....
558 Their embassy to Constantinople
569—582. Embassies of the Turks and Romans
500—530. State of Persia
531—579. Reign of Nushirvan, or Chosroes


His love of learning
533—539. Peace and war with the Romans
540 He invades Syria ....
And ruins Antioch . . ...
541 Defence of the East by Belisarius
Description of Colchos, Lazica, or Mingrelia
Manners of the natives
Revolutions of Colchos
Under the Persians, before Christ, 500
Under the Romans, before Christ, 60
130 Visit of Arian ....
522 Conversion of the Lazi
542—549. Revolt and repentance of the Colchians
549—551. Siege of Petra
549—556. The Colchian or Lazic war
540—561. Negotiations and treaties between Justinian and
Chosroes .
522 Conquests of the Abyssinians
533 Their alliance with Justinian


100
101
103
106
108
110
113
115
116
118
121
124
126
ib.
127
ib.
128
ib.
130
132
135
137
139


a 4







OCR Output








272 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. and delays are necessary to guard the person and pro-
_ perty of the citizen; that the discretion of the judge
is the first engine of tyranny, and that the laws of afree people should foresee and determine every ques­tion that may probably arise in the exercise of powerand the transactions of industry.







OCR Output








424 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap, empire, by placing the Imperial crown on the headXL- of Charlemagne, in the year 800 *. But the empireof this prince, which was extended by his conquests,till it embraced the far greater part of France, Spain,Italy, Germany, and Hungary, was in a short timereduced from the highest degree of strength to thelowest condition of weakness. The reign of his sonLewis the First was distracted by civil war. Theempire was divided among his three sons. The dregsof the Carlovingian race no longer exhibited anysymptoms of virtue or power; and the ridiculousepithets of the Bald, the Stammerer, the Simple, andthe Fat, distinguished the dates and uniform featuresof a crowd of kings, alike deserving of oblivion.Charles the Fat was deprived of his crown in a diet.Germany and France were for ever separated; and aperiod of seventy-four years may be termed a vacancyfrom the abdication of Charles the Fat to the esta­blishment of the power of Othq the First, in theyear 962.
But the events of the ninth and tenth centuries inthe west of Europe, the fall of the Carlovingian race,and the establishment of the present Constitution ofthe Germanic empire, belong to the histories ofFrance and Germany; and can scarcely be said toform a part of the decline and fall of the Romanempire. That empire expired in the West in theperson of Augustulus, in the middle of the fifth cen­tury; and the connexion of Romagna with Con­stantinople, which the arms of Justinian re-esta­blished, was finally dissolved by Astolphus, when herendered himself master of Ravenna. In the East,the Roman world bowed to the government of a fe­


* This great event of the translation or restoration of the empire is related and
discussed by Natalis Alexander (secul. ix. dissert, i. p. 390 337), Pagi (tom iii
p. 418;, Muratori (Annali d'ltalia, tom. iv. p. 339—352), Sigo'nius de Regno"Italiae, 1. iv. opp. tom. ii. p. 247—251), Spanheim (de ficta translaiione Imperii)Giannone (tom. i. p. 395—405), St. Marc (Abrege Chronologique, tom. i. p.438—450), Guillard (Hist, de Charlemagne, tom. ii. p. 386—44G'.







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 457


"fidels. My brother (a name most offensive to the chap."vanity of the Greek), accelerate your naval sue- XL-"cours, respect your allies, and distrust your flat-"terers."
These lofty hopes were soon extinguished by the New pro-death of Lewis, and the decay of the Carlovingian Greeks inhouse; and, whoever might deserve the honour, the ^f^' 890Greek emperors Basil and his son Leo secured theadvantage of the reduction of Bari. The Italians ofApulia and Calabria were persuaded or compelled toacknowledge their supremacy, and an ideal line fromMount Garganus to the bay of Salerno leaves thefar greater part of the kingdom of Naples under thedominion of the Eastern empire. Beyond that line,the dukes or republics of Amalfi and Naples, whohad never forfeited their voluntary allegiance, re­joiced in the neighbourhood of their lawful sove­reign; and Amalfi was enriched by supplying Europewith the produce and manufactures of Asia. Butthe Lombard princes of Benevento, Salerno, andCapua, were reluctantly torn from the communionof the Latin world, and too often violated their oathsof servitude and. tribute. The city of Bari rose todignity and wealth, as the metropolis of the newtheme or province of Lombardy; the title of patri­cian, and afterwards the singular name of Catapan,was assigned to the supreme governor; and the po­licy both of the church and state was modelled inexact subordination to the throne of Constantinople.As long as the sceptre was disputed by the princes ofItaly, their efforts were feeble and adverse; and theGreeks resisted or eluded the forces of Germanywhich descended from the Alps under the Imperialstandard of the Othos. The first and greatest ofthose Saxon princes was compelled to relinquish thesiege of Bari; the second, after the loss of his stoutest Defeat ofbarons, escaped with honour from the bloody field of a.d.983.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 253


in the lives of the Romans; and if that nation was chap.deficient in the more amiable qualities of benevolence xxxvir-and generosity, they astonished the Greeks by theirsincere and simple performance of the most burthen-some engagements*. Yet among the same people,according to the rigid maxims of the patricians anddecemvirs, a naked pact, a promise, or even an oath,did not create any civil obligation, unless it was con­firmed by the legal form of a stipulation. Whatevermight be the etymology of the Latin word, it con­veyed the idea of a firm and irrevocable contract,which was always expressed in the mode of a questionand answer. Do you promise to pay me one hun­dred pieces of gold? was the solemn interrogationof Seius. I do promise—was the reply of Sempro-nius. The friends of Sempronius, who answeredfor his ability and inclination, might be separatelysued at the option of Seius; and the benefit ofpartition, or order of reciprocal actions, insensiblydeviated from the strict theory of stipulation. Themost cautious and deliberate consent was justlyrequired to sustain the validity of a gratuitous pro­mise; and the citizen who might have obtained alegal security incurred the suspicion of fraud, andpaid the forfeit of his neglect. But the ingenuityof the civilians successfully laboured to convertsimple engagements into the form of solemn stipula­tions. The praetors, as the guardians of social faith,admitted every rational evidence of a voluntary anddeliberate act, which in their tribunal produced anequitable obligation, and for which they gave an ac­tion and a remedy.
2. The obligations of the second class, as they were Benefits.contracted by the delivery of a thing, are marked by
• How much is the cool, rational evidence of Polybius (1 . vi. p. 693.1. xxxi.p. 1459, 1460) superior to vague, indiscriminate applause—omnium maxime ctpracipue fidem coluit (A. Gellius, xx. 1).







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. • 503


the Imperial library; by their pens, or those of their C5AP-
associates, they were imparted in such extracts and '"—
abridgments as might amuse the curiosity, withoutoppressing the indolence, of the public. Besides theBasilics, Or code of laws, the arts of husbandry andwar, of feeding or destroying the human species,were propagated with equal diligence; and the hi­story of Greece and Rome was digested into fifty-three heads or titles, of which two only (of embassies,and of virtues and vices) have escaped the injuries oftime. In every station, the reader might contem­plate the image of the past world, apply the lessonor warning of each page, and learn to admire, per­haps to imitate, the examples of a brighter period.I shall not expatiate on the works of the ByzantineGreeks, who, by the assiduous study of the ancients,have deserved in some measure the remembrance andgratitude of the moderns. The scholars of the pre­sent age may still enjoy the benefit of the philoso­phical common-place book of Stobaeus, the gramma­tical and historical lexicon of Suidas, the Chiliads ofTzetzes, which comprise six hundred narratives intwelve thousand verses, and the commentaries onHomer of Eustathius archbishop of Thessalonica,who, from his horn of plenty, has poured the namesand authorities of four hundred writers. From theseoriginals, and from the numerous tribe of scholiastsand critics, some estimate maybe formed of the literarywealth of the twelfth century: Constantinople was en­lightened by the genius of Homer and Demosthenes,of Aristotle and Plato; and in the enjoyment or neg­lect of our present riches, we must envy the genera­tion that could still peruse the history of Theopompus,the orations of Hyperides, the comedies of Menander,and the odes of Alcaeus and Sappho. The frequentlabour of illustration attests not only the existencebut the popularity of the Grecian classics: the ge­







OCR Output








390 THE DECLINE AND FALL


CHAP.XL.
Punish­ment ofMartinaami Hcra-clconas,A. D. 041,September.


ConstansII. A. D.
641, Sep-tcmber.


of the judgment of tyrants, and the Imperial cul­prits were deposed and condemned as the authors ofthe death of Constantine. But the severity of theconscript fathers was stained by the indiscriminatepunishment of the innocent and the guilty: Martinaand Heracleonas were sentenced to the amputation,the former of her tongue, the latter of his nose; andafter this cruel execution, they consumed the remain­der of their days in exile and oblivion. The Greekswho were capable of reflection might find some con­solation for their servitude, by observing the abuseof power when it was lodged for a moment in thehands of an aristocracy.
We shall imagine ourselves transported five hun­dred years backwards to the age of the Antonines.if welisten to the oration which Constans II. pronouncedin the twelfth year of his age, before the Byzantinesenate. After returning his thanks for the just pu­nishment of the assassins who had intercepted thefairest hopes of his father's reign, "By the Divine"Providence," said the young emperor, "andby your"righteous decree, Martina and her incestuous pro-"geny have been cast headlong from the throne."Your majesty and wisdom have prevented the Ro-"man state from degenerating into lawless tyranny."I, therefore, exhort and beseech you to stand forth"as the counsellors and judges of the common"safety." The senators were gratified by the re­spectful address and liberal donative of their sove­reign; but these servile Greeks were unworthy andregardless of freedom, and in his mind the lesson ofan hour was quickly erased by the prejudices of theage and the habits of despotism. He retained only ajealous fear lest the senate or people should one dayinvade the right of primogeniture, and seat his bro­ther Theodosius on an equal throne. By the impo­sition of holy orders, the grandson of Heraclius was







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 465


new enemies and new misfortunes: the relics of Italy ct*fi*-
were swept away by the Norman adventurers; and —
almost all the Asiatic branches were dissevered fromthe Roman trunk by the Turkish conquerors. Afterthese losses, the emperors of the Comnenian familycontinued to reign from the Danube to Peloponnesus,and from Belgrade to Nice, Trebizond, and the wind­ing stream of the Meander. The spacious provincesof Thrace, Macedonia, and Greece, were obedient totheir sceptre: the possession of Cyprus, Rhodes, andCrete, was accompanied by the fifty islands of theiEgean, or Holy Sea; and the remnant of their empiretranscends the measure of the largest of the Europeankingdoms.
The same princes might assert with dignity and Generaltruth, that of all the monarchs of Christendom they populous-possessed the greatest city, the most ample revenue,the most flourishing and populous state. With thedecline and fall of the empire, the cities of the Westhad decayed and fallen; nor could the ruins ofRome, or the mud walls, wooden hovels, and narrowprecincts, of Paris and London, prepare the Latinstranger to contemplate the situation and extent ofConstantinople, her stately palaces and churches, andthe arts and luxury of an innumerable people. Herriches might attract, but her virgin strength had re­pelled, and still promised to repel, the audacious in­vasion of the Persian and Bulgarian, the Arab andthe Russian. The provinces were less fortunate andimpregnable; and few districts, few cities, could bediscovered, which had not been violated by some fierceBarbarian, impatient to despoil, because he was hope­less to possess. From the age of Justinian, the Easternempire was sinking below its former level: the powersof destruction were more active than those of improvement; and the calamities of war were imbit-tered by the more permanent evils of tyranny. Yet


ness.
VOL. IV. H H







OCR Output








430 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. of the ninth century were provoked by the insolence... of a female, who, in the front of the standards, pre­
sumed to direct their discipline and animate theirvalour; and their licentious clamours advised the newSemiramis to reverence the majesty of a Roman camp.After an unsuccessful campaign, the emperor left intheir winter quarters of Thrace a disaffected armyunder the command of his enemies, and their artfuleloquence persuaded the soldiers to break the do­minion of the eunuchs, to degrade the husband ofProcopia, and to assert the right of a military elec­tion. They marched towards the capital; yet theclergy, the senate, and the people of Constantinopleadhered to the cause of Michael; and the troopsand treasures of Asia might have protracted the mis­chiefs of civil war; but his humanity (by the am­bitious it will be termed his weakness) protested thatnot a drop of Christian blood should be shed in hisquarrel, and his messengers presented the conquerorswith the keys of the city and palace. They weredisarmed by his innocence and submission; his lifeand his eyes were spared; and the Imperial monkenjoyed the comforts of solitude and religion abovethirty-two years after he had been stripped of thepurple, and separated from his wife.Leo v- the A rebel, in the time of Nicephorus, the famousa.d. 813'. and unfortunate Bardanes, had once the curiosity toJuly 11. COnSult an Asiatic prophet, who, after prognosticatinghis fall, announced the fortunes of his three principalofficers, Leo the Armenian, Michael the Phrygian,and Thomas the Cappadocian; the successive reignsof the two former, and the fruitless and fatal enter­prise of the third. This prediction was verified, orrather was produced by the event.
Ten years afterwards, when the Thracian camp re­jected the husband of Procopia, the crown was pre­sented to the same Leo, the first in military rank,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 127


Mithridates, king of Pontus, added Colchos to the chap.wide circle of his dominions on the Euxine; and xxxv-when the natives presumed to request that his sonmight reign over them, he bound the ambitious youthin chains of gold, and delegated a servant in his place.In the pursuit of Mithridates, the Romans advanced under theto the banks of the Phasis, and their galleys ascended beforethe river till they reached the camp of Pompey and Chnst 60'his legions. But the senate, and afterwards the em­perors, disdained to reduce that distant and uselessconquest into the form of a province. The familyof a Greek rhetorician was permitted to reign inColchos and the adjacent kingdoms, from the timeof Mark Antony to that of Nero; and after the raceof Polemo was extinct, the eastern Pontus, whichpreserved his name, extended no farther than theneighbourhood of Trebizond. Beyond these limitsthe fortifications of Hyssus, of Apsarus, of the Phasis,of Dioscurias or Sebastopolis, and of Pityus, wereguarded by sufficient detachments of horse and foot;and six princes of Colchos received- their diademsfrom the lieutenants of Caesar. One of these lieu- Vi^oftenants, the eloquent and philosophic Arrian, sur- a. d. 130.veyed, and has described, the Euxine coast, underthe reign of Hadrian. The garrison which he re­viewed at the mouth of the Phasis consisted of fourhundred chosen legionaries; the brick walls andtowers, the double ditch, and the military engineson the rampart, rendered this place inaccessible tothe Barbarians; but the new suburbs, which had beenbuilt by the merchants and veterans, required, in theopinion of Arrian, some external defence. As thestrength of the empire was gradually impaired, theRomans stationed on the Phasis were either with­drawn or expelled; and the tribe of the Lazi, whoseposterity speak a foreign dialect and inhabit the sea-coast of Trebizond, imposed their name and dominion







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 301


sufficiently conversant with the obsolete, the rustic, chap.and the municipal dialects of ancient Italy, we should xxxvnLtrace the origin of many terms which might, perhaps,be rejected by the classic purity of Rome. A numerousarmy constitutes but a small nation, and the powersof the Lombards were soon diminished by the retreatof twenty thousand Saxons, who scorned a dependentsituation, and returned, after many bold and perilousadventures, to their native country *. The camp of Al-boin was of formidable extent, but the extent of a campwould be easily circumscribed within the limits of acity; and its martial inhabitants must be thinly scat­tered over the face of a large country. When Alboindescended from the Alps, he invested his nephew, thefirst duke of Friuli, with the command of the pro­vince and the people; but the prudent Gisulf wouldhave declined the dangerous office, unless he hadbeen permitted to choose, among the nobles of theLombards, a sufficient number of families to form aperpetual colony of soldiers and subjects. In theprogress of conquest, the same option could not begranted to the dukes of Brescia or Bergamo, of Paviaor Turin, of Spoleto or Beneventum; but each ofthese, and each of their colleagues, settled in hisappointed district with a band of followers, who re­sorted to his standard in war and his tribunal inpeace. Their attachment was free and honourable:resigning the gifts and benefits which they had ac­cepted, they might emigrate with their families intothe jurisdiction of another duke; but their absencefrom the kingdom was punished with death, as acrime of military desertion t. The posterity of thefirst conquerors struck a deeper root into the soil,which, by every motive of interest and honour, theywere bound to defend. A Lombard was born the


* Paul, ilc (icst. Langobard. 1. iii. c . 5, 6,7-
t Compare No. 3 and 177 of the laws of Rotharis.







OCR Output








.-


/"







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 381


CHAP. XL.
Conquest of Persia, Syria, and Egypt, by the Saracens.—Succession and Character of the Emperors of Constan­tinople, from Heraclius to Leo the Philosopher.—TwoSiegesqf Constantinople by the Saracens.— Their Conquestsof Africa and Spain.—Invasion of France, and Defeat byCharles Mattel.—-Exarchate of Ravenna conquered by theLombards.— Their Kingdom subdued by Charlemagne.—His Coronation, and Separation of Italy from the Greeks—War with Harun al Rashid. Saracens subdue Creteand Sicily, attack Rome, and are repulsed by Pope Leo.—First Conquest ofRari by the Emperor Basil.
When the emperor Heraclius returned in triumph chap-from the Persian war, he entertained at Emesa one XL"of the ambassadors of Mahomet *, who invited the
• The history of Arabia, and of Mahomet and his successors, is detailed withsuch circumstantial minuteness by Mr. Gibbon, and he enters so largely into thenature and tenets of the Mahometan religion, that almost a whole volume of thehistory is occupied with this subject. The intelligent reader, who notices the in­defatigable zeal with which our author endeavours to point out the superiority ofthe Moslems above the Christians, will be at no loss to discover the reason of hisexerting the full powers of his pen, on a subject of so peculiar a nature.
The history of the Christian church docs not form a part of the present pub.lication, and as the religious systems of the different nations which surrounded theempire are equally excluded, I shall not follow the historian in those parts ofhis work, in which he enlarges on the doctrine of the Koran.
With respect to the life and character of Mahomet, I am persuaded that noabridgment would be satisfactory. His history should be fully and completelydetailed, if it were at all introduced; and the writer who entered on the taskshould possess the talents and the principles Which directed the pen of the authorof the celebrated Bampton Lectures.
I therefore request my readers in this instance, as in the rest of the presentpublication, to remember that it is the history of the Decline and Fall of the Ro­man Empire that is now laid before them.
With the wars of the successors of Mahomet, we are indeed deeply interested;and I hope that I have not neglected any of those parts of the great work of our au­thor, in which the Greek empire is engaged: not but it is with the progress of thearms, and not with the religious tenets of the Moslems, that our history is prin­cipally concerned. Instead, therefore, of withdrawing the attention of the readerfrom the Roman world, so completely, and for so long a period, as Mr. Gibbonhas done, I shall continue the narrative without interruption, inserting in theirproper place, and proper order of time, the events by which the empire was gra­dually shaken, and at length finally destroyed.







OCR Output








438 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. who, in the trial of the first adventures, might suc-XL- ceed with the more glory, or fail with the least re­proach. In the revenge of his injury, the caliphprepared to retaliate a similar affront. The fatherof Theophilus was a native of Amorium in Phrygia;the original seat of the Imperial house had beenadorned with privileges and monuments; and, what­ever might be the indifference of the people, Con­stantinople itself was scarcely of more value in theeyes of the sovereign and his court. The name ofAmorium was inscribed on the shields of the Sara­cens; and their three armies were again unitedunder the walls of the devoted city. It had beenproposed by the wisest counsellors to evacuate Amo­rium, to remove the inhabitants, and to abandon theempty structures to the vain resentment of the Bar­barians. The emperor embraced the more generousresolution of defending,, in a siege and battle, thecountry of his ancestors. When the armies drewnear, the front of the Mahometan line appeared to aRoman eye more closely planted with spears andjavelins; but the event of the action was not glo­rious on either side to the national troops. TheArabs were broken, but it was by the swords ofthirty thousand Persians, who had obtained serviceand settlement in the Byzantine empire. TheGreeks were repulsed and vanquished, but it wasby the arrows of the Turkish cavalry; and had nottheir bowstrings been damped and relaxed by theevening rain, very few of the Christians could haveescaped with the emperor from the field of battle.They breathed at Dorylaeum, at the distance of threedays; and Theophilus reviewing his trembling squa­drons, forgave the common flight both of the princeand people. After this discovery of his weakness,he vainly hoped to deprecate the fate of Amorium;the inexorable caliph rejected with contempt his







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 95


their vicinity to the empire; and the level country chap.
of Moldavia and Walachia was occupied by the'
Antes, a Sclavonian tribe, which swelled the titlesof Justinian with an epithet of conquest. Againstthe Antes he erected the fortifications of the lowerDanube; and laboured to secure the alliance of apeople seated in the direct channel of northern in­undation, an interval of two hundred miles betweenthe mountains of Transylvania and the Euxine sea.But the Antes wanted power and inclination to stemthe fury of the torrent: and the light-armed Scla-vonians, from a hundred tribes, pursued with al­most equal speed the footsteps of the Bulgarian horse.The payment of one piece of gold for each soldierprocured a safe and easy retreat through the countryof the Gepidae, who commanded the passage of theupper Danube*. The hopes or fears of the Bar­barians; their intestine union or discord; the acci­dent of a frozen or shallow stream; the prospect ofharvest or vintage; the prosperity or distress of theRomans; were the causes which produced the uni­form repetition of annual visits, tedious in the nar­rative, and destructive in the event. The same year,and possibly the same month, in which Ravenna sur­rendered, was marked by an invasion of the Huns orBulgarians, so dreadful, that it almost effaced thememory of their past inroads. They spread fromthe suburbs of Constantinople to the Ionian gulf,destroyed thirty-two cities or castles, erased Potidaea,which Athens had built and Philip had besieged,and repassed the Danube, dragging at their horses,heels one hundred and twenty thousand of the sub­jects of Justinian. In a subsequent inroad theypierced the wall of the Thracian Chersonesus, ex­tirpated the habitations and the inhabitants, boldlytraversed the Hellespont, and returned to their com-
* Procopius, Goth. 1. iv. c. 25.


r







OCR Output













OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 373


Romans. The discovery of his flight agitated with chap.
terror and tumult the palace, the city, and the camp^'
of Dastagerd; the satraps hesitated whether they hadmost to fear from their sovereign or the enemy; andthe females of the haram were astonished and pleasedby the sight of mankind, till the jealous husband ofthree thousand wives again confined them to a moredistant castle. At his command, the army of Dasta­gerd retreated to a new camp; the front was coveredby the Arba, and a line of two hundred elephants;the troops of the more distant provinces successivelyarrived, and the vilest domestics of the king andsatraps were enrolled for the last defence of thethrone. It was still in the power of Chosroes toobtain a reasonable peace; and he was repeatedlypressed by the messengers of Heraclius to spare theblood of his subjects, and to relieve a humane con­queror from the painful duty of carrying fire andsword through the fairest countries of Asia. Butthe pride of the Persian had not yet sunk to thelevel of his fortune; he derived a momentary con­fidence from the retreat of the emperor; he wept withimpotent rage over the ruins of his Assyrian palaces,and disregarded too long the rising murmurs of thenation, who complained that their lives and fortuneswere sacrificed to the obstinacy of an old man. Thatunhappy old man was himself tortured with thesharpest pains both of mind and body; and, in theconsciousness of his approaching end, he resolved tofix the tiara on the head of Merdeza, the most fa­voured of his sons. But the will of Chosroes was nolonger revered, and Shoes, who gloried in the rankand merit of his mother Sira, had conspired withthe malecontents to assert and anticipate the rightsof primogeniture *. Twenty-two satraps, they styled


* The authentic narrative of the fall of Chosroes is contained in the letter ofHeraclius (Chron. Pascha1 . p. 398) and the history of Thcophanes (p. 271).


B B 3







OCR Output













OCR Output








30 THE DECLINE AND FAIX


chap. Their contempt was soon justified by a new ex-
XXXIV i
ample of a vulgar truth; that flattery adheres to


Retum and power, and envy to superior merit. The chiefs of
triumph of,— J r . ,
Beiisarius, the Koman army presumed to think themselves theAutumn.4 rivals of a hero. Their private despatches maliciouslyaffirmed, that the conqueror of Africa, strong in hisreputation and the public love, conspired to seathimself on the throne of the V-andals. Justinianlistened with too patient an ear; and his silence wasthe result of jealousy rather than of confidence. Anhonourable alternative, of remaining in the province,or of returning to the capital, was indeed submittedto the discretion of Belisarius; but he wisely con­cluded, from intercepted letters, and the knowledgeof his sovereign's temper, that he must either resignhis head, erect his standard, or confound his enemiesby his presence and submission. Innocence andcourage decided his choice: his guards, captives,and treasures, were diligently embarked;" and soprosperous was the navigation, that his arrival atConstantinople preceded any certain account of hisdeparture from the port of Carthage. Such unsus­pecting loyalty removed the apprehensions of Jus­tinian : envy was silenced and inflamed by the publicgratitude: and the third Africanus obtained thehonours of a triumph, a ceremony which the city ofConstantinople had never seen, and which ancientRome, since the reign of Tiberius, had reserved forthe auspicious arms of the Caesars. From the palaceof Belisarius, the procession was conducted throughthe principal streets to the hippodrome; and thismemorable day seemed to avenge the injuries ofGenseric, and to expiate the shame of the Romans.The wealth of nations was displayed, the trophies ofmartial or effeminate luxury; rich armour, goldenthrones, and the chariots of state which had been







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 77


"was impatient to reward his services, and to consult chap.
"his wisdom; and he alone was capable of defend- 1
"ing the East against the innumerable armies of"Persia." Belisarius understood the suspicion, ac­cepted the excuse, embarked at Ravenna his spoilsand trophies; and proved, by his ready obedience,that such an abrupt removal from the government ofItaly was not less unjust than it might have beenindiscreet. The emperor received with honourablecourtesy both Vitiges and his more noble consort;and as the king of the Goths conformed to theAthanasian faith, he obtained, with a rich inheritanceof lands in Asia, the rank of senator and patrician.Every spectator admired, without peril, the strengthand stature of the young Barbarians: they adoredthe majesty of the throne, and promised to shed theirblood in the service of their benefactor. Justiniandeposited in the Byzantine palace the treasures ofthe Gothic monarchy. A flattering senate was some­times admitted to gaze on the magnificent spectacle;but it was enviously secluded from the public view;and the conqueror of Italy renounced, without amurmur, perhaps without a sigh, the well-earnedhonours of a second triumph. His glory was indeedexalted above all external pomp; and the faint andhollow praises of the court were supplied, even in aservile age, by the respect and admiration of hiscountry. Whenever he appeared in the streets andpublic places of Constantinople, Belisarius attractedand satisfied the eyes of the people. His lofty statureand majestic countenance fulfilled their expectationsof a hero •> the meanest of his fellow-citizens wereemboldened by his gentle and gracious demeanour;and the martial train which attended his footstepsleft his person more accessible than in a day of battle.Seven thousand horsemen, matchless for beauty andvalour, were maintained in the service, and at the







OCR Output








298 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. Imperial forces had been effected in the neighbour-xxxvm. hood of Milan, perhaps they might have subvertedthe throne of the Lombards; but the Franks ex­pected six days the signal of a flaming village, andthe arms of the Greeks were idly employed in thereduction of Modena and Parma, which were tornfrom them after the retreat of their Transalpineallies. The victorious Autharis asserted his claim tothe dominion of Italy. At the foot of the RhaetianAlps, he subdued the resistance, and rifled the hiddentreasures, of a sequestered island in the lake of Co-mum. At the extreme point of Calabria, he touchedwith his spear a column on the sea-shore of Rhegium,proclaiming that ancient land-mark to stand the im­movable boundary of his kingdom.Mchateof During a period of two hundred years, Italy wasRavenna, unequally divided between the kingdom of the Lom­bards and the exarchate of Ravenna. The offices andprofessions, which the jealousy of Constantine hadseparated, were united by the indulgence of Jus­tinian; and eighteen successive exarchs were in­vested, in the decline of the empire, with the fullremains of civil, of military, and even of ecclesiasticalpower. Their immediate jurisdiction, which wasafterwards consecrated as the patrimony of St. Peter,extended over the modern Romagna, the marshesor valleys of Ferrara and Commachio, five maritimecities from Rimini to Ancona, and a second, inlandPentapolis, between the Adriatic coast and the hillsof the Apennine. Three subordinate provinces, ofRome, of Venice, and of Naples, which were dividedby hostile lands from the palace bf Ravenna, acknow­ledged, both in peace and war, the supremacy of theexarch. The duchy of Rome appears to have in­cluded the Tuscan, Sabine, and Latian conquests, ofthe first four hundred years of the city; and the limitsmay be distinctly traced along the coast, from Civita







OCR Output








474 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. old world; and in the tenth century, the ByzantineXLL palace excited the admiration, at least of the Latins,by an unquestionable pre-eminence of strength, size,and magnificence. But the toil and treasure of somany ages had produced a vast and irregular pile:each separate building was marked with the characterof the times and of the founder; and the want ofspace might excuse the reigning monarch who de­molished perhaps with secret satisfaction the worksof his predecessors. The economy of the emperorTheophilus allowed a more free and ample scope forhis domestic luxury and splendour. A favourite am­bassador, who had astonished the Abbassides them­selves by his pride and liberality, presented on hisreturn the model of a palace which the caliph of Bag­dad had recently constructed on the banks of theTigris. The model was instantly copied and sur­passed: the new buildings of Theophilus * were ac­companied with gardens, and with five churches, oneof which was conspicuous for size and beauty: it wascrowned with three domes, the roof of gilt brass re­posed on columns of Italian marble, and the wallswere incrusted with marbles of various colours. Inthe face of the church, a semicircular portico, of thefigure and name of the Greek sigma, was supportedby fifteen columns of Phrygian marble, and the sub­terraneous vaults were of a similar construction. Thesquare before the sigma was decorated with a foun­tain, and the margin of the basin was lined and en­compassed with plates of silver. In the beginning ofeach season, the basin, instead of water, was reple­nished with the most exquisite fruits, which wereabandoned to the populace for the entertainment ofthe prince. He enjoyed this tumultuous spectacle
• Sea the anonymous continuator of Theophanes (p. 59, 61, 86.), whom Ihave followed in the neat and concise abstract of La Beau (Hist, de Bas Em­pire, tom. xiv. p. 436, 438).







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 45


he marched, without hesitation, above fifty miles, to chap.seek an enemy, whom he affected to pity and despise. xxxjv-Eight thousand rebels trembled at his approach; theywere routed at the first onset, by the dexterity oftheir master: and this ignoble victory would haverestored the peace of Africa, if the conqueror hadnot been hastily recalled to Sicily, to appease a se­dition which was kindled during his absence in hisown camp. Disorder and disobedience were the com­mon malady of the times: the genius to command,and the virtue to obey, resided only in the mind ofBelisarius.
Although Theodatus descended from a race of Reign andheroes, he was ignorant of the art, and averse to Theodatusthe dangers, of war. Although he had studied the JjjJ Go°fUlicwritings of Plato and Tully, philosophy was incapa- My,ble of purifying his mind from the basest passions, October—'avarice and fear. He had purchased a sceptre by August'0'ingratitude and murder: at the first menace of anenemy, he degraded his own majesty, and that of anation, which already disdained their unworthy sove­reign. Astonished by the recent example of Geli-mer, he saw himself dragged in chains through thestreets of Constantinople: the terrors which Belisa­rius inspired were heightened by the eloquence ofPeter, the Byzantine ambassador; and that bold andsubtle advocate persuaded him to sign a treaty, tooignominious to become the foundation of a lastingpeace. It was stipulated, that in the acclamationsof the Roman people, the name of the emperorshould be always proclaimed before that of the Go­thic king; and that as often as the statue of Theo­datus was erected in brass or marble, the divineimage of Justinian should be placed on its righthand. Instead of conferring, the king of Italy wasreduced to solicit, the honours of the senate; andthe consent of the emperor was made indispensable







OCR Output








OF THE KOMAN EMPIRE. 281


Teutonic language, still repeated the songs which chap.described the heroic virtues, the valour, liberality, XXXVIILand fortune of the king of the Lombards. But hisambition was yet unsatisfied; and the conqueror ofthe Gepidae turned his eyes from the Danube to thericher banks of the Po and the Tyber. Fifteen yearshad not elapsed since his subjects, the confederatesof Narses, had visited the pleasant climate of Italy:the mountains, the rivers, the highways, were familiarto their memory: the report of their success, perhapsthe view of their spoils, had kindled in the risinggeneration the flame of emulation and enterprise.Their hopes were encouraged by the spirit and elo­quence of Alboin; and it is affirmed, that he spoketo their senses, by producing, at the royal feast, thefairest and most exquisite fruits that grew spon­taneously in the garden of the world. No soonerhad he erected his standard, than the native strengthof the Lombards was multiplied by the adventurousyouth of Germany and Scythia. The robust pea­santry of Noricum and Pannonia had resumed themanners of Barbarians; and the names of the Ge­pidae, Bulgarians, Sarmatians, and Bavarians, may bedistinctly traced in the provinces of Italy. Of theSaxons, the old allies of the Lombards, twenty thou­sand warriors, with their wives and children, acceptedthe invitation of Alboin. Their bravery contributedto his success; but the accession or the absence oftheir numbers was not sensibly felt in the magnitudeof his host. Every mode of religion was freely prac­tised by its respective votaries. The king of theLombards had been educated in the Arian heresy;but the Catholics, in their public worship, were al­lowed to pray for his conversion; while the morestubborn Barbarians sacrificed a she-goat, or perhapsa captive, to the gods of their fathers. The Lom­bards, and their confederates, were united by their







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 365


divisions of their chiefs, and by a well-concerted train chap.of marches, retreats, and successful actions, finally XXIX-chased them from the field into the fortified cities ofMedia and Assyria. In the severity of the winterseason, Sabaraza deemed himself secure in the wallsof Salban; he was surprised by the activity of Hera-clius, who divided his troops and performed a labori­ous inarch in the silence of the night. The flat roofsof the houses were defended with useless valour againstthe darts and torches of the Romans : the satraps andnobles of Persia, with their wives and children, andthe flower of their martial youth, were, either slain ormade prisoners. The general escaped by a precipi­tate flight, but his golden armour was the prize ofthe conqueror; and the soldiers of Heraclius enjoyedthe wealth and repose which they had so nobly de­served. On the return of spring, the emperor tra­versed in seven days the mountains of Curdistan,and passed without resistance the rapid stream of theTigris. Oppressed by the weight of their spoils andcaptives, the Roman ajmy halted under the walls ofAmida; and Heraclius informed the senate of Con­stantinople of his safety and success, which they hadalready felt by the retreat of the besiegers. Thebridges of the Euphrates were destroyed by the Per­sians; but as soon as the emperor had discovered aford, they hastily retired to defend the banks of theSarus, in Cilicia. That river, an impetuous torrent,was about three hundred feet broad, the bridge wasfortified with strong turrets, and the banks were linedwith Barbarian archers. After a bloody conflict,which continued till the evening, the Romans pre­vailed in the assault, and a Persian of gigantic sizewas slain and thrown into the Sarus by the hand ofthe emperor himself. The enemies were dispersedand dismayed; Heraclius pursued his march to Se-baste in Cappadocia; and at the expiration of three







OCR Output








392 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. the public hatred. His subjects contributed, withXL" zeal and alacrity, to chastise the guilt and presump­tion of a province which had usurped the rights ofthe senate and people: the young emperor sailedfrom the Hellespont with a powerful fleet; and thelegions of Rome and Carthage were assembled underhis standard in the harbour of Syracuse. The defeatof the Sicilian tyrant was easy, his punishment just,and his beauteous head was exposed in the hippo­drome. After pouring this bloody libation on hisfather's tomb, Constantine returned to his capital;and the growth of his young beard during the Sicilianvoyage was announced, by the familiar surname ofPogonatus, to the Grecian world. But his reign,like that of his predecessor, was stained with fraternaldiscord. On his two brothers, Heraclius and Tibe­rius, he had bestowed the title of Augustus: anempty title, for they continued to languish, withouttrust or power, in the solitude of the palace. Attheir secret instigation, the troops of the Anatoliantheme or province approached the city on the Asiaticside, demanded for the royal brothers the partitionor exercise of sovereignty, and supported their sedi­tious claim by a theological argument. The emperorinvited these learned divines to a friendly conference,in which they might propose their arguments to thesenate: they obeyed the summons, but the prospectof their bodies hanging on the gibbet in the suburbof Galata reconciled their companions to the unityof the reign of Constantine. He pardoned his bro­thers, and their names were still pronounced in thepublic acclamations; but on the repetition, or suspi­cion, of a similar offence, the obnoxious princes weredeprived of their titles and noses, in the presence ofthe Catholic bishops, who were assembled at Con­stantinople in the sixth general synod.pf "consul- In the reign of the emperor Constantine Pogo­







OCR Output








156 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. archers. But the enterprise of forcing these bai-riers,XXXVI- and relieving the capital, displays a shining exampleof the boldness and conduct of Belisarius. His ca­valry advanced from the port along the public road,to awe the motions, and distract the attention, of theenemy. His infantry and provisions were distributedin two hundred large boats; and each boat wasshielded by a high rampart of thick planks, piercedwith many small holes for the discharge of missileweapons. In the front, two large vessels were linkedtogether to sustain a floating castle, which commandedthe towers of the bridge, and contained a magazineof fire, sulphur, and bitumen. The whole fleet,which the general led in person, was laboriouslymoved against the current of the river. The chainyielded to their weight, and the enemies who guardedthe banks were either slain or scattered. As soon asthey touched the principal barrier, the fire-ship wasinstantly grappled to the bridge; one of the towers,with two hundred Goths, was consumed by theflames; the assailants shouted victory; and Romewas saved, if the wisdom of Belisarius had not beendefeated by the misconduct of his officers. He hadpreviously sent orders to Bessas to second his opera­tions by a timely sally from the town; and he hadfixed his lieutenant, Isaac, by a peremptory command,to the station of the port. But avarice renderedBessas immoveable; while the youthful ardour ofIsaac delivered him into the hands of a superiorenemy. The exaggerated rumour of his defeat washastily carried to the ears of Belisarius: he paused;betrayed in that single moment of his life some emo­tions of surprise and perplexity; and reluctantlysounded a retreat to save his wife Antonina, histreasures, and the only harbour which he possessedon the Tuscan coast. The vexation of his mind pro­duced an ardent and almost mortal fever; and Rome







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 173


beheld the corpse of the Gothic king. His hat, en- chap.riched with gems, and his bloody robe, were pre- XXXVLsented to Justinian by the messengers of triumph*.
The victorious eunuch pursued his march through Conquest ofTuscany, accepted the submission of the Goths, heard Narses.7the acclamations, and often the complaints, of theItalians, and encompassed the walls of Rome withthe remainder of his formidable host. Round thewide circumference, Narses assigned to himself, andto each of his lieutenants, a real or a feigned attack,while he silently marked the place of easy and un­guarded entrance. Neither the fortifications of Ha­drian's mole, nor of the port, could long delay theprogress of the conqueror; and Justinian once morereceived the keys of Rome, which, under his reign,had heenjive times taken and recovered j". But thedeliverance of Rome was the last calamity of theRoman people. The Barbarian allies of Narses toofrequently confounded the privileges of peace andwar: the despair of the flying Goths found some con­solation in sanguinary revenge: and three hundredyouths of the noblest families, who had been sent ashostages beyond the Po, were inhumanly slain by thesuccessor of Totila. The fate of the senate suggestsan awful lesson of the vicissitude of human affairs.Of the senators whom Totila had banished from theircountry, some were rescued by an officer of Belisarius,and transported from Campania to Sicily; while otherswere too guilty to confide in the clemency of Justinian,or too poor to provide horses for their escape to thesea-shore. Their brethren languished five years in astate of indigence and exile; the victory of Narsesrevived their hopes; but their premature return tothe metropolis was prevented by the furious Goths;
• Theophanes, Chron. p. 193. Hist . Miscell. 1. xvi. p. 108.f Eti TovTov ^ao-(XeuovTof To ire^irTov JttXw. In the year 536 by Belisarius, in546 by Totila, in 547 by Belisarius, in 549 by Totila, and in 552 by Narses.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 109


xxxv.


reducing twelve nations to the obedience of Persia. . chap.The zeal and prudence of Mebodes had fixed thediadem on the head of Chosroes himself; but hedelayed to attend the royal summons, till he hadperformed the duties of a military review: he wasinstantly commanded to repair to the iron tripod,which stood before the gate of the palace*, where itwas death to relieve or approach the victim; andMebodes languished several days before his sentencewas pronounced, by the inflexible pride and calm in­gratitude of the son of Kobad. In the execution ofthe laws which he had no temptation to violate; inthe punishment of crimes which attacked his owndignity, as well as the happiness of individuals; Nu-shirvan, or Chosroes, deserved the appellation of Just.His government was firm, rigorous, and impartial.It was the first labour of his reign to abolish thedangerous theory of common or equal possessions:the lands and women which the sectaries of Mazdakhad usurped were restored to their lawful owners;and the temperate chastisement of the fanatics orimpostors confirmed the domestic rights of society.Instead of listening with blind confidence to a fa­vourite minister, he established four viziers over thefour great provinces of his empire, Assyria, Media,Persia, and Bactriana. In the choice of judges,praefects, and counsellors, he strove to remove themask which is always worn in the presence of kings;he wished to substitute the natural order of talentsfor the accidental distinctions of birth and fortune;he professed, in specious language, his intention toprefer those men who carried the poor in theirbosoms, and to banish corruption from the seat ofJustice, as dogs were excluded from the temples of
• Procopius, Persic. 1. i. e. 23. Brisson de Regn. Pers. p. 494. The gate ofthe palace of Ispahan is, or was, the fatal scene of disgrace or death (Chardin,Voyage en Perse, tom. iv. p. 312, 313).







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 27


general of the forces; but the office of praetorian prae- chap.
feet was intrusted to a soldier; the civil and military 'm
powers were united, according to the practice of Jus­tinian, in the chief governor; and the representativeof the emperor in Africa, as well as in Italy, wassoon distinguished by the appellation of Exarch.
Yet the conquest of Africa was imperfect, till her Distress andformer sovereign was delivered, either alive or dead, Gdimw,into the hands of the Romans. Doubtful of the^^^?4—event, Gelimer had given secret orders that a part ofhis treasure should be transported to Spain, wherehe hoped to find a secure refuge at the court of theking of the Visigoths. But these intentions weredisappointed by accident, treachery, and the inde­fatigable pursuit of his enemies, who intercepted hisflight from the sea-shore, and chased the unfortunatemonarch, with some faithful followers, to the inac­cessible mountain of Papua, in the inland country ofNumidia. He was immediately besieged by Pharas,an officer whose truth and sobriety were the moreapplauded, as such qualities could seldom be foundamong the Heruli, the most corrupt of the Barbariantribes. To his vigilance Belisarius had intrustedthis important charge; and, after a bold attempt toscale the mountain, in which he lost a hundred andten soldiers, Pharas expected, during a winter siege,the operation of distress and famine on the mind ofthe Vandal king. From the softest habits of plea­sure, from the unbounded command of industry andwealth, he was reduced to share the poverty of theMoors, supportable only to themselves by their ig­norance of a happier condition. In their rude hovels,of mud and hurdles, which confined the smoke andexcluded the light, they promiscuously slept on theground, perhaps on a sheep-skin, with their wives,their children, and their cattle. Sordid and scantywere their garments; the use of bread and wine was







OCR Output








288 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. country, and a criminal who deserved the abhor-xxxviii. rence 0f mankind was protected by the selfish policyof the exarch. With her daughter, the heiress ofthe Lombard throne, her two lovers, her trusty Ge-pidae, and the spoils of the palace of Verona, Rosa­mond descended the Adige and the Po, and wastransported by a Greek vessel to the safe harbour ofRavenna. Longinus beheld with delight the charmsand the treasures of the widow of Alboin: her situ­ation and her past conduct might justify the mostlicentious proposals; and she readily listened to thepassion of a minister, who, even in the decline of theempire, was respected as the equal of kings. Thedeath of a jealous lover was an easy and gratefulsacrifice, and as Helmichis issued from the bath, hereceived the deadly potion from the hand of hismistress. The taste of the liquor, its speedy opera­tion, and his experience of the character of Rosa­mond, convinced him that he was poisoned: hepointed his dagger to her breast, compelled her todrain the remainder of the cup, and expired in afew minutes, with the consolation that she could notsurvive to enjoy the fruits of her wickedness. Thedaughter of Alboin and Rosamond, with the richestspoils of the Lombards, was embarked for Constanti-ciepho, nople. By the free suffrage of the nation, in thei-ombards, assembly of Pavia, Clepho, one of their noblest chiefs,August. ' was elected as the successor of Alboin. Before theend of eighteen months, the throne was polluted bya second murder; Clepho was stabbed by the handof a domestic; the regal office was suspended aboveten years, during the minority of his son Autharis;and Italy was divided and oppressed by a ducalaristocracy of thirty tyrants *.


* See the history of Paul, 1. ii. c . 28—32. I have borrowed some interestingcircumstances from the Liber Pontificalis of Agnellus, in Script. Rer. Ital. tom.ii. p. 124. Of all chronological guides, Muratori is the safest.







OCR Output








258 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. command of a single man. The twelve tables affordxxxvnV a more decisive proof of the national spirit, sinceseverity of they were framed by the wisest of the senate, and!abierive accepted by the free voices of the people; yet theselaws, like the statutes of Draco*, are written in cha-.racters of bloodt. The decemvirs distributed withmuch liberality the slighter chastisements of flagella­tion and servitude; and nine crimes of a very dif­ferent complexion are adjudged worthy of death.
1. Any act of treason against the state, or of cor­respondence with the public enemy. The mode ofexecution was painful and ignominious; the head ofthe degenerate Roman was shrouded in a veil, hishands were tied behind his back, and, after he hadbeen scourged by the lictor, he was suspended in themidst of the forum on a cross, or inauspicious tree.
2. Nocturnal meetings in the city; whatever mightbe the pretence, of pleasure, or religion, or the pub­lic good. 3. The murder of a citizen; for whichthe common feelings of mankind demand the bloodof the murderer. Poison is still more odious thanthe sword or dagger; and we are surprised to dis­cover, in two flagitious events, how early suchsubtle wickedness had infected the simplicity of therepublic, and the chaste virtues of the Roman ma­trons $. The parricide who violated the duties ofnature and gratitude was cast into the river or thesea, inclosed in a sack; and a cock, a viper, a dog,and a monkey, were successively added as the mostsuitable companions. Italy produces no monkies;


* The age of Draco (Olympiad xxxix. 1) is fixed by Sir John Marsham(Canon Chronicus, p. 593—596) and Corsini (Fasti Attici, tom. iii. p. G2). Forhis laws, see the writers on the government of Athens, Sigonius, Meursius,Potter, &c.
+ The viiith, de delictis, of the xii tables is delineated by Gravina (Opp. p.292, 293, with a commentary, p. 214—230).
% Livy mentions two remarkable and flagitious acras, of 3000 persons accused,and of 190 noble matrons convicted, of the crime of poisoning (xl. 43. viii. 18).







OCR Output








6 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. any of those advantages which had formed the vir-tues of the elder and the younger Scipio; a nobleorigin, liberal studies, and the emulation of a freestate. The silence of a loquacious secretary maybe admitted, to prove that the youth of Belisariuscould not afford any subject of praise: he served,most assuredly with valour and reputation, amongthe private guards of Justinian; and when hispatron became emperor, the domestic was promotedto military command. After a bold inroad intoPersarmenia, in which his glory was shared bya colleague, and his progress was checked by anenemy, Belisarius repaired to the important stationof Dara, where he first accepted the service of Pro-copius, the faithful companion, and diligent histo­idsservices rian, of his exploits *. The Mirranes of Persia ad-sian war, vanced, with forty thousand of her best troops, to^532.529 raze the fortifications of Dara; and signified theday and the hour on which the citizens should pre­pare a bath for his refreshment after the toils ofvictory. He encountered an adversary equal tohimself, by the new title of General of the East;his superior in the science of war, but much inferiorin the number and quality of his troops, whichamounted only to twenty-five thousand Romans andstrangers, relaxed in their discipline, and humbledby recent disasters. As the level plain of Dara re­fused all shelter to stratagem and ambush, Belisa­rius protected his front with a deep trench, whichwas prolonged at first in perpendicular, and af­terwards in parallel lines, to cover the wings ofcavalry advantageously posted to command the flanksand rear of the enemy. When the Roman centrewas shaken, their well-timed and rapid charge de­cided the conflict; the standard of Persia fell; the


* The two first Persian campaigns of Belisarius are fairly and copiously re­lated by his secretary (Persic. 1. i. c. 12—18.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. * . 325


defection of those who, in the hour of his distress, chap.avenged their wrongs, or forgot their obligations. XXXI'He proudly displayed the ensigns of royalty; butthe city and palace of Modain had already escapedfrom the hand of the tyrant. Among the victims ofhis cruelty, Bindoes, a Sassanian prince, had beencast into a dungeon: his fetters were broken by thezeal and courage of a brother; and he stood beforethe king at the head of those trusty guards, who hadbeen chosen as the ministers of his confinement, andperhaps of his death. Alarmed by the hasty intrusionand bold reproaches of the captive, Hormouz lookedround, but in vain, for advice or assistance; discoveredthat his strength consisted in the obedience of others,and patiently yielded to the single arm of Bindoes,who dragged him from the throne to the same dun­geon in which he himself had been so lately confined.At the first tumult, Chosroes, the eldest of the sonsof Hormouz, escaped from the city; he was persuadedto return by the pressing and friendly invitation ofBindoes, who promised to seat him on his father'sthrone, and who expected to reign under the nameof an inexperienced youth. In the just assurance,that his accomplice could neither forgive nor hopeto be forgiven, and that every Persian might betrusted as the judge and enemy of the tyrant, heinstituted a public trial without a precedent and with­out a copy in the annals of the East. The son ofNushirvan, who had requested to plead in his owndefence, was introduced as a criminal into the fullassembly of the nobles and satraps*. He was heardwith decent attention as long as he expatiated on theadvantages of order and obedience, the danger ofinnovation, and the inevitable discord of those whohad encouraged each other to trample on their lawful


* The Orientals suppose that Bahrain convened this assembly and proclaimedChosroes; but Theophylact is, in this instance, more distinct and credible.


Y 3







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 117


inherited the vain and satirical genius of their ances- chap.tors: they were elated by a sudden reinforcement of xxxv-six thousand soldiers; they disdained the offers ofan easy capitulation; and their intemperate clamoursinsulted from the ramparts the majesty of the greatking. Under his eye the Persian myriads mountedwith scaling ladders to the assault; the Roman mer­cenaries fled through the opposite gate of Daphne;and the generous assistance of the youth of Antiochserved only to aggravate the miseries of their country.As Chosroes, attended by the ambassadors of Justi­nian, was descending from the mountain, he affected,in a plaintive voice, to deplore the obstinacy and ruinof that unhappy people; but the slaughter still ragedwith unrelenting fury; and the city, at the commandof a Barbarian, was delivered to the flames. Thecathedral of Antioch was indeed preserved by theavarice, not the piety, of the conqueror: a more ho­nourable exemption was granted to the church of St.Julian, and the quarter of the town where the am­bassadors resided; some distant streets were saved bythe shifting of the wind, and the walls still subsistedto protect, and soon to betray, their new inhabitants.Eighteen miles below Antioch, the river Orontes fallsinto the Mediterranean. The haughty Persian visitedthe term of his conquests; and after bathing alone inthe sea, he offered a solemn sacrifice of thanksgivingto the sun, or rather to the creator of the sun, whomthe Magi adored. If this act of superstition offendedthe prejudices of the Syrians, they were pleased bythe courteous and even eager attention with which heassisted at the games of the circus; and as Chosroeshad heard that the blue faction was espoused by theemperor, his peremptory command secured the vic­tory of the green charioteer. From the discipline ofhis camp the people derived more solid consolation;and they interceded in vain for the life of a soldier
i 3


r


i







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. A citizen could only forfeit his rights by apparentxxxvn- dereliction, and such dereliction of a valuable interestcould not easily be presumed. Yet, according to thetwelve tables, a prescription of one year for move­ables, and of two years for immoveables, abolishedthe claim of the ancient master, if the actual possessorhad acquired them by a fair transaction from the per­son whom he believed to be the lawful proprietor.Such conscientious injustice, without any mixture offraud or force, could seldom injure the members of asmall republic; but the various periods of three, often, or of twenty years, determined by Justinian, aremore suitable to the latitude of a great empire. Itis only in the term of prescription that the distinctionof real and personal fortune has been remarked bythe civilians, and their general idea of property isthat of simple, uniform, and absolute dominion. Thesubordinate exceptions of use, of usufruct *, of ser­vitudes]; imposed for the benefit of a neighbour onlands and houses, are abundantly explained by theprofessors of jurisprudence. The claims of property,as far as they are altered, by the mixture, the division,or the transformation of substances, are investigatedwith metaphysical subtlety by the same civilians,of inherit- The personal title of the first proprietor must bedetermined by his death: but the possession, withoutany appearance of change, is peaceably continued inhis children, the associates of his toil and the partnersof his wealth. This natural inheritance has beenprotected by the legislators of every climate and age,and the father is encouraged to persevere in slow anddistant improvements, by the tender hope, that a longposterity will enjoy the fruits of his labour. Theprinciple of hereditary succession is universal, but the


* See the Institutes (1. i. tit. iv. v.), and the Pandects (1. vii). Noodt has com­posed a learned and distinct treatise de Umfruclu (Opp. tom. i. p. 387—478).
+ The questions de Servitutiinis are discussed in the Institutes (1. ii. tit. iii. Vand Pandects (1. viii.).
ance andsuccession







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 199


CHAP. XXXVII.
Idea of the Roman Jurisprudence.—The Laws of the Kings.—The Twelve Tables of the Decemvirs. —The Laws ofthe People.—The Decrees of the Senate.—The Edicts ofthe Magistrates and Emperors. — AutJiority of the Ci­vilians.—Code, Pandects, Novels, and Institutes of Jus­tinian :—I. Rights of Persons.—II. Rights of Things.—III. Private Injuries and Actions.—IV. Crimes andPunishments.
The vain titles of the victories of Justinian are chap.crumbled into dust: but the name of the legislator XXXVILis inscribed on a fair and everlasting monument. The civil orUnder his reign, and by his care, the civil jurispru- Roman law-dence was digested in the immortal works of theCode, the Pandects, and the Institutes *: thepublic reason of the Romans has been silently orstudiously transfused into the domestic institutionsof Europe t, and the laws of Justinian still commandthe respect or obedience of independent nations.Wise or fortunate is the prince who connects hisown reputation with the honour and interest of aperpetual order of men. The defence of theirfounder is the first cause, which in every age hasexercised the zeal and industry of the civilians.


* The civilians of the darker ages have established an absurd and incompre­hensible mode of quotation, which is supported by authority and custom. Intheir references to the Code, the Pandects, and the Institutes, they mention thenumber, not of the book, but only of the law; and content themselves with re^citing the first words of the title to which it belongs; and of these titles there aremore than a thousand. Ludewig (Vit . Justiniani, p. 268) wishes to shake offthis pedantic yoke; and I have dared to adopt the simple and rational method ofnumbering the book, the title, and the law.
•f Germany, Bohemia, Hungary, Poland, and Scotland, have received them ascommon law or reason; in France, Italy, &c. they possess a direct or indirectinfluence; and they were respected in England, from Stephen to Edward I. ournational Justinian (Duck, de Usit et Auctoritate Juris Civilis, 1. ii. c. 1. 8—15.Heineccius, Hist. Juris Germanici, c. 3,4- No. 55—124. and the legal historiansof each country).


o 4







OCR Output








358 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. honour of Rome and Heraclius was gloriously re-XXXIX" trieved by the exploits and trophies of six adven­turous campaigns. It was the duty of the Byzantinehistorians to have revealed the causes of his slumberand vigilance. At this distance we can only conjec­ture, that he was endowed with more personal cou­rage than political resolution; that he was detainedby the charms, and perhaps the arts, of his nieceMartina, with whom, after the death of Eudocia,he contracted an incestuous marriage; and that heyielded to the base advice of the counsellors, whourged as a fundamental law, that the life of the em­peror should never be exposed in the field. Perhapshe was awakened by the last insolent demand of thePersian conqueror; but at the moment when Hera­clius assumed the spirit of a hero, the only hopes ofthe Romans were drawn from the vicissitudes of for­tune, which might threaten the proud prosperity ofChosroes, and must be favourable to those who hadattained the lowest period of depression. To providefor the expenses of war was the first care of the em­peror; and for the purpose of collecting the tribute,he was allowed to solicit the benevolence of theEastern provinces. But the revenue no longer flowedin the usual channels—the credit of an arbitrary princeis annihilated by his power; and the courage of He­raclius was first displayed in daring to borrow theconsecrated wealth of churches under the solemnvow of restoring, with usury, whatever he had beencompelled to employ in the service of religion and ofthe empire. The clergy themselves appear to havesympathized with the public distress, and the discreetpatriarch of Alexandria, without admitting the pre­cedent of sacrilege, assisted his sovereign by theseasonable revelation of a secret treasure. Of thesoldiers who had conspired with Phocas, only twowere found to have survived the stroke of time and







OCR Output








2 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. earth. But the proud claim of perpetual and inde-
_ feasible dominion, which her soldiers could no longer
maintain, was firmly asserted by her statesmen andlawyers, whose opinions have been sometimes revivedand propagated in the modern schools of jurispru­dence. After Rome herself had been stripped of theImperial purple, the princes of Constantinople as­sumed the sole and sacred sceptre of the monarchy;demanded, as their rightful inheritance, the provinceswhich had been subdued by the consuls, or possessedby the Caesars; and feebly aspired to deliver theirfaithful subjects of the West from the usurpation ofheretics and barbarians. The execution of thissplendid design was in some degree reserved forJustinian. During the five first years of his reign,he reluctantly waged a costly and unprofitable waragainst the Persians; till his pride submitted to hisambition, and he purchased, at the price of four hun­dred and forty thousand pounds sterling, the benefitof a precarious truce, which, in the language of bothnations, was dignified with the appellation of theendless peace. The safety of the East enabled theemperor to employ his forces against the Vandals;and the internal state of Africa afforded an honour­able motive, and promised a powerful support, to theRoman arms *.state of the According to the testament of the founder, theHuLric, African kingdom had lineally descended to Hilderic,^53o.523 tne eldest of the Vandal princes. A mild dispositioninclined the son of a tyrant, the grandson of a con­queror, to prefer the counsels of clemency and peace;and his accession was marked by the salutary edict,


* The complete series of the Vandal war is related by Procopius in a regularand elegant narrative (1. i. c. 9—25.1. ii. c . 1—13.); and happy would be mylot, could I always tread in the footsteps of such a guide. From the entire anddiligent perusal of the Greek text, I have a right to pronounce that the Latinand French versions of Grotius and Cousin may not be implicitly trusted: yetthe president Cousin has been often praised, and Hugo Grotius was the firstscholar of a learned age.







OCR Output








220 THE DECLINE AND FALL


his youth had been instructed by the lessons of juris­prudence, and his Imperial choice selected the mostlearned civilians of the East, to labour with their sove­reign in the work of reformation *. The theory ofprofessors was assisted by the practice of advocates, andthe experience of magistrates; and the whole under­taking was animated by the spirit of Tribonian. Thisextraordinary man, the object of so much praise andcensure, was a native of Side in Pamphylia; and hisgenius, like that of Bacon, embraced, as his own, allthe business and knowledge of the age. Triboniancomposed, both in prose and verse, on a strange diver­sity of curious and abstruse subjects: a double pane­gyric of Justinian, and the life of the philosopherTheodotus; the nature of happiness and the duties ofgovernment; Homer,s catalogue, and the four-and-twenty sorts of metre; the astronomical canon ofPtolemy; the changes of the months; the houses ofthe planets; and the harmonic system of the world.To the literature df Greece he added the use of theLatin tongue; the Roman civilians were deposited inhis library and in his mind; and he most assiduouslycultivated those arts which opened the road of wealthand preferment. From the bar of the praetorian pre­fects, he raised himself to the honours of quaestor, ofconsul, and of master of the offices: the council ofJustinian listened to his eloquence and wisdom, andenvy was mitigated by the gentleness and affability ofhis manners. The reproaches of impiety and avaricehave stained the virtues or the reputation of Tribo­nian. The principal minister was accused of a secret


CHAP.XXXVII.
Tribonian,A. D. 527
—540.
* For the legal labours of Justinian, I have studied the preface to the Insti­tutes; the 1st, 2d, and 3d Prefaces to the Pandects; the 1 st and 2d Preface to theCode; and the Code itself (1. i. tit. xvii. de Veteri Jure enucleando). After theseoriginal testimonies, I have consulted, among the moderns, Hcinecdus (Hist. J.R. No. 383—404), Terasson (Hist. de la Jurisprudence Romaine, p. 295—356),Gravina (Opp. p- 93—100), and Ludcwig, in his life of Justinian (p. 19—123,318—321: for the Code and Novels, p. 209—261; for the Digest or Pandects,p. 262—317).







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 151


soon as they had yielded to his arms, he demolished chap.the fortifications; to save the people from the cala- XXXVLmities of a future siege, to deprive the Romans ofthe arts of defence, and to decide the tedious quarrelof the two nations, by an equal and honourable con­flict in the field of battle. The Roman captives anddeserters were tempted to inlist in the service of aliberal and courteous adversary; the slaves were at­tracted by the firm and faithful promise, that theyshould never be delivered to their masters; and fromthe thousand warriors of Pavia, a new people, underthe same appellation of Goths, was insensibly formedin the camp of Totila. He sincerely accomplishedthe articles of capitulation, without seeking or ac­cepting any sinister advantage from ambiguous ex­pressions or unforeseen events: the garrison of Na­ples had stipulated, that they should be transportedby sea; the obstinacy of the winds prevented theirvoyage, but they were generously supplied withhorses, provisions, and a safe conduct to the gates ofRome. The wives of the senators, who had beensurprised in the villas of Campania, were restored,without a ransom, to their husbands; the violationof female chastity was inexorably chastised withdeath; and, in the salutary regulation of the diet ofthe famished Neapolitans, the conqueror assumed theoffice of a humane and attentive physician. The vir­tues of Totila are equally laudable, whether they pro­ceeded from true policy, religious principle, or theinstinct of humanity: he often harangued his troops;and it was his constant theme, that national vice andruin are inseparably connected; that victory is thefruit of moral as well as military virtue; and thatthe prince, and even the people, are responsible forthe crimes which they neglect to punish.
The return of Belisarius to save the country which Secondhe had subdued was pressed with equal vehemence Bdisarius


L 4







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 33


been their empire, it became their prison; nor could chap.they entertain a hope, or even a wish, of returning'
to the banks of the Elbe, where their brethren, of aspirit less adventurous, still wandered in their nativeforests. It was impossible for cowards to surmountthe barriers of unknown seas and hostile Barbarians:it was impossible for brave men to expose theirnakedness and defeat before the eyes of theircountrymen, to describe the kingdoms which theyhad lost, and to claim a share of the humbleinheritance, which, in a happier hour, they hadalmost unanimously renounced. In the countrybetween the Elbe and the Oder, several populousvillages of Lusatia are inhabited by the Vandals:they still preserve their language, their customs, andthe purity of their blood; support with some im­patience the Saxon, or Prussian yoke; and servewith secret and voluntary allegiance the descendantof their ancient kings, who in his garb and presentfortune is confounded with the meanest of his vassals.The name and situation of this unhappy peoplemight indicate their descent from one common stockwith the conquerors of Africa: but the use of aSclavonian dialect more clearly represents them asthe last remnant of the new colonies, who succeededto the genuine Vandals, already scattered or de­stroyed in the age of Procopius.
If Belisarius had been tempted to hesitate in his Mannersallegiance, he might have urged, even against theofth/68emperor himself, the indispensable duty of saving AIoSs,535Africa from an enemy more barbarous than theVandals. The origin of the Moors is involved indarkness: they were ignorant of the use of letters.Their limits cannot be precisely defined: a boundlesscontinent was open to the Libyan shepherds; thechange of seasons and pastures regulated their mo­tions; and their rude huts and slender furniture .
VOL. IV. D







OCR Output








28 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. unknown; and their oaten or barley cakes, imper-
_ fectly baked in the ashes, were devoured almost in a
crude state by the hungry savages. The health ofGelimer must have sunk under these strange andunwonted hardships, from whatsoever cause they hadbeen endured; but his actual misery was embitteredby the recollection of past greatness, the daily inso­lence of his protectors, and the just apprehension,that the light and venal Moors might be tempted tobetray the rights of hospitality. The knowledge ofhis situation dictated the humane and friendly epistleof Pharas. "Like yourself," said the chief of theHeruli, "I am an illiterate Barbarian, but I speak"the language of plain sense, and an honest heart."Why will you persist in hopeless obstinacy? Why"will you ruin yourself, your family, and nation?"The love of freedom and abhorrence of slavery?"Alas! my dearest Gellmer, are you not already"the worst of slaves, the slave of the vile nation of"the Moors? Would it not be preferable to sus-"tain at Constantinople a life of poverty and servi-"tude, rather than to reign the undoubted monarch"of the mountain of Papua? Do you think it a"disgrace to be the subject of Justinian? Belisarius"is his subject; and we ourselves, whose birth is not"inferior to your own, are not ashamed of our obe-"dience to the Roman emperor. That generous"prince will grant you a rich inheritance of lands, a"place in the senate, and the dignity of Patrician:"such are his gracious intentions, and you may de-"pend with full assurance on the word of Belisarius."So long as Heaven has condemned us to suffer,"patience is a virtue; but if we reject the proffered"deliverance, it degenerates into blind and stupid"despair." "I am not insensible," replied theking of the Vandals, "how kind and rational is"your advice. But I cannot persuade myself to







OCR Output








814 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. country; and such was the extreme sensibility of his
. conscience, that, for the death of a beggar who had
perished in the streets, he interdicted himself duringseveral days from the exercise of sacerdotal functions.and arms. JJ. The misfortunes of Rome involved the apostolicalpastor in the business of peace and war; and it mightbe doubtful to himself, whether piety or ambitionprompted him to supply the place of his absent so­vereign. Gregory awakened the emperor from along slumber; exposed the guilt or incapacity of theexarch and his inferior ministers; complained thatthe veterans were withdrawn from Rome for the de­fence of Spoleto, encouraged the Italians to guardtheir cities and altars; and condescended, in thecrisis of danger, to name the tribunes, and to directthe operations of the provincial troops. But themartial spirit of the pope was checked by the scruplesof humanity and religion; the imposition of tribute,though it was employed in the Italian war, he freelycondemned as odious and oppressive; •whilst he pro­tected against the Imperial edicts the pious cowardiceof the soldiers, who deserted a military for a monasticlife. If we may credit his own declarations, it wouldhave been easy for Gregory to exterminate the Lom­bards by their domestic factions, without leaving aking, a duke, or a count, to save that unfortunatenation from the vengeance of their foes. As aChristian bishop, he preferred the salutary offices ofpeace; his mediation appeased the tumult of arms;but he was too conscious of the ails of the Greeks,and the passions of the Lombards, to engage hissacred promise for the observance of the truce. Dis­appointed in the hope of a general and lasting treaty,he presumed to save his country without the consentof the emperor or the exarch. The sword of theenemy was suspended over Rome; it was averted by


^







OCR Output








138 THE DECLINE AND FAIX


chap. people of savage negroes into the system of civilizedXXXV- society. But the friends of the Roman empire, theAxumites, or Abyssinians, may be always distin­guished from the original natives of Africa. Thehand of nature has flattened the noses of the negroes,covered their heads with shaggy wool, and tingedtheir skin with inherent and indelible blackness. Butthe olive complexion of the Abyssinians, their hair,shape, and features, distinctly mark them as a colonyof Arabs; and this descent is confirmed by the re­semblance of language and manners, the report of anancient emigration, and the narrow interval betweenthe shores of the Red Sea. Christianity had raisedthat nation above the level of African barbarism;their intercourse with Egypt, and the successors ofConstantine*, had communicated the rudiments ofthe arts and sciences; their vessels traded to the isleof Ceylon, and seven kingdoms obeyed the Negus orsupreme prince of Abyssinia. The independence ofthe Homerites, who reigned in the rich and happyArabia, was first violated by an ^Ethiopian conqueror;he drew his hereditary claim from the queen of Sheba,and his ambition was sanctified by religious zeal. TheJews, powerful and active in exile, had seduced themind of Dunaan, prince of the Homerites. Theyurged him to retaliate the persecution inflicted by theImperial laws on their unfortunate brethren: someRoman merchants were injuriously treated; and se­veral Christians of Negra were honoured with thecrown of martyrdom. The churches of Arabia im­plored the protection of the Abyssinian monarch.The Negus passed the Red Sea with a fleet andarmy, deprived the Jewish proselyte of his kingdomand life, and extinguished a race of princes, who had


* The negotiations of Justinian with the Axumites, 01 Ethiopians, are recordedby Procopius (Persic. 1. i. c. 19, 20.) and John Malala (tom. ii. p. 163—165. 193—196). The historian of Antioch quotes the original narrative of the ambassadorNonnosus, of which Photius (Bibliot. cod. iii.) has preserved a curious extract.







OCR Output








36 THE DECLINE AND FALL


CHAP.XXXIV.


annexed to the Roman empire. The Moorish warcontinued several years after the departure of Beli-sarius; but the laurels which he resigned to a faith­ful lieutenant may be justly ascribed to his owntriumph.
The experience of past faults, which may some­times correct the mature age of an individual, isseldom profitable to the successive generations ofmankind. The nations of antiquity, careless of eachother's safety, were separately vanquished and en­slaved by the Romans. This awful lesson might haveinstructed the Barbarians of the West to oppose, withtimely counsels and confederate arms, the unboundedambition of Justinian. Yet the same error was re­peated, the same consequences were felt, and theGoths, both of Italy and Spain, insensible of theirapproaching danger, beheld with indifference, andeven with joy, the rapid downfal of the Vandals.After the failure of the royal line, Theudes, a valiantand powerful chief, ascended the throne of Spain,which he had formerly administered in the name ofTheodoric and his infant grandson. Under his com­mand, the Visigoths besieged the fortress of Ceutaon the African coast: but, while they spent the sab­bath-day in peace and devotion, the pious security oftheir camp was invaded by a sally from the town;and the king himself, with some difficulty and danger,escaped from the hands of a sacrilegious enemy*. Itwas not long before his pride and resentment weregratified by a suppliant embassy from the unfortunateGelimer, who implored, in his distress, the aid of theSpanish monarch. But instead of sacrificing theseunworthy passions to the dictates of generosity andprudence, Theudes amused the ambassadors, till he


Neutralityof the Vi­sigoths.
* Isidor. Chron. p. 722. edit. Grot. Mariana, Hist. Hispan. 1. v. c. 8. p. 173.Yet according to Isidore, the siege of Ceuta, and the death of Theudes, hap­pened, A. JE. H. 586, A. ]). 348; and the place was defended, not by the Van­dals, but by the Romans.







OCR Output








XVI CONTENTS.


A. D. Page
Character and tactics of the Saracens . • 493
The Franks or Latins .... 495
Their character and tactics .... 496
Oblivion of the Latin language . . • 498The Greek emperors and their subjects retain and
assert the name of Romans ... • 500
Period of ignorance . . ib.
Revival of Greek learning .... 501
Decay of taste and genius .... 504
Want of national emulation .... 506







OCR Output








466 THE DECLINK AND FALL


chap. the subjects of the Byzantine empire were still theXU- most dexterous and diligent of nations ; their countrywas blessed by nature with every advantage of soil,climate, and situation; and, in the support and re­storation of the arts, their patient and peaceful temperwas more useful than the warlike spirit and feudalanarchy of Europe. The provinces that still adheredto the empire were repeopled and enriched by themisfortunes of those which were irrecoverably lost.From the yoke of the caliphs, the Catholics of Syria,Egypt, and Africa, retired to the allegiance of theirprince, to the society of their brethren: the move­able wealth, which eludes the search of oppression,accompanied and alleviated their exile; and Constan­tinople received into her bosom the fugitive trade ofAlexandria and Tyre. The chiefs of Armenia andScythia, who fled from hostile or religious perse­cution, were hospitably entertained: their followerswere encouraged to build new cities and to cultivatewaste lands; and many spots, both in Europe andAsia, preserved the name, the manners, or at least,the memory, of these national colonies. Even thetribes of Barbarians, who had seated themselves inarms on the territory of the empire, were graduallyreclaimed to the laws of the church and state; andas long as they were separated from the Greeks, theirposterity supplied a race of faithful and obedient sol­diers. Did we possess sufficient materials to surveythe twenty-nine themes of the Byzantine monarchy,our curiosity might be satisfied with a chosen exam­ple: it is fortunate enough that the clearest lightshould be thrown on the most interesting province,and the name of Peloponnesus will awaken the at­tention of the classic reader.k^mncsus*- ^s earty as *ne eighth century, in the troubledSlavonians, reigii of the Iconoclasts, Greece, and even Pelopon­nesus, were overrun by some Sclavonian bands, who







OCR Output








306 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. powers of the constitution, or of discussing thenice theory of political government. Such crimesas threatened the life of the sovereign, or the safetyof the state, were adjudged w?orthy of death; buttheir attention was principally confined to the de­fence of the person and property of the subject.According to the strange jurisprudence of the times,the guilt of blood might be redeemed by a fine; yetthe high price of nine hundred pieces of gold declaresa just sense of the value of a simple citizen. Lessatrocious injuries, a wound, a fracture, a blow, anopprobrious word, were measured with scrupulousand almost ridiculous diligence; and the prudenceof the legislator encouraged the ignoble practice ofbartering honour and revenge for a pecuniary com­pensation. The ignorance of the Lombards, in thestate of Paganism or Christianity, gave implicit creditto the malice and mischief of witchcraft; but thejudges of the seventeenth century might have beeninstructed and confounded by the wisdom of Ro-tharis, who derides the absurd superstition, and pro­tects the wretched victims of popular or judicialcruelty. The same spirit of a legislator, superior tohis age and country, may be ascribed to Luitprand,who condemns, while he tolerates, the impious andinveterate abuse of duels, observing from his ownexperience, that the juster cause had often been op­pressed by successful violence. Whatever merit maybe discovered in the laws of the Lombards, they arethe genuine fruit of the reason of the Barbarians.The succession of their kings is marked with virtueand ability; the troubled series of their annals isadorned with fair intervals of peace, order, and do­mestic happiness; and the Italians enjoyed a milderand more equitable government than any of theother kingdoms which had been founded on theruins of the Western empire *.


XXXVIII.
* Read the history of Paul Warnefrid; particularly 1. iii. c. 16.







OCR Output








84 THE DECLINE AND FALL


Belisarius.


chap. Virgin; but his tyrants were insensible of religionXXXIv- as of pity; and the helpless youth, amidst the cla­mours of the clergy and people, was twice draggedfrom the altar to the dungeon. His third attemptwas more successful. At the end of three years, heeluded the spies and guards of the empress, reachedthe holy sepulchre of Jerusalem, embraced the pro­fession of a monk; and the abbot Photius was em­ployed, after the death of Justinian, to reconcile andregulate the churches of Egypt. The son of An-tonina suffered all that an enemy can inflict: herpatient husband imposed on himself the more ex­quisite misery of violating his promise and desertinghis friend.Disgrace In the succeeding campaign, Belisarius was again
and submis- . t> • i ii -n i 1
sion of sent against the Persians: he saved the East, but heoffended Theodora, and perhaps the emperor him­self. The malady of Justinian had countenancedthe rumour of his death; and the Roman general,on the supposition of that probable event, spoke thefree language of a citizen and a soldier. His col­league Buzes, who concurred in the same sentiments,lost his rank, his liberty, and his health, by the per­secution of the empress; but the disgrace of Belisa­rius was alleviated by the dignity of his own cha­racter, and the influence of his wife, who might wishto humble, but could not desire to ruin, the partnerof her fortunes. Even his removal was coloured bythe assurance, that the sinking state of Italy wouldbe retrieved by the single presence of its conqueror.But no sooner had he returned, alone and defence­less, than a hostile commission was sent to the East,to seize his treasures and criminate his actions; theguards and veterans who followed his private bannerwere distributed among the chiefs of the army, andeven the eunuchs presumed to cast lots for the par­tition of his martial domestics. When he passed with







OCR Output








62 THE DECLINE AND FALL,


chap. portant posts in the neighbourhood of Rome. ByXXXIv- the loss of the port, or, as it is now called, the city ofPorto, he was deprived of the country on the rightof the Tyber, and the best communication with thesea; and he reflected with grief and anger, that threehundred men, could he have spared such a feebleband, might have defended its impregnable works.Seven miles from the capital, between the Appianand the Latin ways, two principal aqueducts crossing,and again crossing each other, inclosed within theirsolid and lofty arches a fortified space, where Vitigesestablished a camp of seven thousand Goths to in­tercept the convoys of Sicily and Campania. Thegranaries of Rome were insensibly exhausted, the ad­jacent country had been wasted with fire and sword;such scanty supplies as might yet be obtained byhasty excursions were the reward of valour, and thepurchase of wealth: the forage of the horses, and thebread of the soldiers, never failed; but in the lastmonths of the siege, the people were exposed to themiseries of scarcity, unwholesome food, and con­tagious disorders. Belisarius saw and pitied theirsufferings; but he had foreseen, and he watched thedecay of their loyalty, and the progress of their dis­content. Adversity had awakened the Romans fromthe dreams of grandeur and freedom, and taughtthem the humiliating lesson, that it was of small mo­ment to their real happiness, whether the name oftheir master was derived from the Gothic or the Latinlanguage. The lieutenant of Justinian listened totheir just complaints, but he rejected with disdainthe idea of flight or capitulation; repressed theirclamorous impatience for battle; amused them withthe prospect of sure and speedy relief; and securedhimself and the city from the effects of their despairor treachery. Twice in each month he changed thestation of the officers to whom the custody of the







OCR Output








212 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. stood prepared for combat before the tribunal of thexxxvh. pra2tor. Jie commanded them to produce the objectof the dispute; they went, they returned with mea­sured steps, and a clod of earth was cast at his feetto represent the field for which they contended. Thisoccult science of the words and actions of law wasthe inheritance of the pontiffs and patricians. Likethe Chaldean astrologers, they announced to theirclients the days of business and repose: these im­portant trifles were interwoven with the religion ofNuma; and, after the publication of the twelvetables, the Roman people was still enslaved by theignorance of judicial proceedings. The treachery ofsome plebeian officers at length revealed the profitablemystery: in a more enlightened age, the legal actionswere derided and observed; and the same antiquitywhich sanctified the practice, obliterated the use andmeaning, of this primitive language,of thecal ^ more liberal art was cultivated, however, by thelawyers. sages of Rome, who, in a stricter sense, may be con­sidered, as the authors of the civil law. The altera­tion of the idiom and manners of the Romans ren­dered the style of the twelve tables less familiar toeach rising generation, and the doubtful passageswere imperfectly explained by the study of legal an­tiquarians. To define the ambiguities, to circum­scribe the latitude, to apply the principles, to extendthe consequences, to reconcile the real or apparentcontradictions, was a much nobler and more import­ant task; and the province of legislation was silentlyinvaded by the expounders of ancient statutes. Theirsubtle interpretations concurred with the equity ofthe prator, to reform the tyranny of the darker ages:however strange or intricate the means, it was theaim of artificial jurisprudence to restore the simpledictates of nature and reason, and the skill of privatecitizens was usefully employed to undermine the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 209


the prayer of the ancient Caesars, the people or the chap.senate had sometimes granted a personal exemption'


from the obligation and penalty of particular statutes;and each indulgence was an act of jurisdiction exer­cised by the republic over the first of her citizens.His humble privilege was at length transformed intothe prerogative of a tyrant; and the Latin expressionof " released from the laws" was supposed to exaltthe emperor above all human restraints, and to leavehis conscience and reason as the sacred measure ofhis conduct. 2. A similar dependence was impliedin the decrees of the senate, which, in every reign,defined the titles and powers of an elective magistrate.But it was not before the ideas, and even the lan­guage, of the Romans had been corrupted, that aroyal law, and an irrevocable gift of the people, werecreated by the fancy of Ulpian, or more probably ofTribonian himself: and the origin of Imperial power,though false in fact, and slavish in its consequence,was supported on a principle of freedom and justice."The pleasure of the emperor has the vigour and Their ie-"effect of law, since the Roman people, by the royal ^we"e"law, have transferred to their prince the full extent"of their own power and sovereignty." The willof a single man, of a child perhaps, was allowed toprevail over the wisdom of ages and the inclinationsof millions; and the degenerate Greeks were proudto declare, that in his hands alone the arbitrary exer­cise of legislation could be safely deposited. "What"interest or passion," exclaims Theophilus in thecourt of Justinian, "can reach the calm and sublime"elevation of the monarch? he is already master of"the lives and fortunes of his subjects; and those"who have incurred his displeasure are already num-"bered with the dead." Disdaining the languageof flattery, the historian may confess, that in ques­tions of private jurisprudence, the absolute sovereign
VOL. IV.







OCR Output








64 THE DECLINE AND FALE


chap. "to speak with freedom: if you wish that we should
'" live, send us subsistence; if you desire that we
"should conquer, send us arms, horses, and men."The Romans have received us as friends and de-"liverers; but in our present distress, they will be"either betrayed by their confidence, or we shall be'' oppressed by their treachery and hatred. For my-"self, my life is consecrated to your service: it is"yours to reflect, whether my death in this situation"will contribute to the glory and prosperity of your"reign." Perhaps that reign would have beenequally prosperous, if the peaceful master of the Easthad abstained from the conquest of Africa and Italy;but as Justinian was ambitious of fame, he made someefforts, they were feeble and languid, to support andrescue his victorious general. A reinforcement ofsixteen hundred Sclavonians and Huns was led byMartin and Valerian; and as they had reposed duringthe winter season in the harbours of Greece, thestrength of the men and horses was not impaired bythe fatigues of a sea-voyage; and they distinguishedtheir valour in the first sally against the besiegers.About the time of the summer solstice, Euthaliuslanded at Terracina with large syms of money forthe payment of the troops; he cautiously proceededalong the Appian way, and this convoy entered Romethrough the gate Capena, while Belisarius, on theother side, diverted the attention of the Goths by avigorous and successful skirmish. These seasonableaids, the use and reputation of which were dexter­ously managed by the Roman general, revived thecourage, or at least the hopes, of the soldiers andpeople. The historian Procopius was despatchedwith an important commission, to collect the troopsand provisions which Campania could furnish, orConstantinople had sent; and the secretary of Beli­sarius was soon followed by Antonina herself, who







OCR Output








236 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. was rigorous and unequal; and she renounced thename and worship of her father's house, to embrace anew servitude decorated only with the title of adop­tion. A fiction of the law, neither rational nor ele­gant, bestowed on the mother of a family (her properappellation) the strange characters of sister to herown children, and of daughter to her husband ormaster, who was invested with the plenitude of pa­ternal power. By his judgment or caprice her be­haviour was approved, or censured, or chastised; heexercised the jurisdiction of life and death; and itwas allowed, that in the cases of adultery or drunken­ness, the sentence might be properly inflicted. Sheacquired and inherited for the sole profit of her lord;and so clearly was woman defined, not as a person,but as a thing, that if the original title were deficient,she might be claimed, like other moveables, by theuse and possession of an entire year. The inclinationof the Roman husband discharged or withheld theconjugal debt, so scrupulously exacted by the Athe­nian and Jewish laws: but as polygamy was un­known, he could never admit to his bed a fairer ormore favoured partner.
After the Punic triumphs, the matrons of Rometrimonuf aspired to the common benefits of a free and opulentrepublic: their wishes were gratified by the indul­gence of fathers and lovers, and their ambition wasunsuccessfully resisted by the gravity of Cato theCensor. They declined the solemnities of the oldnuptials, defeated the annual prescription by an ab­sence of three days, and, without losing their nameor independence, subscribed the liberal and definiteterms of a marriage-contract. Of their private for­tunes, they communicated the use, and secured theproperty; the estates of a wife could neither bealienated nor mortgaged by a prodigal husband;their mutual gifts were prohibited by the jealousy of


Freedomof the ma-







OCR Output








 


 


Vf


 







OCR Output








72 THE DECLINE AND FAIX


chap. sex, and the more precious spoil, was resigned to theXXX1v- Burgundians; and the houses, or at least the walls,Destruction of Milan were levelled with the ground. The Goths,in their last moments, were revenged by the destruc­tion of a city, second only to Rome in size and opu­lence, in the splendour of its buildings, or the numberof its inhabitants; and Belisarius sympathized alonein the fate of his deserted and devoted friends. En­couraged by this successful inroad, Theodebert him­self, in the ensuing spring, invaded the plains of Italywith an army of one hundred thousand Barbarians.The king, and some chosen followers, were mountedon horseback, and armed with lances; the infantry,without bows or spears, were satisfied with a shield,a sword, and a double-edged battle-axe, which, intheir hands, became a deadly and unerring weapon.Italy trembled at the march of the Franks; and boththe Gothic prince and the Roman general, alike ig­norant of their designs, solicited, with hope and ter­ror, the friendship of these dangerous allies. Till hehad secured the passage of the Po on the bridge ofPavia, the grandson of Clovis dissembled his inten­tions, which he at length declared, by assaulting, al­most at the same instant, the hostile camps of theRomans and Goths. Instead of uniting their arms,they fled with equal precipitation; and the fertilethough desolate provinces of Liguria and iEmiliawere abandoned to a licentious host of Barbarians,whose rage was not mitigated by any thoughts ofsettlement or conquest. Among the cities whichthey ruined, Genoa, not yet constructed of marble,is particularly enumerated: and the deaths of thou­sands, according to the regular practice of war, appearto have excited less horror than sacrifices of womenand children, which were performed with impunityin the camp. If it were not a melancholy truth, thatthe first and most cruel sufferings must be the lot of







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 1


immortals fled: the infantry threw away their buck- chap.
lers, and eight thousand of the vanquished were left'
on the field of battle. In the next campaign, Syriawas invaded on the side of the desert; and Beli-sarius, with twenty thousand men, hastened fromDara to the relief of the province. During thewhole summer, the designs of the enemy werebaffled by his skilful dispositions: he pressed theirretreat, occupied each night their camp of the pre­ceding day, and would have secured a bloodless vic­tory, if he could have resisted the impatience of hisown troops. Their valiant promise was faintly sup­ported in the hour of battle; the right wing was ex­posed by the treacherous or cowardly desertion of theChristian Arabs; the Huns, a veteran band of eighthundred warriors, were oppressed by superior num­bers; the flight of the Isaurians was intercepted ; butthe Roman infantry stood firm on the left, for Beli-sarius himself, dismounting from his horse, showedthem that intrepid despair was their only safety.They turned their backs to the Euphrates, and theirfaces to the enemy; innumerable arrows glancedwithout effect from the compact and shelving orderof their bucklers; an impenetrable line of pikes wasopposed to the repeated assaults of the Persian ca­valry; and after a resistance of many hours, the re­maining troops were skilfully embarked under theshadow of the night. The Persian commander re­tired with disorder and disgrace, to answer a strictaccount pf the lives of so many soldiers which hehad consumed in a barren victory. But the fameof Belisarius was not sullied by a defeat, in whichalone he had saved his army from the consequencesof their own rashness: the approach of peace relievedhim from the guard of the eastern frontier, and hisconduct in the sedition of Constantinople amply dis­charged his obligations to the emperor. When the


b 4







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 427


XL.


"spoke of Irene,) considered you as a rook, and herself chap."as a pawn. That pusillanimous female submitted __"to pay a tribute, the double of which she ought to"have exacted from the Barbarians. Restore, there-"fore, the fruits of your injustice, or abide the de-"termination of the sword." At these words theambassadors cast a bundle of swords before the footof the throne. The caliph smiled at the menace;and, drawing his scimitar, samsamah, a weapon ofhistoric or fabulous renown, he cut asunder the feeblearms of the Greeks, without turning the edge, or en­dangering the temper of his blade. He then dictatedan epistle of tremendous brevity: "In the name"of the most merciful God. Harun Al Rashid, to"Nicephoms, the Roman dog. I have read thy"letter, O thou son of an unbelieving mother. Thou"shalt not hear, thou shalt behold, my reply." Itwas written in characters of blood and fire, on theplains of Phrygia; and the warlike celerity of theArabs could only be checked by the arts of deceit,and the show of repentance. The triumphant caliphretired, after the fatigues of the campaign, to his fa­vourite palace of Racca, on the Euphrates: but thedistance of five hundred miles, and the inclemency ofthe season, encouraged his adversary to violate thepeace. Nicephorus was astonished by the bold andrapid march of the commander of the faithful, whorepassed, in the depth of winter, the snows of mountTaurus; his stratagems of policy and war were ex-husted; and the perfidious Greek escaped with threewounds, from a field of battle overspread with fortythousand of his subjects. Yet the emperor wasashamed of submission, and the caliph was resolvedon victory. One hundred and thirty-five thousandregular soldiers received pay, and were inscribed inthe military roll; and above three hundred thousandpersons of every denomination marched under the







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 435


pellation of Candia. The hundred cities of the age chap.of Minos were diminished to thirty; and of these, XL'only one, most probably Cydonia, had courage to re­tain its freedom and the profession of Christianity.By the Saracens of Crete the timbers of Mount Idawere launched into the main, and during an hostileperiod of one hundred and thirty-eight years, theprinces of Constantinople attacked these licentiouscorsairs with ineffectual arms.
The loss of Sicily was occasioned by an act of ^iofrigour. An amorous youth, who had stolen a nun a. d.'827from her cloister, was sentenced by the emperor tothe amputation of his tongue. Euphemius appealedto the policy of the Saracens of Africa; and soonreturned with the Imperial purple, a fleet of one hun­dred ships, and an army of seven hundred horse andten thousand foot. They landed at Mazara, near theruins of the ancient Selinus; but after some partialvictories Syracuse was delivered by the Greeks, theapostate was slain before her walls, and his Africanfriends were reduced to the necessity of feeding onthe flesh of their own horses. In their turn theywere relieved by a powerful reinforcement of theirbrethren of Andalusia; the largest and western partof the island was gradually reduced, and the commo­dious harbour of Palermo was chosen for the seat of thenaval and. military power of the Saracens. Syracusepreserved above fifty years the faith which she had swornto Christ and to Caesar. In the last and fatal siege, hercitizens displayed some remnant of the spirit which hadformerly resisted the powers of Athens and Carthage.
They stood above twenty days against the batter­ing rams and catapultae, the mines and tortoises ofthe besiegers; and the place might have been relievedif the mariners of the Imperial fleet had not beendetained at Constantinople.
The deacon Theodosius, with the bishop and clergy,


v f 2







OCR Output








!2 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. selves for a while after the fatigues of the sea. In
"XXXIV. i .
, *. this place they experienced how avarice, invested
with authority, may sport with the lives of thousandswhich are bravely exposed for the public service.According to military practice, the bread or biscuitof the Romans was twice prepared in the oven, anda diminution of one-fourth was cheerfully allowedfor the loss of weight. To gain this miserable profit,and to save the expense of wood, the praefect John ofCappadocia had given orders that the flour should beslightly baked by the same fire which warmed thebaths of Constantinople: and when the sacks wereopened, a soft and mouldy paste was distributed tothe army. Such unwholesome food, assisted by theheat of the climate and season, soon produced anepidemical disease, which swept away five hundredsoldiers. Their health was restored by the diligenceof Belisarius, who provided fresh bread at Methone,and boldly expressed his just and humane indig­nation: the emperor heard his complaint; the ge­neral was praised ; but the minister was not punished.From the port of Methone, the pilots steered alongthe western coast of Peloponnesus, as far as the isleof Zacynthus or Zant, before they undertook thevoyage (in their eyes -a most arduous voyage) of onehundred leagues over the Ionian sea. As the fleetwas surprised by a calm, sixteen days were consumedin the slow navigation; and even the general wouldhave suffered the intolerable hardship of thirst, ifthe ingenuity of Antonina had not preserved thewater in glass bottles, which she buried deep in thesand in a part of the ship impervious to the rays ofthe sun. At length the harbour of Caucana, on thesouthern side of Sicily, afforded a secure and hos­pitable shelter. The Gothic officers, who governedthe island in the name of the daughter and grandsonof Theodoric, obeyed their imprudent orders, to re-







OCR Output








190 THE DECLINE AND FALL


CHAP.XXXVI.


a conqueror, who leads and directs his subjects in theexercise of arms. The characters of Philip the Secondand of Justinian are distinguished by the cold am­bition which delights in war, and declines the dangersof the field. Yet a colossal statue of bronze re­presented the emperor on horseback, preparing tomarch against the Persians in the habit and armourof Achilles. In the great square before the churchof St. Sophia, this monument was raised on a brasscolumn and a stone pedestal of seven steps: and thepillar of Theodosius, which weighed seven thousandfour hundred pounds of silver, was removed from thesame place by the avarice and vanity of Justinian.Future princes were more just or indulgent to hismemory; the elder Andronicus, in the beginning ofthe fourteenth century, repaired and beautified hisequestrian statue: since the fall of the empire, it hasbeen melted into cannon by the victorious Turks*.


I shall conclude this chapter with the comets, theearthquakes, and the plague, which astonished orafflicted the age of Justinian. » .


Comets,A. D. 531—539.


I. In the fifth year of his reign, and in the monthof September, a comet t was seen during twenty daysin the western quarter of the heavens, and which shotits rays into the north. Eight years afterwards, whilethe sun was in Capricorn, another comet appeared tofollow in the Sagittary: the size was gradually in­creasing; the head was in the east, the tail in thewest, and it remained visible above forty days. Thenations, who gazed with astonishment, expected wars


* See in the C P. Christiana of Ducange (1. i. c. 24. No. 1.), a chain of originaltestimonies, from Procopius in the vith, to Gyllius in the xvith century.
-f- The first comet is mentioned by John Malala (tom. ii. p. 190. 219.) andThcophanes (p. 154); the second by Procopius (Persic 1. ii. c. 4). Yet I stronglysuspect their identity. The paleness of the sun (Vandal. 1. ii. c. 14) is appliedby Theophanes (p. 158) to a different year.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 297


ment of fifty thousand pieces; but as he had viewed chap.
YYWTTI
with delight some Byzantine coin of the weight of 1
one pound of gold, the king of Austrasia might sti­pulate, that the gift should be rendered more worthyof his acceptance by a proper mixture of these re­spectable medals. The dukes of the Lombards hadprovoked by frequent inroads their powerful neigh­bours of Gaul. As soon as they were apprehensiveof a just retaliation, they renounced their feeble anddisorderly independence: the advantages of regalgovernment, union, secrecy, and vigour were una­nimously confessed; and Autharis, the son of Clepho, Autharis,had already attained the strength and reputation of Lombards,a warrior. Under the standard of their new king, ^^q584the conquerors of Italy withstood three successiveinvasions; one of which was led by Childebert him­self, the last of the Merovingian race who descendedfrom the Alps. The first expedition was defeatedby the jealous animosity of the Franks and Alemanni.In the second they were vanquished in a bloodybattle, with more loss and dishonour than they hadsustained since the foundation of their monarchy.Impatient for revenge, they returned a third timewith accumulated force, and Autharis yielded to thefury of the torrent. The troops and treasures ofthe Lombards were distributed in the walled townsbetween the Alps and the Apennine. A nation,less sensible of danger than of fatigue and delay,soon murmured against the folly of their twentycommanders; and the hot vapours of an Italian suninfected with disease those tramontane bodies, whichhad already suffered the vicissitudes of intemperanceand famine. The powers that were inadequate tothe conquest were more than sufficient for the de­solation of the country; nor could the tremblingnatives distinguish between their enemies and theirdeliverers. If the junction of the Merovingian and







OCR Output








60 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. of contending with their adversaries, whose lancesXXXIV- and arrows, at a distance, or at hand, were alike for­midable. The consummate skill of Belisarius em­braced the favourable opportunities: and as he chosethe ground and the moment, as he pressed the chargeor sounded the retreat, the squadrons which he de­tached were seldom unsuccessful. These partial ad­vantages diffused an impatient ardour among thesoldiers and people, who began to feel the hardshipsof a siege, and to disregard the dangers of a generalengagement. Each plebeian conceived himself to bea hero; and the infantry, who, since the decay of dis­cipline, were rejected from the line of battle, aspiredto the ancient honours of the Roman legion. Beli­sarius praised the spirit of his troops, condemnedtheir presumption, yielded to their clamours, andprepared the remedies of a defeat, the possibility ofwhich he alone had courage to suspect. In thequarter of the Vatican, the Romans prevailed; andif the irreparable moments had not been wasted inthe pillage of the camp, they might have occupiedthe Milvian bridge, and charged in the rear of theGothic host. On the other side of the Tyber, Beli­sarius advanced from the Pincian and Salarian gates.But his army, four thousand soldiers perhaps, waslost in a spacious plain; they were encompassed andoppressed by fresh multitudes, who continually re­lieved the broken ranks of the Barbarians. Thevaliant leaders of the infantry were unskilled to con­quer; they died: the retreat (a hasty retreat) wascovered by the prudence of the general, and thevictors started back with affright from the formidableaspect of an armed rampart. The reputation ofBelisarius was unsullied by a defeat; and the vainconfidence of the Goths was not less serviceable tohis designs, than the repentance and modesty of theRoman troops.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 205


stood forth in the assembly of the people with a cord chap.round his neck, and if the law was rejected, the in- XXXVILnovator was instantly strangled.
The Decemvirs had been named, and their tables Laws of thewere approved, by an assembly of the centuries, in pcople'which riches preponderated against numbers. To thefirst class of Romans, the proprietors of one hundredthousand pounds of copper, ninety-eight votes wereassigned, and only ninety-five were left for the sixinferior classes, distributed according to their sub­stance by the artful policy of Servius. But the tri­bunes soon established a more specious and popularmaxim, that every citizen has an equal right to enactthe laws which he is bound to obey. Instead of thecenturies, they convened the tribes; and the patri­cians, after an impotent struggle, submitted to thedecrees of an assembly, in which their votes wereconfounded with those of the meanest plebeians. Yetas long as the tribes successively passed over narrowbridges, and gave their voices aloud, the conduct ofeach citizen was exposed to the eyes and ears of hisfriends and countrymen. The insolvent debtor con­sulted the wishes of his creditor; the client wouldhave blushed to oppose the views of his patron: thegeneral was followed by his veterans, and the aspectof a grave magistrate was a living lesson to the multi­tude. A new method of secret ballot abolished theinfluence of fear and shame, of honour and interest,and the abuse of freedom accelerated the progress ofanarchy and despotism*. The Romans had aspiredto be equal; they were levelled by the equality ofservitude; and the dictates of Augustus were pa­tiently ratified by the formal consent of the tribes orcenturies. Once, and once only, he experienced asincere and strenuous opposition. His subjects had


* Cicero (de Legibus, iii. 16, 17, 18) debates this constitutional question, andassigns to his brother Quintus the most unpopular side.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE; 29


"become the slave of an unjust enemy, who has de- chap.
"served my implacable hatred. Him I had never 1
"injured, either by word or deed: yet he has sent"against me, I know not from whence, a certain"Belisarius, who has cast me headlong from the"throne into this abyss of misery. Justinian is a"man; he is a prince; does he not dread for him-"self a similar reverse of fortune? I can write no"more: my grief oppresses me. Send me, I be- .seech you, my dear Pharas, send me a lyre, a"spunge, and a loaf of bread." From the Vandalmessenger, Pharas was informed of the motives ofthis singular request. It was long since the king ofAfrica had tasted bread; a defluxion had fallen onhis eyes, the effect of fatigue or incessant weeping;and he wished to solace the melancholy hours, bysinging to the lyre the sad story of his own mis­fortunes. The humanity of Pharas was moved; hesent the three extraordinary gifts; but even his hu­manity prompted him to redouble the vigilance ofhis guard, that he might sooner compel his prisonerto embrace a resolution advantageous to the Romans,but salutary to himself. The obstinacy of Gelimerat length yielded to reason and necessity; the solemnassurances of safety and honourable treatment wereratified in the emperor's name, by the ambassador ofBelisarius; and the king of the Vandals descendedfrom the mountain. The first public interview wasin one of the suburbs of Carthage; and when theroyal captive accosted his conqueror, he burst into afit of laughter. The crowd might naturally believe,that extreme grief had deprived Gelimer of hissenses; but in this mournful state, unseasonablemirth insinuated to more intelligent observers, thatthe vain and transitory scenes of human greatnessare unworthy of a serious thought.







OCR Output








240 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. portion. The Christian princes were the first whoxxxvii. Specified the just causes of a private divorce; theirinstitutions, from Constantine to Justinian, appearto fluctuate between the custom of the empire andthe wishes of the church, and the author of the Novelstoo frequently reforms the jurisprudence of the Codeand Pandects. In the most rigorous laws, a wife wascondemned to support a gamester, a drunkard, or alibertine, unless he were guilty of homicide, poison,or sacrilege; in which cases the marriage, as it shouldseem, might have been dissolved by the hand of theexecutioner. But the sacred right of the husbandwas invariably maintained to deliver his name andfamily from the disgrace of adultery: the list ofmortal sins, either male or female, was curtailed andenlarged by successive regulations, and the obstaclesof incurable impotence, long absence, and monasticprofession, were allowed to rescind the matrimonialobligation. Whoever transgressed the permission ofthe law was subject to various and heavy penalties.The woman was stripped of her wealth and ornaments,without excepting the bodkin of her hair: if the manintroduced a new bride into his bed, her fortunemight be lawfully seized by the vengeance of hisexiled wife. Forfeiture was sometimes commuted toa fine; the fine was sometimes aggravated by trans­portation to an island, or imprisonment in a mo­nastery: the injured party was released from thebonds of marriage; but the offender, during life ora term of years, was disabled from the repetition ofnuptials. The successor of Justinian yielded to theprayers of his unhappy subjects, and restored theliberty of divorce by mutual consent,incest, con- The freedom of love and marriage was restrained
cubmes, and ,,".,. ...
bastards, among the Romans by natural and civil impediments.An instinct, almost innate and universal, appears toprohibit the incestuous commerce of parents and







OCR Output








432 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. inhuman spectacle, and Leo consented with reluct­ance to a decent respite) but on the vigil of thefeast, his sleepless anxiety prompted him to visit atthe dead of night the chamber in which his enemywas confined. He beheld him released from his chain,and stretched on his gaoler's bed in a profound slum­ber. Leo was alarmed at these signs of security andintelligence; but, though he retired with silent steps,his entrance and departure were noticed by a slave,who lay concealed in a corner of the prison. Underthe pretence of requesting the spiritual aid of a con­fessor, Michael informed the conspirators, that theirlives depended on his discretion, and that a few hourswere left to assure their own safety, by the deliver­ance of their friend and country. On the great festi­vals, a chosen band of priests and chanters was ad­mitted into the palace by a private gate, to singmatins in the chapel; and Leo, who regulated withthe same strictness the discipline of the choir and ofthe camp, was seldom absent from those early devo­tions. In the ecclesiastical habit, but with swordsunder their robes, the conspirators mingled with theprocession, lurked in the angles of the chapel, andexpected, as the signal of murder, the intonation ofthe first psalm by the emperor himself. The im­perfect light, and the uniformity of dress, mighthave favoured his escape, while their assault waspointed against a harmless priest; but they soondiscovered their mistake, and encompassed on allsides the royal victim. Without a weapon and with­out a friend, he grasped a weighty cross, and stoodat bay against the hunters of his life; but as he askedfor mercy, "This is the hour not of mercy but ofvengeance," was the inexorable reply. The strokeof a well aimed sword separated from his body theright arm and the cross; and Leo the Armenian wasslain at the foot of the altar.







OCR Output








102 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. above thirty, he had lived above seventy-five years:xxxv- his mind, as well as his body, was feeble and languid;and the conqueror of Africa and Italy, careless of thepermanent interest of his people, aspired only to endhis days in the bosom even of inglorious peace. Ina studied oration, he imparted to the senate his re­solution to dissemble the insult, and to purchase thefriendship of the Avars; and the whole senate, likethe mandarins of China, applauded the incomparablewisdom and foresight of their sovereign. The in­struments of luxury were immediately prepared tocaptivate the Barbarians; silken garments, soft andsplendid beds, and chains and collars incrusted withgold. The ambassadors, content with such liberalreception, departed from Constantinople, and Va­lentin, one of the emperor's guards, was sent with asimilar character to their camp at the foot of mountCaucasus. As their destruction or their success mustbe alike advantageous to the empire, he persuadedthem to invade the enemies of Rome; and they wereeasily tempted, by gifts and promises, to gratify theirruling inclinations. These fugitives, who fled beforethe Turkish arms, passed the Tanais and Borys-thenes, and boldly advanced into the heart of Po­land and Germany, violating the law of nations, andabusing the rights of victory. Before ten years hadelapsed, their camps were seated on the Danube andthe Elbe, many Bulgarian and Sclavonian names wereobliterated from the earth, and the remainder of theirtribes are found, as tributaries and vassals, under thestandard of the Avars. The chagan, the peculiartitle of their king, still affected to cultivate the friend­ship of the emperor; and Justinian entertained somethoughts of fixing them in Pannonia to balance theprevailing power of the Lombards. But the vir­tue or treachery of an Avar betrayed the secret en­mity and ambitious designs of their countrymen; and







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 221


aversion to the Christian faith, and was supposed to chap.
YYYVTI
entertain the sentiments of an Atheist and a Pagan, 1
which have been imputed, inconsistently enough, tothe last philosophers of Greece. His avarice wasmore clearly proved and more sensibly felt. If hewere swayed by gifts in the administration of justice,the example of Bacon will again occur; nor can themerit of Tribonian atone for his baseness, if he de­graded the sanctity of his profession; and if lawswere every day enacted, modified, or repealed, forthe base consideration of his private emolument. Inthe sedition of Constantinople, his removal was grantedto the clamours, perhaps to the just indignation, ofthe people; but the quaestor was speedily restored,and till the hour of his death, he possessed, abovetwenty years, the favour and confidence of the em­peror. His passive and dutiful submission has beenhonoured with the praise of Justinian himself, whosevanity was incapable of discerning how often thatsubmission degenerated into the grossest adula­tion.
If Cassar had achieved the reformation of the Ro- The Code ofman law, his creative genius, enlightened by reflec- a. d: 528,tion and study, would have given to the world a pure ^^ragand original system of jurisprudence. Whatever flat- April 7.tery might suggest, the emperor of the East wasafraid to establish his private judgment as the stand­ard of equity: in the possession of legislative power,he borrowed the aid of time and opinion; and hislaborious compilations are guarded by the sages andlegislators of past times. Instead of a statue cast ina simple mould by the hand of an artist, the worksof Justinian represent a tesselated pavement of an­tique and costly, but too often of incoherent frag­ments. In the first year of his reign, he directed thefaithful Tribonian, and nine learned associates, torevise the ordinances of his predecessors, as they were







OCR Output








228 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. superior to the prejudices of his profession, these in-xxxvu. cessant, and for the most part trifling, alterations,can be only explained by the venal spirit of a prince,who sold without shame his judgments and his laws*.The charge of the secret historian is indeed explicitand vehement; but the sole instance, which he pro­duces, may be ascribed to the devotion as well as tothe avarice of Justinian. A wealthy bigot had be­queathed his inheritance to the church of Emesa;and its value was enhanced by the dexterity of anartist, who subscribed confessions of debt and pro­mises of payment with the names of the richest'Syrians. They pleaded the established prescription
of thirty or forty years; but their defence was over­ruled by a retrospective edict, which extended theclaims of the church to the term of a century; anedict so pregnant with injustice and disorder, thatafter serving this occasional purpose, it was prudentlyabolished in the same reign. If candour will acquitthe emperor himself, and transfer the corruption tohis wife and favourites, the suspicion of so foul a vicemust still degrade the majesty of his laws: and theadvocates of Justinian may acknowledge, that suchlevity, whatsoever be the motive, is unworthy of alegislator and a man.Theinsti- Monarchs seldom condescend to become the pre-a.D. 533, ceptors of their subjects; and some praise is due toNov. 21. Justinian, by whose command an ample system wasreduced to a short and elementary treatise. Amongthe various institutes of the Roman law, those of. Caiust were the most popular in the East and West;


• Montesquieu, Considerations sur la Grandeur et la Decadence des Romains,c. 20. tom. iii. p. 501, in 4to. On this occasion he throws aside the gown andcap of a President a Mortier.
f The emperor Justinian calls him suum, though he died before the end ofthe second century. His Institutes are quoted by Servius, Boethius, Priscian,&c . and the Epitome by Arrian is still extant. (See the Prolegomena andNotes to the edition of Schulting, in the Jurisprudent Ante-Justinianea, Lugd.Bat. 1717. Heineccius, Hist. J. R. No. 313. Ludewig. in Vit. Just. p. 199.)







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 475


from a throne resplendent with gold and gems, which chap.was raised by a marble staircase to the height of a L'lofty terrace. Below the throne were seated the of­ficers of his guards, the magistrates, the chiefs of thefactions of the circus; the inferior steps were occu­pied by the people, and the place below was coveredwith troops of dancers, singers, and pantomimes.The square was surrounded by the hall of justice,the arsenal and the various offices of business andpleasure; and the purple chamber was named fromthe annual distribution of robes of scarlet and purpleby the hand of the empress herself. The long seriesof the apartments was adapted to the seasons, anddecorated with marble and porphyry, with painting,sculpture, and mosaics, with a profusion of gold,silver, and precious stones. His fanciful magnificenceemployed the skill and patience of such artists as thetimes could afford: but the taste of Athens wouldhave despised their frivolous and costly labours; agolden tree with its leaves and branches, which shel­tered a multitude of birds, warbling their artificialnotes, and two lions of massy gold, and of the na­tural size, who looked and roared like their brethrenof the forest. The successors of Theophilus, of theBasilian and Comnenian dynasties, were not less am­bitious of leaving some memorial of their residence;and the portion of the palace most splendid andaugust was dignified with the title of the golden tri­clinium. With becoming modesty, the rich and noble FurnitureGreeks aspired to imitate their sovereign; and when and attend-they passed through the streets on horseback, in theirrobes of silk and embroidery, they were mistaken bythe children for kings. A matron of Peloponnesus,who had cherished the infant fortunes of Basil theMacedonian, was excited by tenderness or vanity tovisit the greatness of her adopted son. In a journeyof five hundred miles from Patras to Constantinople,







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 169


key of the public treasure was put into his hand, to chap.
collect magazines, to levy soldiers, to purchase arms _
and horses, to discharge the arrears of pay, and totempt the fidelity of the fugitives and deserters. Thetroops of Germanus were still in arms; they haltedat Salona in the expectation of a new leader; andlegions of subjects and allies were created by thewell-known liberality of the eunuch Narses. Theking of the Lombards satisfied or surpassed the ob­ligations of a treaty, by lending two thousand twohundred of his bravest warriors, who were followedby three thousand of their martial attendants. Threethousand Heruli fought on horseback under Phile-muth, their native chief; and the noble Aratus, whoadopted the manners and discipline of Rome, con­ducted a band of veterans of the same nation. Da-gistheus was released from prison to command theHuns; and Kobad, the grandson and nephew of thegreat king, was conspicuous by the regal tiara at thehead of his faithful Persians, who had devoted them­selves to the fortunes of their prince. Absolute inthe exercise of his authority, more absolute in theaffection of his troops, Narses led a numerous andgallant army from Philippolis to Salona, from whencehe coasted the eastern side of the Hadriatic as far asthe confines of Italy. His progress was checked.The East could not supply vessels capable of transport­ing such multitudes of men and horses. The Franks,who, in the general confusion, had usurped the greaterpart of the Venetian province, refused a free passageto the friends of the Lombards. The station of Ve­rona was occupied by Teias, with the flower of theGothic forces; and that skilful commander had over­spread the adjacent country with the fall of woodsand the inundation of waters. In this perplexity, anofficer of experience proposed a measure, secure bythe appearance of rashness; that the Roman army







OCR Output








340 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. But the soldiers accepted without gratitude the tardyXXXIX' and reluctant gifts of the emperor; their insolencewas elated by the discovery of his weakness and theirown strength; and their mutual hatred was inflamedbeyond the desire of forgiveness or the hope of re­conciliation. The historians of the times adopt thevulgar suspicion, that Maurice conspired to destroythe troops whom he had laboured to reform; themisconduct and favour of Commentiolus are imputedto this malevolent design; and every age must con­demn the inhumanity or avarice of a prince, who, bythe trifling ransom of six thousand pieces of gold,might haye prevented the massacre of twelve thou­sand prisoners in the hands of the chagan. Inand rebel- {^q just ferVour of indignation, an order was sig­nified to the army of the Danube, that they shouldspare the magazines of the province, and establishtheir winter-quarters in the hostile country of theAvars. The measure of their grievances was full:they pronounced Maurice unworthy to reign, ex­pelled or slaughtered his faithful adherents, and,under the command of Phocas, a simple centurion,returned by hasty marches to the neighbourhood ofElection of Constantinople. After a long series of legal succes-a. d. 602, sion, the military disorders of the third century wereOctober. again revived; yet such was the novelty of the en­terprise, that the insurgents were awed by their ownrashness. They hesitated to invest their favouritewith the vacant purple, and while they rejected alltreaty with Maurice himself, they held a friendlycorrespondence with his son Theodosius, and withGermanus, the father-in-law of the royal youth. Soobscure had been the former condition of Phocas,that the emperor was ignorant of the name and cha­racter of his rival; but as soon as he learned thatthe centurion, though bold in sedition, was timid in







OCR Output








22 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. "the field of Bulla, and the hope of your valour.
_" Abandon Sardinia; fly to our relief; restore our
"empire, or perish by our side." On the receipt ofthis epistle, Zano imparted his grief to the principalVandals; but the intelligence was prudently con­cealed from the natives of the island. The troopsembarked in one hundred and twenty galleys at theport of Cagliari, cast anchor the third day on theconfines of Mauritania, and hastily pursued theirmarch to join the royal standard in the camp ofBulla. Mournful was the interview: the two bro­thers embraced; they wept in silence; no questionswere asked of the Sardinian victory; no inquirieswere made of the African misfortunes: they sawbefore their eyes the whole extent of their cala­mities; and the absence of their wives and childrenafforded a melancholy proof, that either death orcaptivity had been their lot. The languid spirit ofthe Vandals was at length awakened and united bythe entreaties of their king, the example of Zano,and the instant danger which threatened their mon­archy and religion. The military strength of thenation advanced to battle; and such was the rapidincrease, that, before their army reached Tricameron,about twenty miles from Carthage, they might boast,perhaps with some exaggeration, that they surpassed,in a tenfold proportion, the diminutive powers of theRomans. But these powers were under the commandof Belisarius; and, as he was conscious of their su­perior merit, he permitted the Barbarians to surprisehim at an unseasonable hour. The Romans wereinstantly under arms: a rivulet covered their front;the cavalry formed the first line, which Belisariussupported in the centre, at the head of five hundredguards; the infantry, at some distance, was postedin the second line; and the vigilance of the generalwatched the separate station and ambiguous faith of







OCR Output








378 THE DECLINE AND FAIX


CHAP. Patriarchs of Alexandria and Constantinople.—St. Cyril andXXXIX. Nestorius.—Third General Council of Ephesus.—Heresy~ ""of Eutyches.—Fourth General Council of Chalcedon.—Civil and Ecclesiastical Discord.—Intolerance of Justinian.—The Three Chapters.—The Monothelite Controversy.—State of the Oriental Sects.—First, The Nestorians.—Second,The Jacobites.—Third, The Maronites.—Fourth, The Ar­menians.—Fifth, The Copts.—Sixth, The Abyssinians.—Mission, and final Expulsion of the Jesuits from that Coun­try, A. D. 3632.
I believe that very few persons, who peruse the foregoingTable, will feel any regret at the omission of the Chapter, inwhich these contents are detailed; and I think I may safelyaffirm, that none of my readers will be of opinion that theexpulsion of the Jesuits from Abyssinia, which happenedin the year 1632, can possibly be considered as a part ofthe History of the Decline and Fall of tbe Roman Empire.This chapter is indeed a perfect illustration of the truth ofthe observation of Sir David Dalrymple, which was noticedin the life of Mr. Gibbon; I mean, that those parts of hiswork which contain the most violent attacks on the Chris­tian religion, are so far from forming a part of the History,that they are in fact very inconvenient interruptions of thenarrative.
As a proof of the truth of the foregoing assertion, I shallobserve, that, in the preceding chapter, Heraclius appears asone of the most interesting characters in the History. Hisexpedition against Persia is by far the most brilliant thatwas achieved by the Romans against that country, from thedefeat and death of Crassus, to the time of Heraclius. Everyperson must, of course, be desirous of being acquainted withthe remaining circumstances of the reign of this emperor.True it is, that the close of it was as calamitous, as the pre­ceding part had been glorious. But still it must be the wish ofevery reader to be acquainted with it; and it will not be with­out some trouble that he can obtain the necessary informationfrom Mr. Gibbon. A few words are indeed said in the be­ginning of the next volume respecting the second marriageand death of Heraclius; but the important events whichtook place in Syria and Egypt during the later part of hisreign must be sought for at the end of the ninth volume. Thereader, in the mean time, must have perused a sketch of a







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIB.E. 275


into the midst of the hippodrome, and the hopeless chap.
creditors of Justinian accepted this equitable payment;
as a voluntary gift. Before the end of three years,his example was imitated and surpassed by the em­press Sophia, who delivered many indigent citizensfrom the weight of debt and usury: an act of be­nevolence the best entitled to gratitude, since itrelieves the most intolerable distress; but in whichthe bounty of a prince is the most liable to be abusedby the claims of prodigality and fraud.
On the seventh day of his reign, Justin gave au- Embassy ofdience to the ambassadors of the Avars, and the scene a'd^g.was decorated to impress the Barbarians with astonish­ment, veneration, and terror. From the palace gate,the spacious courts and long porticoes were lined withthe lofty crests and gilt bucklers of the guards, whopresented their spears and axes with more confidencethan they would have shown in a field of battle. Theofficers who exercised the power, or attended theperson of the prince, were attired in their richesthabits, and arranged according to the military andcivil order of the hierarchy. When the veil of thesanctuary was withdrawn, the ambassadors beheld theemperor of the East on his throne, beneath a canopyor dome, which was supported by four columns, andcrowned with a winged figure of victory. In the firstemotions of surprise, they submitted to the servileadoration of the Byzantine court; but as soon as theyrose from the ground, Targetius, the chief of theembassy, expressed the freedom and pride of a Bar­barian. He extolled, by the tongue of his interpreter,the greatness of the chagan, by whose clemency thekingdoms of the South were permitted to exist, whosevictorious subjects had traversed the frozen rivers ofScythia, and who now covered the banks of the Da­nube with innumerable tents. The late emperor hadcultivated, with annual and costly gifts, the friend-


T 2







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EM PIKE. 371


concealing their own loss, passed the night on the chap.field. They acknowledged, that on this occasion it *was less difficult to kill than to discomfit the soldiersof Chosroes; amidst the bodies of their friends, nomore than two bowshot from the enemy, the rem­nant of the Persian cavalry stood firm till the seventhhour of the night; about the eighth hour they retiredto their unrifled camp, collected their baggage, anddispersed on all sides, from the want of orders ratherthan of resolution. The diligence of Heraclius wasnot less admirable in the use of victory; by a marchof forty-eight miles in four and twenty hours, hisvanguard occupied the bridges of the greater andthe lesser Zab; and the cities and palaces of Assyriawere open for the first time to the Romans. By ajust gradation of magnificent scenes, they penetratedto the royal seat of Dastagerd, and, though much ofthe treasure had been removed, and much had beenexpended, the remaining wealth appears to have ex­ceeded their hopes, and even to have satiated theiravarice. Whatever could not be easily transportedthey consumed with fire, that Chosroes might feelthe anguish of those wounds, which he had so oftenindicted on the provinces of the empire; and justicemight allow the excuse, if the desolation had beenconfined to the works of regal luxury, if nationalhatred, military licence, and religious zeal, had notwasted with equal rage the habitations and thetemples of the guiltless subject. The recovery ofthree hundred Roman standards, and the deliver­ance of the numerous captives of Edessa and Alex­andria, reflect a purer glory on the arms of Hera­clius. From the palace of Dastagerd, he pursuedhis march within a few miles of Modian or Ctesi-phon, till he was stopped, on the banks of the Arba,uy the difficulty of the passage, the rigour of theseason, and perhaps the fame of an impregnable


B B 2







OCR Output








London:
Printed by A. & R. Spottiswoode,
New-Street Square.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 265


of the Etruscans and Greeks: in the mad abuse of chap.
» YYYVIT
prosperity and power, every pleasure that is innocent'
was deemed insipid; and the Scatinian law, whichhad been extorted by an act of violence, was insensi­bly abolished by the lapse of time and the multitudeof criminals. By this law, the rape, perhaps the se­duction of an ingenuous youth, was compensated, asa personal injury, by the poor damages of ten thou­sand sesterces, or fourscore pounds; the ravishermight be slain by the resistance or revenge of chas­tity; and I wish to believe, that at Rome, as inAthens, the voluntary and effeminate deserter of hissex was degraded from the honours and the rights ofa citizen*. But the practice of vice was not dis­couraged by the severity of opinion: the indeliblestain of manhood was confounded with the morevenial transgression of fornication, nor was the licen­tious lover exposed to the same dishonour which heimpressed on the male or female partner of his guilt.From Catullus to Juvenal t, the poets accuse andcelebrate the degeneracy of the times, and the re­formation of manners was feebly attempted by thereason and authority of the civilians, till the mostvirtuous of the Caesars proscribed the sin againstnature as a crime against society J.
A new spirit of legislation arose in the empire Rigour ofwith the religion of Constantine §. The laws oftianem-"Moses were received as the divine original of justice, perors'and the Christian princes adapted their penal sta-


*See the oration of ^Eschines against the catamite Timarchus (in Reiske,Orator. Graec. torn. iii. p. 21—184).
"f A crowd of disgraceful passages will force themselves on the memory of theclassic reader: I will only remind him of the cool declaration of Ovid—77«e•words must not be inserted, but they speak volumes.—Editor.
% Mlias Lampridius, in Vit. Heliogobal. in Hist. August, p. 112. AureliusVictor, in Philippo, Codex Theodos. 1. ix. tit. vii. leg. 7? and Godefroy's Com­mentary, tom. iii. p. 63. Theodosius abolished the subterraneous brothels ofRome, in which the prostitution of both sexes was acted with impunity.
§ See the laws of Constantine and his successors against adultery, sodomy, &c.in the Theodosian (1. ix. tit. vii. leg. 7. 1. xi. tit. xxxvi. leg. 1. 1J and JustinianCodes (1. ix. tit. ix. leg. 30, 31).







OCR Output








66 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. Barbarians, but the conscious superiority of the Ro-XXXIV- man chief was expressed in the distribution of hisBciisarius troops. As soon as fear or hunger compelled the™dties Goths to evacuate Alba, Porto, and Centumcella?,of Italy. ^eir place was instantly supplied; the garrisons ofNarnix Spoleto, and Perusia, were reinforced, andthe seven camps of the besiegers were gradually en­compassed with the calamities of a siege. The prayersand pilgrimage of Datius, bishop of Milan, were notwithout effect; and he obtained one thousand Thra-cians and Isaurians, to assist the revolt of Liguriaagainst her Arian tyrant. At the same time, Johnthe Sanguinary, the nephew of Vitalian, was detachedwith two thousand chosen horse, first to Alba on theFucine lake, and afterwards to the frontiers of Pi-cenum on the Hadriatic sea. "In that province,"said Belisarius, "" the Goths have deposited their"families and treasures, without a guard or the"suspicion of danger. Doubtless they will violate"the truce: let them feel your presence, before they"hear of your motions. Spare the Italians; suffer"not any fortified places to remain hostile in your"rear; and faithfully reserve the spoil for an equal"and common partition. It would not be reason-"able," he added with a laugh, "that whilst we are"toiling to the destruction of the drones, our- more"fortunate brethren should rifle and enjoy the"honey."The Goths The whole nation of the Ostrogoths had been as-ITege of sembled for the attack, and was almost entirely con-a?d!'538 sumed in the siege of Rome. If any credit be dueMarch. to an intelligent spectator, one-third at least of theirenormous host was destroyed, in frequent and bloodycombats under the walls of the city. The bad fameand pernicious qualities of the summer air mightalready be imputed to the decay of agriculture andpopulation; and the evijs of famine and pestilence







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. number of his children: the domestic judge mightxxxvii. pronounce the death of the offender, or his mercym ight expel her from his bed and house: but theslavery of the wretched female was hopeless and per­petual, unless he asserted for his own conveniencethe manly prerogative of divorce. The warmest ap­plause has been lavished on the virtue of the Ro­mans, who abstained from the exercise of this tempt­ing privilege above five hundred years: but the samefact evinces the unequal terms of a connexion inwhich the slave was unable to renounce her tyrant,and the tyrant was unwilling to relinquish his slave.When the Roman matrons became the equal andvoluntary companions of their lords, a new jurispru­dence was introduced, that marriage, like other part­nerships, might be dissolved by the abdication of oneof the associates. In three centuries of prosperityand corruption, this principle was enlarged to fre­quent practice and pernicious abuse. Passion, in­terest, or caprice, suggested daily motives for thedissolution of marriage; a word, a sign, a message,a letter, the mandate of a freedman, declared theseparation: the most tender of human connexionswas degraded to a transient society of profit or plea­sure. According to the various conditions of life,both sexes alternately felt the disgrace and injury:an inconstant spouse transferred her wealth to a newfamily, abandoning a numerous, perhaps a spurious,progeny to the paternal authority and care of her latehusband; a beautiful virgin might be dismissed tothe world, old, indigent, and friendless; but the re­luctance of the Romans, when they were pressed tomarriage by Augustus, sufficiently marks, that theprevailing institutions were least favourable to themales. A specious theory is confuted by this freeand perfect experiment, which demonstrates, that theliberty of divorce does not contribute to happiness







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 53


secured in the midst of war the blessings of tran- chap.quillity and justice. They applauded the rapid sue- XXKIV-cess of his arms, which overran the adjacent country,as far as Narni, Perusia, and Spoleto; but theytrembled, the senate, the clergy, and the unwarlikepeople, as soon as they understood that he had re­solved, and would speedily be reduced, to sustain asiege against the powers of the Gothic monarchy.The designs of Vitiges were executed, during thewinter season, with diligence and effect. From theirrustic habitations, from their distant garrisons, theGoths assembled at Ravenna for the defence of theircountry; and such were their numbers, that after anarmy had been detached for the relief of Dalmatia,one hundred and fifty thousand fighting men marchedunder the royal standard. According to the degreesof rank or merit, the Gothic king distributed armsand horses, rich gifts, and liberal promises: he movedalong the Flaminian way, declined the useless siegesof Perusia and Spoleto, respected the impregnablerock of Narni, and arrived within two miles of Romeat the foot of the Milvian bridge. The narrow pass­age was fortified with a tower, and Belisarius hadcomputed the value of the twenty days, which mustbe lost in the construction of another bridge. Butthe consternation of the soldiers of the tower, whoeither fled or deserted, disappointed his hopes, andbetrayed his person into the most imminent danger.At the head of one thousand horse, the Romangeneral sallied from the Flaminian gate to mark theground of an advantageous position, and to surveythe camp of the Barbarians; but while he still be­lieved them on the other side of the Tyber, he wassuddenly encompassed and assaulted by their innu­merable squadrons. The fate of Italy depended onhis life; and the deserters pointed to the conspicuous


r


e 3







OCR Output








38 THE DECLINE AND FALL


XXXIV.


chap. train of one thousand nobles, and five thousandGothic soldiers, who signalized their valour in theMoorish wars. Their merit was over-rated by them­selves, and perhaps neglected by the Vandals: theyviewed the country with envy, and the conquerorswith disdain; but their real or fictitious conspiracywas prevented by a massacre; the Goths were op­pressed, and the captivity of Amalafrida was soonfollowed by her secret and suspicious death. Theeloquent pen of Cassiodorius was employed to re­proach the Vandal court with the cruel violation ofevery social and public duty; but the vengeancewhich he threatened in the name of his sovereignmight be derided with impunity, as long as Africawas protected by the sea, and the Goths were desti­tute of a navy. In the blind impotence of grief andindignation, they joyfully saluted the approach of theRomans, entertained the fleet of Belisarius in theports of Sicily, and were speedily delighted or alarmedby the surprising intelligence, that their revenge wasexecuted beyond the measure of their hopes, or per­haps of their wishes. To their friendship the em­peror was indebted for the kingdbm of Africa, andthe Goths might reasonably think that they wereentitled to resume the possession of a barren rock, sorecently separated as a nuptial gift from the islandof Sicily. They were soon undeceived by the haughtymandate of Belisarius, which excited their tardy andunavailing repentance. "The city and promontory"of Lilybaeum," said the Roman general, "belonged"to the Vandals, and I claim them by the right of-"conquest. Your submission may deserve the favour"of the emperor; your obstinacy will provoke his"displeasure, and must kindle a war, that can ter-"minate only in your utter ruin. If you compel us"to take up arms, we shall contend, not to regain"the possession of a single city, but to deprive you







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 489


of seamen to the Imperial fleet. Since the time of chap.the Peloponesian and Punic wars, the sphere of ac-'
tion had not been enlarged; and the science of navalarchitecture appears to have declined. The art ofconstructing those stupendous machines which dis­played three, or six, or ten, ranges of oars, risingabove, or falling behind, each other, was unknown tothe ship-builders of Constantinople, as well as to themechanicians of modern days. The Dromones, orlight galleys of the Byzantine empire, were contentwith two tier of oars; each tier was composed of fiveand twenty benches ; and two rowers were seated oneach bench, who plyed their oars on either side ofthe vessel. To these we must add the captain orcenturion, who, in time of action, stood erect withhis armour-bearer on the poop, two steersmen at thehelm, and two officers at the prow, the one to managethe anchor, the other to point and play against theenemy the tube of liquid fire. The whole crew, asin the infancy of the art, performed the double serviceof mariners and soldiers; they were provided withdefensive and offensive arms, with bows and arrows,which they used from the upper deck, with longpikes, which they pushed through the port-holes ofthe lower tier. Sometimes indeed the ships of warwere of a larger and more solid construction; andthe labours of combat and navigation were moreregularly divided between seventy soldiers and twohundred and thirty mariners. But for the most partthey were of the light and manageable size; and asthe cape of Malea in Peloponesus was still clothedwith its ancient terrors, an Imperial fleet was trans­ported five miles over land across the Isthmus ofCorinth. The principles of maritime tactics had notundergone any change since the time of Thucydides:a squadron of galleys still advanced in a crescent,charged to the front, and strove to impel their sharp







OCR Output








38 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. gates were likewise of brass; and a fruitless effort toxxx iv- turn them on their rusty hinges, revealed the scandal­


ous secret, that some Romans were still attached tothe superstition of their ancestors.^F*tta Eighteen days were employed by the besiegers, toassault of provide all the instruments of attack which antiquityhad invented. Fascines were prepared to fill theditches, scaling-ladders to ascend the walls. Thelargest trees of the forest supplied the timbers of fourbattering-rams; their heads were armed with iron;they were suspended by ropes, and each of them wasworked by the labour of fifty men. The lofty woodenturrets moved on wheels or rollers, and formed aspacious platform of the level of the rampart. Onthe morning of the nineteenth day, a general attackwas made from the Praenestine gate to the Vatican:seven Gothic columns, with their military engines,advanced to the assault; and the Romans who linedthe ramparts listened with doubt and anxiety to thecheerful assurances of their commander. As soon asthe enemy approached the ditch, Belisarius himselfdrew the first arrow; and such was his strength anddexterity, that he transfixed the foremost of the Bar­barian leaders. A shout of applause and victory wasre-echoed along the wall. He drew a second arrow,and the stroke was followed with the same successand the same acclamation. The Roman general thengave the word, that the archers should aim at theteams of oxen; they were instantly covered withmortal wounds; the towers which they drew re­mained useless and immoveable, and a single momentdisconcerted the laborious projects of the king of theGoths. After this disappointment, Vitiges still con­tinued, or feigned to continue, the assault of the Sa-larian gate, that he might divert the attention of hisadversary, while his principal forces more strenuouslyattacked the Pramestine gate and the sepulchre of







OCR Output








44 THE DECLINE AND FALL


xxxiv voya8*e for tne African coast. He found a fruitful
1 land and a friendly people. Notwithstanding the
decay of agriculture, Sicily still supplied the gra­naries of Rome; the farmers were graciously ex­empted from the oppression of military quarters; andthe Goths, who trusted the defence of the island tothe inhabitants, had some reason to complain, thattheir confidence was ungratefully betrayed. Insteadof soliciting and expecting the aid of the king of Italy,they yielded to the first summons a cheerful obe­dience: and this province, the first fruits of thePunic wars, was again, after a long separation, unitedto the Roman empire*. The Gothic garrison ofPalermo, which alone attempted to resist, was re­duced, after a short siege, by a singular stratagem.Belisarius introduced his ships into the deepest re­cess of the harbour; their boats were laboriouslyhoisted with ropes and pulleys to the top-mast head,and he filled them with archers, who, from that su­perior station, commanded the ramparts of the city.After this easy, though successful campaign, the con­queror entered Syracuse in triumph, at the head ofhis victorious bands, distributing gold medals to thepeople, on the day which so gloriously terminated theyear of the consulship. He passed the winter seasonin the palace of ancient kings, amidst the ruins of aGrecian colony, which once extended to a circum­ference of two and twenty miles: but in the spring,about the festival of Easter, the prosecution of hisdesigns was interrupted by a dangerous revolt of theAfrican forces.. Carthage was saved by the presenceof Belisarius, who suddenly landed with a thousandguards. Two thousand soldiers of doubtful faith re­turned to the standard of their old commander: and


* For the conquest of Sicily, compare the narrative of Procopius with the com­plaints of Totila (Gothic. 1. i, c. 5.1. iii. c . 10). The Gothic queen had latelyrelieved that thankless island (Var. ix. 10, II).







OCR Output








354 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. terred by superstition or resentment from approach-XXXIX- ing the gates of Ctesiphon: and his favourite re­sidence of Artemita, orDastagerd, was situate beyondthe Tigris, about sixty miles to the north of thecapital *. The adjacent pastures were covered withflocks and herds: the paradise or park was replenishedwith pheasants, peacocks, ostriches, roebucks, andwild boars; and the noble game of lions and tigerswas sometimes turned loose for the bolder pleasuresof the chase. Nine hundred and sixty elephantswere maintained for the use or splendour of the greatking: his tents and baggage were carried into thefield by twelve thousand great camels and eight thou­sand of a smaller size; and the royal stables werefilled with six thousand mules and horses, amongwhom the names of Shebdiz and Barid are renownedfor their speed or beauty. Six thousand guardssuccessively mounted before the palace gate; and theservice of the interior apartments was performed bytwelve thousand slaves. The various treasures ofgold, silver, gems, silk, and aromatics, were depositedin a hundred subterraneous vaults; and the chamberBadwverd 'denoted the accidental gift of the windswhich had wafted the spoils of Heraclius into one ofthe Syrian harbours of his rival. The voice of flattery,and perhaps of fiction, is not ashamed to compute thethirty thousand rich hangings that adorned the walls,the forty thousand columns of silver, or more pro­bably of marble, and plated wood, that supported theroof; and the thousand globes of gold suspended inthe dome, to imitate the motions of the planets andthe constellations of the zodiac f. While the Persianmonarch contemplated the wonders of his art and


* D'Anville, Mem. de PAcademie des Inscriptions, tom, xxxii. p. 568—571.
f Theophanes, Chronograph, p. 268. D'Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientak.p. 997. The Greeks describe the decay, the Persians the splendour of Dastagerd;but the former speak from the modest witness of the eye, the latter from thtvague report of the ear.







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 179


Verona. The banners of Narses soon approached the chap.Vulturnus, and the eyes of Italy were anxiously fixed xxxv'on the event of this final contest. Perhaps the talentsof the Roman general were most conspicuous in thecalm operations which precede the tumult of a battle.His skilful movements intercepted the subsistence ofthe Barbarian, deprived him of the advantage of thebridge and river, and, in the choice of the ground andmoment of action, reduced him to comply with theinclination of his enemy. On the morning of theimportant day, when the ranks were already formed,a servant, for some trivial fault, was killed by hismaster, one of the leaders of the Heruli. The justiceor passion of Narses was awakened: he summonedthe offender to his presence, and without listening tohis excuses, gave the signal to the minister of death.If the cruel master had not infringed the laws of hisnation, this arbitrary execution was not less unjustthan it appears to have been imprudent. The Herulifelt the indignity; they halted: but the Roman ge­neral, without soothing their rage, or expecting theirresolution, called aloud, as the trumpets sounded,that unless they hastened to occupy their place, theywould lose the honour of the victory. His troopswere disposed in a long front, the cavalry on thewings; in the centre, the heavy-armed foot; thearchers and slingers in the rear. The Germans ad­vanced in a sharp-pointed column, of the form of atriangle or solid wedge. 'They pierced the feeblecentre of Narses, who received them with a smileinto the fatal snare, and directed his wings of cavalryinsensibly to wheel on their flanks and encompasstheir rear. The host of the Franks and Alemanniconsisted of infantry: a sword and buckler hung bytheir side, and they used as their weapons of offencea weighty hatchet, and a hooked javelin, which wereonly formidable in close combat, or at a short di-


N 2







OCR Output








142 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. the clamours of military discontent. Many of theXXXVL Roman soldiers had married the widows and daugh­ters of the Vandals. As their own, by the doubleright of conquest and inheritance, they claimed theestates which Genseric had assigned to his victorioustroops. They heard with disdain the cold and selfishrepresentations of their officers, that the liberality ofJustinian had raised them from a savage or servilecondition; that they were already enriched by thespoils of Africa, the treasure, the slaves, and themoveables, of the vanquished Barbarians; and thatthe ancient and lawful patrimony of the emperorswould be applied only to the support of that govern­ment on which their own safety and reward must ulti­mately depend. The mutiny was secretly inflamedby a thousand soldiers, for the most part Heruli, whohad imbibed the doctrines, and were instigated by theclergy, of the Arian sect; and the cause of perjuryand rebellion was sanctified by the dispensing powersof fanaticism. The Arians deplored the ruin of theirchurch, triumphant above a century in Africa; andthey,were justly provoked by the laws of the con­queror, which interdicted the baptism of their chil­dren and the exercise of all religious worship. Ofthe Vandals chosen by Belisarius, the far greater part,in the honours of the Eastern service, forgot theircountry and religion. But a band of four hundredobliged the mariners, when they were in sight of theisle of Lesbos, to alter their course: they touched onPeloponnesus, ran ashore on a desert coast of Africa,and boldly erected, on mount Aurasius, the standardof independence and revolt. While the troops of theprovince disclaimed the command of their superiors,a conspiracy was formed at Carthage against the lifeof Solomon, who filled with honour the place of Beli­sarius; and the Arians had resolved to sacrifice thetyrant at the foot of the altar, during the awfulmysteries of the festival of Easter. Fear or remorse







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 269


Before the age of Justinian, or perhaps of Diocletian, chap.
the decuries of Roman judges had sunk to an empty __
title: the humble advice of the assessors might be Assessors.accepted or despised; and in each tribunal the civiland criminal jurisdiction was administered by a singlemagistrate, who was raised and disgraced by the willof the emperor.
A Roman accused of any capital crime might pre- Voluntaryvent the sentence of the law by voluntary exile, or death.death. Till his guilt had been legally proved, hisinnocence was presumed, and his person was free;till the votes of the last century had been countedand declared, he might peaceably secede to any ofthe allied cities of Italy, or Greece, or Asia. Hisfame and fortunes were preserved, at least to hischildren, by this civil death; and he might still behappy in every rational and sensual enjoyment, if amind accustomed to the ambitious tumult at Romecould support the uniformity and silence of Rhodesor Athens. A bolder effort was required to escapefrom the tyranny of the Caesars; but this effort wasrendered familiar by the maxims of the Stoics, theexample of the bravest Romans, and the legal en­couragements of suicide. The bodies of condemnedcriminals were exposed to public ignominy, and theirchildren, a more serious evil, were reduced to po­verty by the confiscation of their fortunes. But ifthe victims of Tiberius and Nero anticipated thedecree of the prince or senate, their courage anddespatch were recompensed by the applause of thepublic, the decent honours of burial, and the validityof their testaments. The exquisite avarice andcruelty of Domitian appear to have deprived theunfortunate of this last consolation, and it was stilldenied even by the clemency of the Antonines. Avoluntary death, which, in the case of a capital of­fence, intervened between the accusation and the







OCR Output








464 'THE DECLINE AND FAIX


XLI.


chap. harbours of Crete and the fortresses of Cilicia, thatthe faithful or rebel emirs insulted the majesty of thethrone and capital. The remaining provinces underthe obedience of the emperors were cast into a newmould; and the jurisdiction of the presidents, theconsulars, and the counts, was superseded by the in­stitution of the themes, or military governments, whichprevailed under the successors of Heraclius, and aredescribed by the pen of the royal author. Of thetwenty-nine themes, twelve in Europe and seventeenin Asia, the origin is obscure, the etymology doubt­ful or capricious: the limits were arbitrary andfluctuating; but some particular names that soundthe most strangely to our ear were derived from thecharacter and attributes of the troops that were main­tained at the expense, and for the guard, of the re­spective divisions. The vanity of the Greek princesmost eagerly grasped the shadow of conquest and thememory of lost dominion. A new Mesopotamia wascreated on the Western side of the Euphrates: theappellation and praetor of Sicily were transferred to anarrow slip of Calabria; and a fragment of the duchyof Beneventum was promoted to the style and title ofthe theme of Lombardy. In the decline of the Ara­bian empire, the successors of Constantine mightindulge their pride in more solid advantages. Thevictories of Nicephorus, John Zimisces, and Basil thesecond, revived the fame and enlarged the boundariesof the Roman name: the province of Cilicia, themetropolis of Antioch, the islands of Crete andCyprus, were restored to the allegiance of Christ andCaesar: one-third of Italy was annexed to the throneof Constantinople: the kingdom of Bulgaria was de­stroyed; and the last sovereigns of the Macedoniandynasty extended their sway from the sources of theTigris to the neighbourhood of Rome. In the ele­venth century, the prospect was again clouded by







OCR Output








366 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. years, the same coast of the Euxine applauded his
YYYTY •
return from a long and victorious expedition *.
Deliver- Instead of skirmishing on the frontier, the two
Constan- monarchs who disputed the empire of the East aimedfrom the their desperate strokes at the heart of their rival.Persians The military force of Persia was wasted bythe marches
ana Avars, » J
a. d. 626. and combats of twenty years, and many of the vete­rans, who had survived the perils of the sword andthe climate, were still detained in the fortresses ofEgypt and Syria. But the revenge and ambition ofChosroes exhausted his kingdom; and the new leviesof subjects, strangers, and slaves, were divided intothree formidable bodies t. The first army of fiftythousand men, illustrious by the ornament and titleof the golden spears, was destined to march againstHeraclius; the second was stationed to prevent hisjunction with the troops of his brother Theodoras;and the third was commanded to besiege Constan­tinople, and to second the operations of the chagan,with whom the Persian king had ratified a treaty ofalliance and partition. Sarbar, the general of thethird army, penetrated through the provinces of Asiato the well-known camp of Chalcedon, and amusedhimself with the destruction of the sacred and pro.fane buildings of the Asiatic suburbs, while he im­patiently waited the arrival of his Scythian friendson the opposite side of the Bosphorus. On the twenty-ninth of June, thirty thousand Barbarians, the van­guard of the Avars, forced the long wall, and droveinto the capital a promiscuous crowd of peasants, ci­tizens, and soldiers. Fourscore thousand of his na­tive subjects, and of the vassal tribes of Gepidfe, Rus­sians, Bulgarians, and Sclavonians, advanced under


* George of Pisidia (Bell. Abaricum, 246—265. p. 49.) celebrates with truththe persevering courage of the three campaigns (t(ii; iripiSpoftoi/;) against the Per­sians.
f Petavius (Annotationes ad Nicephorum, p. 62, 63, 64.) discriminates thenames and actions of five Persian generals who were successively sent againstHeraclius.







OCR Output








436 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. was dragged in chains from the altar to Palermo, castXL- into a subterraneous dungeon, and exposed to the


hourly peril of death or apostacy. His pathetic andnot inelegant complaint may be read as the epitaphof his country. From the Roman conquest to thisfinal calamity, Syracuse, now dwindled to the primi­tive isle of Ortygea, had insensibly declined. Yetthe relics were still precious; the plate of the cathe­dral weighed five thousand pounds of silver; the en­tire spoil was computed at one million of pieces ofgold (about four hundred thousand pounds sterling);and the captives must outnumber the seventeen thou­sand Christians who were transported from the sackof Tauromenium into African servitude. In Sicilythe religion and language of the Greeks were eradi­cated. The Arabian squadrons issued from the har­bours of Palermo, Biserta, and Tunis ; a hundred andfifty towns of Calabria and Campania were attackedand pillaged; nor could the suburbs of Rome bedefended by the name of the Caesars and apostles.Had the Mahometans been united, Italy must havefallen an easy and glorious accession to the empire ofthe Prophet. But the Caliphs of Bagdad had losttheir authority in the West; the Aglabites and Fa-timites usurped the provinces of Africa; their emirsof Sicily aspired to independence; and the design ofconquest and dominion was degraded to a repetitionof predatory inroads.Theophiius, The emperor Theophilus, the son and successor ofOct. 3, 9' Michael the Stammerer, was one of the most activeand high-spirited princes who reigned at Constan­tinople during the middle age. In offensive or de­fensive war, he marched in person five times againstthe Saracens, formidable in his attacks, esteemed bythe enemy in his losses and defeats. In the last ofthese expeditions he penetrated into Syria, and be­sieged the obscure town of Sozopetra, the casual







OCR Output








CONTENTS. xiii


A. D. Page
610—622. Distress of Heraclius . . . .355
He solicits peace ..... 356
621 His preparations for war . • . . . 357
622 First expedition of Heraclius against the Persians . 359
623, 624, 625. His second expedition . . .362
626 Deliverance of Constantinople from the Persians and
Avars . . . . . .366
Alliances and conquests of Heraclius . 368
627 His third expedition' . . . .369
And victories ..... 370
Flight of Chosroes . . . .372
628 He is deposed . . .374
And murdered by his son Siroes ib.
Treaty of peace between the two empires . . ib.
Observations of the Editor on the alteration which is
here made by Mr. Gibbon in the plan and conduct
of his history, from the seventh to the thirteenth
century . . ... 377


CHAP. XL.


Conquests of Persia, Syria, and Egypt, by the Saracens.—Suc­
cession and Character of the Emperors of Constantinople, from
Heraclius to Leo the Philosopher—Two Sieges of Constanti­
nople by the Saracens.—Their Conquests of Africa and Spain.
—Invasion of France, and Defeat by Charles Martel.—Ex­
archate of Ravenna conquered by the Lombards—Their King­
dom subdued by Charlemagne—His Coronation, and Separation
of Italy from the Greeks.—War tvith Hanoi al Rashid.—Sa­
racens subdue Crete and Sicily, attack Rome, and are repulsed
by Pope Leo IV.—Conquest qfBariby the Emperor Basil.


A. D. Page
632 Saracens invade Persia and Syria . . . 382
633 Battle of Aiziradin .
634 Loss of Damascus
636 Battle of Yermuk
637 Loss of Jerusalem


383
ib.
384
ib.


638 End of the Syrian war
640 Loss of Alexandria and Egypt
The Alexandrian library
638 Second marriage and death of Heraclius
641 Constantino III.
641 Heraclconas
641 Punishment of Martina and Heraclconas
ib.
385
ib.
387
388
389
390







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 105


arms of the Turks, that their reign might be long and chap.
prosperous, and that a strict alliance, without envy or L
deceit, might for ever be maintained between the twomost powerful nations of the earth. The answer ofDisabul corresponded with these friendly professions,and the ambassadors were seated by his side, at abanquet which lasted the greatest part of the day:the tent was surrounded with silk hangings, and aTartar liquor was served on the table, which possessedat least the intoxicating qualities of wine. The en­tertainment of the succeeding day Was more sump­tuous; the silk hangings of the second tent wereembroidered in various figures; and the royal seat,the cups, and the vases, were of gold. A third pa­vilion was supported by columns of gilt wood; a bedof pure and massy gold was raised on four peacocksof the same metal; and before the entrance of thetent, dishes, basins, and statues of solid silver, andadmirable art, were ostentatiously piled in waggons,the monuments of valour rather than of industry.When Disabul led his armies against the frontiers ofPersia, his Roman allies followed many days themarch of the Turkish camp; nor were they dismissedtill they had enjoyed their precedency over the envoyof the great king, whose loud and intemperate cla­mours interrupted the silence of the royal banquet.The power and ambition of Chosroes cemented theunion of the Turks and Romans, who touched hisdominions on either side: but those distant nations,regardless of each other, consulted the dictates of in­terest, without recollecting the obligations of oathsand treaties. While the successor of Disabul cele­brated his father,s obsequies, he was saluted by the-ambassadors of the emperor Tiberius, who proposedan invasion of Persia, and sustained with firmnessthe angry, and perhaps the just, reproaches of thathaughty Barbarian. "You see my ten fingers," said







OCR Output








484 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. of this imaginary law: the, marriage of Leo, or ratherXL1" of his father Constantine the Fourth, with the daugh­


ter of the king of the Chozars; the nuptials of thegrand-daughter of Romanus, with a Bulgarian prince;and the union of Bertha of France or Italy withyoung Romanus, the son of Constantine Porphyro-genitus himself. To these objections three answerswere prepared, which solved the difficulty and esta-The first blished the law. I. The deed and the guilt of Con-a.°d."733. stantine Copronymus were acknowledged. The Isau-rian heretic, who sullied the baptismal font, and de­clared war against the images, had indeed embracedThe second a Barbarian wife. II. Romanus could not be allegedas a legitimate emperor; he was a plebeian usurper,ignorant of the laws, and regardless of the honour ofthe monarchy. His son Christopher, father of thebride, was the third in rank in the college of princes,at once the subject and the accomplice of a rebelliousparent. The Bulgarians were sincere and devoutChristians; and the safety of the empire, with theredemption of many thousand captives, depended onthis preposterous alliance. Yet no consideration coulddispense from the law of Constantine: the clergy,the senate, and the people, disapproved the conductof Romanus; and he was reproached, both in his lifeand death, as the author of the public disgrace. III.The third, For the marriage of his own son with the daughtera. . 943. o£ HUgo) king of Italy, a more honourable defence iscontrived by the wise Porphyrogenitus. Constantine,the great and holy, esteemed the fidelity and valourof the Franks; and his prophetic spirit beheld thevision of their future greatness. They alone wereexcepted from the general prohibition: Hugo, kingof France, was the lineal descendant of Charlemagne;and his daughter Bertha inherited the prerogativesof her family and nation. The voice of truth and







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 197


public consternation was expressed in the habits of chap.the citizens; and their idleness and despondence oc-'


casioned a general scarcity in the capital of the East.
Contagion is the inseparable symptom of the^et^nandplague; which, by mutual respiration, is transfused a. d. 542from the infected persons to the lungs and stomach ~~of those who approach them. While philosophersbelieve and tremble, it is singular, that the existenceof a real danger should have been denied by a peoplemost prone to vain and imaginary terrors. Yet thefellow-citizens of Procopius were satisfied, by someshort and partial experience, that the infection couldnot be gained by the closest conversation; and thispersuasion might support the assiduity of friends orphysicians in the care of the sick, whom inhumanprudence would have condemned to solitude anddespair. But the fatal security, like the predestina­tion of the Turks, must have aided the progress ofthe contagion, and those salutary precautions to whichEurope is indebted for her safety were unknown tothe government of Justinian. No restraints wereimposed on the free and frequent intercourse of theRoman provinces; from Persia to France, the na­tions were mingled and infected by wars and emi­grations: and the pestilential odour which lurks foryears in a bale of cotton was imported, by the abuseof trade, into the most distant regions. The modeof its propagation is explained by the remark of Pro­copius himself, that it always spread from the sea-coast to the inland country; the most sequesteredislands and mountains were successively visited; theplaces which had escaped the fury of its first passagewere alone exposed to the contagion of the ensuingyear. The winds might diffuse that subtle venom;but unless the atmosphere be previously disposed forits reception, the plague would soon expire in thecold or temperate climates of the earth. Such was


o 3







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 231


merly introduced to check the abuse of manumis- chap.sions, and the too rapid increase of vile and indigent XXXVILRomans, he finally abolished; and the spirit of hislaws promoted the extinction of domestic servitude.Yet the eastern provinces were filled, in the time ofJustinian, with multitudes of slaves, either born orpurchased for the use of their masters; and the price,from ten to seventy pieces of gold, was determinedby their age, their strength, and their education.But the hardships of this dependent state were con­tinually diminished by the influence of governmentand religion; and the pride of a subject was nolonger elated by his absolute dominion over the lifeand happiness of his bondsman.
The law of nature instructs most animals to cherish Fathers andand educate their infant progeny. The law of reasoncinculcates to the human species the returns of filialpiety. But the exclusive, absolute, and perpetualdominion of the father over his children, is peculiarto the Roman jurisprudence*, and seems to be coevalwith the foundation of the city. The paternal powerwas" instituted or confirmed by Romulus himself;and after the practice of three centuries, it was in­scribed on the fourth table of the Decemvirs. In theforum, the senate, or the camp, the adult son of aRoman citizen enjoyed the public and private rightsof a person: in his father's house, he was a merething; confounded by the laws with the moveables,the cattle, and the slaves, whom the capricious master -might alienate or destroy, without being responsibleto any earthly tribunal. The hand which bestowedthe daily sustenance might resume the voluntarygift, and whatever was acquired by the labour or fOr-
» See the patria potestas in the Institutes (1. i. tit. iv.), the Pandects (1. i. tit. vi.vii.) and the Code (1. viii. tit. xlvii. xlviii. xlix.). Jus potestatis quod in liberoshabemus proprium est civium Romanorum. Nulli enini alii sunt homines, quitalem in liberos habeant potestatem qualem nos habemus.


Q 4







OCR Output








292 THK DECLINE AND FALL


chap. Sophia were astonished by the proclamation of Anas-
tasia, the secret, though lawful, wife of the emperor
Tiberius. Whatever could alleviate the disappoint­ment of Sophia, Imperial honours, a stately palace, anumerous household, was liberally bestowed by thepiety of her adopted son; on solemn occasions heattended and consulted the widow of his benefactor:but her ambition disdained the vain semblance ofroyalty, and the respectful appellation of motherserved to exasperate, rather than appease, the rageof an injured woman. While she accepted, and re­paid with a courtly smile, the fair expressions of re­gard and confidence, a secret alliance was concludedbetween the dowager empress and her ancient ene­mies; and Justinian, the son of Germanus, was em­ployed as the instrument of her revenge. The prideof the reigning house supported, with reluctance, thedominion of a stranger: the youth was deservedlypopular; his name, after the death of Justin, hadbeen mentioned by a tumultuous faction; and hisown submissive offer of his head, with a treasure ofsixty thousand pounds, might be interpreted as anevidence of guilt, or at least of fear. Justinian re­ceived a free pardon, and the command of the easternarmy. The Persian monarch fled before his arms;and the acclamations which accompanied his triumphdeclared him worthy of the purple. His artful pa­troness had chosen the month of the vintage, whilethe emperor, in a rural solitude, was permitted toenjoy the pleasures of a subject. On the first in­telligence of her designs he returned to Constanti­nople, and the conspiracy was suppressed by hispresence and firmness. From the pomp and ho­nours which she had abused, Sophia was reduced toa modest allowance: Tiberius dismissed her train,intercepted her correspondence, and committed to afaithful guard the custody of her person. But the







OCR Output








310 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. vanities of this world. His ample patrimony was
YYYvnr
• dedicated to the foundation of seven monasteries,one in Rome, and six in Sicily; and it was the wishof Gregory that he might be unknown in this life,and glorious only in the next. Yet his devotion,and it might be sincere, pursued the path whichwould have been chosen by a crafty and ambitiousstatesman. The talents of Gregory, and the splen­dour which accompanied his retreat, rendered himdear and useful to the church; and implicit obe­dience has been always inculcated as the first dutyof a monk. As soon as he had received the cha­racter of deacon, Gregory was sent to reside at theByzantine court, the nuncio or minister of the apos­tolic see; and he boldly assumed, in the name ofSt. Peter, a_ tone of independent dignity, whichwould have been criminal and dangerous in the mostillustrious layman of the empire. He returned toRome with a just increase of reputation, and after ashort exercise of the monastic virtues, he was draggedfrom the cloister to the papal throne, by the unani­mous voice of the clergy, the senate, and the people.He alone resisted, or seemed to resist, his own eleva­tion; and his humble petition, that Maurice wouldbe pleased to reject the choice of the Romans, couldonly serve to exalt his character in the eyes of theemperor and the public. When the fatal mandatewas proclaimed, Gregory solicited the aid of somefriendly merchants to convey him in a basket beyondthe gates of Rome, and modestly concealed himseltsome days among the woods and mountains, till hisretreat was discovered.SoSS The Pontificate of Gregory the Great, which lastedthe Great, thirteen years six months and ten days, is one of thea.d. 590, most edifying periods of the history of the church.A!i)?604, His virtues, and even his faults, a singular mixture
March 12.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 251


the valuation of the effects. The last will of a citizen chap.might be altered during his life or rescinded after his xxxvILdeath : the persons whom he named might die beforehim, or reject the inheritance, or be exposed to somelegal disqualification. In the contemplation of theseevents, he was permitted to substitute second andthird heirs, to replace each other according to theorder of the testament; and the incapacity of amadman or an infant to bequeath his propertymight be supplied by a similar substitution. Butthe power of the testator expired with the acceptanceof the testament: each Roman of mature age anddiscretion acquired the absolute dominion of his in­heritance, and the simplicity of the civil law wasnever clouded by the long and intricate entailswhich confine the happiness and freedom of unborngenerations.
Conquest and the formalities of law established the Codicilsuse of codicils. If a Roman was surprised by deathan trusts'in a remote province of the empire, he addressed ashort epistle to his legitimate or testamentary heir $who fulfilled his honour, or neglected with impunity,this last request, which the judges before the age ofAugustus were not authorised to enforce. A codicilmight be expressed in any mode, or in any language;but the subscription of five witnesses must declarethat it was the genuine composition of the author.His intention, however laudable, was sometimes ille­gal; and the invention of Jidei-commissa, or trusts,arose from the struggle between natural justice andpositive jurisprudence. A stranger of Greece orAfrica might be the friend or benefactor of a child­less Roman, but none, except a fellow-citizen, couldact as his heir. The Voconian law, which abolishedfemale succession, restrained the legacy or inherit­ance of a woman to the sum of one hundred thousandsesterces; and an only daughter was condemned al-







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 307


Amidst the arms of the Lombards, and under the chap.despotism of the Greeks, we again inquire into the XXXVIILfate of Rome *, which had reached, about the close of Misery ofthe sixth century, the lowest period of her depression.By the removal of the seat of empire, and the suc­cessive loss of the provinces, the sources of publicand private opulence were exhausted; the lofty tree,under whose shade the nations of the earth had re­posed, was deprived of its leaves and branches, andthe sapless trunk was left to wither on the ground.The ministers of command, and the messengers ofvictory, no longer met on the Appian or Flaminianway; and the hostile approach of the Lombards wasoften felt, and continually feared. The inhabitantsof a potent and peaceful capital, who visit without ananxious thought the garden of the adjacent country,will faintly picture in their fancy the distress of theRomans; they shut or opened their gates with atrembling hand, beheld from the walls the flames oftheir houses, and heard the lamentations of theirbrethren, who were coupled together like dogs, anddragged away into distant slavery beyond the sea andthe mountains. Such incessant alarms must annihi­late the pleasures and interrupt the labours of a rurallife; and the Campagna of Rome was speedily re­duced to the state of a dreary wilderness, in whichthe land is barren, the waters are impure, and theair is infectious. Curiosity and ambition no longerattracted the nations to the capital of the world : butif chance or necessity directed the steps of the wander­ing stranger, he contemplated with horror the va­cancy and solitude of the city, and might be tempted -to ask, where is the senate, and where are the people?In a season of excessive rains, the Tyber swelled
• The passages of the homilies of Gregory, which represent the miserable stateof the city and country, are transcribed in the Annals of Baronius, A. D. A90,No. 10. A. D. 595, No. 2, &c. Ike.


x 2







OCR Output








20 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. obedience; and in an age in which custom andimpunity almost sanctified the abuse of conquest,the genius of one man repressed the passions of avictorious army. The voice of menace and complaintwas silent; the trade of Carthage was not inter­rupted; while Africa changed her master and hergovernment, the shops continued open and busy;and the soldiers, after sufficient guards had beenposted, modestly departed to the houses which wereallotted for their reception. Belisarius fixed his re­sidence in the palace; seated himself on the throneof Genseric; accepted and distributed the Barbaricspoil; granted their lives to the suppliant Vandals;and laboured to repair the damage which the suburbof Mandracium had sustained in the preceding night.At supper he entertained his principal officers withthe form and magnificence of a royal banquet. Thevictor was respectfully served by the captive officersof the household; and in the moments of festivity,when the impartial spectators applauded the fortuneand merit of Belisarius, his envious flatterers secretlyshed their venom on every word and gesture whichmight alarm the suspicions of a jealous monarch.One day was given to these pompous scenes, whichmay not be despised as useless, if they attracted thepopular veneration: but the active mind of Beli­sarius, which in the pride of victory could supposea defeat, had already resolved, that the Roman empirein Africa should not depend on the chance of arms,or the favour of the people. The fortifications ofCarthage had alone been exempted from the generalproscription; but in the reign of ninety-five yearsthey were suffered to decay by the thoughtless andindolent Vandals. A wiser conqueror restored withincredible despatch the walls and ditches of the city.His liberality encouraged the workmen; the sol­diers, the mariners, and the citizens, vied with each







OCR Output








830 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. Persians still commemorate the exploits of Bahram:
XXXIX. t
, 1 and some excellent laws have prolonged the duration


of his troubled and transitory reign.Restoration -phe restoration of Chosroes was celebrated with
and policy
of Chosroes, feasts and executions; and the music of the royal—603. banquet was often disturbed by the groans of dyingor mutilated criminals. A general pardon might havediffused comfort and tranquillity through a countrywhich had been shaken by the late revolutions; yet,before the sanguinary temper of Chosroes is blamed,we should learn whether the Persians had not beenaccustomed either to dread the rigour or to despisethe weakness of their sovereign. The revolt of Bah­ram, and the conspiracy of the satraps, were im­partially punished by the revenge or justice of theconqueror; the merits of Bindoes himself could notpurify his hand from the guilt of royal blood; andthe sou of Hormouz was desirous to assert his owninnocence, and to vindicate the sanctity of kings.During the vigour of the Roman power, severalprinces were seated on the throne of Persia by thearms and the authority of the first Caesars. But theirnew subjects were soon disgusted with the vices orvirtues which they had imbibed in a foreign land;the instability of their dominion gave birth to a vul­gar observation, that the choice of Rome was solicitedand rejected with equal ardour by the capricious levityof Oriental slaves. But the glory of Maurice wasconspicuous in the long and fortunate reign of hisson and his ally. A band of a thousand Romans,who continued to guard the person of Chosroes, pro­claimed his confidence in the fidelity of the strangers;his growing strength enabled him to dismiss his un­popular aid, but he steadily professed the same grati­tude and reverence to his adopted father; and tillthe death of Maurice, the peace and alliance of thetwo empires were faithfully maintained. Yet the







OCR Output








OF THE EOMAN EMPIRE. 75


of his officers gave a written opinion, that the siege chap.of Ravenna was impracticable and hopeless: the ge- xxxneral then rejected the treaty of partition, and de­clared his own resolution of leading Vitiges in chainsto the feet of Justinian. The Goths retired with doubtand dismay: this peremptory refusal deprived themof the only signature which they could trust, andfilled their minds with a just apprehension, that asagacious enemy had discovered the full extent oftheir deplorable state. They compared the fame andfortune of Belisarius with the weakness of their ill-fated king; and the comparison suggested an extra­ordinary project, to which Vitiges, with apparentresignation, was compelled to acquiesce. Partitionwould ruin the strength, exile would disgrace thehonour, of the nation; but they offered their arms,their treasures, and the fortifications of Ravenna, ifBelisarius would disclaim the authority of a master,accept the choice of the Goths, and assume, as hehad deserved, the kingdom of Italy. If the falselustre of a diadem could have tempted the loyalty ofa faithful subject, his prudence must have foreseenthe inconstancy of the Barbarians, and his rationalambition would prefer the safe and honourable sta­tion of a Roman general. Even the patience andseeming satisfaction with which he entertained a pro­posal of treason might be susceptible of a malignantinterpretation. But the lieutenant of Justinian wasconscious of his own rectitude: he entered into adark and crooked path, as it might lead to the vo­luntary submission of the Goths; and his dexterouspolicy persuaded them that he was disposed to complywith their wishes, without engaging an oath or apromise for the performance of a treaty which hesecretly abhorred. The day of the surrender of Ra­venna was stipulated by the Gothic ambassadors-: a


i







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. H


Belisarius waited five days to receive some Thracian chap.
horses, a military gift of his sovereign. From thence *
the fleet pursued their course through the midst ofthe Propontis; but as they struggled to pass thestraits of the Hellespont, an unfavourable winddetained them four days at Abydus, where the ge­neral exhibited a memorable lesson of firmness andseverity. Two of the Huns, who in a drunkenquarrel had slain one of their fellow-soldiers, wereinstantly shown to the army suspended on a loftygibbet. The national indignity was resented bytheir countrymen, who disclaimed the servile laws ofthe empire, and asserted the free privilege of Scythia,where a small fine was allowed to expiate the hastysallies of intemperance and anger. Their complaintswere specious, their clamours were loud, and theRomans were not averse to the example of disorderand impunity. But the rising sedition was appeasedby the authority and eloquence of the general: andhe represented to the assembled troops the obligationof justice, the importance of discipline, the rewardsof piety and virtue, and the unpardonable guilt ofmurder, which, in his apprehension, was aggravatedrather than excused by the vice of intoxication. Inthe navigation from the Hellespont to Peloponnesus,which the Greeks, after the siege of Troy, had per­formed in four days, the fleet of Belisarius wasguided in their course by his master-galley, con­spicuous in the day by the redness of the sails, andin the night by the torches blazing from the mast­head. It was the duty of the pilots, as they steeredbetween the islands, and turned the capes of Maleaand Taenarium, to preserve the just order and regularintervals of such a multitude of ships; as the windwas fair and moderate, their labours were not un­successful, and the troops were safely disembarked atMethonc on the Messenian coast, to repose them­







OCR Output








120 THE DECLINE AND FALL


XXXV.


chap. had resolved to collect his forces, and to execute_ whatever God should inspire him to achieve againstthe enemy. His firm attitude on the banks of theEuphrates restrained Chosroes from advancing to­wards Palestine; and he received with art and dig­nity the ambassadors, or rather spies, of the Persianmonarch. The plain between Hierapolis and theriver was covered with the squadrons of cavalry, sixthousand hunters, tall and robust, who pursued theirgame without the apprehension of an enemy. Onthe opposite bank the ambassadors descried a thou­sand Armenian horse, who appeared to guard thepassage of the Euphrates. The tent of Belisariuswas of the coarsest linen, the simple equipage ofa warrior who disdained the luxury of the East.Around his tent, the nations who marched underhis standard were arranged with skilful confusion.The Thracians and Illyrians were posted in thefront, the Heruli and Goths in the centre; theprospect was closed by the Moors and Vandals, andtheir loose array seemed to multiply their numbers.Their dress was light and active ; one soldier carrieda whip, another a sword, a third a bow, a fourthperhaps a battle-axe, and the whole picture exhibitedthe intrepidity of the troops and the vigilance of thegeneral. Chosroes was deluded by the address, andawed by the genius, of the lieutenant of Justinian.Conscious of the merit, and ignorant of the force, ofhis antagonist, he dreaded a decisive battle in a di­stant country, from whence not a Persian might re­turn to relate the melancholy tale. The great kinghastened to repass the Euphrates; and Belisariuspressed his retreat, by affecting to oppose a measureso salutary to the empire, and which could scarcelyhave been prevented by an army of a hundred thou­sand men. Envy might suggest to ignorance andpride, that the public enemy had been suffered to







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 31


used by the Vandal queen; the massy furniture of chap.the royal banquet, the splendour of precious stones, XXXIVthe elegant forms of statues and vases, the moresubstantial treasure of gold, and the holy vessels ofthe Jewish temple, which, after their long peregri­nation, were respectfully deposited in the Christianchurch of Jerusalem. A long train of the noblestVandals reluctantly exposed their lofty stature andmanly countenance. Gelimer slowly advanced: hewas clad in a purple robe, and still maintained themajesty of a king. Not a tear escaped from hiseyes, not a sigh was heard; but his pride or pietyderived some secret consolation from the words ofSolomon, which he repeatedly pronounced, vanity!vanity! all is vanity! Instead of ascending atriumphal car drawn by four horses or elephants, themodest conqueror marched on foot at the head ofhis brave companions: his prudence might declinean honour too conspicuous for a subject; and hismagnanimity might justly disdain what had been sooften sullied by the vilest of tyrants. The gloriousprocession entered the gate of the hippodrome; wassaluted by the acclamations of the senate and people;and halted before the throne where Justinian andTheodora were seated to receive the homage of thecaptive monarch and the victorious hero. Theyboth performed the customary adoration; and, fallingprostrate on the ground, respectfully touched thefootstool of a prince who had not unsheathed hissword, and of a prostitute, who had danced on thetheatre; some gentle violence was used to bend thestubborn spirit of the grandson of Genseric; andhowever trained to servitude, the genius of Belisariusmust have secretly rebelled. He was immediately His soledeclared consul for the ensuing year, and the day a. d. 535.of his inauguration resembled the pomp of a second January *•triumph: his curule chair was borne aloft on the







OCR Output








166 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. plauded the concord of their predecessors, and offeredXXXVL to employ the Gothic arms in the service of the
empire.Prepara- Justinian was deaf to the voice of peace; but heJustinian neglected the prosecution of war; and the indolencethic'wa^0" of his temper disappointed, in some degree, the ob-a.d.549 stinacy of his passions. From this salutary slumberthe emperor was awakened by the pope Vigilius andthe patrician Cethegus, who appeared before histhrone, and adjured him, in the name of God andthe people, to resume the conquest and deliveranceof Italy. In the choice of the generals, caprice, aswell as judgment, was shown. A fleet and armysailed for the relief of Sicily under the conduct ofLiberius ; but his youth and want of experience wereafterwards discovered, and before he touched theshores of the island he was overtaken by his suc­cessor. In the place of Liberius the conspiratorArtaban was raised from a prison to military ho­nours; in the pious presumption, that gratitudewould animate his valour and fortify his allegiance.Belisarius reposed in the shade of his laurels, but thecommand of the principal army was reserved for Ger-manus, the emperor's nephew, whose rank and merithad been long depressed by the jealousy of the court.Theodora had injured him in the rights of a privatecitizen, the marriage of his children, and the testa­ment of his brother; and although his conduct waspure and blameless, Justinian was displeased that heshould be thought worthy of the confidence of themalecontents. The life of Germanus was a lessonof implicit obedience; he nobly refused to prostitutehis name and character in the factions of the circus:the gravity of his manners was tempered by innocentcheerfulness; and his riches were lent without in­terest to indigent or deserving friends. His valourhad formerly triumphed over the Sclavonians of the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPI11E. 309


the city had not been animated by a vital principle, chap.
which again restored her to honour and dominion. [
The power of the apostles resided with living energyin the breast of their successors; and the chair ofSt. Peter was filled under the reign of Maurice bythe first and greatest of the name of Gregory*. His Birth andgrandfather Felix had himself been pope, and as the of Gregorybishops were already bound by the law of celibacy,the Roman-his consecration must have been preceded by thedeath of his wife. The parents of Gregory, Sylviaand Gordian, were the noblest of the senate, andthe most pious of the church of Rome: his femalerelations were numbered among the saints and vir­gins; and his own figure with those of his fatherand mother were represented near three hundredyears in a family portraitf, which he offered to themonastery of St. Andrew. The design and colour­ing of this picture afford an honourable testimony,that the art of painting was cultivated by the Italiansof the sixth century; but the most abject ideas mustbe entertained of their taste and learning, since theepistles of Gregory, his sermons, and his dialogues,arc the work of a man who was second in eruditionto none of his contemporaries: his birth and abilitieshad raised him to the office of praefect of the city,and he enjoyed the merit of renouncing the pomp and


* Resides the Epistles of Gregory himself which are methodised by Dupin,(Bibliothequc Eccles. tom. v. p. 103—126), we have three lives of the pope; thefirst two written in the viiith and ixth centuries (de Triplici Vita St. Greg. Pre­face to the ivth volume of the Benedictine edition) by the deacons Paul (p. 1—1U) and John (p. 19—188), and containing much original, though doubtful, evi­dence; a third, a long and laboured compilation by the Benedictine editors(p. II)!)—305). The Annals of Baronius are a copious but partial history. Hispapal prejudices are tempered by the good sense of Fleury (Hist. Eccles. tom,viii.), and his chronology has been rectified by the criticism of Pagi andMuratori.
+ John trie deacon has described them like an eye-witness (I. iv. c . 83, 84);and his description is illustrated by Angelo Rocca, a Human antiquary (St. Greg.Opera, tom. iv. p. 312—32C); who observes, that some mosaics of the popes ofthe viith century are still preserved in the old churches of Rome (p. 321—323).The same walls which represented Gregory's family are now decorated with themartyrdom of St. Andrew, the noble contest of Dominichino and Guido.


x 3







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.


indeed, the harvest of his death, and assumed the chap.
XT
government, in the name of the surviving emperor;


but the incestuous widow of Heraclius was universally Heracieo-abhorred; the jealousy of the people was awakened, 64i', Mayand the two orphans whom Constantine had left be-25th'came the objects of the public care. It was in vainthat the son of Martina, who was no more than fif­teen years of age, was taught to declare himself theguardian of his nephews, one of whom he had presentedat the baptismal font; it was in vain that he sworeto defend them against all their enemies. On hisdeathbed, the late emperor had despatched a trusty ser­vant to arm the troops and provinces of the East indefence of his helpless children: the eloquence andliberality of Valentin had been successful; and, fromhis camp of Chalcedon, he boldly demanded the pu­nishment of the assassins, and the restoration of thelawful heir. The licence of the soldiers, who devouredthe grapes and drank the wine of their Asiatic vine­yards, provoked the citizens of Constantinople againstthe domestic authors of their calamities, and the domeof St. Sophia re-echoed, not with prayers and hymns,but with the clamours and imprecations of an enragedmultitude. At their imperious command, Heracleonasappeared in the pulpit with the eldest of the royalorphans. Constans alone was saluted as emperor ofthe Romans; and a crown of gold, which had beentaken from the tomb of Heraclius, was placed on hishead, with the solemn benediction of the patriarch.But in the tumult of joy and indignation, the churchwas pillaged, the sanctuary was polluted, by a promis­cuous crowd of Jews and Barbarians; and Pyrrhus,a creature of the empress, escaped by a prudent flight.A more serious and bloody task was reserved for thesenate, who derived a temporary strength from theconsent of the soldiers and people. The spirit of Ro­man freedom revived the ancient and awful examples
c cS


'







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 337


to violate this privilege, and to mingle a patriot band chap.with the mercenaries of his camp; they retired to XXXIX-the church ; he was not awed by the sanctity of the ~*
place; the people rose in their cause, the gates wereshut, the ramparts were manned; and the cowardiceof Peter was found equal to his arrogance and injus­tice. The military fame of Commentiolus * is theobject of satire or comedy rather than of serious hi-story, since he was even deficient in the vile andvulgar qualification of personal courage. His solemncouncils, strange evolutions, and secret orders, al­ways supplied an apology for flight or delay. If hemarched against the enemy, the pleasant valleys ofmount Hasmus opposed an insuperable barrier; butin his retreat, he explored, with fearless curiosity,the most difficult and obsolete paths, which had al­most escaped the memory of the oldest native. Theonly blood which he lost was drawn, in a real oraffected malady, by the lancet of a surgeon; and hishealth, which felt with exquisite sensibility the ap­proach of the Barbarians, was uniformly restored bythe repose and safety of the winter season. A princewho could promote and support this unworthy fa­vourite must derive no glory from the accidentalmerit of his colleague Priscust. In five successivebattles, which seem to have been conducted withskill. and resolution, seventeen thousand two hun­dred Barbarians were made prisoners: near sixtythousand, with four sons of the chagan, were slain:the Roman general surprised a peaceful district ofthe Gepidae, who slept under the protection of theAvars: and his last trophies were erected on thebanks of the Danube and the Teyss. Since thedeath of Trajan, the arms of the empire had not


* See the shameful conduct of Commentiolus, in Theophylact, 1. if. c . 10—15.1. vii. c. 13, 14. 1. viii. c. 2. 4.
t See the exploits of Priscus, 1. viii. c. 2,3.
VOL. IV. Z







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 359


of the Barbarians; the loss, even of these seditious chap.veterans, was imperfectly supplied by the new levies XXXIX-of Heraclius, and the gold of the sanctuary united inthe same camp the names, and arms, and languages,of the East and West. He would have been contentwith the neutrality of the Avars; and his friendlyentreaty that the chagan would act, not as the enemybut as the guardian of the empire, was accompaniedwith a more persuasive donative of two hundredthousand pieces of gold. Two days after the festivalof Easter, the emperor, exchanging his purple forthe simple garb of a penitent and warrior, gave thesignal of his departure. To the faith of the peopleHeraclius recommended his children; the civil andmilitary powers were vested in the most deservinghands; and the discretion of the patriarch and senatewas authorised to save or surrender the city, if theyshould be oppressed in his absence by the superiorforces of the enemy.
The neighbouring heights of Chalcedon were co- First expe-vered with tents and arms: but if the new levies ofile'riuusHeraclius had been rashly led to the attack, the vie- p^^L'1'6tory of the Persians in the sight of Constantinople A-D- 622.might have been the last day of the Roman empire.As imprudent would it have been to advance intothe provinces of Asia, leaving their innumerablecavalry to intercept his convoys, and continually tohang on the lassitude and disorder of his rear. Butthe Greeks were still masters of the sea; a fleet ofgalleys, transports, and storeships, was assembled inthe harbour; the Barbarians consented to embark;a steady wind carried them through the Hellespont;the western and southern coast of Asia Minor lay ontheir left hand; the spirit of their chief was firstdisplayed in a storm; and even the eunuchs of histrain were excited to suffer and to work by theexample of their master. He landed his troops on


A A 4







OCR Output








296 THE DECLINE AND FALL


XXXVIII.


chap. "from the sword of the Lombards, save us at least"from the calamity of famine." Tiberius forgave thereproach, and relieved the distress: a supply of cornwas transported from Egypt to the Tyber; and theRoman people, invoking the name, not of Camillus,but of St. Peter, repulsed the Barbarians from theirwalls. But the relief was accidental, the danger wasperpetual and pressing: and the clergy and senate,collecting the remains of their ancient opulence, asum of three thousand pounds of gold, despatchedthe patrician Pamphronius to lay their gifts and theircomplaints at the foot of the Byzantine throne. Theattention of the court, and the forces of the East,were diverted by the Persian war; but the justice ofTiberius applied the subsidy to the defence of thecity; .and he dismissed the patrician with his bestadvice, either to bribe the Lombard chiefs, or to pur­chase the aid of the kings of France. Notwith­standing this weak invention, Italy was still afflicted,Rome was again besieged, and the suburb of Classe,only three miles from Ravenna, was pillaged andoccupied by the troops of a simple duke of Spoleto.Maurice gave audience to a second deputation ofpriests and senators; the duties and the menaces ofreligion were forcibly urged in the letters of the Ro­man pontiff; and his nuncio, the deacon Gregory,was alike qualified to solicit the powers either ofheaven or of the earth. The emperor adopted, withstronger effect, the measures of his predecessor; someformidable chiefs were persuaded to embrace thefriendship of the Romans; and one of them, a mildand faithful Barbarian, lived and died in the serviceof the exarch: the passes of the Alps were deliveredto the Franks; and the pope encouraged them toviolate, without scruple, their oaths and engagementsto the misbelievers. Childebert, the great-grandsonof Clovis, was persuaded to invade Italy by the pay­







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 43


with Theodatus to betray the province of Tuscany, chap.
and tempted Amalasontha to extricate herself from'
danger and perplexity, by a free surrender of thekingdom of Italy. A false and servile epistle wassubscribed by the reluctant hand of the captivequeen: but the confession of the Roman senators,who were sent to Constantinople, revealed the truthof her deplorable situation; and Justinian, by thevoice of a new ambassador, most powerfully inter­ceded for her life and liberty. Yet the secret in­structions of the same minister were adapted to servethe cruel jealousy of Theodora, who dreaded the pre­sence and superior charms of a rival: he prompted,with artful and ambiguous hints, the execution of acrime so useful to the Romans *; received the intel­ligence of her death with grief and indignation, anddenounced, in his master's name, immortal war againstthe perfidious assassin. In Italy, as well as in Africa,the guilt of a usurper appeared to justify the armsof Justinian; but the forces which he prepared wereinsufficient for the subversion of a mighty kingdom,if their feeble numbers had not been multiplied bythe name, the spirit, and the conduct of a hero. Achosen troop of guards, who served on horseback, andwere armed with lances and bucklers, attended theperson of Belisarius: his cavalry was composed oftwo hundred Huns, three hundred Moors, and fourthousand confederates, and the infantry consistedonly of three thousand Isaurians. Steering the samecourse as in bis former expedition, the Roman con­sul cast anchor before Catana in Sicily, to survey thestrength of the island, and to decide whether heshould attempt the conquest, or peaceably pursue his


* Yet Procopius discredits his own evidence (Anecdot. c. 16), by confessingthat in his public history he had not spoken the truth. Sec the Epistles fromqueen Oundelina to the empress Theodora (Var. x. 20, 21. 23, and observe asuspicious word, dc ilia persona, &c.). with the elaborate Commentary of Buat(tom. x. p. 177-185).







OCR Output








106 THE DECLINE AND FALL


CHAP.XXXV.


the great khan, and he applied them to his mouth."You Romans speak with as many tongues, but they"are tongues of deceit and perjury. To me you hold"one language, to my subjects another; and the na-"tions are successively deluded by your perfidious"eloquence. You precipitate your allies into war"and danger, you enjoy their labours, and you neg-"lect your benefactors. Hasten your return; inform"your master that a Turk is incapable of uttering"or forgiving falsehood, and that he shall speedily"meet the punishment which he deserves. While"he solicits my friendship with flattering and hollow"words, he is sunk to a confederate of my fugitive"Varchonites. If I condescend to march against"those contemptible slaves, they will tremble at the"sound of our whips; they will be trampled, like a"nest of ants, under the feet of my innumerable"cavalry. I am not ignorant of the road which"they have followed to invade your empire; nor"can I be deceived by the vain pretence, that mount"Caucasus is the impregnable barrier of the Ro-"mans. I know the course of the Niester, the Da-"nube, and the Hebrus; the most warlike nations"have yielded to the arms of the Turks; and from"the rising to the setting sun, the earth is my in-"heritance." Notwithstanding this menace, a senseof mutual advantage soon renewed the alliance of theTurks and Romans: but the pride of the great khansurvived his resentment: and when he announced animportant conquest to his friend the emperor Mau­rice, he styled himself the master of the seven races,and the lord of the seven climates of the world *.
Disputes have often arisen between the sovereignsof Asia, for the title of king of the world; while the


State ofPersia,A. D. 500—630.
* All the details of these Turkish and Roman embassies, so curious in thehistory of human manners, are drawn from the extracts of Menander (p. 106—110. 151 154. 161—164), in which we often regret the want of order and con-







OCR Output








GIBBON'S
HISTORY
OF THE
DECLINE AND FALL
OF
THE ROMAN EMPIRE:
FOB THE USE OF
families and looting persons.VOL. IV.


r







OCR Output








230 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. ancestors. He delighted to honour with titles andxxxvh. emoluments his generals, magistrates, and senators;and his precarious indulgence communicated somerays of their glory to the persons of their wives andchildren. But in the eye of the law, all Romancitizens were equal, and all subjects of the empirewere citizens of Rome. That inestimable characterwas degraded to an obsolete and empty name. Thevoice of a Roman could no longer enact his laws, orcreate the annual ministers of his power: his consti­tutional rights might have checked the arbitrary willof a master; and the bold adventurer from Germanyor Arabia was admitted, with equal favour, to thecivil and military command, which the citizen alonehad been once entitled to assume over the conquestsof his fathers. The first Caesars had scrupulouslyguarded the distinction of ingenuous, and servilebirth, which was decided by the condition of themother; and the candour of the laws was satisfied, ifher freedom could be ascertained during a singlemoment between the conception and the delivery.The slaves, who were liberated by a generous master,immediately entered into the middle class of libertinesor freedmen: but they could never be enfranchisedfrom the duties of obedience and gratitude: what­ever were the fruits of their industry, their patronand his family, inherited the third part; or even thewhole of their fortune, if they died without childrenand without a testament. Justinian respected therights of patrons; but his indulgence removed thebadge of disgrace from the two inferior orders offreedmen: whoever ceased to be a slave obtained,without reserve or delay, the station of a citizen;and at length the dignity of an ingenuous birth,which nature had refused, was created, or supposed,by the omnipotence of the emperor. Whatever re­straints of age, or forms, or numbers, had been for­







OCR Output








f







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 321)


might appear. Persia had already repented of her chap.fatal rashness, which betrayed the heir of the house XXXIX-of Sassan to the ambition of a rebellious subject; and His return,the bold refusal of the Magi to consecrate his usurpa­tion compelled Bahram to assume the sceptre, re­gardless of the laws and prejudices of the nation. Thepalace was soon distracted with conspiracy, the citywith tumult, the provinces with insurrection ; and thecruel execution of the guilty and the suspected servedto irritate rather than subdue the public discontent.No sooner did the grandson of Nushirvan display hisown and the Roman banners beyond the Tigris, thanhe was joined, each day, by the increasing multitudesof the nobility and people; and as he advanced hereceived from every side the grateful offerings of thekeys of his cities and the heads of his enemies. Assoon as Modain was freed from the presence of theusurper, the loyal inhabitants obeyed the first sum­mons of Mebodes at the head of only two thousandhorse, and Chosroes accepted the sacred and preciousornaments of the palace as the pledge of their truthand a presage of his approaching success. After thejunction of the Imperial troops, which Bahram vainlystruggled to prevent, the contest was decided by twobattles on the banks of the Zab, and the confines ofMedia. The Romans, with the faithful subjects ofa?dfinal
victorv
Persia, amounted to sixty thousand, while the wholeforce of the usurper did not exceed forty thousandmen: the two generals signalized their valour andability, but the victory was finally determined bythe prevalence of numbers and discipline. With theremnant of a broken army, Bahram fled towards theeastern provinces of the Oxus: the enmity of Persia Death ofreconciled him to the Turks; but his days were ahram-shortened by poison, perhaps the most incurable ofpoisons; the stings of remorse and despair, and thebitter remembrance of lost glory. Yet the modern







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 203


laws of Charondas accepted the aid of poetry and chap.music; and Zaleucus framed the republic of the xxxvn-Locrians, which stood without alteration above twohundred years. From a similar motive of nationalpride, both Livy and Dionysius are willing to believe,that the deputies of Rome visited Athens under thewise and splendid administration of Pericles; and thelaws of Solon were transfused into the twelve tables.If such an embassy had indeed been received fromthe Barbarians of Hesperia, the Roman name wouldhave been familiar to the Greeks before the reign ofAlexander*; and the faintest evidence would havebeen explored and celebrated by the curiosity of suc­ceeding times. But the Athenian monuments aresilent; nor will it seem credible that the patriciansshould undertake a long and perilous navigation tocopy the purest model of a democracy. In the com­parison of the tables of Solon with those of the De­cemvirs, some casual resemblance may be found:some rules, which nature and reason have revealed toevery society; some proofs of a common descentfrom Egypt or Phoenicia. But in all the great linesof public and private jurisprudence, the legislators ofRome and Athens appear to be strangers or adverseto each other.
* I seize the opportunity of tracing the progress of this national intercourse:1. Herodotus and Thucydides (A. U. C. 330—350) appear ignorant of the nameand existence of Rome (Joseph, contra Apion. tom. ii. 1 . i. c. 12. p. 444. edit.Havercamp). 2. Theopompus (A. U. C. 400. Plin. iii. 9) mentions the invasionof the Gauls, which is noticed in looser terms by Heraclides Ponticus (Plutarchin Camillo, p. 292. edit . H. Stephan.). 3. The real or fabulous embassy of theRomans to Alexander (A. U. C. 430) is attested by Clitarchus (Plin. iii. 9), byAristus and Asclepiades (Arrian, 1. vii. p. 294, 295), and by Memnon of He­rat-lea (apud Photium, cod. ccxxiv. p. 725); though tacitly denied by Livy.4. Theophrastus (A. U. G. 440) primus externorum aliqua de Romania dili-gcntius scripsit (Plin. iii. 9). 5. Lycophron (A. IT. C. 480—500) scattered thefirst seed of a Trojan colony and the fable of the /Kncid (Cassandra, 1226—1280):
Aa&urff*A bold prediction before the end of the first Punic war!


r







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 257


on the destruction of any other valuable effects. A chap.
personal injury is blunted or sharpened by the man- 1
ners of the times and the sensibility of the indi­vidual: the pain or the disgrace of a word or blowcannot easily be appreciated by a pecuniary equiva­lent. The rude jurisprudence of the decemvirs hadconfounded all hasty insults, which did not amountto the fracture* of a limb, by condemning the ag­gressor to the common penalty of twenty-five asses.But the same denomination of money was reduced,in three centuries, from a pound to the weight ofhalf an ounce; and the insolence of a wealthy Ro­man indulged himself in the cheap amusement ofbreaking and satisfying the law of the twelve tables.Veratius ran through the streets striking on the facethe inoffensive passengers, and his attendant purse-bearer immediately silenced their clamours by thelegal tender of twenty-five pieces of copper, aboutthe value of one shilling *. The equity of the prae­tors examined and estimated the distinct merits ofeach particular complaint. In the adjudication ofcivil damages, the magistrate assumed a right to con­sider the various circumstances of time and place, ofage and dignity, which may aggravate the shame andsufferings of the injured person; but if he admittedthe idea of a fine, a punishment, an example, he in­vaded the province, though, perhaps, he supplied thedefects of the criminal law.
The execution of the Alban dictator, who was dis- Punish.membered by eight horses, is represented by Livyments'as the first and the last instance of Roman cruelty inthe punishment of the most atrocious crimes. Butthis act of justice, or revenge, was inflicted on aforeign enemy in the heat of victory, and at the


* Aulus Gellius (Noct. Attic, xx. i.) borrowed his story from the Commen­taries of Q. Labeo on the xii tables.
VOL. IV. S







OCR Output








8(5 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. peror himself, would be sacrificed to the just revenge
XXXIV- of a virtuous rebel. Their hopes were deceived;
and the unconquerable patience and loyalty of Beli-
sarius appear either below or above the character of


a MAN*.
* The continuator of the chronicle of Marccllinus'gives, in a few decent words,the substance of the Anecdotes: Belisarius de Oriente evocatus, in offensampericulumque incurrens grave, et invidias subjacens rursus remittitur in Ita'iam(p. 54.)







OCR Output








"OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 17


third part of his numbers: but each Scythian was chap.fired by the example of his chief, who gloriously exer­


cised the privilege of his family, by riding foremostand alone to shoot the first arrow against the enemy.In the meanwhile, Gelimer himself, ignorant of theevent, and misguided by the windings of the hills,inadvertently passed the Roman army, and reachedthe scene of action where Ammatas had fallen. Hewept the fate of his brother and of Carthage, chargedwith irresistible fury the advancing squadrons, andmight have pursued, and perhaps decided the victory,if he had not wasted those inestimable moments inthe discharge of a vain, though pious, duty to thedead. While his spirit was broken by this mourn­ful office, he heard the trumpet of Belisarius, who,leaving Antonina and his infantry in the camp,pressed forwards with his guards and the remainderof the cavalry to rally his flying troops, and to restorethe fortune of the day. Much room could not befound in this disorderly battle for the talents of ageneral; but the king fled before the hero; and theVandals, accustomed only to a Moorish enemy, wereincapable of withstanding the arms and discipline ofthe Romans. Gelimer retired with hasty steps to­wards the desert of Numidia; but he had soon theconsolation of learning that his private orders for theexecution of Hilderic and his captive friends hadbeen faithfully obeyed. The tyrant's revenge wasuseful only to his enemies. The death of a lawfulprince excited the compassion of his people; his lifemight have perplexed the victorious Romans; andthe beutenant of Justinian, by a crime of which hewas innocent, was relieved from the painful alter*native of forfeiting his honour or relinquishing hisconquests.
As soon as the tumult had subsided, the several Reductionparts of the army informed each other of the ac-A.D. 533.'
„ Sept. 15.
vol. iv. c v







OCR Output








352 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. But Egypt itself, the only province which had beenxxxix. exempt, since the time of Diocletian, from foreign
and domestic war, was again subdued by the suc-of Egypt, cessors of Cyrus. Pelusium, the key of that im-'pervious country, was surprised by the cavalry of thePersians: they passed, with impunity, the innumer­able channels of the Delta, and explored the longvalley of the Nile, from the pyramids of Memphis tothe confines of ^Ethiopia. Alexandria might havebeen relieved by a naval force, but the archbishopand the prefect embarked for Cyprus; and Chosroesentered the second city of the empire, which still pre­served a wealthy remnant of industry and commerce.His western trophy was erected, not on the walls ofCarthage, but in the neighbourhood of Tripoli: theGreek colonies of Cyrene were finally extirpated;and the conqueror, treading in the footsteps of Alex­ander, returned in triumph through the sands of theMinor* Lybian desert. In the first campaign, another armya.d.616, advanced from the Euphrates to the Thracian Bos-phorus; Chalcedon surrendered after a long siege,and a Persian camp was maintained above ten yearsin the presence of Constantinople. The sea-coast ofPontus, the city of Ancyra, and the isle of Rhodes,are enumerated among the last conquests of the greatking; and if Chosroes had possessed any maritimepower, his boundless ambition would have spreadslavery and desolation over the provinces of Europe.His reign From the long-disputed banks of the Tigris andnificence. Euphrates, the reign of the grandson of Nushirvanwas suddenly extended to the Hellespont and theNile, the ancient limits of the Persian monarchy.But the provinces, which had been fashioned by thehabits of six hundred years to the virtues and vicesof the Roman government, supported with reluct­ance the yoke of the Barbarians. The idea of a re­public was kept alive by the institutions, or at least







OCR Output








416 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. wisdom of his administration, and the purity of his
manners. The emperor was ignorant of sacred and
profane literature, but his education and his reasonhad inspired the martial peasant with a hatred ofimages, the worship of which was established beforethe end of the sixth century. But in the reforma­tion of religion, Leo proceeded with moderate andcautious steps. He assembled a council of senatorsand bishops, and, with their consent, enacted that allthe images should be removed from the sanctuary,and the altar to a proper height in the churches,where they might be visible to the sight, but inac­cessible to the superstition of the people. By a se­cond edict, the churches of Constantinople and theprovinces were cleared of idolatry. The Iconoclasts(as they are termed) were supported by the zeal ofsix emperors, but the East and West were involvedin a conflict of one hundred and twenty years. Va­rious disturbances, which were excited in the East indefence of the images, were checked by the troopsof the emperor; but in the West, the attempt ofLeo and his son to remove them from the churcheswas followed by a general insurrection of the people,to which they were excited and encouraged by thepope, Gregory the Second. A bloody contest ensued:Rome was repeatedly assaulted by the troops of theexarchs, but was defended by the courage of theRomans. The Greeks were overthrown and massa­cred. At Ravenna the contest was still more violent,but the votaries of images were superior in number,and the exarch was slain in a popular sedition. Topunish this flagitious deed, and restore his dominionin Italy, the emperor sent a fleet and army into theAdriatic Gulf. The Greeks landed in the neigh­bourhood of Ravenna, and an obstinate and bloodyengagement ensued; but at length, after a hardfought day, the defenders of Ravenna were victorious,







OCR Output








268 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. individuals. By these inquisitors the trial was pre-xxxvii. pared and directed; but they could only pronouncethe sentence of the majority of judges, who with sometruth, and more prejudice, have been compared toSelect the English juries. To discharge this importantjudges. though burdensome office, an annual list of ancientand respectable citizens was formed by the praetor.After many constitutional struggles, they were chosenin equal numbers from the senate, the equestrianorder, and the people; four hundred and fifty wereappointed for single questions; and the various rollsor decuries of judges must have contained the namesof some thousand Romans, who represented the ju­dicial authority of the state. In each particular cause,a sufficient number was drawn from the urn; theirintegrity was guarded by an oath; the mode of ballotsecured their independence; the suspicion of parti­ality was removed by the mutual challenges of theaccuser and defendant; and the judges of Milo, bythe retrenchment of fifteen on each side, were reducedto fifty-one voices or tablets, of acquittal, of condemna­tion, or of favourable doubt*. 3. In his civil ju­risdiction, the praetor of the city was truly a judge,and almost a legislator; but as soon as he had pre­scribed the action of law, he often referred to a de­legate the determination of the fact. With the in­crease of legal proceedings, the tribunal of the cen-tumvirs, in which he presided, acquired more weightand reputation. But whether he acted alone, or withthe advice of his council, the most absolute powersmight be trusted to a magistrate who was annuallychosen by the votes of the people. The rules andprecautions of freedom have required some explana­tion; the order of despotism is simple and inanimate.
• We are indebted for this interesting fact to a fragment of Asconius Pcdianus,who flourished under the reign of Tiberius. The loss of his Commentaries onthe Orations of Cicero has deprived us of a valuable fund of historical and legalknowledge.







OCR Output








or THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 339


camp that his authority was disobeyed and insulted: chap.he appeased and inflamed with gold the licentious- . '.ness of the troops; but their vices were inherent,their victories were accidental, and their costly main­tenance exhausted the substance of a state whichthey were unable to defend. After a long and per­nicious indulgence, the cure of this inveterate evilwas undertaken by Maurice; but the rash attempt,which drew destruction on his own head, tendedonly to aggravate the disease. A reformer shouldbe exempt from the suspicion of interest, and hemust possess the confidence and esteem of thosewhom he proposes to reclaim. The troops of Mau­rice might listen to the voice of a victorious leader;they disdained the admonitions of statesmen andsophists, and when they received an edict which de- their de­ducted from their pay the price of their arms and content'clothing, they execrated the avarice of a prince in­sensible of the dangers and fatigues from which hehad escaped. The camps both of Asia and Europewere agitated with frequent and furious seditions;the enraged soldiers of Edessa pursued, with re­proaches, with threats, with wounds, their tremblinggenerals: they overturned the statues of the em­peror, and either rejected the yoke of all civil andmilitary laws, or instituted a dangerous model ofvoluntary subordination. The monarch, always di­stant and often deceived, was incapable of yielding orpersisting according to the exigence of the moment.But the fear of a general revolt induced him tooreadily to accept any act of valour, or any expressionof loyalty, as an atonement for the popular offence;the new reform was abolished as hastily as it hadbeen announced, and the troops, instead of punish­ment and restraint, were agreeably surprised by agracious proclamation of. immunities and rewards.


z2







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 83


pope. At the end of the campaign, Belisarius was chap.recalled; he complied, as usual, with the Imperial XXXIV'mandate. His mind was not prepared for rebellion;his obedience, however adverse to the dictates ofhonour, was consonant to the wishes of his heart;and when he embraced his wife, at the command,and perhaps in the presence, of the empress, thetender husband was disposed to forgive or to be for­given. The bounty of Theodora reserved for hercompanion a more precious favour. "I have found,"she said, " my dearest patrician, a pearl of inestima-"ble value; it has not yet been viewed by any mortal"eye; but the sight and the possession of this jewel"are destined for my friend." As soon as the cu­riosity and impatience of Antonina were kindled, thedoor of a bedchamber was thrown open, and she be­held her lover, whom the diligence of the eunuchshad discovered in his secret prison. Her silent wonderburst into passionate exclamations of gratitude andjoy, and she named Theodora her queen, her bene­factress, and her saviour. The monk of Ephesus wasnourished in the palace with luxury and ambition;but instead of assuming, as he was promised, thecommand of the Roman armies, Theodosius expiredsoon afterwards. The grief of Antonina could only Persecutionbe assuaged by the sufferings of her son. A youth ° er son"of consular rank, and a sickly constitution, was pu­nished, without a trial, like a malefactor and a slave:yet such was the constancy of his mind, that Photiussustained the tortures of the scourge and the rack,without violating the faith which he had sworn toBelisarius. After this fruitless cruelty, the son ofAntonina, while his mother feasted with the em­press, was buried in her subterraneous prisons, whichadmitted not the distinction of night and day. Hetwice escaped to the most venerable sanctuaries ofConstantinople, the churches of St. Sophia and of the


g 2







OCR Output








OF THE 110MAN EMPIRE; 13


ceive the troops of Justinian like friends and allies; chap.provisions were liberally supplied, the cavalry was XXXIV-remounted, and Procopius soon returned from Syra­cuse with correct information of the state and designsof the Vandals. His intelligence determined Beli-sarius to hasten his operations, and his wise impatiencewas seconded by the winds. The fleet lost sight ofSicily, passed before the isle of Malta, discovered thecapes of Africa, ran along the coast with a stronggale from the north-east, and finally cast anchorat the promontory of Caput Vada, about five daysjourney to the south of Carthage.
If Gelimer had been informed of the approach of Belisarius
1 1 1 Till C lan"S 0I1
the enemy, he must have delayed the -conquest or the coast
Sardinia, for the immediate defence of his person ° sq>-
and kingdom. A detachment of five thousand sol- tcmber-diers, and one hundred and twenty galleys, wouldhave joined the remaining forces of the Vandals;and the descendant of Genseric might have surprisedand oppressed a fleet of deep-laden transports in­capable of action, and of light brigantines thatseemed only qualified for flight. Belisarius had se­cretly trembled when he overheard his soldiers, inthe passage, emboldening each other to confess theirapprehensions: if they were once on shore, theyhoped to maintain the honour of their arms; but ifthey should be attacked at sea, they did not blush toacknowledge that they wanted courage to contend atthe same time with the winds, the waves, and theBarbarians. The knowledge of their sentiments de­cided Belisarius to seize the first opportunity oflanding them on the coast of Africa; and he pru­dently rejected, in a council of war, the proposal ofsailing with the fleet and army into the port ofCarthage. Three months after their departure fromConstantinople, the men and horses, the arms andmilitary stores, were safely disembarked, and five







OCR Output








THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. African war became the topic of popular discourse _ and secret deliberation, each of the Roman generals


was apprehensive, rather than ambitious, of the dan­gerous honour; but as soon as Justinian had de­clared his preference of superior merit, their envywas rekindled by the unanimous applause which wasgiven to the choice of Belisarius. The temper ofthe Byzantine court may encourage a suspicion, thatthe hero was darkly assisted by the intrigues of hiswife, the fair and subtile Antonina, who alternatelyenjoyed the confidence, and incurred the hatred, ofthe empress Theodora. The birth of Antonina wasignoble, she descended from a family of charioteers;and her chastity has been stained with the foulestreproach. Yet she reigned with long and absolutepower over the mind of her illustrious husband;and if Antonina disdained the merit of conjugalfidelity, she expressed a manly friendship to Belisarius,whom she accompanied with undaunted resolutionin all the hardships and dangers of a military life *.Prepara- The preparations for the African war were not
AeAMcan unworthy of the last contest between Rome and Car-*ar, thage. The pride and flower of the army consisted
of the guards of Belisarius, who, according to thepernicious indulgence of the times, devoted them­selves by a particular oath of fidelity to the serviceof their patron. Their strength and stature, forwhich they had been curiously selected, the goodnessof their horses and armour, and the assiduous practiceof all the exercises of war, enabled them to act what­ever their courage might prompt; and their couragewas exalted by the social honour of their rank, andthe personal ambition of favour and fortune. Fourhundred of the bravest of the Heruli marched underthe banner of the faithful and active Pharas; their


* See the birth and character of Antonina, in the Anecdotes, c . 1. and thenotes of Alemannus, p. 3.







OCR Output








50 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. "the wives to their husbands; and show them, byxxxiv. « your generosity, of what friends they have ob-"stinately deprived themselves." The city wassaved by the virtue and authority of its conqueror;and when the Neapolitans returned to their houses,they found some consolation in the secret enjoymentof their hidden treasures. The Barbarian garrisoninlisted in the service of the emperor; Apulia andCalabria, delivered from the odious presence of theGoths, acknowledged his dominion; and the tusksof the Calydonian boar, which were still shown atBeneventum, are curiously described by the historianof Belisarius.Vitiges, The faithful soldiers and citizens of Naples had
Italy,° expected their deliverance from a prince, who re-AugL5-' mained the inactive and almost indifferent spectatora. d. 540. of their ruin. Theodatus secured his person withinthe walls of Rome, while his cavalry advanced fortymiles on the Appian way, and encamped in thePomptine marshes; which, by a canal of nineteenmiles in length, had been recently drained and con­verted into excellent pastures*. But the principalforces of the Goths were dispersed in Dalmatia,Venetia, and Gaul; and the feeble mind of theirking was confounded by the unsuccessful event of adivination, which seemed to presage the downfal ofhis empire. The most abject slaves have arraignedthe guilt or weakness of an unfortunate master. Thecharacter of Theodatus was rigorously scrutinized bya free and idle camp of Barbarians, conscious of theirprivilege and power: he was declared unworthy ofhis race, his nation, and his throne; and their ge­


* The Decennovium is strangely confounded by Cluvierius (tom. Ii. p. 1007)with the river Uteris. It was in truth a canal of nineteen miles, from ForumAppii to Terracina, on which Horace embarked in the night. The Decennoviumwhich is mentioned by Lucan, Dion Cassius, and Cassiodorius, has been suf­ficiently ruined, restored, and obliterated (d'Anville, Analyse de 1'Italie, p.185, &c.).







OCR Output








88 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. tions flowed from the contagion of the times; hisxxxv- virtues were his own, the free gift of nature or re­flection; he raised himself without a master or arival; and so inadequate were the arms committedto his hand, that his sole advantage was derived fromthe pride and presumption of his adversaries. Underhis command, the subjects of Justinian often de­served to be called Romans: but the unwarlike ap­pellation of Greeks was imposed as a term of reproachby the haughty Goths; who affected to blush, thatthey must dispute the kingdom of Italy with a nationof tragedians, pantomimes, and pirates. The climateof Asia has indeed been found less congenial thanthat of Europe to military spirit: those populouscountries were enervated by luxury, despotism, andsuperstition. The regular force of the empire hadonce amounted to six hundred and forty-five thou­sand men: it was reduced, in the time of Justinian,to one hundred and fifty thousand; and this num­ber, large as it may seem, was thinly scattered overthe sea and land; in Spain and Italy, in Africa andEgypt, on the banks of the Danube, the coast of theEuxine, and the frontiers of Persia. The citizenwas exhausted, yet the soldier was unpaid; his po­verty was mischievously soothed by the privilege ofrapine and indolence; and the tardy payments weredetained and intercepted by the fraud of those agentswho usurp, without courage or danger, the emolu­ments of war. Public and private distress recruitedthe armies of the state; but in the field, and stillmore in the presence of the enemy, their numberswere always defective. The want of national spiritwas supplied by the precarious faith and disorderlyservice of Barbarian mercenaries. Even military ho­nour, which has often survived the loss of virtue andfreedom, was almost totally extinct. The generals,who were multiplied beyond the example of former







OCR Output








444 THK DECLINE AND FALL


chap. putcd to the haste, rather than the scruples, of the
Saracens. In their course along the Appian way,
they pillaged Fundi, and besieged Gayeta ; but theyhad turned aside from the walls of Rome; and, bytheir divisions, the capitol was saved from the yokeof the Prophet of Mecca. The same danger still im­pended on the heads of the Roman people; andtheir domestic force was unequal to the assault of anAfrican emir. They claimed the protection of theirLatin sovereign; but the Carlovingian standard wasoverthrown by a detachment of the Barbarians: theymeditated the restoration of the Greek emperors;but the attempt was treasonable, and the succourremote and precarious. Their distress appeared to re­ceive some aggravation from the death of their spi­ritual and temporal chief; but the pressing emergencysuperseded the forms and intrigues of an election;and the unanimous choice of Leo the Fourth was thesafety of the church and city. This pontiff wasborn a Roman: the courage of the first ages of therepublic glowed in his breast; and amidst the ruinsof his country, he stood erect, like one of the firmand lofty columns that rear their heads above thefragments of the Roman forum. The first days ofhis reign were consecrated to all the solemn officesof religion, which served to restore the hopes of the. multitude. The public defence had been long neg­lected, not from the presumption of peace, but fromthe distress and poverty of the times. As far as thescantiness of his means, and the shortness of his lei­sure, would allow, the ancient walls were repaired bythe command of Leo; fifteen towers, in the mostaccessible stations, were built or renewed; two ofthese commanded on either side the Tyber; and aniron chain was drawn across the stream to impede theascent of an hostile navy. The Romans were assuredof a short respite by the welcome news, that the siege







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 107


contest has proved that it could not belong to either chap.
of the competitors. The kingdom of the Turks was
bounded by the Oxus or Gihon; and Touran wasseparated by that great river from the rival monarchyof Iran, or Persia, which, in a smaller compass, con­tained perhaps a larger measure of power and popula­tion. The Persians, who alternately invaded andrepulsed the Turks and the Romans, were still ruledby the house of Sassan, which ascended the thronethree hundred years before the accession of Justinian.His contemporary, Cabades, or Kobad, had been suc­cessful in war against the emperor Anastasius; butthe reign of that prince was distracted by civil andreligious troubles. A prisoner in the hands of hissubjects; an exile among the enemies of Persia; herecovered his liberty by prostituting the honour ofhis wife, and regained his kingdom with the danger­ous and mercenary aid of the Barbarians, who hadslain his father. His nobles were suspicious thatKobad never forgave the authors of his expulsion, oreven those of his restoration. The people was de­luded and inflamed by the fanaticism of Mazdak, whoasserted the community of women, and the equalityof mankind, whilst he appropriated the richest landsand most beautiful females to his sectaries. The viewof these disorders, which had been fomented by hislaws and example, embittered the declining age ofthe Persian monarch; and his fears were increasedby the consciousness of his design to reverse the na­tural and customary order of succession, in favour ofhis third and most favoured son, so famous under thenames of Chosroes and Nushirvan. To render theyouth more illustrious in the eyes of the nations,Kobad was desirous that he should be adopted by theemperor Justin: the hope of peace inclined the By­zantine court to accept this singular proposal;" andChosroes might have acquired a specious claim to the







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 287


darkness and silence, till she could inform her com- chap.panion that he had enjoyed the queen of the Lorn-XXXVHLbards, and that his own death, or the death of Alboin,must be the consequence of such treasonable adultery.In this alternative, he chose rather to be the accom­plice than the victim of Rosamond, whose undauntedspirit was incapable of fear or remorse. She ex­pected, and soon found a favourable moment, whenthe king, oppressed with wine, had retired from thetable to his afternoon slumbers. His faithless spousewas anxious for his health and repose; the gates ofthe palace were shut, the arms removed, the attend­ants dismissed, and Rosamond, after lulling him torest by her tender caresses, unbolted the chamber-door, and urged the reluctant conspirators to the in­stant execution of the deed. On the first alarm, thewarrior started from his couch; his sword, which heattempted to draw, had been fastened to the scabbardby the hand of Rosamond; and a small stool, hisonly weapon, could not long protect him from thespears of the assassins. The daughter of Cunimundsmiled in his fall; his body was buried under thestaircase of the palace, and the grateful posterity ofthe Lombards revered the tomb and the memory of t
their victorious leader.
The ambitious Rosamond aspired to reign in the Her flightname of her lover; the city and palace of Veronaand deatb-were awed by her power, and a faithful band of hernative Gepidae was prepared to applaud the revenge,and to second the wishes, of their sovereign. Butthe Lombard chiefs, who fled in the first momentsof consternation and disorder, had resumed theircourage and collected their powers; and the nation,instead of submitting to her reign, demanded, withunanimous cries, that justice should be executed onthe guilty spouse and the murderers of their king.She sought a refuge among the enemies of her







OCR Output








184 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. the alacrity and vigour of his youth. By his com-XXXVI- mand, the vessels of gold and silver were removedfrom the churches in the neighbourhood, and eventhe suburbs, of Constantinople: the ramparts werelined with trembling spectators: the golden gate wascrowded with useless generals and tribunes, and thesenate shared the fatigues and the apprehensions ofthe populace.tfBeiisC^ry -But the eyes of the prince and people were directedrius- to a feeble veteran, who was compelled by the public
danger to resume the armour in which he had enteredCarthage and defended Rome. The horses of theroyal stables, of private citizens, and even of the cir­cus, were hastily collected; the emulation of the oldand young was roused by the name of Belisarius, andhis first encampment was in the presence of a vic­torious enemy. His prudence, and the labour of thefriendly peasants, secured, with a ditch and rampart,the repose, of the night: innumerable fires, andclouds of dust, were artfully contrived to magnifythe opinion of his strength: his soldiers suddenlypassed from despondency to presumption; and whileten thousand voices demanded the battle, Belisariusdissembled his knowledge, that in the hour of trialhe must depend on the firmness of three hundredveterans. The next morning the Bulgarian cavalryadvanced to the charge. But they heard the shoutsof multitudes; they beheld the arms and discipline ofthe front; they were assaulted on the flanks by twoambuscades which rose from the woods; their fore­most warriors fell by the hand of the aged hero andhis guards; and the swiftness of their evolutions wasrendered useless by the close attack and rapid pur­suit of the Romans. In this action (so speedy wastheir flight) the Bulgarians lost only four hundredhorse; but Constantinople was saved; and Zaber-gan, who felt the hand of a master, withdrew to a







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 65


boldly traversed the posts of the enemy, and returned chap.with the Oriental succours to the relief of her husband XXXIV-and the besieged city. A fleet of three thousandIsaurians cast anchor in the bay of Naples, and after­wards at Ostia. Above two thousand horse, of whoma part were Thracians, landed at Tarentum; and,after the junction of five hundred soldiers of Cam­pania, and a train of waggons laden with wine andflour, they directed their march on the Appian way,from Capua to the neighbourhood of Rome. Theforces that arrived by land and sea were united at themouth of the Tyber. Antonina convened a councilof war: it was resolved to surmount, with sails andoars, the adverse stream of the river: and the Gothswere apprehensive of disturbing, by any rash hostili­ties, the negotiation to which Belisarius had craftilylistened. They credulously believed, that they sawno more than the vanguard of a fleet and army,which already covered the Ionian sea and the plainsof Campania; and the illusion was supported by thehaughty language of the Roman general, when hegave audience to the ambassadors of Vitiges. Aftera specious discourse to vindicate the justice of hiscause, they declared that, for the sake of peace, theywere disposed to renounce the possession of Sicily."The emperor is not less generous," replied hislieutenant, with a disdainful smile, " in return for a"gift which you no longer possess: he presents you"with an ancient province of the empire; he resigns"to the Goths the sovereignty of the British island."Belisarius rejected with equal firmness and contemptthe offer of a tribute; but he allowed the Gothic am­bassadors to seek their fate from the mouth of Jus­tinian himself; and consented, with seeming re­luctance, to a truce of three months, from the wintersolstice to the equinox of spring. Prudence mightnot safely trust either the oaths or hostages of the
VOL. IV. F







OCR Output








300 THE DECLINE AND FALL


CHAP.XXXVIII
The king­dom of theLombards.


Languageand man­ners of theLombards.


venna. The remainder of Italy was possessed by theLombards; and from Pavia, the royal seat, theirkingdom was extended to the east, the north, and thewest, as far as the confines of the Avars, the Bava­rians, and the Franks of Austrasia and Burgundy. Inthe language of modern geography, it is now repre­sented by the Terra Finna of the Venetian republic,Tyrol, the Milanese, Piemont, the coast of Genoa,Mantua, Parma, and Modena, the grand duchy ofTuscany, and a large portion of the ecclesiasticalstate from Perugia to the Adriatic. The dukes, andat length the princes of Beneventum, survived themonarchy, and propagated the name of the Lombards.From Capua to Tarentum, they reigned near fivehundred years over the greatest part of the presentkingdom of Naples*.
In comparing the proportion of the victorious andthe vanquished people, the change of language willafford the most probable inference. According to thisstandard it will appear, that the Lombards of Italyand the Visigoths of Spain were less numerous thanthe Franks or Burgundians; and the conquerors ofGaul must yield, in their turn, to the multitude ofSaxons and Angles who almost eradicated the idiomsof Britain. The modern Italian has been insensiblyformed by the mixture of nations; the awkwardnessof the Barbarians in the nice management of declen­sions and conjugations reduced them to the use ofarticles and auxiliary verbs; and many new ideashave been expressed by Teutonic appellations. Yetthe principal stock of technical and familiar words isfound to- be of Latin derivation t; and if we were


• I have described the state of Italy from the excellent Dissertation of Beretti.Oiannone (Istoria Civile, tom. i. p. 374—387) has followed the learned CamilloFelegrini in the geography of the kingdom of Naples.
+ MafFei (Verona Illustrate, part i . p. 310—321), and Muratori (AntichitaItaliane, tom. ii. Dissertazione xxxii. xxxiii. p. 71—365), have asserted thenative claims of the Italian idiom: the former with enthusiasm, the latter withdiscretion: both with learning, ingenuity, and truth.







OCR Output








46 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. before he could execute, against a priest or senator,XXXIV- the sentence either of death or confiscation. Thefeeble monarch resigned the possession of Sicily;offered, as the annual mark of his dependence, acrown of gold, of the weight of three hundred pounds;and promised to supply, at the requisition of hissovereign, three thousand Gothic auxiliaries for theservice of the empire. Satisfied with these extraor­dinary concessions, the successful agent of Justinianhastened his journey to Constantinople; but nosooner had he reached the Alban villa, than he wasrecalled by the anxiety of Theodatus; and the dia­logue which passed between the king and the am­bassador deserves to be represented in its originalsimplicity. "Are you of opinion that the emperor"will ratify this treaty? Perhaps. If he refuses,"what consequence will ensue? War. Will such"a war be just or reasonable? Most assuredly:"every one should act according to his character."What is your meaning? You are a philosopher—"Justinian is emperor of the Romans: it would ill"become the disciple of Plato to shed the blood of"thousands in his private quarrel: the successor of"Augustus should vindicate his rights, and recover"by arms the ancient provinces of his empire." Thisreasoning might not convince, but it was sufficient toalarm and subdue the weakness of Theodatus; andhe soon descended to his last offer, that, for the poorequivalent of a pension of forty-eight thousandpoundssterling, he would resign the kingdom of the Gothsand Italians, and spend the remainder of his days inthe innocent pleasures of philosophy and agriculture.Both treaties were intrusted to the hands of the am­bassador, on the frail security of an oath not to pro­duce the second till the first had been positively re­jected. The event may be easily foreseen: Justinianrequired and accepted the abdication of the Gothic







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 393


natus, forty-six years after the flight of Mahomet C"£P'from Mecca, his disciples appeared in arms under-


the walls of Constantinople. They were animated S^.by a genuine or fictitious saying of the Prophet, that ^.d. 668—to the first army which besieged the city of theCaesars, their sins were forgiven; the long series ofRoman triumphs would be meritoriously transferredto the conquerors of new Rome; and the wealth ofnations was deposited in this well-chosen seat ofroyalty and commerce. No sooner had the caliphMoawiyah suppressed his rivals and established histhrone, than he aspired to expiate the guilt of civilblood by the success and glory of his holy expedi­tion*; his preparations by sea and land were ade­quate to the importance of the object; his standardwas intrusted to Sophian, a veteran warrior, but thetroops were encouraged by the example and presenceof Yezid, the son and presumptive heir of the com­mander of the faithful. The Greeks had little tohope, nor had their enemies any reasons of fear,from the courage and vigilance of the reigning em­peror, who disgraced the name of Constantine, andimitated only the inglorious years of Heraclius.Without delay or opposition, the naval forces of theSaracens passed through the unguarded channel ofthe Hellespont; which, even now, under the feebleand disorderly government of the Turks, is main­tained as the natural bulwark of the capital. TheArabian fleet cast anchor, and the troops were dis­embarked, near the palace of Hebdomon, seven milesfrom the city. During many days, from the dawn
• For this first siege of Constantinople, see Nicephorus (Breviar. p. 21, 22) jTheophanes (Chronograph, p. IJ94); Cedrenus (Compend. p. 437); Zonaras(Hist. tom. ii. lxiv. p. 89); Elmacin (Hist. Saracen, p. 56", 57); Abulfeda(Anna!. Moslem, p. 107, 108. vers. Reiske); D'Herbelot (BiblioL Orient. Con­stantly); Ockley's History of the Saracens, vol. ii. p. 127, 128. the year 668.February 20th is fixed as the date of the siege by Abulfeda, whose testimony Iesteem the most convenient and creditable of the Arabians.—The history of thisand the second siege of Constantinople is copied from the first of the tenth volumeof Mr. Gibbon, being in the history of the Saracens. Edit.







OCR Output








178 THE DECLINE AND FALL


CHAP.XXXVI.


Defeat ofthe Franksand Ale-manni byNarses,A. D. 554.


with simple pillage and occasional murder. But thechurches which their piety had spared were strippedby the sacrilegious hands of the Alemanni, who sa­crificed horses' heads to their native deities of thewoods and rivers: they melted or profaned the con­secrated vessels, and the ruins of shrines and altarswere stained with the blood of the faithful. Buccelinwas actuated by ambition, and Lothaire by avarice.The former aspired to restore the Gothic kingdom:the latter, after a promise to his brother of speedysuccours, returned by the same road to deposit histreasure beyond the Alps. The strength of theirarmies was already wasted by the change of climateand contagion of disease: the Germans revelled inthe vintage of Italy; and their own intemperanceavenged in some degree the miseries of a defencelesspeople.
At the entrance of the spring, the Imperial troops,who had guarded the cities, assembled to the numberof eighteen thousand men, in the neighbourhood ofRome. Their winter hours had not been consumedin idleness. By the command, and after the exampleof Narses, they repeated each day their military exer­cise on foot and on horseback, accustomed theirear to obey the sound of the trumpet, and practisedthe steps and evolutions of the Pyrrhic dance. Fromthe straits of Sicily, Buccelin, with thirty thousandFranks and Alemanni, slowly moved towards Capua,occupied with a wooden tower the bridge of Casili-num, covered his right by the stream of the Vulturnus,and secured the rest of his encampment by a rampartof sharp stakes, and a circle of waggons, whose wheelswere buried in the earth. He impatiently expectedthe return of Lothaire; ignorant, alas! that his bro­ther could never return, and that the chief and hisarmy had been swept away by a strange disease onthe banks of the lake Benacus, between Trent and







OCR Output








CONTENTS.


A. D.
Return and triumph of Belisarius
535 His sole consulship .
End of Gelimer and the Vandals
Manners and defeat of the Moors
Neutrality of the Visigoths .
550—620. Conquests of the Romans in Spain
534 Belisarius threatens the Ostrogoths in Italy
522—534. Government and death of Amalasontha, queen
of Italy ....
535 Her exile and death
Belisarius invades and subdues Sicily


Page
30
31
32
33
36
37
ib.
39
42
ib.


534—536. Reign and weakness of Theodatus, the Gothic
king of Italy
537 Belisarius invades Italy, and reduces Naples
536—540. Vitiges, king of Italy .
536 Belisarius enters Rome
537 Siege of Rome by the Goths .
Valour of Belisarius
His defence of Rome
Repulses a general assault of the Goths
His sallies ....
Distress of the city .
Exile of Pope Sylverius
Deliverance of the city
Belisarius recovers many cities of Italy
538 The Goths raise the siege of Rome
Lose Rimini
Retire to Ravenna
Jealousy of the Roman generals
Death of Constantine
The eunuch Narses"
Firmness and authority of Belisarius
538—539. Invasion of Italy by the Franks
Destruction of Milan
Belisarius besieges Ravenna
539 Subdues the Gothic kingdom of ItalyCaptivity of Vitiges
540 Return and glory of Belisarius .
Secret history of his wife Antonina
Her lover Theodosius
Resentment of Belisarius and her son Photius
Persecution of her son
Disgrace and submission of Belisarius
45
47
50
52
ib.
54
55
58
59
61
63
ib.
66
ib.
68
69
ib.
ib.
70
71
ib.
72
73
70ib.
ib.
79
80
82
83
84







OCR Output








OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 351


The Persians were equally successful and more for- chap.
YYYTY
tunate in the sack of Caesarea, the capital of Cappa-'
docia; and as they advanced beyond the rampartsof the frontier, the boundary of ancient war, theyfound a less obstinate resistance and a more plentifulharvest. The pleasant vale of Damascus has beenadorned in every age with a royal city: her obscurefelicity has hitherto escaped the historian of the Ro­man empire: but Chosroes reposed his troops in theparadise of Damascus before he ascended the hillsof Libanus, or invaded the cities of the Phoenicianeoast. The conquest of Jerusalem, which had been of Palestine,meditated by Nushirvan, was achieved by the zealand avarice of his grandson; the ruin of the proudestmonument of Christianity was vehemently urged bythe intolerant spirit of the Magi; and he could in-list, for this holy warfare, an army of six and twentythousand Jews, whose furious bigotry might com­pensate, in some degree, for the want of valour anddiscipline. After the reduction of Galilee, and theregion beyond the Jordan, whose resistance appearsto have delayed the fate of the capital, Jerusalem it­self was taken by assault. The sepulchre of Christ,and the stately churches of Helena and Constantine,were consumed, or at least damaged, by the flames;the devout offerings of three hundred years wererifled in one sacrilegious day; the patriarch Zacha-riah, and the true cross, were transported into Persia;and the massacre of ninety thousand Christians is im­puted to the Jews and Arabs who swelled the disorderof the Persian march. The fugitives of Palestine wereentertained at Alexandria by the charity of John thearchbishop, who is distinguished among a crowd ofsaints by the epithet of alms-giver: and the revenuesof the church, with a treasure of three hundred thou­sand pounds, were restored to the true proprietors,the poor of every country and every denomination.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 187


had disdained the fairest offers of ambition and re- chap.venge, should stoop to the murder of his prince, XXXVL"whom he could not long expect to survive. Hisfollowers were impatient to fly; but flight must havebeen supported by rebellion, and he had lived enoughfor nature and for glory. Belisarius appeared before a. d. 563,the council with less fear than indignation: afterDec"5"forty years' service, the emperor had prejudged hisguilt; and injustice was sanctified by the presenceand authority of the patriarch. The life of Beli­sarius was graciously spared; but his fortunes weresequestered, and from December to July, he wasguarded as a prisoner in his own palace. At length a.d.564,his innocence was acknowledged; his freedom and uyhonours were restored; and death, which might behastened by resentment and grief, removed him fromthe world about eight months after his deliverance, a. d. 565,The name of Belisarius can never die: but insteadof the funeral, the monuments, the statues, so justlydue to his memory, I only read, that his treasures,the spoils of the Goths and Vandals, were imme­diately confiscated by the emperor. Some decentportion was reserved, however, for the use of hiswidow; and as Antonina had much to repent, she de­voted the last remains of her life and fortune to thefoundation of a convent. Such is the simple andgenuine narrative of the fall of Belisarius and the in­gratitude of Justinian*. That he was deprived ofhis eyes, and reduced by envy to beg his bread, " Give"a penny to Belisarius the general!" is a fiction oflater times f, which has obtained credit, or rather
• Of the disgrace and restoration of Belisarius, the genuine original record ispreserved in the fragment of John Molala (tom. ii. p. 234—243), and the exactChronicle of Theophanes (p. 194—204). Cedrenus (Compend. p. 387, 388)and Zonaras (tom. ii. 1. xiv. p. 69) seem to hesitate between the obsolete truthand the growing falsehood.
"f The source of this idle fable may be derived from a miscellaneous work ofthe xiith century, the Chiliads of John Tzetzes, a monk (Basil, 1546, ad calcemLycophront, Colon. Allobrog. 1614. in Corp. Poet. Oraec.). He relates the







OCR Output








48 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. of Bruttium, Lucania, and Campania, who abhorred; the, name and religion of the Goths, embraced thespecious excuse, that their ruined walls were incapa­ble of defence: the soldiers paid a just equivalent fora plentiful market; and curiosity alone interruptedthe peaceful occupations of the husbandman or ar­tificer. Naples, which has swelled to a great andpopulous capital, long cherished the language andmanners of a Grecian colony; and the choice ofVirgil had ennobled this elegant retreat, which at­tracted the lovers of repose and study, from thenoise, the smoke, and the laborious opulence ofRome. As soon as the place was invested by seaand land, Belisarius gave audience to the deputiesof the people, who exhorted him to disregard a con­quest unworthy of his arms, to seek the Gothic kingin a field of battle, and, after his victory, to claim, asthe sovereign of Rome, the allegiance of the de­pendent cities. "When I treat with my enemies,"replied the Roman chief, with a haughty smile, " I"am more accustomed to give than to receive coun-"sel; but I hold in one hand inevitable ruin, and,"in the other, peace and freedom, such as Sicily"now enjoys." The impatience of delay urged himto grant the most liberal terms; his honour securedtheir performance: but Naples was divided into twofactions; and the Greek democracy was inflamed bytheir orators, who, with much spirit and some truth,represented to the multitude, that the Goths wouldpunish their defection, and that Belisarius himselfmust esteem their loyalty and valour. Their deli­berations, however, were not perfectly free: the citywas commanded by eight hundred Barbarians, whosewives and children were detained at Ravenna as thepledge of their fidelity; and even the Jews, who wererich and numerous, resisted, with desperate enthusi-• asm, the intolerant laws of Justinian. In a much







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 115


"Armenia, the independence of Colchos, and the chap."wild liberty of the Tzanian mountains? Has he xxxv-"not usurped, with equal avidity, the city of Bospho-"rus on the frozen Maeotis, and the vale of palm-"trees on the shores of the Red Sea? The Moors,"the Vandals, the Goths, have been successively op-"pressed, and each nation has calmly remained the"spectator of their neighbour's ruin. Embrace, O"king! the favourable moment; the East is left"without defence, while the armies of Justinian and"his renowned general are detained in the distant"regions of the West. If you hesitate and delay,"Belisarius and his victorious troops will soon return"from the Tiber to the Tigris, and Persia may en-"joy the wretched consolation of being the last de-"voured *." By such arguments Chosroes was easilypersuaded to imitate the example which he con­demned: but the Persian, ambitious of military fame,disdained the inactive warfare of a rival, who issuedhis sanguinary commands from the secure station ofthe Byzantine palace.
Whatever might be the provocations of Chosroes, He invadedhe abused the confidence of treaties; and the just aTid. 540,reproaches of dissimulation and falsehood could onlybe concealed by the lustre of his victories t. The Per­sian army, which had been assembled in the plains ofBabylon, prudently declined the strong cities ofMesopotamia, and followed the western bank of theEuphrates, till the small though populous town ofDura presumed to arrest the progress of the greatking. The gates of Dura, by treachery and surprise,were burst open; and as soon as Chosroes had stainedhis scimitar with the blood of the inhabitants, he dis-


* I have blended, in a short speech, the two orations of the Arsacides of Ar­menia and the Gothic ambassadors. Procopius, in his public history, feels, andmakes us feel, that Justinian was the true author of the war (Persic. 1. ii. c. 2, 3).
f The invasion of Syria, the ruin of Antioch, &c. are related in a full and re­gular scries by Procopius (Persic. 1. ii. c. 5—14). On the geography of the seatof war, d'Anvillc (l'Euphrate et le Tigre) is sufficient and satisfactory.


r







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE 499


despoiled a beautiful and blooming virgin, to enrich, chap.or rather to expose, the deformity of a wrinkled and xu-decrepid matron*. But the sword of the Lombardsopposed his settlement in Italy: he entered Rome,not as a conqueror, but as a fugitive, and, after avisit of twelve days, he pillaged, and for ever de­serted, the ancient capital of the world f. The finalrevolt and separation of Italy was accomplished abouttwo centuries after the conquests of Justinian, andfrom his reign we may date the gradual- oblivion ofthe Latin tongue. That legislator had composedhis Institutes, his Code, and his Pandects, in a lan­guage which he celebrates as the proper and publicstyle of the Roman government, the consecratedidiom of the palace and senate of Constantinople, ofthe camps and tribunals of the East. But this fo­reign dialect was unknown to the people and soldiersof the Asiatic provinces; it was imperfectly under­stood by the greater part of the interpreters of thelaws and the ministers of the state. After a shortconflict, nature and habit prevailed over the obsoleteinstitutions of human power: for the general benefitof his subjects, Jusjtinian promulgated his novels inthe two languages; the several parts of his volumi­nous jurisprudence were successively translated: theoriginal was forgotten, the version was studied, andthe Greek, whose intrinsic merit deserved indeed thepreference, obtained a legal as well as popular esta-


* ('onstantinc Manasses reprobates this design in his barbarous verse:
Kai ypaw Tiva Tptaopuiro* til; xog>]y woZtati.
and it is confirmed by Theophanes, Zonaras, Cedrenus, and the I listeria Miscclla;voluit in urbem Romam imperium transferre (1. xix. p. 157- in tom. i. part i. ofthe Scriptores Rer. Ital. of Muratori).
t Paul. Diaoon. 1. v. c. 11. p. 480. Anastasius in Vitis Pontirkum, in Mu-ratori's Collection, tom. iii. pars i. p. 141.


K K 2







OCR Output








232 THK DECLINE AND FALL


chap. tune of the son was immediately lost in the property
'' of the father. His stolen goods (his oxen or his
children) might be recovered by the same action oftheft; and if either had been guilty of a trespass, itwas in his own option to compensate the damage, orresign to the injured party the obnoxious animal.At the call of indigence or avarice, the master of afamily could dispose of his children or his slaves.But the condition of the slave was far more advan­tageous, since he regained by the first manumissionhis alienated freedom: the son was again restored tohis unnatural father; he might be condemned toservitude a second and a third time, and it was nottill after the third sale and deliverance, that he wasenfranchised from the domestic power which hadbeen so repeatedly abused. According to his discre­tion, a father might chastise the real or imaginaryfaults of his children, by stripes, by imprisonment,by exile, by sending them to the country to work inchains among the meanest of his servants. The ma­jesty of a parent was armed with the power of lifeand death*; and the examples of such bloody exe­cutions, which were sometimes praised and neverpunished, may be traced in the annals of Rome, be­yond the times of Pompey and Augustus. Neitherage, nor rank, nor the consular office, nor the ho­nours of a triumph, could exempt the most illustriouscitizen from the bonds of filial subjection: his owndescendants were included in the family of theircommon ancestor; and the claims of adoption werenot less sacred or less rigorous than those of nature.Without fear, though not without danger of abuse,the Roman legislators had reposed an unboundedconfidence in the sentiments of paternal love; and


* By Justinian, the old law, the jus necis of the Roman father (Institut. I. iv.tit. ix. No. 7), is reported and reprobated.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 895


of annual tribute, fifty horses of noble breed, fifty chap.slaves, and three thousand pieces of gold, degraded XL>the majesty of the commander of the faithful*. Theaged caliph was desirous of possessing his dominions,and ending his days, in tranquillity and repose: whilethe Moors and Indians trembled at his name, hispalace and city of Damascus were insulted by theMardaites, or Maronites, of Mount Libanus, thefirmest barrier of the empire, till they were dis­armed and transplanted by the spurious policy ofthe Greeks. After the revolt of Arabia and Persia,the house of Ommiyah was reduced to the kingdomsof Syria and Egypt: their distress and fear enforcedtheir compliance with the pressing demands of theChristians; and the tribute was increased to a slave,a horse, and a thousand pieces of gold, for each ofthe three hundred and sixty-five days in the solaryear. But as soon as the empire was again unitedby the arms and policy of Abdalmalek, he disclaimeda badge of servitude, not less injurious to his con­science than to his pride: he discontinued the pay­ment of the tribute; and the resentment of theGreeks was disabled from action by the mad tyrannyof the second Justinian, the just rebellion of his sub­jects, and the frequent change of his antagonists andsuccessors. Tilltthe reign of Abdalmalek, the Sara­cens had been content with the free possession of thePersian and Roman treasures, in the coin of Chosroesand Caesar. By the command of that caliph anational mint was established, both of silver and gold;and under the reign of the caliph Waled, the Greeklanguage and characters were excluded from theaccounts of the public revenue. If this change wasproductive of the invention or familiar use of our


* Theophanes, though a Greek, deserves credit for these tributes (Chrono­graph, p. 295, 29G, 300, 301); which are confirmed, with some variation, bythe Arabic History of Abulpharagius (Dynast, p. 128. vers. Pococke).







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 335


were rudely framed and awkwardly managed: and chap.
the resistance of Diocletianopolis and Beraea, of'
Philippopolis and Adrianople, soon exhausted theskill and patience of the besiegers. The warfare ofBaian was that of a Tartar, yet his mind was sus­ceptible of a humane and generous sentiment; hespared Anachialus, whose salutary waters had re­stored the health of the best beloved of his wives;and the Romans confess, that their starving army wasfed and dismissed by the liberality of a foe. His em­pire extended over Hungary, Poland, and Prussia,from the mouth of the Danube to that of the Oder;and his new subjects were divided and transplantedby the jealous policy of the conqueror*. The easternregions of Germany, which had been left vacant bythe emigration of the Vandals, were replenished withSclavonian colonists; the same tribes are discoveredin the neighbourhood of the Adriatic and of theBaltic; and with the name of Baian himself, theIllyrian cities of Neyss and Lissa are again found inthe heart of Silesia. In the disposition both of histroops and provinces, the chagan exposed the vassals,whose lives he disregarded, to the first assault; andthe swords of the enemy were blunted before theyencountered the native valour of the Avars.
The Persian alliance restored the troops of the WarsofEast to the defence of Europe; and Maurice, who agrinsuhehad supported ten years the insolence of the chagan, jf™declared his resolution to march in person against the — 602Barbarians. In the space of two centuries, none ofthe successors of Theodosius had appeared in thefield, their lives were supinely spent in the palace ofConstantinople; and the Greeks could no longerunderstand, that the name of emperor, in its primitivesense, denoted the chief of the armies of the republic.
• This is one of the most probable and luminous conjectures of the learnedcount tie Buat.


vars,595







OCR Output








OP THE KOMAN EMPIRE. 279


unequal to the gratification of his love, ambition, chap.
and revenge: he condescended to implore the for-'
midable aid of the chagan; and the arguments thathe employed are expressive of the art and policy ofthe Barbarians. In the attack of the Gepidae, he hadbeen prompted by the just desire of extirpating apeople whom their alliance with the Roman empirehad rendered the common enemies of the nations,and the personal adversaries of the chagan. If theforces of the Avars and the Lombards should unitein this glorious quarrel, the victory was secure, andthe reward inestimable: the Danube, the Hebrus,Italy, and Constantinople, would be exposed, with­out a barrier, to their invincible arms. But if theyhesitated or delayed to prevent the malice of theRomans, the same spirit which had insulted, wouldpursue the Avars to the extremity of the earth.These specious reasons were heard by the chaganwith coldness and disdain: he detained the Lombardambassadors in his camp, protracted the negotiation,and by turns alleged his want of inclination, or hiswant of ability, to undertake this important enter­prise. At length he signified the ultimate price ofhis alliance, that the Lombards should immediatelypresent him with the tithe of their cattle; that thespoils and captives should be equally divided; butthat the lands of the Gepidae should become the solepatrimony of the Avars. Such hard conditions wereeagerly accepted by the passions of Alboin; and asthe Romans were dissatisfied with the ingratitudeand perfidy of the Gepidae, Justin abandoned thatincorrigible people to their fate, and remained thetranquil spectator of this unequal conflict. The de­spair of Cunimund was active .and dangerous. Hewas informed that the Avars had entered his con­fines; but on the strong assurance that, after thedefeat of the Lombards, these foreign invaders would
t4


/


r







OCR Output








136 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. Isdigune had saluted the emperor, and delivered his'_'__ presents, he passed ten months at Constantinoplewithout discussing any serious affairs. Instead ofheing confined to his palace, and receiving food andwater from the hands of his keepers, the Persian am­bassador, without spies or guards, was allowed to visitthe capital; and the freedom of conversation andtrade enjoyed by his domestics offended the pre­judices of an age, which rigorously practised the lawof nations, without confidence or courtesy. By anunexampled indulgence, his interpreter, a servant be­low the notice of a Roman magistrate, was seated, atthe table of Justinian, by the side of his master; andone thousand pounds of gold might be assigned forthe expense of his journey and entertainment. Yetthe repeated labours of Isdigune could procure onlya partial and imperfect truce, which was always pur­chased with the treasures, and renewed at the solicita­tion, of the Byzantine court. Many years of fruitlessdesolation elapsed before Justinian and Chosroes werecompelled, by mutual lassitude, to consult the reposeof their declining age. At a conference held on thefrontier, each party, without expecting to gain credit,displayed the power, the justice, and the pacific in­tentions, of their respective sovereigns; but necessityand interest dictated the treaty of peace, which wasconcluded for a term of fifty years, diligently com­posed in the Greek and Persian language, and at­tested by the seals of twelve interpreters. The libertyof commerce and religion was fixed and defined; theallies of the emperor and the great king were includedin the same benefits and obligations; and the mostscrupulous precautions were provided to prevent ordetermine the accidental disputes that might arise onthe confines of two hostile nations. After twentyyears of destructive though feeble war, the limitsstill remained without alteration} and Chosroes was







OCR Output








OF THE KOMAN EMPIRE. 59


Hadrian, at the distance of three miles from each chap.other. Near the former, the double walls of the Vi- 1,


varium were low or broken; the fortifications of thelatter were feebly guarded: the vigour of the Gothswas excited by the hope of victory and spoil; and ifa single post had given way, the Romans, and Romeitself, were irrecoverably lost. This perilous day wasthe most glorious in the life of Belisarius. Amidsttumult and dismay, the whole plan of the attack anddefence was distinctly present to his mind; he ob­served the changes of each instant, weighed everypossible advantage, transported his person to thescenes of danger, and communicated his spirit in calmand decisive orders. The contest was fiercely main­tained from the morning to the evening; the Gothswere repulsed on all sides, and each Roman mightboast, that he had vanquished thirty Barbarians, if thestrange disproportion of numbers were not counter­balanced by the merit of one man. Thirty thou­sand Goths, according to the confession of their ownchiefs, perished in this bloody action: and the mul­titude of the wounded was equal to that of the slain.When they advanced to the assault, their close dis­order suffered not a javelin to fall without effect; andas -they retired, the populace of the city joined thepursuit, and slaughtered, with impunity, the backsof their flying enemies. Belisarius instantly sallied His sallies,from the gates; and while the soldiers chanted hisname and victory, the hostile engines of war were re­duced to ashes. Such was the loss and consternationof the Goths, that, from this day, the siege of Romedegenerated into a tedious and indolent blockade;and they were incessantly harassed by the Romangeneral, who, in frequent skirmishes, destroyed abovefive thousand of their bravest troops. Their cavalrywas unpractised in the use of the bow; their archersserved on foot; and this divided force was incapable


r







OCR Output








128 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. on the ancient kingdom of Colchos. Their inde-xxxv. pendence was soon evaded by a formidable neigh­bour, who had acquired, by arms and treaties, thesovereignty of Iberia. The dependent king of Lazicareceived his sceptre at the hands of the Persian mon­arch, and the successors of Constantine acquiescedin this injurious claim, which was proudly urged as aConversion right of immemorial prescription. In the beginninga.'d. 522!' oftne sixth century, their influence was restored bythe introduction of Christianity, which the Mingre-lians still profess, without understanding the doc­trines, or observing the precepts, of their religion.After the decease of his father, Zathus was exaltedto the regal dignity by the favour of the great king;but the pious youth abhorred the ceremonies of theMagi, and sought, in the palace of Constantinople,an orthodox baptism, a noble wife, and the allianceof the emperor Justin. The king of Lazica was so­lemnly invested with the diadem, and his cloak andtunic of white silk, with a gold border, displayed, inrich embroidery, the figure of his new patron; whosoothed the jealousy of the Persian court, and ex­cused the revolt of Colchos, by the venerable namesof hospitality and religion. The common interest ofboth empires imposed on the Colchians the duty ofguarding the passes of mount Caucasus, where a wallof sixty miles is now defended by the monthly serviceof the musqueteers of Mingrelia *.Revolt and But this honourable connexion was soon corruptedof the coi- by the avarice and ambition of the Romans. De-a!d!'542 graded from the rank of allies, the Lazi were in-—549- cessantly reminded, by words and actions, of theirdependent state. At the distance of a day's journeybeyond the Apsarus, they beheld the rising fortressof Petra, which commanded the maritime country to
• John Malala, Chron. tom. ii. p. 134—137. Theophanes, p. 144. Hist.Miscell. I. xv. p. 103. The fact is authentic, but the date seems too recent.







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 229


and their use may be considered as an evidence of chap.their merit. They were seFected by the Imperial XXXVI1-delegates, Tribonian, Theophilus, and Dorotheus:and the freedom and purity of the Antonines wasincrusted with the coarser materials of a degenerateage. The same volume which introduced the youthof Rome, Constantinople, and Berytus, to the gra­dual study of the Code and Pandects, is still preciousto the historian, the philosopher, and the magistrate.The institutes of Justinian are divided into fourbooks; they proceed, with no contemptible method,from, I. Persons, to II. Things, and from things,to III. Actions; and the article IV. of PrivateWrongs, is terminated by the principles of CriminalLaw.
I. The distinctions of ranks and persons, is the I. Offirmest basis of a mixed and limited government. FreemenIn Franqe, the remains of liberty are kept alive by and slaves"the spirit, the honours, and even the prejudices, offifty thousand nobles. Two hundred families supply,in lineal descent, the second branch of the Englishlegislature, which maintains, between the king andcommons, the balance of the constitution. A gra­dation of patricians and plebeians, of strangers andsubjects, has supported the aristocracy of Genoa,Venice, and ancient Rome. The perfect equality ofmen is the point in which the extremes of democracyand despotism are confounded; since the majesty ofthe prince or people would be offended, if any headswere exalted above the level of their fellow-slaves orfellow-citizens. In the decline of the Roman em­pire, the proud distinctions of the republic weregradually abolished, and the reason or instinct ofJustinian completed the simple form of an absolutemonarchy. The emperor could not eradicate thepopular reverence which always waits on the posses­sion of hereditary wealth, or the memory of famous







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. *7


king. His indefatigable agent returned from Con- CHAP-
stantinople to Ravenna, with ample instructions; 1
and a fair epistle, which praised the wisdom andgenerosity of the royal philosopher, granted his pen­sion, with the assurance of such honours as a subjectand a catholic might enjoy; and wisely referred thefinal execution of the treaty to the presence andauthority of Belisarius. But in the interval of sus­pense, two Roman generals, who had entered theprovince of Dalmatia, were defeated and slain bythe Gothic troops. From blind and abject despair,Theodatus capriciously rose to groundless and fatalpresumption, and dared to receive, with menace andcontempt, the ambassador of Justinian; who claimedhis promise, solicited the allegiance of his subjects,and boldly asserted the inviolable privilege of hisown character. The march of Belisarius dispelledthis visionary pride; and as the first campaign wasemployed in the reduction of Sicily, the invasion ofItaly is applied by Procopius to the second year ofthe Gothic war.
After Belisarius had left sufficient garrisons in BefeariusPalermo and Syracuse, he embarked his troops at JJaiy^dMessina, and landed them, without resistance, on «duces
•i n a/~ii • Naples,
the opposite shores of Rhegium. A Gothic prince, a.d. 537.who had married the daughter of Theodatus, was sta­tioned with an army to guard the entrance of Italy;but he imitated, without scruple, the example of asovereign, faithless to his public and private duties.The perfidious Ebermor deserted with his followersto the Roman camp, and was dismissed to enjoy theservile honours of the Byzantine court*. From Re-gium to Naples, the fleet and army of Belisarius,almost always in view of each other, advanced nearthree hundred miles along the sea-coast. The people
• Jornamlcs, de Rebus Geticis, c. GO. p. 702. edit. Grot. and tom. i. p. 221.Muratori, de Success. Regn. p. 241.







OCR Output








18 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. cidents of the day; and Belisarius pitched his campxxxiv- on ^ flgl^ of victory, t0 which the tenth mile-stone
from Carthage had applied the Latin appellation ofdecimus. From a wise suspicion of the stratagemsand resources of the Vandals, he marched the nextday in order of battle, halted in the evening beforethe gates of Carthage, and allowed a night pf repose,that he might not, in darkness and disorder, exposethe city to the licence of the soldiers, or the soldiersthemselves to the secret ambush of the city. But asthe fears of Belisarius were the result of calm and in­trepid reason, he was soon satisfied that he mightconfide, without danger, in the peaceful and friendlyaspect of the capital. Carthage blazed with innu­merable torches, the signals of the public joy; thechain was removed that guarded the entrance of theport; the gates were thrown open, and the people,with acclamations of gratitude, hailed and invitedtheir Roman deliverers. The defeat of the Vandals,and the freedom of Africa, were announced to thecity on the eve of St. Cyprian, when the churcheswere already adorned and illuminated for the festivalof the martyr. The Arians, conscious that theirreign had expired, resigned the temple to the Ca­tholics, who rescued their saint from profane hands,performed the holy rites, and loudly proclaimed thecreed of Athanasius and Justinian. One awful hourreversed the fortunes of the contending parties. Thesuppliant Vandals, who had so lately indulged thevices of conquerors, sought an humble refuge in thesanctuary of the church; while the merchants ofthe East were delivered from the deepest dungeon ofthe palace by their affrighted keeper, who imploredthe protection of his captives, and showed them,through an aperture in the wall, the sails of theRoman fleet. After their separation from the army,the naval commanders had proceeded with slow







OCR Output








80 THE DECLINE AND FALL


chap. vourite of the empress Theodora; these loose andxxxiv. ambitious females had been connected by similarpleasures; theywere separated by the jealousy of vice,and at length reconciled by the partnership of guilt.Before her marriage with Belisarius, Antonina hadone husband and many lovers; Photius, the son ofher former nuptials, was of an age to distinguishhimself at the siege of Naples; and it was not tillthe autumn of her age and beauty that she indulgeda scandalous attachment to a Thracian youth. Theo-TheJdosius dosius nad Deen educated hi the Eunomian heresy;the African voyage was consecrated by the baptismand auspicious name of the first soldier who em­barked; and the proselyte was adopted into the fa­mily of his spiritual parents, Belisarius and Antonina.Before they touched the shores of Africa, this holykindred degenerated into sensual love; and as An­tonina soon overleaped the bounds of modesty andcaution, the Roman general was alone ignorant ofhis own dishonour. During their residence at Car­thage, he surprised the two lovers in a subterraneouschamber. Anger flashed from his eyes. " With the help"of this young man," said the unblushing Antonina,"I was secreting our most precious effects from the"knowledge of Justinian." And the pious husbandconsented to disbelieve the evidence of his own senses.From this pleasing and perhaps voluntary delusion,Belisarius was awakened at Syracuse, by the officiousinformation of Macedonia: and that female attend­ant, after requiring an oath for her security, producedtwo chamberlains, who, like herself, had often beheldthe adulteries of Antonina. A hasty flight into Asiasaved Theodosius from the justice of an injured hus­band, who had signified to one of his guards theorder of his death; but the tears of Antonina, andher artful seductions, assured the credulous hero of







OCR Output








74 THE DECLINE AND FALL


XXXIV.


chap. moiety at least of their wealth, with the free alterna­tive of retiring peaceably to their estates, or inlistingto serve the emperor in his Persian wars. The mul­titudes which yet adhered to the standard of Vitigesfar surpassed the number of the Roman troops; butneither prayers, nor defiance, nor the extreme dangerof his most faithful subjects, could tempt the Gothicking beyond the fortifications of Ravenna. Thesefortifications were, indeed, impregnable to the assaultsof art or violence; and when Belisarius invested thecapital, he was soon convinced that famine only couldtame the stubborn spirit of the Barbarians. The sea,the land, and the channels of the Po, were guardedby the vigilance of the Roman general; and his mo­rality extended the rights of war to the practice ofpoisoning the waters, and secretly firing the granariesof a besieged city. While he pressed the blockade ofRavenna, he was surprised by the arrival of two am­bassadors from Constantinople, with a treaty of peace,which Justinian had imprudently signed, withoutdeigning to consult the author of his victory. Bythis disgraceful and precarious agreement, Italy andthe Gothic treasure were divided, and the provincesbeyond the Po were left with the regal title to thesuccessor of Theodoric. The ambassadors were eagerto accomplish their salutary commission; the captiveVitiges accepted, with transport, the unexpectedoffer of a crown; honour was less prevalent amongthe Goths, than the want and appetite of food; andthe Roman chiefs, who murmured at the continuanceof the war, professed implicit submission to the com­mands of the emperor. If Belisarius had possessedonly the courage of a soldier, the laurel would havebeen snatched from his hand by timid and enviouscounsels; but in this decisive moment, he resolved,with the magnanimity of a statesman, to sustain alonethe danger and merit of generous disobedience. Each







OCR Output








OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 161


seasonable effort, the war which he had ambitiously chap.undertaken. The indolence, perhaps the impotence, XXXVI-of a prince who despised his enemies, and envied hisservants, protracted the calamities of Italy. Aftera long silence, Belisarius was commanded to leavea sufficient garrison at Rome, and to transport him­self into the province of Lucania, whose inhabitants,inflamed by Catholic zeal, had cast away the yoke oftheir Arian conquerors. In this ignoble warfare,the hero, invincible against the power of the Bar­barians, was basely vanquished by the delay, the dis­obedience, and the cowardice of his own officers. Hereposed in his winter-quarters of Crotona, in the fullassurance, that the two passes of the Lucanian hillswere guarded by his cavalry. They were betrayedby treachery or weakness; and the rapid march ofthe Goths scarcely allowed time for the escape ofBelisarius to the coast of Sicily. At length a fleetand army were assembled for the relief of Ruscianum,or Rossano, a fortress sixty furlongs from the ruinsof Sybaris, where the nobles of Lucania had takenrefuge. In the first attempt, the Roman forces weredissipated by a storm. In the second, they approachedthe shore; but they saw the hills covered with archers,the landing-place defended by a line of spears, andthe king of the Goths impatient for battle. The con­queror of Italy retired with a sigh, and continued tolanguish, inglorious and inactive, till Antonina, whohad been sent to Constantinople to solicit succours,obtained, after the death of the empress, the per­mission of his return.
The five last campaigns of Belisarius might abate Final recaithe envy of his competitors, whose eyes had been °fufehsa-dazzled and wounded by the blaze of his formerA-D-548'glory. Instead of delivering Italy from the Goths,he had wandered like a fugitive along the coast,without daring to march into the country, or to ac-
VOL. IV. M



