


OCR Output








410 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVI.


6. But when Archelaus, king of Cappadocia, heard of thestate that Herod was in, and being in great distress about hisdaughter, and the young man [her husband,] and grieving withHerod, as with a man that was his friend, on account of so greata disturbance as he was under, he came [to Jerusalem] on pur­pose to compose their differences; and when he found Herod insuch a temper, he thought it wholly unseasonable to reprove him,or to pretend that he had done any thing rashly, for that heshould thereby naturally bring him to dispute the point withhim, and by still more and more apologizing for himself to be themore irritated. He went therefore another way to work, in or­der to correct the former misfortunes, and appeared angry at theyoung man, and said, that Herod had been so very mild a man,that he had not acted a rash part at all. Healsosaid, hewoulddis-solve his daughter's marriage with Alexander, nor could in jus­tice spare his own daughter, if she were conscious of any thing,and did not inform Herod of it. When Archelaus appeared tobe of this temper, and otherwise than Herod expected or imag­ined, and for the main, took Herod's part, and was angry on hisaccount, the king abated of his harshness, and took occasion fromhis appearing to have acted justly hitherto, to come by degreesto put on the affection of a father, and was on both sides to bepitied; for when some persons refuted the calumnies that werelaid on the young man, he was thrown into a passion, but whenArchelaus joined in the accusation, he was dissolved into tearsandsorrow after an affectionatemanner. Accordingly, hedesiredthathe would not dissolve his son's marriage, and became not so an­gry as before for his offences. So when Archelaus had broughthim to a more moderate temper, he transferred the calumniesupon his friends; and said, it must be owing to them that soyoung a man, and one unacquainted with malice, was corrupted,and he supposed that there was more reason to suspect the bro­ther than the son. Upon which Herod was very much displeasedat Pheroras, who indeed now had no one that could makea reconciliation between him and his brother; so when he saw-that Archelaus had the greatest power with Herod, he betookhimself to him in the habit of a mourner, and like one that hadall the signs upon him of an undone man. Upon this Archelausdid not overlook the intercession he made to him, nor yet did heundertake to change the king's disposition towards him imme­diately, and he said, that it was better for him to come himselfto the king, and confess himself the occasion of all, that thiswould make the king's anger not to be extravagant towards him,and that then he would be present to assist him. When he hadpersuaded him to this, he gained his point with both of them;and the calumnies raised »gainst the young man were, beyond







OCR Output








Chap. III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 199


"And many other such things did he prophesy relating to that"place."
2. And this was what Onias wrote to king Ptolemy. Nowany one may observe his piety, and that of his sister and wifeCleopatra's, by that epistle which they wrote in answer to it;for they laid the blame and the transgression of the law uponthe head of Onias. And this was their reply: "King Ptolemy"and queen Cleopatra to Onias, send greeting: We have read"thy petition, wherein thou desirest leave to be given thee to"purge that temple which is fallen down at Leontopolis, in the"Nomus of Heliopolis, and which is named from the country"Buhastis; on which account we cannot but wonder that it"should be pleasing to God to have a temple erected in a"place so unclean, and so full of sacred animals: But since"thou sayest that Isaiah the prophet foretold this long ago,"we give thee leave to do it, if it may be done according to"vour law, and so that we may not appear to have at all of-"fended God herein."
3. So Onias took the place, and built a temple, and an altarto God, like indeed to that in Jerusalem, but smaller and poor­er. . I do not think it proper for me now to describe its dimen­sions, or its vessels, which have been already described in myseventh book of the wars of the Jews. However, Onias foundother Jews like to himself, together with priests and Levites,that there performed divine service. But we have said enoughabout this temple.
4. Now it came to pass that the Alexandrian Jews, and thoseSamaritans who paid their worship to the temple that was builtin the days of Alexander at mount Gerizzim, did now make asedition one against another, and disputed about their templesbefore Ptolemy himself, the Jews saying, that according to thelaws of Moses, the temple was to be built at Jerusalem; andthe Samaritans saying, that it was to be built at Gerizzim.


two or three other copies the Hebrew word itself for the sun, Coheres, or Thares, ispreserved. And since Onias insists with the king and queen, that Isaiah's prophecycontained many other predictions relating to this place, besides the words by himrecited; it is highly probable that these were especially meant by him; and that onemain reason why he applied this prediction to himself, and to his prefecture of He­liopolis, which Dean Prideaux well proves was in that part of Egypt, and why hechose to build in that prefecture of Heliopolis, though otherwise an improper place,was this, that the same authority that he had for building this temple in Egypt, thevery same he had for building it in his own prefecture of Heliopolis also, which hedesired to do, and which he did accordingly. Dean Frideaux has much ado toavoid seeing this corruption of the Hebrew, but it being in support of his own opin­ion about this temple, be durst not see it; and indeed he reasons here in the mostivcviU and injudicious manner possible. See him at the year 149.







OCR Output








Chap. XI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 81


"walking, of stone, and made it resemble mountains, and built"it so that it might be planted with all sorts of trees. He"also erected what was called a pensile paradise, because his"wile was desirous to have things like her own country, she"having been bred up in the palaces of Media." Megasthenes-also, in his fourth book of his accounts of India, makes mentionof these things, and thereby endeavours to show that this king"[Nebuchadnezzar] exceeded Hercules, in fortitude, and in thegreatness of his actions; for he saith, that "he conquered a"great part of Lybia and Iberia." Diocles also, in the secondbook of his accounts of Persia, mentions this king; as does Phi-lostrates in his accounts both of India and of Phenicia, say, that"this king besieged Tyre thirteen years, while at the same"time Ethball reigned at Tyre." These are all the historiesthat I have met with concerning this king.
2. But now after the death of Nebuchadnezzar, Evil-Mero-dach his son succeeded in the kingdom, who immediately set Je-coniah at liberty, and esteemed him among his most intimatefriends: He also gave him many presents, and made him honour­able above the rest of the kings that were in Babylon; for his fa­ther had not kept his faith with Jeconiah, when he voluntarilydelivered up himself to him, with his wives and children, and hiswhole kindred, for the sake of his country, that it might not betaken by siege, and utterly destroyed, as we said before. WhenEvil-Merodach was dead, after a reign of eighteen years, Nig-lissar his son took the government, and retained it forty years,and then ended his life: and after him the succession in the king­dom came to his son Labofordacus,• who continued in it in all butnine months; and when he was dead it came to * Baltasar, who,by the Babylonians, was called Naboandelus; against him didCyrus, the king of Persia, and Darius, the king of Media, make


* It is here remarkable, that Josephus, without the knowledge of Ptolemy's canon,should call the same king whom he himself here (Bar. i. 11. and Dan. v. 1, 2, 9.12,22, 29, 30.) styles Beltazar, or Belihatzar, from the Babylonian god Bel, Neboan-ilelus also; but in the first book against Apion sect. 19. vol. iii. from the same citationout of Berosus, Nabonnedon, from the Babylonian god Nabo or Nebo. This last isnot remote from the original pronunciation itself in Ptolemy's canon, Nabonadiut,for both the place of this king in that canon, as the last of the Assyrian or Babylo­nian kings, and the number of years of his reign, seventeen, the same in both, de­monstrate that it is one and the same king that is meant by them all. It is alsoworth noting, that Josephus knew that Darius, the partner of Cyrus, was the son ofAstyages, and was called by another name among the Greeks, though it does not ap­pear he knew what that name was, as having never seen the best history of this pe­riod, which is Xenophen's: But then what Josephus' present copies say presently,sect. 4. that it was only within no long time after the hand writing on the wall thatISeltasar was slain, does not so agree with our copies of Daniel, which say it was thelame night, Dan. v. 30.







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQUITIES Of THE JEWS. 897


superiors, the same did he desire to be paid to himself; andwhat he thought the most excellent present he could make ano­ther, he discovered an inclination to have the like presented tohimself. But now the Jewish nation is by their law a strangerto all such things, and accustomed to prefer righteousness toglory; for which reason that nation was not agreeable to him,because it was out of their power to flatter the king's ambitionwith statues or temples, or any other such performances. Andthis seems to me to have been at once the occasion of Herod'scrimes, as to his own courtiers and counsellors, and of his bene­factions, as to foreigners and those that had no relation to him.
CHAP. VI. ''
An embassage of the Jews in Cyrene and Asia to Caesar, concern­ing the complaints they had to make against the Greeks: withcopies of the epistles "which Ccesar and Agrippa wrote to thecities for them.
§ 1. -IN ow the cities ill treated the Jews in Asia, and all thosealso of the same nation which lived in Lybia, which joins toCyrene, while the former kings had given them equal privilegeswith the other citizens; but the Greeks affronted them at thistime, and that so far as to take away their sacred money, and todo them mischief on other particular occasions. When there­fore they were thus afflicted, and found no end of the barbar­ous treatment they met with among the Greeks, they sent am­bassadors to Caesar on those accounts; who gave them the sameprivileges as they had before, and sent letters to the same pur­pose to the governors of the provinces, copies of which I sub­join here, as testimonials of the ancient favourable dispositionthe Roman emperors had towards us.
2. " Caesar Augustus high priest, and tribune of the people,"ordains thus: Since the nation of the Jews hath been found"grateful to the Roman people, not only at this time, but m"time past also, and chiefly Hyrcanus the high priest, under"my father * Caesar the emperor, it seemed good to me and"my counsellors, according to the sentence and oath of the peo-"pie of Rome, that the Jews have liberty to make use of their"own customs, according to the law of their forefathers, as they"made use of them under Hyrcanus the high priest of Almigh-"ty God; and that their sacred money be not touched, but be** sent to Jerusalem, and that it be committed to the care of the


* Augustus here calls Julius Csesar his father, though by birth he was only hisuncle, on account of his adoption by him. See the same, Antiq. B. XIV. ch. xiv
SUCt. 4.







OCR Output








578 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVI.


multitude were very desirous to see them, and they became con­spicuous among them all, as adorned with great blessings of for­tune, and having the countenances of persons of royal dignity.So they soon appeared to be the objects of envy to Salome, theking's sister, and to such as had raised calumnies against Ma-riamne; for they were suspicious, that when these came to thegovernment, they should be punished for the wickedness theyhad been guilty of against their mother: so they made this veryfear of theirs a motive to raise calumnies against them also.They gave it out that they were not pleased with their father'scompany, because he had put their mother to death, as if it werenot agreeable to piety to appear to converse with their mother'smurderer. Now by carrying these stories, that had indeed atrue foundation [in the fact,] but were only built on probabil­ities; as to the present accusation, they were able to do themmischief, and to make Herod take away that kindness from hissons which he had before borne to them, for they did not saythese things to him openly, but scattered abroad such wordsamong the rest of the multitude; from which words, when car­ried to Herod, he was induced [at last] to hate them, and whichnatural affection itself, even in length of time, was not able toovercome; yet was the king at that time in a condition to pre­fer the natural affection of a father before all the suspicions andcalumnies his sons lay under; So he respected them as he oughtto do, and married them to wives, now they were of an age,suitable thereto. To Aristobulus he gave for a wife Berenice,Salome's daughter, and to Alexander, Glaphyra, the daughterof Archelaus, king of Cappadocia.
CHAP. II.
How Herod twice sailed to Agrippa: and homo, upon the com­plaint of the Jews in Ionia, against the Greeks, Agrippa con­firmed the laws of the Jews to them.
§ 1. WHEN Herod had despatched these affairs, and heunderstood that Marcus Agrippa had sailed again out of Italyinto Asia, he made haste to him, and besought him to cometo him into his kingdom, and to partake of what he mightjustly expect from one that had been his guest, and was hisfriend. This request he greatly pressed, and to it Agrippaagreed and came into Judea; whereupon Herod omitted nothingtliat might please him. He entertained him in his new builtcities, and showed him the edifice he had built, and providedall sorts of the best and most costly dainties for him and hisfriends, and that at Sebaste and Cscsarea, about that port that







OCR Output








188 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS Book XII.


don, and Simon his brother was general of the army. And thiswas the first league that the Romans made with the Jews, andwas managed after this manner.
CHAP. XI .
That Bacchides was again sent out agaqist Judas ,' and howJudas Jell as he was courageously Jighting.
§ 1. XJUT when Demetrius was informed of the death of Ni-canor, and of the destruction of the army that was with him,he sent Bacchides again with an army into Judea, who marchedout of Antioch, and came into Judea, and pitched his camp atArbela, a city of Galilee, and having besieged and taken thosethat were there in caves, (for many of the people fled into suchplaces,) he removed, and made all the haste he could to Jerusa­lem. And when he had learned that Judas pitched his campat a certain village whose name was Bethzetho, he led his armyagainst him: they were twenty thousand footmen; and twothousand horsemen. Now Judas had no more soldiers than * onethousand. When these saw the multitude of Bacchides' menthey were afraid, and left their camp, and fled all away, exceptingeight hundred. Now when Judas was deserted by his own sol­diers, and the enemy pressed upon him, and gave him no time to§ather his army together, he was disposed to fight with Bacchi-es' army, though he had but eight hundred men with him; sohe exhorted these men to undergo the danger courageously, andencouraged them to attack the enemy. And when they said theywere not a body sufficient to fight so great an army, and advisedthat they should retire now, and save themselves, and that whenhe had gathered his own men together, then he should fall uponthe enemy afterwards, his answer was this: "Let not the sun"ever see such a thing that I should show my back to the ene-"my; and although this be the time that will bring me to my"end, and I must die in this battle, I will rather stand to it cou-"rageously, and bear whatsoever comes upon me, than by now"running away, bring reproach upon my former great actions,'; or tarnish their glory." This was the speech he made to thosethat remained with him, whereby he encouraged them to attackthe enemy.
2. But Bacchides drew his army out of their camp, and put


* That this copy of Josephus, as he wrote it, had here not 100O but 3000 with1 Maccab. ix. 5. is very plain, because though the main part ran away at first evenin Josephus, as welt as in 1 Maccab. ix. 6. yet, as there, so here 8OO are said tohave remained with Judas, which would be absurd, if the whole number had beenno mote than 1000.







OCR Output








174 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XII.


ed down into that army, which they left in their camp, and sawthat it was overthrown; and the camp burnt; for the smoke thatarose from it showed them, even when they were a great wayoff, what had happened. When therefore those that were withGorgias understood that things were in this posture, and per­ceived that those that were with Judas were ready to fight them,they also were affrighted, and put to flight; but then Judas, asthough he had already beaten Gorgias' soldiers without fighting,returned and seized on the spoils. He took a great quantity ofgold and silver, and purple, and blue, and then returned homewith joy, and singing hymns to God for their good success; forthis victory greatly contributed to the recovery of their liberty.
5. Hereupon Lysias was confounded at the defeat of the ar­my which he had sent, and the next year he got together sixtythousand chosen men. He also took five thousand horsemen,and fell upon Judea; and he went up to the hill country of Beth-sur, a village of Judea, and pitched his camp there, where Judasmet him with ten thousand men; and when he saw the greatnumber of his enemies, he prayed to God, that he would assisthim, and joined battle with the first of the enemy that appeared,and beat them, and slew about five thousand of them, andthereby became terrible to the rest of them. Nay, indeed, Lysiasobserving the great spirit of the Jews, how they were preparedto die rather than lose their liberty, and being afraid of theirdesperate way of fighting, as if it were real strength, he tookthe rest of the army back with him, and returned to Antioch,where he listed foreigners into the service, and prepared to fallupon Judea with a greater army.
6. When therefore the generals of Antiochus' armies hadbeen beaten so often, Judas assembled the people together, andtold them, That " after these many victories, which God had"given them, they ought to go up to Jerusalem, and purify the"temple, and offer the appointed sacrifices." But as soon as he,with the whole multitude, was come to Jerusalem, and foundthe temple deserted, and its gates burnt down, and plants grow­ing in the temple of their own accord, on account of its deser­tion, he and those that were with him began to lament, andwere quite confounded at the sight of the temple; so he choseout some of his soldiers and gave them order to fight againstthose guards that were in the citadel, until he should have puri­fied the temple. When therefore he had carefully purged it,and had brought in new vessels, the candlestick, the table [ofshew-bread], and the altar [of incense], which were made ofgold, he hung up the vails at the gates, and added doors to them.He also took down the altar [of burnt-offering], and built a newone of stones that he gathered together, and not of such as were







OCR Output








Chap. XI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. $$


to them, bat, as he was wont, he stood and prayed to. God inthe sight of them all: but the princes having met with the oocasion they so earnestly sought to find against Daniel, came pre­sently to the king, and accused him, that Daniel was the onlyperson'that transgressed the decree, while not one of the restdurst pray to their gods. This discovery they made, not be­cause of his impiety, but because they had watched him, and ob­served him out of envy; for supposing that Darius did thus outof a greater kindness to him than they expected, and that he wasready to grant him pardon for this contempt of his injunctions,and envying this very pardon to Daniel, they did not becomemore favourable to him, but desired he might be cast into theden of lions according to the law. .So Darius, hoping that Godwould deliver him, and that he would undergo nothing that wasterrible by the wild beasts, bid him bear this accident 'cheerful­ly: And when he was cast into the den, Jie put his seal to thestone that lay upon the mouth of the den, and went iiis way; buthe passed all the night without food, and without sleep, being ingreat distress for Daniel. But when it was day, he got up, andcame to the den, and found the seal entire, which he had left thestone sealed withal; he also opened the seal, and cried out, andcalled to Daniel, and asked him, If he were alive? And as soonas he heard the king's voice, and said that he had suffered noharm, the king gave order that he should be drawn up out of thoden. Now when his enemies saw that Daniel had suffered no­thing which was terrible, they would not own that he was pre­served by God, and by his providence; but they said, that thelions had been filled full with food, and on that account it was,»s they supposed, that the lions would not touch Daniel, norcome to him; and" this they alleged to the king: But the king,out of an abhorrence of their wickedness, gave order, that theyshould throw in a great deal of flesh to the lions; and when theyhad nlled themselves, he gave farther order that Daniel's ene­mies should be cast into the den, that he might learn whetherthe lions, now they were full, would touch them or not. Andit appeared plain to Darius, after the princes had been cast tothe wild beasts, that it was God who preserved Daniel, * for thelions spared none of them, but tore them all to pieces, as theyhad been very hungry, and wanted food. I suppose therefore


* It is no way improbable that Daniel's enemies might suggest this reason to theking, why the lions did not meddle with him, and that they suspected the king's kind­ness to Daniel had procured these lions to be so filled beforehand, and that thenceH was that be encouraged Daniel to submit to this experiment, in hopes of comingoff safe; and that this was the true reason of makhig so terrible an experiment up­on those his" enemies, and all their t'iuuilies, Dan. Ti. 21.' though our other copiwdo not directly take notice of it.







OCR Output








S86 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVI.


the death of their mother, that while they said both she andthemselves were in a miserable case, they vehemently complain­ed of her pitiable end, which indeed was truly such, and saidthat they were themselves in a pitiable case also, because theywere forced to live with those that had been her murderers,and to be partakers with them.
2. These disorders increased greatly, and the king's absenceabroad had afforded a fit opportunity for that increase; but assoon as Herod was returned, and had made the forementionedspeech to the multitude, Pheroras and Salome let fall words im­mediately, as if he were in great danger, and as if the youngmen openly threatened that they would not spare him any longer,but revenge their mother's death upon him. They also addedanother circumstance, that their hopes were fixed on Arche-laus, the king of Cappadocia, that they should be able by hismeans to come to Caesar, and accuse their father. Upon hearingsuch things, Herod was immediately disturbed; and indeed wasthe more astonished, because the same things were related tohim by some others also. He then called to mind his formercalamity, and considered that the disorders in his family hadhindered him from enjoying any comfort from those that weredearest to him, or from his wife whom he loved so well; andsuspecting that his future troubles would soon be heavier andgreater, than those that were past, he was in great confusion ofmind; for divine providence had in reality conferred upon hima great many outward advantages for his happiness, even be­yond his hopes, but the troubles he had at home were such ashe never expected to have met with, and rendered him unfortu­nate; nay both sorts came upon him to such a degree as no onecould imagine, and made it a doubtful question, whether, uponthe comparison of both, he ought to have exchanged so great asuccess of outward good things, for so great misfortunes at home,or whether he ought not to have chosen to avoid the calamitiesrelating to his family, though he had, for a compensation, neverbeen possessed of the admired grandeur of a kingdom.
3. As he was thus disturbed and afflicted, in order to depressthese young men, he brought to court another of his sons, thatwas born to him when he was a private man: his name wasAntipater ,' yet did he not then indulge him as he did afterwards,when he was quite overcome by him, and let him do every thingas he pleased, but rather with a design of depressing the insolenceof the sons of Mariamne, and managing this elevation of his so,that it might be for a warning to them, for this bold behaviourof theirs (he thought) would not be so great, if they were oncepersuaded, that the succession to the kingdom did not appertainto them alone, or must of necessity come to them. So he intro­







OCR Output








842 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XV


greatly honoured him beyond that river, though he were to beentirely under Herod's government, and that it was a most in­credible thing that he should enterprise any thing by way of in­novation, and not at all agreeable to his temper, but that thiswas 9 plot of Herod's contrivance.
4. And this was the fate of Hyrcanus; and thus did he endhis iife, after he had endured various and manifold turns of for­tune in his lifetime: For he was made high priest of the Jew­ish nation in the beginning of his mother Alexandra's reign,who held the government nine years; and when, after his mo­ther's death, he took the kingdom himself, and held it threemonths, he lost it, by the means of his brother Aristobulus.He was then restored by Pompey, and received all sorts of ho­nour from him, and enjoyed them forty years; but when hewas again deprived by Antigonus, and was maimed in his body,he was made a captive by the Parthians, and thence returnedhome again after some time, on account of the hopes that He­rod had given him; none of which came to pass according tohis expectation, but he still conflicted with many misfortunesthrough the whole course of his life; and what was the heaviestcalamity of all, as we have related already, he came to an endwhich was undeserved by him. His character appeared to bethat of a man of a mild and moderate disposition, and sufferedthe administration of affairs to be generally done by others un­der him. He was averse to much meddling with the public,nor had shrewdness enough to govern a kingdom: And bothAntipater and Herod came to their greatness by reason of hismildness, and at last he met with such an end from them aswas not agreeable either to justice or piety.
5. Now Herod as soon as he had put Hyrcanus out of theway, made haste to Caesar; and because he could not have anyhopes of kindness from him, on account of the friendship he hadfor Antony, he had a suspicion of Alexandra, lest she should takethis opportunity to bring the multitude to a revolt, and intro­duce a sedition into the affairs of the kingdom; so he commit­ted the care of every thing to his brother Pheroras, and placedhis mother Cypros, and his sister [Salome,] and the wholefamily at Massada, and gave him a charge, that if he shouldhear any sad news about him, he should take care of the gov­ernment: But as to Mariamne his wife, because of the mis­understanding between her and his sister, and his sister's mo­ther, which made it impossible for them to live together, heplaced her at Alexandrium, with Alexandra her molher, andleft his treasurer Joseph and Sohemus of Iturea, to take careof that fortress. These two had been very faithful to himfrom the beginning, and were now left as a guard to the wo­







OCR Output








IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 99


twenty-eight, and porters one hundred and ten; and of the sacredministers three hundred and ninetyrtwo; there were also othersbesides these, who said they were of the Israelites, but were notable to show their genealogies, six hundred and sixty-two; somethere were also, who were expelled out of the number and ho­nour of the priests, as having married wives whose genealogiesthey could not produce, nor were they found in the genealogiesof the Levites a-nd priests: they were about five hundred andtwenty-five; the multitude also of servants that followed those thatwent up out of Jerusalem were seven thousand three hundred andthirty-seven; the singing men and singing women were two hun­dred and forty-five; the camels were four hundred and thirty-five ; the beasts used to the yoke were five thousand five hundredand twenty-five; and the governors of all this multitude thus num­bered were Zorobabel, the son of Salathiel, of the posterity of Da­vid, and of the tribe of Judah, and Jeshua, the son of Josedek thehigh priest; and besides these there were Mordecai and Serebe*us, who were distinguished from the multitude, and were rulers^who also contributed a hundred pounds of gold, and five thou­sand of silver. By this means therefore the priests and the Le­vites, and a certain part of the entire people of the Jews thatwere hi Babylon, came and dwelt in Jerusalem, but the rest ofthe multitude returned every one to their own countries.
CHAP. IV.
JJow the temple was built, while the Cutheans endeavoured invain to obitruct the work.
§ 1. .Now in the seventh month, after they were departedput of Babylon, both Jeshua the high priest, and Zorobabelthe governor, sent messengers every way round about: and ga­thered those that were in the country together to Jerusalem uni-versally, who came very gladly thither. He then built the altaron the same place it had formerly been built, that they might of­fer the appointed sacrifices upon it to God, according to the lawsof Moses. But while they did this, they did .not please the neigh­bouring nations, who all of them bare an ill will to them. They


days of Xerxes they were also, as well as these of the two tribes, and out of themonly, and were in all no more than a seed and a remnant, while an immense numberof the ten tribes never returned, but as he believed, continued then beyond Eu­phrates, ch. v. sect. 2,3. Of which multitude, the Jews beyond Euphrates, he speaksfrequently elsewhere; though, by the way, he never takes them to be idolaters, butlooks on them still as observers of the laws of Moses. The certain part of thepeople that now came up from Babylon, at the end of this chapter, imply the sam«smaller number of Jews that now cams up, and will no way agree with the 4,000)00*VOL. II. N 17







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 367


but by rational methods aimed to mitigate things, as not wil­ling to give any handle for tumults.
3. Now when Herod had already reigned seventeen years, Cae­sar came into Syria; at which time the greatest part of the in­habitants of Gadara clamoured against Herod, as one that washeavy in his injunctions, and tyrannical. These reproachesthey mainly ventured upon by the encouragement of Zenodorus,who took his oath that he would never leave Herod till he hadprocured that they should be severed from Herod's kingdom, andjoined to Caesar's province. The Gadarens were induced hereby,and made no small cry against him, and that the more boldly,because those that had been delivered up by Agrippa were notpunished by Herod, who let them go, and did them no harm, forindeed he was the principal man in the world who appeared al­most inexorable in punishing crimes in his own family, but verygenerous in remitting the offences that were committed else­where. And while they accused Herod of injuries, and plun-derings, and subversions of temples, he stood unconcerned, andwas ready to make his defence. However, Caesar gave him hisright-hand, and remitted nothing of his kindness to him, uponthis disturbance by the multitude; and indeed these things werealleged the first day, but the hearing proceeded no farther; foras the Gadarens saw the inclination of Caesar and of his asses­sors, and expected, as they had reason to do, that they should bedelivered up to the king, some of them, out of a dread of thetorments they might undergo, cut their own throats in the nighttime, and some of them threw themselves down precipices, andothers of them cast themselves into the river, and destroyedthemselves of their own accord; which accidents seemed a suffi­cient condemnation of the rashness and crimes they had beenguilty of: whereupon Caesar made no longer delay, but cleared He­rod from the crimes he was accused of. Another happy accidentthere was, which was a farther great advantage to Herod at thistime; for Zenodorus' belly burst, and a great quantity of bloodissued from him in his sickness, and he thereby departed this lifeat Antioch in Syria; so Caesar bestowed his country, which wasno small one, upon Herod; it lay between Trachon and Galilee,and contained Ulatha, and Paneas, and the country round about.He also made him one of the procurators of Syria, and com­manded that they should do every thing with his approbation:and, in short, he arrived at that pitch of felicity, that whereasthere were but two men that governed the vast Roman empire,first Caesar, and then Agrippa, who was his principal favourite;Caesar preferred no one to Herod besides Agrippa, and Agrippamade no one his greater friend than Herod besides Caesar. Andwhen he had acquired such freedom, he begged of Caesar a te-







OCR Output








Chap. II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 51


"of Sennacherib." And this proved to lie the conclusion of
this Assyrian expedition against the people of Jerusalem.
CHAP. II.
Hffw Hezekiah was sick and ready to die / and hem God bestow*ed upon him fifteen years longer life, [and secured that promise}by the going back of the shadow ten degrees,
-j| 1. JN ow king Hezekiah being thus delivered, after a sur­prising manner, from the dread he was in, offered thank-offer­ings to God, with all his people, because nothing else had de­stroyed some of their enemies, and made the rest so fearful 01undergoing the same fate, that they departed from Jerusalem, bythat divine assistance: Yet, while he was very zealous and diligentabout the worship of God, did he soon afterward fall into a severe* distemper, insomuch that the physicians despaired of him, andexpected no good issue of his sickness as neither did his friends;and besides the distemper itself, there was a very melancholycircumstance that disordered the king, which was the considera­tion that he was childless, and was going to die, and leave hishouse and his government without a successor o: his own body;so he was troubled at the thoughts of this his condition, and la­mented himself, and entreated of God that he would prolong hislife for a little while till he had some children, and not suffer himto depart this life before he was become a father. HereuponGod had mercy upon him, and accepted of his supplication, be­cause the trouble he was under at his supposed death was not be­cause he was soon to leave the advantages he enjoyed in the king­dom, nor did he on that account pray that he might have a longerJife afforded him, but in order to have sons, that might receivethe government after him. And God sent Isaiah the prophet, andcommanded him to inform Hezekiah, that " within three days'"time he should get clear of his distemper, and should sur-"vive it fifteen years, and that he should have children also."^Now upon the prophet's saying this, as God had commanded!him; he could hardly believe it, both on account of the distemper


* Josephus, and all our copies place the siclmess of Hezekiah after the destructionof. Sennacherib's army, because it appear* to have been after his first assault, as he-was going into Arabia and Egypt, where he pushed his conquests as far as theywould go ; and in order to despatch his story altogether; yet does no copy but this ofJosephus say it was after that destruction, but only that it happened in those days,or about the time of Hezekiah's life. Nor will the fifteen years prolongation of hislife after his sickness, allow that sickness to hate been later than the former part ofthe 15th year of his reign, since chronology does not allow him in all above 29 yearsand a few months, whereas the first assault of Sennacherib was on the 14th year ofHezekiah, but the destruction of Sennacherib's army was not till the IStb year.VOL. II. G 17







OCR Output








Chap. IX. ANTIgUTTIJiS OF THE JEWS. 361


among foreigners: and it looked as if these calamities that af­flicted his land to a degree plainly incredible, came in order toraise his glory, and to be to his great advantage, for the great­ness of his liberality in these distresses, which he now demonstrat­ed beyond all expectation, did so change the disposition of themultitude towards him, that they were ready to suppose he hadbeen from the beginning not such a one as they had found himto be by experience, but such a one as the care he had taken ofthem in supplying their necessities proved him now to be.
3. About this time it was that he sent five hundred chosenmen out of the guards of his body as auxiliaries to Caesar, whom* jElius Gallus led to the Red Sea, and who were of great serviceto him there. When therefore his affairs were thus improved,and were again in a flourishing condition, he built himself a pa­lace in the upper city, raising the rooms to a very great height,and adorning them with the most costly furniture of gold, andmarble seats and beds, and these were so large, that they couldcontain very many companies of men. These apartments werealso of distinct magnitudes, and had particular names given them,for one apartment was called Caesar's, another Agrippa's. Healso fell in love again, and married another wife, not sufferinghis reason to hinder him from living as he pleased. The occa­sion of thls his marriage was as follows: There was one Simon,a citizen of Jerusalem, the son of one Boethus, a citizen of Alex­andria, and a priest of great note there: this man had a daughter,who was esteemed the most beautiful woman of that time; andwhen the people of Jerusalem began to speak much in her com­mendation, it happened that Herod was much affected withwhat was said of her; and when he saw the damsel, he wassmitten with her beauty, yet did he entirely reject the thoughtsof using his authority to abuse her, as believing, what was thetruth, that by so doing he should be stigmatized for violencemd tyranny, so he thought it best to take the damsel to wife.And while Simon was of a dignity too inferior to be allied tohim, but still too considerable to be despised, he governed hisinclinations after the most prudent manner, by augmenting thedignity of the family, and making them more honourable; so heimmediately deprived Jesus, the son of Phabet, of the high priest­hood, and conferred that dignity on Simon, and so joined in af­finity with him [by marrying his daughter.]
4. When this wedding was over, he built another citadel in


* This TfUius Gallus seems to be no other than that ^Jliu» Largus whom Diospeaks of as conducting an expedition that was about this time ;made into ArabiaFelix, according to Petavius, who is here cited by Spanheim. See a full account ofthis expedition in Prid«aux, at the years 23 and 24.







OCR Output








Chap. V. ANTIQUITIES OK THE JEWS. i.'09


against Jonathan, to a concern for his own preservation : for henow returned out of Arabia into Syria, with the child Antio­chus, for he was in age but a youth, and put the diadem onhis head: And as the whole forces that had left Demetrius, be­cause they had no pay, came to his assistance, he made war uponDemetrius, and joining battle with him, overcame him in thefight, and took from him both his elephants and the city Antioch.
4. Demetrius, upon this defeat, retired into Cilicia: but thechild Antiochus sent ambassadors, and an epistle to Jonathan,and made him his friend and confederate, and confirmed to himthe high priesthood, and yielded up to him the four prefectureswhich had been added to Judea. Moreover he sent him vesselsand cups of gold, and a purple garment; and gave him leave touse them. He also presented him with a golden button, andstyled him one of his principal friends, and appointed his bro­ther Simon to be the general over the forces, from the ladder ofTyre unto Egypt. So Jonathan was so well pleased with thesegrants made him by Antiochus, that he sent ambassadors tohim, and to Trypho, and professed himself to be their friendand confederate, and said he would join with him in a waragainst Demetrius, informing him that he had made no properreturns for the kindnesses he had done him; for that when hehad received many marks of kindness from him, when he stoodin great need of them, he for such good turns, had requitedhim -with further injuries.
5. So Antiochus gave Jonathan leave to raise himself a nu­merous army out of Syria and Phenicia, and to make war againstDemetrius' generals; whereupon he went in haste to the seve­ral cities, which received him splendidly indeed, but put noforces into his hands. And when he was come from thence toAskelon, the inhabitants of Askelon came and brought him pre­sents, and met him in a splendid manner. He exhorted them,and every one of the cities of Celesyria, to forsake Demetrius,and to join with Antiochus; and in assisting him, to endeavourto punish Demetrius for what offences he had been guilty ofagainst themselves; and told them there were many reasons forthat their procedure, if they had a mind so to do. And when hehad persuaded those cities to promise their assistance to Antio­chus, he came to Gaza, in order to induce them also to be friendsto Antiochus; but he found the inhabitants of Gaza much morealienated from him than he expected, for they had shut theirgates against him, and although they had deserted Demetrius,they had not resolved to join themselves to Antiochus. Thisprovoked Jonathan to besiege them, and to harass their country,for as he set a part of his army round about Gaza, itself, so withthe rest he overran their land, and spoiled it, and burnt what







OCR Output








330 ANTIQUIT1KS OF THE JEWS. Book XV.


CHAP. IV.
How Cleopatra, 'when she had gotten Jrom Antony some partsof Judea and Arabia, came into Judea ,' and how Herod gaveher many presents, and conducted her on her isoay lack toEgypt.
§ 1. .N ow at this time the affairs of Syria were in confusionby Cleopatra's constant persuasions to Antony to make an at­tempt upon every body's dominions; for she persuaded himto take those dominions away from their several princes,and bestow them upon her; and she had a mighty influenceupon him, by reason of his being enslaved to her by his af­fections. She was also by nature very covetous, and stuck atno wickedness. She had already poisoned her brother, becauseshe knew that he was to be king of Egypt, and this when he wasbut fifteen years old: and she got her sister Arsinoe to be slain,by the means of Antony, when she was a supplicant at Diana'stemple at Ephesus; for if there were but any hopes of gettingmoney, she would violate both temples and sepulchres. Norwas there any holy place, that was esteemed the most inviol­able, from which she would not fetch the ornaments it had in it;nor any place so profane, but was to suffer the most flagitioustreatment possible from her, if it could but contribute somewhatto the covetous humour of this wicked creature: yet did not allthis suffice so extravagant a woman, who was a slave to herlusts, but she still imagined that she wanted every thing shecould think of, and did her utmost to gain it; for which rea­son she hurried Antony on perpetually to deprive others oftheir dominions, and give them to her. And as she wentover Syria with him, she contrived to get it into her possession,so he slew Lysanius, the son of Ptolemy, accusing him of hisbringing the Parthians upon those countries. She also petition­ed Antony to give her Judea and Arabia, and in order thereto,desired him to take these countries away from their present go­vernors. As for Antony, he was so entirely overcome by thiswoman, that one would not think her conversation only coulddo it, but that he was some way or other bewitched to do what­soever she would have him; yet did the grossest parts of her in­justice make him so ashamed, that he would not always heark­en to her, to do those flagrant enormities she would have per­suaded him to. That therefore he might not totally deny her, nor,by doing every thing which she enjoined him, appear openly tobe an ill man, he took some parts of each of those countriesaway from their former governors, and gave them to her. Thus







OCR Output








876 ANTIQUITIES OF THE 4EWS. Book XV.


tion for the work about the temple, fell also the day of theking's inauguration, which he kept of an old custom as a festi­val, and it now coincided with the other, which coincidence otthem both, made the festival most illustrious.
7. There was also an occult passage built for the king: it ledfrom Antonia to the inner temple, at its eastern gate; over whichhe also erected for himself a tower, that he might have the op­portunity of a subterraneous ascent to the temple, in order toguard against any sedition which might be made by the peopleagainst their kings. It is also * reported, that during the timethat the temple was building, it did not rain in the daytime,but that the showers fell in the night, so that the work was nothindered. And this our fathers have delivered to us; nor is itincredible, if any one have regard to the manifestations of God.And thus was performed the work of the rebuilding of the temple.


* This tradition which Josephus here mentions, as delivered down from fathersto their chitdren, of this particular, remarkable circumstance relating to the build­ing of Herod's temple, is a demonstration that such its building wns a knownthing in Judea at that time. He was born but 46 years after it is related to havebeen finished, and might himself have seen and spoken wiih some of the buildersthemselves, and with a great number of those that had seen it building. Thedoubt therefore about the (ruth of this history, of the pulling down and rebuildingthis temple by Horod, which some weak people have indulged, was not then muchgreater than it soon may be, whether or not our St. Paul's Church in London wasburnt down in the fire of London, A. D. 1666. and rebuilt by Sir ChristopherWren a little afterward.







OCR Output








158 ANTIQUITIES OK THE JEWS. Book XII.


He once came to Alexandria with his brother, who had alongwith him a daughter already marriageable, in order to give herin wedlock to some of the Jews of chief dignity there. He thensupped with the king, and falling in love with an actress, thatwas of great beauty, and came into the room where they feasted,he told his brother of it, and entreated him, because a Jew isforbidden by their law to come near to a foreigner, to concealhis offence, and to be kind and subservient to him, and to givehim an opportunity of fulfilling his desires. Upon which hisbrother willingly entertained the proposal of serving him, andadorned his own daughter, and brought her to him by night, andput her into his bed. And Joseph, being disordered with drink,knew not who she was, and so lay with his brother's daughter;and this did he many times and loved her exceedingly, and saidto his brother, that he loved this actress so well, that he shouldrun the hazard of his life [if he must part with her,] and yetprobably the king would not give him leave [to take her withhim]. But his brother bid him be in no concern about thatmatter, and told him, he might enjoy her whom he loved with­out any danger, and might have her for his wife; and opened thetruth of the matter to him, and assured him that he chose rather tohave his own daughter abused, than to overlook him, and see himcome to [public] disgrace. So Joseph commended him for thishis brotherly love; and married his daughter; and by her begata son, whose name was Hyrcanus, as we said before. And whenthis his youngest son showed, at thirteen years old, a mind thatwas both courageous and wise, and was greatly envied by hisbrethren, as being of a genius much above them, and such an oneas they might well envy, Joseph had once a min'd to know whichof his sons had the best disposition to virtue, and when he sentthem severally to those that had then the best reputation for in­structing youth, the rest of his children, by reason of their sloth,and unwillingness to take pains, returned to him foolish and un­learned. After them he sent out the youngest, Hyrcanus, andgave him three hundred yoke of oxen, and bid him go two daysjourney into the wilderness, and sow the land there and yet keptback privately the yokes of the oxen that coupled them together.When Hyrcanus came to the place, and found he had no yokeswith him, he contemned the drivers of the oxen, who advisedhim to send home to his father, to bring them some yokes; buthe thinking that he ought not to lose his time, while they shouldbe sent to bring him the yokes, he invented a kind of stratagem,and what suited an age older than his own; for he slew ten yokeof the oxen, and distributed their flesh among the labourers, andcut their hides into several pieces, and made him yokes, andyoked the oxen together with them; by which means he sowed







OCR Output








154 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XII.


"and a portion of land for their husbandry, and for the planta-"tion of their vines; and thou shalt discharge them from pay-"ing taxes of the fruits of the earth for ten years: and let them"have a proper quantity of wheat for the maintenance of their"servants, until they receive bread corn out of the earth: also"let a sufficient share be given to such as minister to them in"the necessaries of life, that by enjoying the effects of our hu-"manity, they may show themselves the more willing and"ready about our affairs. Take care likewise of that nation,"as far as thou art able, that they may not have any disturb-"ance given them by any one." Now these testimonials whichI have produced, are sufficient to declare the friendship thatAntiochus the Great bare to the Jews.
CHAP. IV.
How Antiochus made a league "with Ptolemy; and how Onias pro­voked Ptolemy Euergetes to anger; and how Joseph brought allthings right again, and entered into friendship -with him,- andwhat other things were done by Joseph and his son Hyrcanus.
§ 1. AFTER this Antiochus made a friendship and a leaguewith Ptolemy; and gave him his daughter Cleopatra to wife,and yielded up to him Celcesyria, and Samaria, and Judea,and Phenicia, by way of dowry. And upon the division ofthe taxes between the two kings, all the principal men farmedthe taxes of their several countries, and collecting the sum thatwas settled for them, paid the same to the [two] kings. Nowat this time the Samaritans were in a flourishing condition, andmuch distressed the Jews, cutting off parts of their land, andcarrying off slaves. This happened when Onias was highpriest; for after Eleazar's death, his uncle Manasseh took thepriesthood, and after he had ended his life, Onias received thatdignity. He was the son of Simon, who was called the Just,which Simon was the brother of Eleazar, as I said before. This'Onias was one of a little soul, and a great lover of money; andfor that reason, because he did not pay the tax of twenty ta­lents of silver, which his forefathers paid to these kings, outof their own estates, he provoked king Ptolemy Euergetes toanger, who was the father of Philopater. Euergetes sent an am­bassador to Jerusalem, and complained that Onias did not payhis taxes, and threatened, that if he did not receive them, hewould seize upon their land, and send soldiers to live upon it.When the Jews heard this message of the king's, they were con­founded: But so sordidly covetous was Onias, that nothing ofthis nature made him ashamed.







OCR Output








Chap. III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 197


"places thereto belonging, or who owe the king money, or are"there on any other account let them be set free, and let their"goods be in safety. I also give you leave to repair and re-"build your temple, and that all be done at my expense. I"also allow you to build the walls of your city, and to erect"high towers, and that they be erected at my charge. And if"there be any fortified town that would be convenient for the"Jewish country to have very strong, let it be so built at my"expenses."
4. This was what Demetrius promised, and granted to theJews, by this letter. But king Alexander raised a great armyof mercenary soldiers, and of those that deserted to him out ofSyria, and made an expedition against Demetrius. And whenit was come to a battle, the left wing of Demetrius put thosewho opposed them to flight, and pursued them a great way, andslew many of them, and spoiled their camp, but the right wing,where Demetrius happened to be, was beaten; and as for allthe rest, they ran away: but Demetrius fought courageously,and slew a great many of the enemy; but as he was in the pur­suit of the rest, his horse carried him into a deep bog, where itwas hard to get out, and there it happened, that upon his horse'sfalling down, he could not escape being killed; for > when hisenemies saw what had befallen him, they returned back, and en­compassed Demetrius round, and they all threw their darts athim; but he being now on foot, fought bravely, but at lengthhe received so many wounds, that he was not able to bear upany longer, but fell. And this is the end that Demetrius cameto when he had reigned * eleven years, as we have elsewhererelated.
CHAP. III.
The friendship that was between Onias and Ptolemy Philometer;and how Onias built a temple in Egypt like to that at Jerusa­lem.
§ 1. -DUT then the son of Onias the high priest, who was ofthe same name with his father, and who fled to king Ptolemy,who was called Philometer, lived now at Alexandria, as wehave said already. When this Onias saw that Judea was op­pressed by the Macedonians, and their kings, out of a desireto purchase to himself a memorial and eternal fame, he resolvedto send to king Ptolemy and queen Cleopatra, to ask leave of


* Since the rest of the historians now extant give this Demetrius 13 years, andJosephus only 11 years, Dean Frideaux does not amiss in ascribing to him themean number 12.







OCR Output








Chap. IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 413


the captain of the Arabians, and about twenty of his soldiers,fell, while the rest betook themselves to flight. So when he hadbrought these to punishment, he placed three thousand Idu-means in Trachonitis, and thereby restrained the robbers thatwere there. He also sent an account to the captains that wereabout Phenicia, and demonstrated, that he had done nothing butwhat he ought to do, in punishing the refractory Arabians,which, upon an exact inquiry, they found to be no more thanwhat was true.
3. However, messengers were hasted away to Sylleus to Rome,-and informed him of what had been done, and, as is usual, aggra­vated every thing. Now Sylleus had already insinuated himselfinto the knowledge of Caesar, and was then about the palace:and as soon as he heard of these things, he changed his habitinto black, and went in, and told Caesar, That " Arabia was af-"flicted with war, and that all his kingdom was in great con-"fusion, upon Herod's laying it waste with his army; and he"said, with tears in his eyes, that two thousand five hundred of"the principal men among the Arabians had been destroyed,"and that their captain Nacebus, his familiar friend and kins-"man, was slain; and that the riches that were at Raepta were"carried off; and {hat Obodas was despised, whose infirm state"of body rendered him unfit for war; on which account neither"he, nor the Arabian army, were present." When Sylleussaid so, and added invidiously, That " he would not himself have"come out of the country, unless he had believed that Caesar"would have provided that they should all have peace one with"another, and that, had he been there, he would have taken care"that the war should not have been to Herod's advantage."Caesar was provoked when this was said; and asked no morethan this one question, both of Herod's friends that were there,and of his own friends, who were come from Syria, " Whe-"ther Herod had led an army thither?" And when they wereforced to confess so much, Cajsar, without stay ing to hear forwhat reason he did it, and how it was done, grew very angry,and wrote to Herod sharply. The sum of his epistle was this,That" whereas of old he had used him as his friend he should"now use him as his subject." Sylleus also wrote an accountof this to the Arabians; who were so elevated with it, that theyneither delivered up the robbers that had fled to them, nor paidthe money that was due: they retained those pastures alsowhich they had hired, and kept them without paying their rent,and all this because the king of the Jews was now in a low con­dition, by reason of Caasar's anger at him. Those of Tracho­nitis also made use of this opportunity, and rose up against theIdumean garrison, and followed the same way of robbing with







OCR Output








ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book. XIV.


"pointed to govern." And when Antipater had said this tothem, he himself settled the affairs of this country.
2. And seeing that Hyrcanus was of a slow and slothful tem­per, he made Phasaelus, his eldest son, governor of Jerusalem,and of the places that were about it, but committed Galilee toHerod, his next son, who was then a very young man, for hewas but * fifteen years of age: But that youth of his was noimpediment to him; but as he was a youth of great mind, hepresently met with an opportunity of signalizing his courage;for finding that there was one Hezekias, a captain of a band ofrobbers, who overran the neighbouring parts of Syria, with agreat troop of them, he seized him, and slew him, as well as agreat number of the other robbers that were with him; forwhich action he was greatly beloved by the Syrians; for whenthey were very desirous to have their country freed from thisnest of robbers, he purged it of them: So they sung songs inhis commendation, in their villages and cities, as having pro­cured them peace, and the secure enjoyment of their possessions,and on this account it was that he became known to Sextus Cae-sar, who was a relation of the great Caesar's, and was now pre­sident of Syria. Now Phasaelus, Herod's brother, was movedwith emulation at his actions, and envied the fame he had there­by gotten, and became ambilious not to be behind hand with himin deserving it: So he made the inhabitants of Jerusalem bearhim the greatest good-will, while he held the city himself, butdid neither manage its affairs improperly, nor abuse his autho­rity therein. This conduct procured from the nation to Anti-pater such respect as is due to kings, and such honours as hemight partake of if he were an absolute lord of the country.Yet did not this splendour of his, as frequently happens, in theleast diminish in him that kindness and fidelity which he owedto Hyrcanus.
3. But now the principal men among the Jews, when theysaw Antipater and his sons to grow so much in the good-willthe nation bare to them, and in the revenues which they receivedout of Judea, and out of Hyrcanus' own wealth, they becameill disposed to him: for indeed Antipater had contracted a friend­ship with the Roman emperors: and when he had prevailedwith Hyrcanus to send them money, he took it to himself, and


* Those who will carefully observe the several occasional numbers and chronolo­gical characters in the life and death of this Herod, and of his childien, hereafternoted, will ste, that twenty-Jive years, and not fifteen, must for certain have beenhere Josepbus own number for the age of Herod, when he was made governor ofGalilee. See chap, xxiii. sect. 5. and chap. xxiv. sect. 7. and particularly Antiq. B.XVII. chap. viii. sect. 1. vol. III. »her« about 44 years afterwards Herod dies anold man at about 70.







OCR Output








424 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVI.


"also." Whereupon Herod was silent, and in greiit thought-fitlness, and bid Nicolaus sail along with him.
4. Now as they came to Caesarea, every body was there talk­ing of Herod's sons, and the kingdom was in suspense, and thepeople in great expectation of what would become of them, fora terrible tear seized upon all men, lest the ancient disorders ofthe family should come to a sad conclusion, and they were ingreat trouble about their sufferings: nor was it without dangerto say any rash thing about this matter, nor even to hear anothersaying it; but men's pity was forced to be shut up in themselves,»vhich rendered the excess of their sorrow very irksome, but verysilent; yet was there an old soldier of Herod's, whose namewas Tero, who had a son of the same age with Alexander, andhis friend, who was so very free, as openly to speak out whatothers silently thought about that matter: and was forced to cryout often among the multitude, and said, in the most unguardedmanner, "That truth was perished, and justice taken away from"men, while lies and ill-will prevailed, and brought such a mist"before public affairs, that the offenders were not able to see"the greatest mischief that can befall men." And as he wasso bold, he seemed not to have kept himself out of danger, byspeaking so freely; but the reasonableness of what he said,moved men to regard him, as having behaved himself with greatmanhood, and this at a proper time also, for which reasonevery one heard what he said with pleasure; and although theyfirst took care of their own safety, by keeping silent themselves,yet did they kindly receive the great freedom he took; for theexpectation they were in of so great an affliction, put a forceupon them to speak of Tero whatsoever they pleased.
5. This man had thrust himself into the king's presence withthe greatest freedom, and desired to speak with him by himselfalone, which the king permitted him to do, where he said this:"Since I am not able, O king, to bear up under so great a con-"cern as I am under, I have preferred the use of this bold li-
'berty that I now take, which may be for thy advantage, if'thou mind to get any profit by it, before my own safety.'Whither is thy understanding gone, and left thy soul empty?'Whither is that extraordinary sagacity of thine gone, where-* by thou hast performed so many and such glorious actions f"Whence comes this solitude, and desertion of thy friends and"relations? Of which I cannot but determine, that they are"neither thy friends nor relatic-ns, while they overlook so hor-"rid wickedness in thy once happy kingdom. Dost not thou"perceive what is doing? Wilt thou slay these two young men,"born of thy queen, who are accomplished with every virtue"in the highest degree, aiH leave thyself destitute in thy old







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 259


Pompey gave him leave to do; and this he did two or threetimes, as flattering himself with the hopes of having the king­dom granted him; so that he still pretended he would obey Pom­pey in whatsoever he commanded, although at the same time heretired to his fortress, that he might not depress himself too Ipw,and that he might be prepared for a war, in case it should proveas he feared, that Pompey should transfer the government to Hyr-canus. But when Pompey enjoined Aristobulus to deliver upthe fortresses he held, and to send an injunction to their govern­ors under his own hand, for that purpose, for they had beenforbidden to deliver them up upon any other commands, he sub­mitted indeed to do so, but still he retired in displeasure to Je­rusalem, and made preparation for war. A little after this,certain persons came out of Pontus, and informed Pompey, ashe was on the way, and conducting his army against Aristobu­lus, that Mithridates was dead, and was slain by his son Phar-naces.
CHAP. IV.
Hffso Pompey, when the citizens of Jerusalem shift the gatesagainst him, besieged the city, and took it by force,- as alsoisihat other things he did in Judea.


..go


§ 1. jNow when Pompey had pitched his camp at Jericho,(where the * palm-tree grows, and that balsam which is an oint­ment of all the most precious, which upon any incision madein the wood with a sharp stone, distils out thence like a juice,)he marched in the morning to Jerusalem. Hereupon Aristo­bulus repented of what he was doing, and came to Pompey,and [promised to] give him money, and received him into Je­rusalem, and desired that he would leave off the war, and dowhat he pleased peaceably. So Pompey, upon his entreaty, for­gave him: and sent Gabinius, and soldiers with him, to receivethe money and the city: Yet was no part of this performed, but


* These expres* testimonies of Josephus' here, and Antiq. B. VIII. chap. vi. sect.6. vol. I. and B. XV. chap. iv. sect. 2. vol. II. that the only balsam gardens, andthe best palm-trees, were, at least in his days, near Jericho and Engaddi, about thenorth part of the dead sea (whereabout also Alexander the Great saw the balsam drop,)show the mistake of those that understand Eusebius and Jerom, as if one of thosegardens were at the sou'h part of that sea, at Zoar or Segor, whereas they must eithermean another Zoar or Segor, which was between Jericho and Engaddi, agreeably to<Josephus, which yet they do not appear to do, or else they directly contradict Jose*phus, and were therein greatly mistaken; unless that balsam and the best palm-trees,grew much more southward in Judea in the days of Eusebius and Jerom than theydid in the days of Josephus
VOL. II. K. K. 23







OCR Output








304 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


withal, and the kindness he had always showed him, as also togratify Antony, who was very zealous for Herod. So a senatewas convocated; and Massala, first, and then Atratinus, introduc­ed Herod into it, and enlarged upon the benefits they had receiv­ed from his father, and put them in mind of the good-will hehad borne to the Romans. At the same time they accused An-tigonus, and declared him an enemy, not only because of his for­mer opposition to them, but that he had now overlooked the Ro­mans, and taken the government from the Parthians. Upon thisthe senate was irritated; and Antony informed them farther,that it was for their advantage in the Parthian war that Herodshould be king. This seemed good to all the senators; and sothey made a decree accordingly.
5. And this was the principal instance of Antony's affectionfor Herod, that he not only procured him a kingdom which hedid not expect, for he did not come with an intention to ask thekingdom (for himself, which he did not suppose the Romanswould grant him, who used to bestow it on some of the royal fa­mily, but intended to desire it for his wife's brother, who wasgrandson by his father to Aristobulus, and to Hyrcanus by hismother,) but that he procured it for him so suddenly that he ob­tained what he did not expect, and departed out of Italy in sofew days as seven in all. This young man [the grandson] He­rod afterward took care to have slain, as we shall show in its pro­per place. But when the senate was dissolved Antony and Cae­sar went out of the senate-house, with Herod between them, andwith the consuls and other magistrates before them, in order tooffer sacrifices, and to lay up their decrees in the capitol. An­tony also feasted Herod the first day of his reign. And thus didthis man receive the kingdom, having obtained it on the hundredand eighty-fourth Olympiad, when Caius Domitius Calvinus wasconsul the second time, and Caius Asinius Pollio [the first time.]
6. All this while Antigonus besieged those that were in Mas-sada, who had plenty of all other necessaries, but were only inwant * of water, insomuch that on this occasion Joseph, Herod'sbrother, was contriving to run away from it, with two hundredof his dependents, to the Arabians; for he had heard that Mal-chus repented of the offences he had been guilty of with regardto Herod: but God, by sending rain in the night time prevent­ed his going away, for their cisterns were thereby filled, and hewas under no necessity of running away on that account; but theywere now of good courage, and the more so, because the sendingthat plenty of water which they had been in want of, seemed a


* This grievous want of water at Massada, till the place had like to have beeataken by the Parthians, mentioned both here, and of the War, B. I chap. xv. sect. 1.vol. III. is an indication that it was now summer time.







OCR Output








Chap. XI . ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 189


them in array for the battle. He set the horsemen on both thewings, and the light soldiers and the archers he placed before thewhole army, but he was himself on the right wing. And whenhe had> thus put his army in order of battle, and was going tojoin battle with the enemy, he commanded the trumpeter to givea signal of battle, and the army to make a shout and to fall onthe enemy. And when Judas had done the same, he joinedbattle with them; and as both sides fought valiantly, and thebattle continued till sunset, Judas saw that Bacchides, and thestrongest part of the army was in the right wing, and thereupontook the most courageous men with him, and ran upon that partof the army, and fell upon those that were there, and broke theirranks, and drove them into the middle, and forced them to runaway, and pursued them as far as a mountain called Aza; butwhen those of the left wing saw that the right wing was put toflight, they encompassed Judas; and pursued him, and came be­hind him, and took him into the middle of their army; so beingnot able to fly, but encompassed round about with enemies, hestood still, and he and those that were with him fought, andwhen he had slain a great many of those that came againsthim, he at last was himself wounded, and fell, and gave up theghost, and died in a way like to his former famous actions.When Judas was dead, those that were with him had no onewhom they could regard [as their commander,] but when theysaw themselves deprived of such a general, they fled. But Si­mon and Jonathan, Judas' brethren, received his dead body bya treaty from the enemy, and carried it to the village of Modin,where their father had been buried, and there buried him; whilethe multitude lamented him many days, and performed the usualsolemn rites of a funeral to him. And this was the end thatJudas came to. He had been a man of valour and a great war­rior, and mindful of the commands of his father Mattathias;and had undergone all difficulties, both in doing and suffering,for the liberty of his countrymen. And when his characteiwas so excellent [while he was alive,] he left behind him a glo­rious reputation and memorial, by gaining freedom for his na­tion, and delivering them from slavery under the Macedonians.And when he had retained the high priesthood three years, hedied.







OCR Output








82 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book X.


war; and when he was besieged in Babylon, there happened awonderful and prodigious vision. He was sat down at supper hia large room, and there were a great many vessels of silver, suchas were made for royal entertainments, and he had with him hisconcubines, and his friends; whereupon he came to a resolution,and commanded that those vessels of God which Nebuchadnezzarhad plundered out of Jerusalem, and had not made use of, buthad put them into his own- temple, should be brought out of thattemple. He also grew so haughty as to proceed to use them inthe midst pf his cups drinking out of them, and blasphemingagainst God. In the mean time he saw a hand proceed out otthe wall, and writing upon the wall certain syllables; at whichsight being disturbed, he called the magicians and Chaldeans to­gether, and all that sort of men that are among these Barbarians^and were able to interpret sighs and dreams, that they might ex­plain the writing to him. But when the magicians said theycould discover nothing, nor did understand it, the king was iagreat disorder of mind, and under great trouble at this surprisingaccident, so he caused it to be proclaimed through all the coun­try, and promised, that to him who could explain the writing,and give the signification couched therein, he would give him agolden chain for his neck, and leave to wear a purple garment, asdid the kings of Chaldea, and would bestow on him the third partof his own dominions. When this proclamation was made$ themagicians ran together more earnestly, and were very ambitiousto find out the importance of the writing, but still hesitated aboutit as much as before. Now when the king's * grandmother sawhim cast down at this accident, she began to encourage him, andto say, that " there was a certain captive who came from Judea,"a Jew by birth, but brought away thence by Nebuchadnezzar,"when he had destroyed Jerusalem, whose name was Daniel, a"wise man, and one of great sagacity in finding out what was"impossible for others to discover, and what was known"to God alone; who brought to light and answered such"questions to Nebuchadnezzar, as no one else was able to an-"swer, when they were consulted. She therefore desired thai"he would send for him, and inquire of him concerning th<"writing, and to condemn the unskilful ness of those that could"not find their meaning, and this, although what God signified"thereby should be of a melancholy nature."


* This grandmother or mother of Baltasar, the queen Dowager of Babylon, (forshe is distinguished from his queen, Dan. v. 1O. 23.) seems to have been the famous>Jitceris, who fortified Babylon against the Medes and Persians, and in all probabi­lity governed under BalUsar, who seems to have been a weak and effeminate prince.







OCR Output








228 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. BookXill.


would not receive him. He went thence to Tyre, and was therecaught; and when he had suffered much from his enemies beforehis death, he was slain by them. So Alexander took the king­dom, and made a league with Hyrcanus, who yet, when he af­terward fought with Antiochus the son of Demetrius, who wascalled Grypus, was also beaten in the fight, and slain.
CHAP.'X.
How, upon the quarrel between Antiochus Grypus, and AntiochusCyzicenus, about the kingdom, Hyrcanus took Samaria, andutterly demolished it, - and how Hyrcanus joined himself to thesect of the Sadducees, and left that of the Pharisees.
§ 1. \VHEN Antiochus had taken the kingdom, he was a-fraid to make war against Judea, because he heard that his bro­ther, by the same mother, who was also called Antiochus, wasraising an army against him out cf Cyzicum, so he staid in hisown land, and resolved to prepare himself for the attack he ex­pected from his brother, who was called Cyzicenus, because hehad been brought up in that city. He was the son of Antiochusthat was called Soter, who died in Parthia. He was the bro­ther of Demetrius, the father of Grypus, for it had so happened,that one and the same Cleopatra was married to two, who werebrethren, as we have related elsewhere. But Antiochus Cyzi­cenus coming into Syria, continued many years at war with hisbrother. Now Hyrcanus lived all this while in peace; for afterthe death of Antiochus, he * revolted from the Macedonians,nor did he any longer pay them the least regard, either as theirsubject or their friend, but his affairs were in a very improvingand flourishing condition in the times of Alexander Zebina, andespecially under these brethren, for the war which they hadwith one another gave Hyrcanus the opportunity of enjoyinghimself in Judea quietly, insomuch that he got an immensequantity of money. However, when Antiochus Cyzicenus dis­tressed his land, he then openly showed what he meant. Andwhen he saw that Antiochus was destitute of Egyptian auxiliaries,and that both he and his brother were in an ill condition in thestruggles they had with one another, he despised them both.
2. So he made an expedition against Samaria, which was avery strong city; of whose present name Sebaste, and its re­building by Herod, we shall speak at a proper time: but he made


* Dean Prideaux lakes notice at the year 130, that Justin, in agreement withJosephus, says, "The power of the Jews was now grown so great, that after this"Antiochus, they woutd not bear any Macedonian king over them, and that they"Se't up a government of their own, and infested Syria with groat wars."







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 275


purloined the present intended, and sent it as if it were hisown, and not Hyrcanus' gift to them. Hyrcanus heard of thishis management, but took no care about it: nay, he rather wasvery glad of it: But the chief men of the Jews were thereforein fear, because they saw that Herod was a violent and boldman, and very desirous of acting tyrannically; so they came toHyrcanus, and now accused Antipater openly, and said to him,"How long wilt thou be quiet under such actions as are now"done? Or doest thou not see that Antipater and his sons have"already seized upon the government? And that it is only the"name of a king which is given thee? But do not thou suffer"these things to be hidden from thee; nor do thou think to"escape danger, by being so careless of thyself and of thy king-"dom, for Antipater and his sons are not now stewards of"thine affairs: do not thou deceive thyself with such a notion,"they are evidently absolute lords, for Herod, Antipater's"son, hath slain Hezekiah and those that were with him, and"hath thereby transgressed our law, which hath forbidden to"slay any man, even though he were a wicked man, unless he"had been first * condemned to suffer death by the sanhedrim;"yet hath he been so insolent as to do this, and that without"any authority from thee."
4. Upon Hyrcanus' hearing this, he complied with them.The mothers also of those that had been slain by Herod raisedthis indignation; for those women continued every day in thetemple, persuading the king and the people, that Herod mightundergo a trial before the sanhedrim for what he had done.Hyrcanus was so moved by these complaints, that he summonedHerod to come to his trial, for what was charged upon him.Accordingly he came: but his father had persuaded him to comenot like a private man, but with a guard, for the security of hisperson ; and that when he had settled the affairs of Galilee in thebest manner he could for his own advantage, he should come tohis trial, but still with a body of men sufficient for his securityon his journey, yet so that he should not come with so great aforce as might look like terrifying Hyrcanus, but still such a oneas might not expose him naked and unguarded [to his enemies.]However, Sextus Caesar, president of Syria, wrote to Hyrcanus,and desired him to clear Herod, and dismiss him at his trial, and


* It is here worth our while to remark, that none could he put to death inJudea, but by the approbation of the Jewish sanhedrim, there being an excellentprovision in the law of Moses, that even in criminal causes, and particularly wherelife was concerned, an appeal should he from the lesser councils of seven in theother cities, to the supreme council of seveniy-one at Jerusalem. And this is exactlyaccording to our Saviour's words, when he says, " It could not be that a prophetshould perish out of Jerusalem." Luke xiii. 33.
VOL. II- M M 23







OCR Output








Chap. XI. ASTIO_UITIES or iht JEWS.


"age, but exposed to one son, who hath very ill managed the"hopes thou hast given him, and to relations, whose ci jath thou"hast so often resolved on thyself? Dost not thou take notice,"that the very silence of the multitude at once sees the crime"and abhors the fact? The whole army and the officers have"commiseration on the poor unhappy youths, and hatred to"those that are the actors in this matter." These words theking heard, and for some lime with good temper. But whatcim one say? When Tero plainly touched upon the bad beha­viour and perfidiousness of his domestics, he was moved at it:but Tero went on farther, and by degrees used an unboundedmilitary freedom of speech, nor was he so well disciplined as toaccommodate himself to the time: So Herod was greatly dis­turbed, and seeming to be rather reproached by this speech,than to be hearing what was for his advantage, while he learnedhereby, that both the soldiers abhorred the thing he was about,and the officers had indignation at it, he gave orders that allwhom Tero had named, and Tero himself, should be boundand kept in prison.
6. When this was over, one Trypho, who was the king'sbarber, took the opportunity, and came and told the king, thatTero would often have persuaded him, that when he trimmed himwith a razor, to cut his throat, for that by this means he shouldbe among the chief of Alexander's friends, and receive great re­wards from him. When he had said this, the king gave orderthat Tero and his son, and the barber, should be tortured, whichwas done accordingly; but while Tero bore up himself, hisson seeing his father already in a sad case, and had no hopeof deliverance, and perceiving what would be the consequenceof his terrible sufferings, said, that "if the king would free him"and his father from these torments, for what he should say,"he would tell the truth." And when the king had given hisword to do so, he said that "there was an agreement made, that"Tero should lay violent hands on the king, because it was"easy for him to come when he was alone; and that if, when"he had done the thing, he should suffer death for it, as was"not unlikely, it would be an act of generosity done in favour"of Alexander." This was what Tero's son said, and therebyfreed his father from the distress he was in; but uncertain itis whether he had been thus forced to speak what was tiv.c,or whether it were a contrivance of his in order to procure hisown and his father's deliverance from their miseries.
7. As for Herod, if he had before any doubt about the slaugh­ter of his sons, there was now no longer any room left in his soulfor it; but he had banished away whatsoever might afford himthe least suggestion of reasoning better about this matter, so be







OCR Output








Chap. XIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 299


6. But as soon as he was gone away, some men came andbound Hyrcanus and Phasaelus, while Phasaelus greatly re­proached the Parthians for their perjury. However, that but­ler who was sent against Herod had it in command to get himwithout the walls of the city, and seize upon him; but messen­gers had been sent by Phasaelus to inform Herod of the per,fuliousness of the Parthians: Arid when he knew that the enemyhad seized upon them, he went to Pocorus, and to the most po­tent of the Parthians, as to the lords of the rest, who, althoughthey knew the whole matter, dissembled with him in a deceit­ful way; and said, "That he ought to go out with them before"the walls, and meet those who were bringing him his letters,"for that they were not taken by his adversaries, but were"coming to give him an account of the good success Phasaelus"had had." Herod did not give credit to what they said; for hehad heard that his brother was seized upon by others also: and thedaughter of Hyrcanus, whose daughter he had espoused, was hismonitor also [not to credit them,] which made him still moresuspicious of the Parthians, for although other people did notgive heed to her, yet did he believe her as a woman of verygreat wisdom.
7. Now while the Parthians were in consultation what wasfit to be done; for they did not think it proper to make an openattempt upon a person of his character; and while they put offthe determination to the next day, Herod was under great dis­turbance of mind; and rather inclining to believe the reports heheard about his brother and the Parthians, than to give heed towhat was said on the other side, he determined, that when theevening came on, he would make use of it for his flight, and notmake any longer delay, as if the dangers from the enemy werenot yet certain. He therefore removed with the armed menwhom he had with him; and set his wives upon the beasts, asalso his mother, and sister, and her whom he was about to marry,[Mariamne] the daughter of Alexander, the son of Aristo-bulus, with her mother the daughter of Hyrcanus, and hisyoungest brother, and all their servants, and the rest of the mul­titude that was with him, and without the enemies' privity pur­sued his way to Idumea: Nor could any enemy of his, who thensaw him in this case, be so hard hearted, but would have com­miserated his fortune, while the women drew along their infantchildren, and left their own country, and their friends in prison,with tears in their eyes, and sad lamentations, and in expecta­tion of nothing but what was of a melancholy nature.
8. But for Herod himself, he raised his mind above the mi­serable state he was in, and was of good courage in the midst ofhis misfortunes; and, as he passed along, he bid them every one
VOL. II. P V 25







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 133


forefathers, and live according to them, he was willing to takethem with him, many were ready to accompany him in his wars.
6. So when Alexander had thus settled matters at Jerusalem,he led his army into the neighbouring cities; and when all theinhabitants, to whom he came, received him with great kindness,the Samaritans, who had then Shechem for their metropolis (acity situate at mount Gerizzim, and inhabited by apostates ofthe Jewish nation,) seeing that Alexander had so greatly honour­ed the Jews, determined to profess themselves Jews, for suchis the disposition of the Samaritans, as we have already else­where declared, that when the Jews are in adversity they denythat they are of kin to them, and then they confess the truth;but when they perceive that some good fortune hath befallenthem, they immediately pretend to have communion with them,saying, that they belong to them, and derive their genealogyfrom the posterity of Joseph, Ephraim, and Manasseh. Accord­ingly, they made their address to the king with splendour, andshowed great alacrity in meeting him at a little distance from Je­rusalem. And when Alexander had commanded them, the She-chemites approached to him, taking with them the troops thatSanballat had sent him, and they desired that he would cometo their city, and do honour to their temple also. To whom hepromised, that when he returned he would come to them. Andwhen they petitioned that he would remit the tribute of theseventh year to them, because they did not sow thereon, he askedwho they were that made such a petition, and when they saidthat they were Hebrews, but had the name of Sidonians, livingat Shechem; he asked them again, whether they were Jews, andwhen they said they were not Jews, "It was to the Jews, said"he, that I granted that privilege; however, when I return,"and am thoroughly informed by you of this matter, I will do"what I shall think proper." And in this manner he tookleave of the Shechemites ; but ordered that the troops of San­ballat should follow him into Egypt, because there he designedto give them lands, which he did a little after in Thebais, whenhe ordered them to guard that country.
7. Now when Alexander was dead, the government was part­ed among his successors, but the temple upon mount Gerizzimremained. And if any one were accused by those of Jerusalem,of having eaten things * common, or of having broken the Sab­bath, or of any other crime of the like nature, he fled away tothe Shechemites, and said that he was accused unjustly. Aboutthis time it was that Jaddua the high priest died; and Onias hisson took the high priesthood. This was the state of the affairsof the people of Jerusalem at this time. -


* Here Josephus uses the very word K OINOPHAGIA, eating things common, fattnting things unclean; as does our New Testament, Acts x. .14, 15, 28. xi. 8, !>iRomans xiv. 24.







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS 155


2. There was now one Joseph, young in age, but of great re­putation among the people of Jerusalem, for gravity, prudence,and justice. His father's name was Tobias; and his mother wasthe sister of Onias the high priest, who informed him of thecoming of the ambassador: for he was then sojourning at a vil­lage named * Phicol, where he was bom. Hereupon he cameto the city [Jerusalem], and reproved Onias for not taking careof the preservation of his countrymen, but bringing the nationinto dangers, by not paying this money. For which preserva­tion of them, he told him he had received the authority overthem, and had been made high priest: But that, in case he wasso great a lover of money, as to endure to see his country indanger on that account, and his countrymen suffer the greatestdamages, he advised him to go to the king, and petition him toremit either the whole, or part of the sum demanded. Onias'answer was this, that he did not care for his authority, and thathe was ready, if the thing were practicable, to lay down hishigh priesthood; and that he would not go to the king, becausehe troubled not himself at all about such matters. Joseph thenasked him, If he would not give him leave to go ambassador onbehalf of the nation? He replied, that he would give him leave-Upon which Joseph went up into the temple; and called the mul­titude together, to a congregation, and exhorted them not to bedisturbed nor affrighted, because of his uncle Onias' careless­ness, but desired them to be at rest, and not terrify themselveswith fear about it; for he promised them that he would be theirambassador to the king, and persuade him that they had donehim no wrong. And when the multitude heard this, they re­turned thanks to Joseph. So he went down from the temple,and treated Ptolemy's ambassador in a hospitable manner.He also presented him with rich gifts; and feasted him magni­ficently for many days, and then sent him to the king beforehim, and told him that he would soon follow him: for he wasnow more willing to go to the king, by the encouragement ofthe ambassador, who earnestly persuaded him to come intoEgypt; and promised him that he would take care that heshould obtain every thing that he desired of Ptolemy, for hewas highly pleased with his frank and liberal temper, and withthe gravity of his deportment.
3. When Ptolemy's ambassador was come into Egypt, he toldthe king of the thoughtless temper of Onias; and informed himof the goodness of the disposition of Joseph; and that he was
* The name of this place, Phicol, is the very same with that of the chief captainof Abimelech's host, in the days of Abraham, Gen. xxi. 22. and might possibly bethe place of that Fhicol's nativity or abode, for it seems to have been in the southpart of Palestine, as ihnt was.
vou iI. u 19







OCR Output








Chap. IV. AN-iiguiTiES or THE JEWS. 55


CHAP. IV.
Hffx Amon reigned- instead of Manassek; and after Amon, reign'ed Josiah; he was both righteous and religious. As also con­cerning Hulddh the prophetess.
§ 1. 1 HIS Amon imitated those works of his father whichhe insolently did when he was young: so he had a conspiracymade against him by his own servants, and was slain in his ownhouse, when he had lived twenty-four years, and of themhad reigned two-. But the multitude punished those that slewAmon, and buried him with his father, and gave the kingdomto his son Josiah, who was eight years old. His mother wasof the city of Boscath; and her name was Jedidah. He was ofa most excellent disposition, and naturally virtuous, and fol­lowed the actions of king David, as a pattern and rule to himin the whole conduct of his life. And when he was twelveyears old, he gave demonstrations of his religious and righteousbehaviour; for he brought the people to a sober way of living,and exhorted them to leave off' the opinion they had of theiridols, because they were not gods, but to worship their ownGod. And by reflecting on the actions of his progenitors, heprudently corrected what they did wrong, like a very elderlyman, and like one abundantly able to understand what was fit tobe done, and when he found they had well done, he observed allthe country over, and imitated the same. And thus he acted infollowing the wisdom and sagacity of his own nature, and infollowing the laws it was that he succeeded so well in the orderof his government, and in piety with regard to the divine wor­ship. And this happened because the transgressions of the for--ner kings were seen no more, but quite vanished away; for thedng went about the city, and the whole country, and cut downthe groves which were devoted to strange gods, and overthrewtheir altars; and if there were any gifts dedicated to them byhis forefathers, he made them ignominious and plucked themdown, and by this means he brought the people back from theiropinion about them to the worship of God. He also offered hisaccustomed sacrifices and burnt-offerings upon the altar. More­over, he ordained certain judges and overseers, that they mightorder the matters to them severally belonging, and have regardto justice above all things, and distribute it with the same con­cern they would have about their own soul. He also sent overall the country, and desired such as pleased to bring gold andsilver for the repairs of the temple, according to every one's in­clinations and abilities. And when the money was brought in,







OCR Output








Chilp. XI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 83


3. When Baltasar heard this, he called for Daniel; and whenhe had discoursed to him what he had learned concerning himand his wisdom, and how a divine spirit was with him; and thafhe alone was fully capable of finding out what others wouk\never have thought of, he desired him to declare to him whatthis writing meant: That if he did so, he would give him leaveto wear purple, and to put a chain of gold about his neck, andwould bestow on him the third part of his dominion, as an hon­orary reward for his wisdom, that thereby he might becomeillustrious to those who saw him, and who inquired upon whatoccasion he obtained such honours. But Daniel desired, That"he would keep his gifts to himself: for what is the effect of"wisdom, and of divine revelation, admits of no gifts, and be-"stows its advantages on petitioners freely, but that still he would"explain the writing to him: which denoted, that he should"soon die, and this because he had not learnt to honour God,"atid not to admit things above human nature, by what punish-"ments his progenitors had undergone, for the injuries he ha'd"offered to God; and because he had quite forgotten how Ne-"buchadnezzar was removed to feed among wild beasts, fbf his"impieties, and did not recover his former fife among men, and"his kingdom, but upon God's mercy to him, after many sup-"plications and prayers; who did thereupon praise God all the"days of his life, as one of almighty power, and who takes care"of mankind. [He also put him in mind] how he had greatly"blasphemed against God, and had made use of his vessels,
'amongst his concubines: that therefore God saw this, and was"angry with him, and declared by this writing beforehand"what a sad conclusion of his life he should come to. And he"explained the writing thus;—MANEH. This, if it be ex-"pounded in the Greek language, may .signify, a Ntimber, be-"cause God hath numbered so long a time for thy life, and for"thy government, and that there remains but a small portion."THEKEL. This signifies, a Weight, and means that God"hath weighed thy kingdom in a balance, and finds it going"down already. PHARES, This also, in the Greek tongue,"denotes a Fragment,- God will therefore break thy kingdom"in pieces, and divide it among the Medes and Persians."
4. When Daniel had told the king, that the writing upon thewall signified these events, Baltasar was in great sorrow and af­fliction, as was to be expected, when the interpretation was soheavy upon him. However, he did not refuse what he had pro-raised Daniel, although he were become a foreteller of misfor­tunes to him, but bestowed it all upon him: as reasoning thus,that what he was to reward was peculiar to himself, and to fate,and did not belong to the prophet; but that it was the part of a
VOL. II \, IT







OCR Output








822 ANTIQUITIES OP THE JKWS. Book XV.


the damsel, as being the wife of Herod, and avoided it, becauseof the reproaches he should have from Cleopatra on that account,but he sent, in the most decent manner he could, for the youngman; but added this withal, "Unless he thought it hard upon"him so to do." When this letter was brought to Herod, hedid not think it safe for him to send one so handsome as wasAristobulus, in the prime of his life, for he was sixteen yearsof age, and of so noble a family, and particularly not to Antony,the principal man among the Romans, and one that would abusehim in his amours, and besides, one that openly indulged him­self in such pleasures, as his power allowed him, without con­trol. He therefore wrote back to him, That "if this boy"should only go out of the country, all would be in a state of"war and uproar, because the Jews were in hopes of a change"in the government, and to have another king over them."
7. When Herod had thus excused himself to Antony, he re­solved that he would not entirely permit the child or Alexan­dra to be treated dishonourably: but his wife Mariamne lay ve­hemently at him to restore the high priesthood to her brother,and he judged it was for his advantage so to do, because, if heonce had that dignity, he could not go out of the country. Sohe called his friends together, and told them, That " Alexandra"privately conspired against his royal authority, and endea-"voured, by the means of Cleopatra, so to bring it about, that"he might be deprived of the government, and that by An-"tony's means this youth might have the management of public"affairs in his stead; and"that this procedure of hers was un-"just, since she would at the same time deprive her daughter"of the dignity she now had, and would bring disturbances up-"on the kingdom, for which he had taken a great deal of pains,"and had gotten it with extraordinary hazards: that yet"while he well remembered her wicked practices, he would"not leave off doing what was right himself, but would even"now give the youth the high priesthood: and that he for-"merly set up Ananelus, because Aristobulus was then so"very young a child." Now when he had said this, not atrandom, but as he thought with the best discretion he had, inorder to deceive the women, and those friends whom he hadtaken to consult withal, Alexandra, out of the great joy shehad at this unexpected promise, and out of fear from the sus­picions she lay under, fell a-weeping, and made the followingapology for herself; and said, That "as to the [high] priest-"hood, she was very much concerned for the disgrace her son"was under, and so did her utmost endeavours to procure it for"him, but that as to the kingdom, she had made no attempts,"and that if it were offered her [for her son,] she would not







OCR Output








Chap. V. ANTigumES or THE JEWS. 263


nia, and Arethusa, to their own inhabitants: these were in theinland parts. Besides those that had been demolished, and alsoof the maritime cities, Gaza, and Joppa, and Dora, and Strato'sTower; which last Herod rebuilt after a glorious manner, andadorned with havens, and temples, and changed its name to Ce-sarea. All these Pompey left in a state of freedom, and joinedthem to the province of Syria.
5. Now the occasions of this misery which came upon Jeru­salem, were Hyrcanus and Aristobulus, by raising a seditionone against the other; for now we lost our liberty, and becamesubject to the Romans, and were deprived of that country whichwe had gained by our arms from the Syrians, and were compel­led to restore it to the Syrians. Moreover, the Romans ex­acted of us, in a little time, above ten thousand talents. Andthe royal authority, which was a dignity formerly bestowed onthose that were high priests, by the right of their family, be­came the property of private men. But of these matters weshall treat in their proper places. Now Pompey committed Cce-lesyria, as far as the river Euphrates and Egypt, to Scaurus,with two Roman legions, and then went away to Cilicia, r.ndmade haste to Rome. He also carried bound along with himAristobulus and his children; for he had two daughters, and asmany sons; the one of which ran away, but the younger, An-tigonus, was carried to Rome, together with h5s sisters.
CHAP. V.
How Scaurus made a league of mutual assistance ivith Aretas.And what Gabinius did in Judea, after he had conqueredAlexander the son of Aristobulus.
§ 1. OCAURUS made now an expedition against Petrea, inArabia, and set on fire all the places round about it, because ofthe great difficulty of access to it. And as his army was pinch­ed by famine, Antipater furnished him with corn out of Judea.and with whatever else he wanted, and this at the command ofHyrcanus. And when he was sent to Aretas, as an ambassadorby Scaurus, because he had lived with him formerly, he per­suaded Aretas to give Scaurus a sum of money, to prevent theburning of his country; and undertook to be his surety for threehundred talents. So Scaurus, upon these terms, ceased to makewar any longer: which was done as much at Scaurus' desire,as at the desire of Aretas.
2. Some time after this, when Alexander, the son of Aristo­bulus, made an incursion into Judea, Gabinius came from Rometo Syria, as commander of the Roman forces. He did many







OCR Output








28 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEN'S. Book IX.


of the rebuilding the temple, he used this stratagem for collect­ing the money, with which the multitude was pleased. He madea wooden chest, and closed it up fast on all sides, but opened onehole in it; he then set it in the temple beside the altar, and de­sired every one to cast into it, through the hole, what he pleased,for the repair of the temple. This contrivance was acceptableto the people, and they strove one with another, and brought injointly large quantities of silver and gold: and when the scribeand the priest that were over the treasuries had emptied thechest, and counted the money in the king's presence, they thenset it in its former place, and thus did they every day. Butwhen the multitude appeared to have cast in as much as waswanted, the high priest Jehoiada, and king Jehoash, sent to hiremasons and carpenters, and to buy large pieces of timber, andof the most curious sort, and when they had repaired the tem­ple, they made use of the remaining gold and silver, which wasnot a little, for bowls, and basons, and cups, and other vessels,and they went on to make the altar every day fat with sacrificesof great value. And these things were taken suitable care of,as long as Jehoiada Jived.
3. But as soon as he was dead, which was when he had livedone hundred and thirty years, having been a righteous, nnd inevery respect, a very good man, he was buried in the king's se­pulchre at Jerusalem, (because he had recovered the kingdom tothe family of David), king Jehoash betrayed his [want of] careabout God. The principal men of the people were corruptedalso together with him, and offended against their duty, and whattheir constitution determined to be most for their good. Here­upon God was displeased with the change that was made on theking, and on the rest of the people; and sent prophets to testifyto them what their actions were, and to bring them to leave offtheir wickedness: but they had gotten such a strong affection,and so violent an inclination to it, that neither could the exam­ples of those that had offered affronts to the laws, and hadbeen so severely punished, they and their entire families, norcould the fear of what the prophets now foretold, bring them torepentance, and turn them back from their course of transgres­sion, to their former duty. But the king commanded that Za-chariah, the son of the high priest Jehoiada, should be stoned todeath in the temple, and forgot the kindnesses he had receivedfrom his father; for when God had appointed him to prophesy,he stood in the midst of the multitude, and gave this counsel tothem and to the king, that they should act righteously, and fore­told to them, that if they would not hearken to his admonitions,they should suffer a heavy punishment: But as Zachariah wasready to die, he appealed to God, as a witness of what he suffer-







OCR Output








394 ANTIO.UITIES or THE JEWS. Book XVI.


"turned his speech to the admonition of his sons; and exhorted"those that lived at court, and the multitude, to concord: and"informed them, that his sons were to resign after him; Anti-"pater first, and then Alexander and Aristobulus, the sons of"Mariamne; but he desired that at present they should all have"regard to himself, and esteem him king and lord of all, since"he was not yet hindered by old age, but was in that period ot"life when he must be the most skilful in governing; and that"he was not deficient in other arts of management that might"enable him to govern the kingdom well, and to rule over his"children also. He farther told the rulers under him, and the"soldiery, that in case they would look upon him alone, their"life would be led in a peaceable manner, and they would make"one another happy." And when he had said this, he dismissedthe assembly. Which speech was acceptable to the greatestpart of the audience, but not so to them all, for the contentionamong his sons, and the hopes he had given them, occasionedthoughts and desires of innovations among them.
CHAP. V.
How Herod celebrated the games that were to return every Jifthyear, upon the building of Ccesarea , - and hem he built andadorned many other places after a magnificent manner; and didmany other actions gloriously.
§ 1. ABOUT this time it was that Caesarea Sebaste, which hehad built, was finished. The entire building being accomplish­ed in the tenth year, the solemnity of it fell into the twenty-eight year of Herod's reign, and into the hundred and ninety-second olympiad: There was accordingly a great festival, andmost sumptuous preparations made presently, in order to itsdedication, for he had appointed a contention in music, andgames to be performed naked: He had also gotten ready agreat number of those that fight single combats, and of beastslor the like purpose: horse races also, and the most chargeableof such sports and shows as used to be exhibited at Rome, andin other places. He consecrated this combat to Caesar, and or­dered it to be celebrated every fifth year. He also sent all sortsof ornaments for it out of his own furniture, that it might wantnothing to make it decent: nay Julia, Caesar's wife, sent a greatpart of her most valuable furniture [from Rome,] insomuchthat he had no want of any thing: The sum of them all .was esti­mated at five hundred talents. Now when a great multitude wascome to that city, to see the shows, as well as the ambassadorswhom other people sent, on account of the benefits they had re­







OCR Output








. III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 95


*' and they have slept out their wine in the night, they arise ."without knowing any thing they have done in their cups; J"take these for signs of power, and by them discover that"wine is the strongest, and most insuperable of all things."
4. As soon as the first had given the fore-mentioned demon­strations of the strength of wine, he left off; and the next to himbegan to speak about the strength of a king, and demonstratedthat it was the strongest of all, and more powerful than anything else that appears to have any force or wisdom. He beganhis demonstration after the following manner; and said, "They"are men who govern all things; they force the earth and the"sea to become profitable to them in what they desire, and over"these men do king's rule, and over them they have authority."Now those men who rule over that animal which is of all the"strongest and most powerful, must needs deserve to be esteem-"ed insuperable in power and force; for example, when these"kings command their subjects to make war, and undergo'" dangers, they are hearkened to, and when they send them"against .their enemies, their power is so great that they are"obeyed. They command men to level mountains, and to pull'" down walls and towers; nay, when they are commanded to"be killed and to kill, they submit to it, that they may not ap-'" pear to transgress the king's commands, and when they have"conquered, they bring what they have gained in the war to theft king. Those also who are not soldiers, but cultivate the"ground, and plough it, and when, after they have endured the"labour, and all the inconveniences of such works of husbandry,'" they have reaped and gathered in their fruits, they bring trL-"butes to the king. And whatsoever it is which the king says"or commands, it is done of necessity, and that without any de-"lay, while he in the mean time is satiated with all sorts Oi'' food and pleasures, and sleeps in quiet. He is guarded by"such as watch, and such as are, as it were fixed down to the"place through fear, for no one dares leave him, even when he'' is asleep, nor does any one go away and take care of his own"affairs, but he esteems this one thing the only work of neces-'" sity, to guard the king, and accordingly to this he wholly*' addicts himself. How then can it be otherwise, but that it"must appear that the king exceeds all in strength, while so"great a multitude obeys his injunctions?"
5. Now when this man had held his peace, the third of them,who was Zorobabel; began to instruct them about women, andabout truth, who said thus: " Wine is strong, as is the king"alsoj whom all men obey, but women are superior to them in"power, for it was a woman that brought the king into the"world; and for those that plant the vines and make the wine,*' they are women who bear them, and bring them up: nor in­







OCR Output








334, ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. . Book XV.


I
own, and with those that the country had gotten together forhim: So he fell upon the Jews unexpectedly, when they werefatigued, and thought they had already vanquished the enemy,and made a great slaughter of them: for as the Jews had spenttheir courage upon their known enemies, and were about to en­joy themselves in quietness after the victory, they were easilybeaten by these that attacked them afresh, and in particular re­ceived a great loss in places where the horses could not be of ser­vice, and which were very stony, and where those that attackedthem were better acquainted with the places than themselves.And when the Jews had suffered this loss, the Arabians raisedtheir spirits after their defeat, and returning back again, slewthose that were already put to flight; and indeed all sorts ofslaughter were now frequent, and of those that escaped, a fewonly returned into the camp. So king Herod, when he de­spaired of the battle, rode up to them to bring them assistance,yet did he not come time enough to do them any service, thoughhe laboured hard to do it, but the Jewish camp was taken, sothat the Arabians had unexpectedly a most glorious success,having gained that victory which of themselves they were noway likely to have gained, and slaying a great part of the enemy'sarmy: Whence afterward Herod could only act like a privaterobber and make excursions upon many parts of Arabia, anddistress them by sudden incursions, while he encamped amongthe mountains, and avoided by any means to come to a pitchedbattle, yet did he greatly harass the enemy by his assiduity, andthe hard labour he took in this matter. He also took great careof his own forces, and used all the means he could to restore hisaffairs to their old state.
2. At this time it was that the fight happened at Actium, be­tween Octavius Caesar, and Antony, in * the seventh year of thereign of Herod: and then it was also there was an earthquake inJudea, such a one as had not happened at any other time, andwhich earthquake brought a great destruction upon the cattle inthat country. About ten thousand men also perished by the fallof houses; but the army which lodged in the field, received nodamage by this sad accident. When the Arabians were inform­ed of this, and when those that hated the Jews, and pleased them­selves with aggravating the reports told them of it, they raisedtheir spirits, as if their enemy's country was quite overthrown,


* The reader is here to take notice, that this seventh year of the reign of Herod,and all the other years of his reign, in Josephus, are dated from the death of Anti-gonus, or at the soonest from the conquest of Antigonus, and the taking of Jerusa­lem a few months before, and never from his first obtaining the kingdom at Romeabove three years before, as some have very weakly and injudiciously done







OCR Output








118 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XI-


* how thej' might enjoy those blessings for all time to come.u And whereas I have been kindly informed by Haman, who"on account of his prudence and justice, is the first in my esteem,"and in dignity, and only second to myself for his fidelity and"constant good will to me, that there is an ill natured nation in-"termixed with all mankind, that is averse to our laws, and"not subject to kings, and of a different conduct of life from"others, that hateth monarchy, and of a disposition that is per-"nicious to our affairs, I give order that all these men, of whom"Haman our second father, hath informed us, be destroyed,"with their wives, and children, and that none of them be spared,"and that none prefer pity to them before obedience to this de-"cree. And this I will to be executed on the fourteenth day"of the twelfth month of the present year, that so when all"that have enmity to us are destroyed, and this in one day, we"may be allowed to lead the rest of our lives in peace hereafter."Now when this decree was brought to the cities, and to thecountry, all were ready for the destruction and entire abolish­ment of the Jews, against the day before mentioned; and theywere very hasty about it at Shushan, in particular. Accord­ingly, the king and Haman spent their time in feasting togetherwith good cheer and wine, but the city was in disorder.
7. Now when Mordecai was informed of what was done, herent his clothes and put on sackcloth, and sprinkled ashes uponhis head, and went about the city, crying out, That "a nation"that had been injurious to no man, was to be destroyed." Andhe went on saying thus as far as to the king's palace, and therehe stood, for it was not lawful for him to go into it in that ha­bit. The same thing was done by all the Jews that were in theseveral cities wherein this decree was published, with lamenta­tion and mourning, on account of the calamities denouncedagainst them. But as soon as certain persons had told the queenthat Mordecai stood before the court in a mourning habit, shewas disturbed at this report, and sent out such as should changehis garments; but when he could not be induced to put off hissackcloth, because the sad occasion that forced him to put it onwas not yet ceased; she called the eunuch Acratheus, for he wasthen present, and sent him to Mordecai, in order to know ofhim what sad accident had befallen him, for which he was inmourning, and would not put off the habit he had put on at herdesire. Then did Mordecai inform the eunuch of the occasionof his mourning, and of the decree which was sent by the kinginto all the country, and of the promise of money whereby Ha­man bought the destruction of their nation. He also gave hima copy of what was proclaimed at Shushan, to be carried to Est­her; and he charged her to petition the king about this matter,







OCR Output








280 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


"Hyrcanus and his sons, which they paid to their forefathers."And that no one, neither president, nor lieutenant, nor ambas-"sador, raise auxiliaries within the bounds ofJudea, nor my"soldiers exact money of them for winter quarters, or under"any other pretence, but that they be free from all sorts of"injuries: and that whatsoever they shall hereafter have, and"are in possession of, or have bought, they shall retain them all."It is also our pleasure, that the city Joppa, which the Jews"had originally, when they made a league of friendship with"the Romans, shall belong to them, as it formerly did, and that"Hyrcanus, the son of Alexander, and his sons have as tribute"of that city from those that occupy the land for the country,"and for what they export every year to Sidon, twenty thou-"sand, six hundred, and seventy-five modii every year, the se-"venth year, which they call the Sabbatic year, excepted, where-"on they neither plough nor receive the product of their trees."It is also the pleasure of the senate, lhat as to the villages"which are in the great plain, which Hyrcanus and his forefa-"thers formerly possessed, Hyrcanus and the Jews have them"with the same privileges with which they formerly had them"also, and that the same original ordinances remain still in force,"which concern the Jews, with regard to their high priests;"and that they enjoy the same benefits which they have had"formerly by the concession of the people, and of the senate;"and let them enjoy the like privileges in Lydda. It is the plea-"sure also of the senate, that Hyrcanus the ethnarch, and the"Jews, retain those places, countries and villages, which be-"longed to the kings of Syria and Phenicia, the confederates of"the Romans, and which they had bestowed on them as their"free gifts. It is also granted to Hyrcanus, and to his sons,"and to the ambassadors by them sent to us, that in the fights"between single gladiators, and in those with beasts, they shall"sit among the senators to see those shows, and that when they"desire an audience, they shall be introduced into the senate by"the dictator, or by the general of the horse; and when they"have introduced them, their answers shall be returned them"in ten days at the farthest, after the decree of the senate is"made about their affairs."
7. "Caius Caesar, imperator, dictator the fourth time, and"consul the fifth time, declared to be perpetual dictator, made"this speech concerning the rights and privileges of Hyrcanus"the son of Alexander, the high priest and ethnarch of the"Jews. Since those * imperators that have been in the provinces


* Dr. Hudson justly supposes, that the Roman imperators, or generals of ar­mies, meant both here, and sect. 2. who gave testimony to Hyrcanus' and the Jews'faithfulness and good-will to the Romans before the senate and people of Rome,







OCR Output








168 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XII.


"by them represented to us, that they are no way concerned"with accusations which belong to the Jews, but choose to live"after the customs of the Greeks. Accordingly we declare"them free from such accusations, and order that, agreeable to"their petition, their temple be named, The temple of Jupiter"Hellenius." He also sent the like epistle to Appollonius, thegovernor of that part of the country, in the forty-sixth year,and the eighteenth day of the month Hecatombeon.
CHAP. VI.
How, upon Antiochus' prohibition to the Jews to make use of thelaws of their country, Mattathias the son of Asmoneus, alonedespised the king, and overcame the generals of Antiochus'army; as also concerning the death of Mattathias, and thesuccession of Judas.
§ 1. JN ow at this time there was one whose name was Mat­tathias, who dwelt at Modin, the son of John, the son of Sim­eon, the son of Asmoneus, a priest of the order of Joarib,and a citizen of Jerusalem. He had five sons, John, who wascalled Gaddis, and Simon who was called Matthes, and Judaswho was called Maccabeus,* and Eleazar, who was called Au-ran, and Jonathan, who was called Apphus. Now this Mattathiaslamented to his children the sad state of their affairs, and theravage made in the city, and the plundering of the temple, andthe calamities the multitude were under; and he told them, thatit was better for them to die for the laws of their country, thanto live so ingloriously as they then did.
2. But when those that were appointed by the king were cometo Modin, that they might compel the Jews to do what theywere commanded; and to enjoin those that were there to offersacrifice, as the king had commanded, they desired that Matta­thias, a person of the greatest character among them, both onother accounts, and particularly on account of such a numerousand so deserving a family of children, would begin the sacrifice,because his fellow-citizens would follow his example, and be­cause such a procedure would make him honoured by the king.But Mattathias said, "he would not do it; and that if all the


* That this appellation of Maccabee was not first of all given to Judas Maccabeus,nor was derived from any initial letters of the Hebrew words on his banner,Mi Kamoka Be Elim, Jehovah? Who is like unto tfiee amojig the gods, 0 Jehovah?Exod. xv. 11. as the modern Rabbins vainly pretend, see Authcnt. Rec. pan I.p. 2O5, 206. Only we may note, by the way, that the original name of theseMaccabees, and their posterity, was Asmonians; which was derived from Asmoneus,the great grandfather of Mattathias, as Josephus here informs us.







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 35


lot fell upon the prophet; and when they asked him, Whence hecame? and what he had done ? he replied, That he was an He­brew by nation, and a prophet of Almighty God; and he per­suaded them to cast him into the sea, if they would escape thedanger they were in, for that he was the occasion of the stormwhich was upon them. Now at the first they durst not do so, asesteeming it a wicked thing to cast a man who was a stranger,and who had committed his life to them, into such manifest per­dition; but at last, when their misfortune overbore them, andthe ship was just going to be drowned, and when they were ani­mated to do it by the prophet himself, and by the fear concern­ing their own safety, they cast him into the sea; upon whichthe sea became calm. It is also related that Jonah was swalloweddown by a whale, and that when he had been there three days,and as many nights, he was vomited out upon the Euxine Sea,and this alive, and without any hurt upon his body; and -there,on his prayer to God, he obtained pardon for his sins, and wentto the city Nineveh, where he stood so as to be heard; andpreached, That "in a very little time they should lose the"dominion of Asia." And when he had published this, hereturned. Now, I have given the account about him, as Ifound it written [in our books].
3. When Jeroboam the king had passed his life in great happi­ness, and had ruled forty years, he died and was buried in Sa­maria, and his son Zechariah took the kingdom. After the samemanner did Uzziah, the son of Amaziah, begin to reign overthe two tribes in Jerusalem, in the fourteenth year of the reignof Jeroboam. He was born of Jecoliah, his mother, who was acitizen of Jerusalem. He was a good man, and by nature right­eous and magnanimous, and very laborious in taking care ofthe affairs of his kingdom. He made an expedition also againstthe Philistines, and overcame them in battle, and took the citiesof Gath and Jabneh, and brake down their walls: after whichexpedition, he assaulted those Arabs that adjoined to Egypt.He also built a city upon the Red Sea, and put a garrison intoit. He after this overthrew the Ammonites, and appointed thatthey should pay tribute. He also overcame all the countries asfar as to the bounds of Egypt, and then began to take care ofJerusalem itself for the rest of his life, for he rebuilt and re­paired all those parts of the wall which had either fallen down


the Israelites, but among these heathen mariners, seems a remarkable remains ofthe ancient tradition which prevailed of old over all mankind, that providence usedto interpose visibly in all human affairs, and never to bring, or at least not long tocontinue, notorious judgments but for notorious sins, which the most ancient bookof Job shows to have been the state of mankind for about the former 3000 years ofthe world, till the days of Job and Moses.
VOL. II. E 15







OCR Output








350 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XV.


7. But when she was once dead, the king's affections for herwere kindled in a more outrageous manner than before, whoseold passion for her we have already described: for his love to helTvas not of a calm nature, nor such as we usually meet with amongother husbands, for at its commencement it was of an enthusiastickind, nor was it by their long cohabitation and free conversationtogether, brought under his power to manage; but at this timehis love to Mariamne seemed to seize him in such a peculiarmanner, as looked like divine vengeance upon him, for the tak­ing away her life, for he would frequently call for her, and fre­quently lament for her in a most indecent manner. Moreover,he bethought him of every thing he could make use of to diverthis mind from thinking of her, and contrived feasts and assem­blies for that purpose, but nothing would suffice; he thereforelaid aside the administration of public affairs, and was so far con­quered by his passion, that he would order his servants to callfor Mariamne, as if she were still alive, and could still hear them.And when he was in this way, there arose a pestilential disease,and carried off' the greatest part of the multitude, and of his bestand most esteemed friends, and made all men suspect that thiswas brought upon them by the anger of God, for the injusticethat had been done to Mariamne. This circumstance affectedthe king still more, till at length he forced himself to go into de­sert places, and there, under pretence of going a hunting, bitterlyafflicted himself; yet had he not borne his grief there manydays before he fell into a most dangerous distemper himself:He had an inflammation upon him, and a pain in the hinder partof his head, joined with madness: and for the remedies that wereused, they did him no good at all, but proved contrary to hiscase, and so at length brought him to despair. All the physi­cians also that were about him, partly because the medicinesthey brought for his recovery could not at all conquer the disease,and partly because his diet could be no other than what his dis­ease inclined him to, desired him to eat whatever he had a mindto, and so left the small hopes they had of his recovery in thepower of that diet, and committed him to fortune. And thusdid his distemper go on, while he was at Samaria, now calledSebaste.
8. Now Alexandra abode at this time in Jerusalem, and beinginformed what condition Herod was in, she endeavoured to getpossession of the fortified places that were about the city, whichwere two, the one belonging to the city itself) the other be­longing to the temple; and those that could get them into theirhands had the whole nation under their power, for without thecommand of them it was not possible to offer their sacrifices;and to think of leaving off" those sacrifices, is to every Jew plain­







OCR Output








Chap. XVI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 251


nil parts, insomuch that he had a kind of royal attendants abouthim; for in a little more than fifteen days, he got twenty-twostrong places, which gave him the opportunity of raising an ar­my from Libanus and Trachonitis, and the monarchs: for menare easily led by the greater number, and easily submit to them.And besides this, that by affording him their assistance, when hecould not expect it, they, as well as he, should have the advan­tages that would come by his being king, because they had beenthe occasion of his gaining the kingdom. Now the elders ofthe Jews, and Hyrcanus with them, went in unto the queen,and desired, "That she would give them her sentiments about"the present posture of affairs, for that Aristobulus was in ef-"feet lord of almost all the kingdom, by possessing of so many"strong holds, and that it was absurd for them to take any"counsel by themselves, how ill soever she were, whilst she"was alive, and that the danger would be upon them in no"long time." But she " bid them do what they thought pro-"per to be done: that they had many circumstances in their"favour still remaining, a nation in good heart, an army, and"money in their several treasuries, for that she had small con-"cern about public affairs now, when the strength of her body"already failed her."
6. Now a little while after she had said this to them, she died,when she had reigned nine years, and had in all lived seventy-three. A woman she was who showed no signs of the weaknessof her sex, for she was sagacious to the greatest degree in herambition of governing, and demonstrated by her doings at once,that her mind was fit for action, and that sometimes men them-:selves show the little understanding they have by the frequentmistakes they make in point of government; for she always pre­ferred the present to futurity, and preferred the power of an im­perious dominion above all things, and in comparison of that hadno regard to what was good, or what was right. However, shebrought the affairs of her house to such an unfortunate condition,that she was the occasion of the taking away that authority fromit, and that in no long time afterward, which she had obtained bya vast number of hazards and misfortunes, and this out of a de­sire of what does not belong to a woman, and all by a compliancein her sentiments with those that bare ill-will to their family,and by leaving the administration, destitute of a proper supportof great men: and indeed, her management during her adminis­tration, while she was alive, was such, as filled the palace afterher death, with calamities and disturbance. However, althoughthis had been her way of governing, she preserved the nationin peace. And this is the conclusion of the affairs of Alexandra.
VOL. 41. II 33







OCR Output








Chap. IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 225


hostages, and five hundred talents of silver, of which they paiddown three hundred, and sent the hostages immediately, whichking Antiochus accepted. One of those hostages was Hyr-canus' brother; but still he broke down the fortifications thatencompassed the city: and upon these conditions Antiochusbroke up the siege and departed.
4. But Hyrcanus opened the sepulchre of David, who excel­led all other kings in riches, and took out of it three thousandtalents. He was also the first of the Jews that, relying on thiswealth, maintained foreign troops. There was also a league offriendship and mutual assistance made between them: Uponwhich Hyrcanus admitted him into the city, and furnished himwith whatsoever his army wanted in great plenty, and withgreat generosity, and marched along with him when he made anexpedition against the Parthians; of which Nicolaus of Damas­cus is a witness for us; who in his history writes thus: " When"Antiochus had erected a trophy at the river Lycus, upon his"conquest of Indates, the general of the Parthians, he stayed"there two days. It was at the desire of Hyrcanus the Jew, be-"cause it was such a festival derived to them from their fore-"fathers, whereon the law of the Jews did not allow them to"travel." And truly he did not speak falsely in saying so;for that festival, which we call Pentecost, did then fall out tobe the next day to the Sabbath: nor is it * lawful for us to jour­ney, either on the Sabbath day, or on a festival day. But whenAntiochus joined battle with Arsaces, the king of Parthia, helost a great part of his army, and was himself slain: and hisbrother Demetrius succeeded in the kingdom of Syria by thepermission of Arsaces, who freed hinvfrom his captivity, at thesame time that Antiochus attacked Parthia, as we have formerlyrelated elsewhere.
CHAP. IX.
How, after the death of Antiochus, Hyrcanus made an expedi­tion against Syria, and made a league with the Romans. Con­cerning the death of king Demetrius and Alexander.
$ 1. JJUT when Hyrcanus heard of the death of Antiochus,he presently made an expedition against the cities of Syria,hoping to find them destitute of fighting men, and of such aswere able to defend them. However, it was not till the sixthmonth that he took Medaba, and that not without the great dis­


* The Jews were not to inarch or journey on the Sabbath, or on such a great fes­tival as was equivalent to the Sabbath, any farther than a Sabbath day's journey, or200O cubits, see the note on Antiq. B. XX. ch. vii. sect. 6. vol. Ill







OCR Output








Chap. VII. ANTIgUITIES OF THE JEW'S. 6{>


5. But for the king himself, he was not at all irritated againstJeremiah, such was his gentle and righteous disposition ; yet thathe might not be engaged in a quarrel with those rulers at such atime, by opposing what they intended, he let them do withthe prophet, whatsoever they would: Whereupon, when theking had granted them such a permission, they presently cameinto the prison and took him; and let him down with a cordinto a pit full of mire, that he might be suffocated, and die ofhimself. So he stood up to the neck in the mire, which was allabout him, and so continued: but there was of the king's ser­vants, who was in esteem with him, an Ethiopian by descent,who told the king what a state the prophet was in, and said, thathis friends and his rulers had done evil in putting the prophetinto the mire, and by that means contriving against him that heshould suffer a death more bitter than that by his bonds only.When the king heard this, he repented of his having deliveredup the prophet to the rulers, and bid the Ethiopian take thirtymen of the king's guards, and cords with them, and whatsoeverelse they understood to be necessary for the prophet's preserva­tion, and draw him up immediately. So the Ethiopian tookthe men he was ordered to take, and drew up the prophet outof the mire, and left him at liberty [in the prison],
6. But when the king had sent to call him privately, and in­quired what he could say to him from God, which might be suit­able to his present circumstances, and desired him to inform himof it, Jeremiah replied, that "he had somewhat to say:" but hesaid withal; he " should not be believed, nor if he admonished"them, should be hearkened to; for, said he, thy friends have"determined to destroy me, as though I had been guilty of"some wickedness: and where are now those men who deceiv-"ed us, and said that, the king of Babylon would not come and"fight against us any more; but I am afraid now to speak the"truth, lest thou shouldst condemn me to die." And when theking had assured him upon oath, that he would neither himselfput him to death, nor deliver him up to the rulers, he became boldupon that assurance that was given him; and gave him this ad-vicfe, that " he should deliver the city up to the Babylonians; and"he said, that it was God that prophesied this by him, that (he"must do so) if he would be preserved and escape out of the dan-"ger he was in, and that then neither should the city fall to the"ground, nor should the temple be burned; but that (if he diso-"beyed,) he would be the cause of these miseries coming upon the"citizens, and of the calamity that would befall his whole house."When the king heard this, he said, that "he would willingly do"what he persuaded him to, and what he declared would be to'* his advantage, but that he was afraid of those of his own coun







OCR Output








Chap. III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 1*9


that when, in a certain dramatic representation, he was desirousto make mention of things that were contained in the sacredbooks, he was afflicted with a darkness in his eyes; and thatupon his being conscious of the occasion of his distemper, andappeasing God [by prayer], he was freed from that affliction.
14. And when the king had received these books from De­metrius, as we have said already, he adored them, and gaveorder that great care should be taken of them, that they mightremain uncorrupted. He also desired that the interpreters wouldcome often to him out of Judea, and that both on account of therespects that he would pay them, and on account of the presentshe would make them: For he said, "It was now but just to"send them away, although if of their own accord, they would"come to him hereafter, they should obtain all that their own"wisdom might justly require, and what his generosity was"able to give them." So he then sent them away; and gaveto every one of them three garments of the best sort, and two ta­lents of gold, and a cup of the value of one talent, and the fur­niture of the room wherein they were feasted. And these werethe things he presented to them. But by them he sent to Elea-zar the high priest, ten beds, with feet of silver, and the fur­niture to them belonging, and a cup of the value of thirty ta­lents; and besides these, ten garments, and purple, and a verybeautiful crown, and a hundred pieces of the finest wovenlinen; as also vials and dishes, and vessels for pouring, and twogolden cisterns to be dedicated to God. He also desired him, byan epistle, that he would give these interpreters leave, if anyof them were desirous of coming to him, because he highlyvalued a conversation with men of such learning; and should bevery willing to lay out his wealth upon such men. And thiswas what came to the Jews, and was much to their glory andhonour, from Ptolemy Philadelphus.
CHAP. III.
How the kings of Asia honoured the nation of the Jews, and madethem citizens of those cities which they built.
§ 1. 1 HE Jews also obtained honour from the kings of Asia,when they became their auxiliaries; for Seleucus Nicatormade them citizens in those cities which he built in Asia; andin the lower Syria, and in the metropolis itself, Antioch; andgave them privileges equal to those of the Macedonians andGreeks, who were the inhabitants, insomuch that these privi­leges continue to this very day: An argument for which you







OCR Output








358 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XV.


cause he contrived that it might at once be for his own secu­rity, and a monument of his magnificence. He also changed itsname, and called it Sebaste. Moreover, he parted the adjoin­ing country, which was excellent in its kind, among the inhabi­tants of Samaria, that they might be in a happy condition, upontheir first coming to inhabit it. Besides all which, he encompas­sed the city with a wall of great strength, and made use of theacclivity of the place for making its fortifications stronger; norwas the compass of the place made now so small as it had beenbefore, but was such as rendered it not inferior to the most fa­mous cities; for it was twenty furlongs in circumference. Now,within and about the .niddle of it, he built a sacred place, of afurlong and a half [in circuit,] and adorned it with all sortsof decorations, and therein erected a temple, which was il­lustrious on account of both its largeness and beauty. And asto the several parts of the city, he adorned them with decora­tions of all sorts also: and as to what was necessary to providefor his own security, he made the walls very strong for thatpurpose, and made it for the greatest part a citadel; and as tothe elegance of the building, it was taken care of also, that hemight leave monuments of the fineness of his taste, and of hisbeneficence, to future ages.
CHAP. IX.
Concerning the famine that happened in Judea and Syria , - andhow Herod, after he had married another wife, rebuilt Cesa-rea, and other Grecian cities.
§ 1. JN ow on this very year, which was the thirteenth yearof the reign of Herod, very great calamities came upon thecountry; whether they were derived from the anger of God, or* whether this misery returns again naturally in certain periodsof time; for in the first place there were perpetual droughts,and for that reason the ground was barren, and did not bringforth the same quantity of fruits that it used to produce; andafter this barrenness of the soil, that change of food which thewant of corn occasioned, produced distempers in the bodies ofmen, and a pestilential disease prevailed, one misery followingupon the back of another: and the circumstances, that they


* Here we have an eminent example of the language of Josephus in his writingto Gentiles, different from that when he wrote to Jews; in his writing to whom he•till derives all such judgments from the anger of God; but because he knew manyof the Gentiles thought they might naturally come in certain periods, he complieswith them in the following sentence. See the note on the War, B. I. ch. xxxiii. sect.2. Vol. III.







OCR Output








IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 181


"nation, and this because their sufferings were occasioned on"his father's account, while they left the religious worship of"their fathers, and preferred that which he had commanded"them to follow: that there was danger lest the citadel, and"those appointed to garrison it by the king, should be taken"by Judas, and those that were with him, unless he would"send them succours." When Antiochus, who was but achild, heard this, he was angry, and sent for his captains, andhis friends, and gave order, that they should get an army ofmercenaries together, with such men also of his own kingdomas were of any age fit for war. Accordingly, an army was col­lected of about a hundred thousand footmen, and twenty thou­sand horsemen, and thirty-two elephants.
4. So the king took his army, and marched hastily out ofAntioch, with Lysias, who had the command of the whole, andcame to Idumea, and thence went up to the city Bethsura, acity that was strong, and not to be taken without great difficulty;be set about this city, and besieged it. And while the inhabitantsof Bethsura courageously opposed him; and sallied out upon him,and burnt his engines of war, a great deal of time was spentin the siege. But when Judas heard of the king's coming, heraised the siege of the citadel, and met the king, and pitched hiscamp in certain straits, at a place called Bethzachariah, at thedistance of seventy furlongs from the enemy; but the king soondrew his forces from Bethsura, and brought them to those straits.And as soon as it was day, he put his men in battle array, andmade his elephants follow one another through the narrow passes,because they could not be set sideways by one another. Nowround about every elephant there were a thousand footmen, andfive hundred horsemen. The elephants also had high towers[upon their backs], and archers [in them]. And he also madethe rest of his army to go up the mountains, and put his friendsbefore the rest; and gave orders for the army to shout aloud,and so he attacked the enemy. He also exposed to sight theirgolden and brazen shields, so that a glorious splendour was sentfrom them; and when they shouted, the mountains echoedagain. When Judas saw this, he was not terrified, but receivedwe enemy with great courage, and slew about six hundred of thefirst ranks. But when his brother Eleazar, whom they calledAuran, saw the tallest of the elephants armed with royalbreast-plates, and supposed that the king was upon him, he at­tacked him with great quickness and bravery. He also slewMany of those that were about the elephant, and scattered therest, and then went under the belly of the elephant, and smotetorn, and slew him; so the elephant fell upon Eleazar, and byiiis weight crushed him to death. And thus did this man come







OCR Output








THE
WHOLE GENUINE WORKS
OF
FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS,
THE LEARNED AND AUTHENTIC JEWISH HISTORIAN,
AND CELEBRATED WARRIOR:
TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL GREEK,
ACCORDING TO
HAVERCAMP'S ACCURATE EDITION.


CONTAINING,


I. TWENTY BOOKS OF THE JEWISH ANTI­
QUITIES; WITH THE LIFE OFJOSEFHUS,


II. SEVEN BOOKS OF THE JEWISH WAR.


IT. AN EXTRACT OUT OF JOSEPHUS* EX­
HORTATION TO THE GREEKS,CONCERN-


WRITTEN BY HIMSELF. ING HADES, AND THE RESURRECTION


HI. TWO BOOKS AGAINST APION.
TOGETHER WITH


OF THE DEAD.


LARGE NOTES, PROPER OBSERVATIONS, AND AN INDEX.
TO WHICH ARK ADDED,
THREE DISSERTATIONS,
CONCERNING,
I. THE TESTIMONIRS OF JOSEPH08 VINDICATED. I HI TACITUS' ArrntTNra
U. GOD'S COMMAND TO ABHAHAM TO OFFER UP JEWISH N«Tln«T it T"E OEIGIN °" ™B
ISAAC, HIS SON, FOR A SACRIFICE. | THE LAST JEWISH WA™ ™E PARTICt'1-A118 Of
WITH A COMPLETE TABLE OF THE JEWISH COINS,
WEIGHTS, AND MEASURES.


BY WILLIAM WHISTON, A.M.
PROFESSOR OF MATHEMATICS IN THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.


IN FOUR VOLUMES.


 


GLASGOW:
PUBLISHED BY BLACKIE, FULLARTON, AND CO.;AND ARCHIBALD FULLARTON AND CO, EDINBURGH.
1829.







OCR Output








Chap. VII. ANTIQUITIKS OF THE JEWS. 345


CHAP. VII.
How Herod sieve Sohemus, and Mariamne, and afterward Alex­andra, and Costobarus, and his mast intimate friends, and atlast the sons of Baba also.
§ 1. Irl OWEVER, when he came into his kingdom agam, hefound his house all in disorder, and his wife Mariamne and hermother Alexandra very uneasy; for, as they supposed, what waseasy to be supposed, that they were not put into that fortressEAlexandrium] for the security of their persons, but as into agarrison for their imprisonment, and that they had no powerover any thing, either of others, or of their own affairs, theywere very uneasy; and Mariamne supposing that the king'slove to her was but hypocritical, and rather pretended, as ad­vantageous to himself, as real, she looked upon it as fallacious.She also was grieved that he would not allow her any hopes ofsurviving him, if he should come to any harm himself. Shealso recollected what commands he had formerly given to Jo­seph, insomuch that she endeavoured to please her keepers,and especially Sohemus, as well apprised how all was in hispower. And at the first Sohemus was faithful to Herod, andneglected none of the things he had given him in charge; butwhen the women by kind words, and liberal presents, had gain­ed his affections over to them, he was by degrees overcome, andat length discovered to them all the king's injunctions, and this i-on that account principally, that he did not so*'much as hopehe would come back with the same authority he had before, ^othat he thought he should both escape any danger from him} andsupposed that he did hereby mucirgratify the women, who wereMkely not to be overlooked in the settling of the government,nay, that they would be able to make him abundant recom­pense, since they must either reign themselves, or be very nearto him that should reign. He had a furthep'ground of hope al­so, that though Herod should have all the success he could wishfor, and should return again, he could not contradict his wife inwhat she desired, for he knew that the king's fondness for hiswife was inexpressible. These were the motives that drew So­hemus to discover what injunctions had been given him. SoMariamne was greatly displeased to hear that there was no endof the dangers she was under from Herod, and was greatly un­easy at it, and wished that he might obtain no favours [fromCaesar,] and esteemed it almost an insupportable task, to livewith him any longer: and this she afterward openly declared,without concealing her resentment.







OCR Output








356 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XV.


as if they took no notice of Herod, who, upon the change he hadmade in their government, introduced such customs, and thatin a violent manner, which they had never been used to before;as indeed in pretence a king, but in reality one that showedhimself an enemy to their whole nation; on which account tenmen that were citizens [of Jerusalem,] conspired togetheragainst him, and swore to one another to undergo any dangers inthe attempt, and took daggers with them under their garments,[for the purpose of killing Herod.] Now there was a certainblind man among those conspirators, who had thus sworn to oneanother, on account of the indignation he had against what heheard to have been done; he was not indeed able to afford therest any assistance in the undertaking, but was ready to un­dergo any suffering with them, if so be they should come to anyharm, insomuch, that he became a very great encourager of therest of the undertakers.
4. When they had taken this resolution, and that by commonconsent, they went into the theatre, hoping that, in the first place,Herod himself could not escape them, as they should fall uponhim so unexpectedly; and supposing, however, that if they mis­sed him, they should kill a great many of those that were abouthim; and this resolution they took, though they should die forit, in order to suggest to the king, what injuries he had done tothe multitude. These conspirators, therefore, standing thus pre­pared beforehand, went about their design with great alacrity;but there was one of those spies of Herod's that were appointedfor such purposes, to fish out and inform him of any conspiraciesthat should be made against him, who found out the whole affair,and told the king of it, as he was about to go into the theatre.So when he reflected on the hatred which he knew the greatestpart of the people bore him, and on the disturbances that aroseupon every occasion, he thought this plot against him not tobe improbable. Accordingly, he retired into his palace, and call­ed those that were accused of this conspiracy before him bytheir several names; and as, upon the guards' falling upon them,they were caught in the very fact, and knew they could not escape, they prepared themselves for their ends with all the de­cency they could, and so as not at all to recede from their re­solute behaviour; for they showed no shame for what they wereabout, nor denied it, but when they were seized, they showedtheir daggers, and professed, that "the conspiracy they had"sworn to was a holy and a pious action; that what they in-"tended to do was not for gain, or out of any indulgence to"their passions, but principally for those common customs of"their country, which all the Jews were obliged to observe, or"to die for them." This was what these men said, out of their







OCR Output








6 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book IX,


traffic cities of Thrace; but he failed of his gains, for the shipswere destroyed by being so great [and unwieldy]; on whichaccount he was no longer concerned about shipping. And thisis the history of Jehoshaphat the king of Jerusalem.
CHAP. II.
Concerning Ahaziah, the king of Israel, and again concerningthe prophet Elijah.
§ 1. AND now Ahaziah, the son of Ahab, reigned over Is­rael, and made his abode in Samaria. He was a wicked man,and, in all respects, like to both his parents, and to Jeroboam,who first of all transgressed, and began to deceive the people.On the second year of his reign, the king of Moab fell off fromhis obedience, and left off paying those tributes which he be­fore paid to his father Ahab. Now it happened that Ahaziah,as he was coming down from the top of his house, fell downfrom it, and in his sickness sent to the * Fly, which was thegod of Ekron, for that was this god's name, to inquire about hisrecovery: But the God of the Hebrews appeared to Elijah theprophet, and commanded him to go and meet the messengersthat were sent, and to ask them, "Whether the people of"Israel had not a God of their own, that the king sent to a"foreign god to inquire about his recovery? and to bid them"return and tell the king, that he would not escape this disease."And when Elijah had performed what God had commanded him,and the messengers had heard what he said, they returned to theking immediately: and when the king wondered how they couldreturn so soon, and asked them the reason of it, they said, that a"certain man met them, and forbade them to go on any farther;"but to return and tell thee, from the command of the God of"Israel, that this disease will have a bad end." And when theking bid them describe the man that said this to them, they re­plied, "that he was a hairy man, and was girt about with a girdle"of leather." So the king understood by this that the man whowas described by the messengers was Elijah; whereupon he senta captain to him, with fifty soldiers, and commanded them tobring Elijah to him; and when the captain that was sent foundElijah sitting upon the top of a hill, he commanded him to comedown, and to come to the king, for so had he enjoined, but thatin case he refused, they would carry him by force. Elijah saidto him, " That you may have a trial whether I be a true pro-


* This god of Jlies seems to have been so called, as was the like god among theGreeks; from his supposed power over Hies in driving them away from the fiebh oftheir sacrifices, which otherwise would have beer very troublesome to them.







OCR Output








238 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIII.


said, eighty thousand. He then took his army, and went tomeet Ptolemy; but Ptolemy fell upon Assochis, a city of Ga­lilee, and took it by force on the sabbath day, and there he tookabout ten thousand slaves, and a great deal of other prey.
5. He then tried to take Sepphoris, which was a city notfar from that which was destroyed, but lost many of his men;yet did he then go to fight with Alexander, which Alexandermet him at the river Jordan, near a certain place called Sappoth,[not far from the river Jordan,] and pitched his camp near tothe enemy. He had however eight thousand in the first rank,which he stiled Hecatontomachi, having shields of brass. Thosein the first rank of Ptolemy's soldiers, also had shields coveredwith brass: but Ptolemy's soldiers in other respects were in­ferior to those of Alexander, and therefore were more fearfulof running hazards: but Philostephanus the camp master, putgreat courage into them, and ordered them to pass the river,which was between their camps: Nor did Alexander think fitto hinder their passage over it, for he thought, that if the ene­my had once gotten the river on their back, that he should theeasier take them prisoners, when they could not flee out of (hebattle: In the beginning of which, the acts on both sides, withtheir hands, and with their alacrity, were alike, and a greatslaughter was made by both the armies; but Alexander was su­perior, till Philostephanus opportunely brought up the auxili­aries, to help those that were giving way; but as there were noauxiliaries to afford help to that part of the Jews that gave way,it fell out that they fled, and those near them did not assist them,but fled along with them. However, Ptolemy's soldiers actedquite otherwise; for they followed the Jews, and killed them,till at length those that slew them pursued "after them, whenthey had made them all run away, and slew them so long, thattheir weapons of iron were blunted, and their hands quite tiredwith the slaughter; for the report was, that thirty thousandmen were then slain. Timagenes says, they were fifty thousand.As for the rest, they were part of them taken captives, and theother part ran away to their own country.
6. After this victory, Ptolemy overran all the country;and when night came on, he abode in certain villages of Judea,which when he found full of women and children, he commandedhis soldiers to strangle them, and to cut them in pieces, and thento cast them into boiling caldrons, and then to devour theirlimbs as sacrifices. This commandment was given, that suchas fled from the battle, and-came to them, might suppose theirenemies were cannibals, and eat men's flesh, and might on thataccount be still more terrified at them upon such a sight. Andboth Strabo and Nicholaus [of Damascus] affirm, that they used







OCR Output








Chap. I. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 253


his adversaries that had fled thither, and lay within the walls ofthe temple. So when he had sent a message to his brother aboutagreeing the matters between them, he laid aside his enmity tohim on these conditions, that Aristobulus should be king, thathe should live without intermeddling with public affairs, andquietly enjoy the estate he had acquired. When they had agreedupon these terms in the temple, and had confirmed the agree­ment with oaths, and the giving one another their right hands,and embracing one another in the sight of the whole multitude,they departed; the one, Aristobulus, to the palace; and Hyrcan-us, as a private man, to the former house of Aristobulus.
3. But there was a certain friend of Hyrcanus', an Idumean,called Antipater, who was very rich, and in his nature an activeand a seditious man; who was at enmity with Aristobulus, andhad differences with him on account of his good will to Hyrcan­us. It is true that Nicolaus of Damascus says, that Antipaterwas of the stock of the principal Jews who came out of Babyloninto Judea; but that assertion of his was to gratify Herod, whowas his son, and who, by certain revolutions of fortune, came af­terward to be king of the Jews, whose history we shall give youin its proper place hereafter. However, this Antipater was atfirst called * Antipas, and that was his father's name also: oiwhom they relate this, that king Alexander and his wife madehim general of all Idumea, and that he made a league of friend­ship with those Arabians, and Gazites, and Ascalonites, thatwere of his own party, and had, by many and large presents,made them his fast friends. But now, this younger Antipaterwas suspicious of the power of Aristobulus, and was afraid ofsome mischief he might do him, because of his hatred to him, sohe stirred up the most powerful of the Jews and talked againsthim to them privately; and said, that "it was unjust to over-"look the conduct of Aristobulus, who had gotten the government"unrighteously, and ejected his brother out of it, who was the"elder, and ought to retain what belonged to him by preroga-"tive of his birth." And the same speeches he perpetuallymade to Hyrcanus; and told him, that his own life would bein danger, unless he guarded himself, and got shut of Aristobu­lus; for he said, that the friends of Aristobulus omitted no op­portunity of advising him to kill him, as being then, and not be­fore, sure to retain his principality. Hyrcanus gave no creditto these words of his, as being of a gentle disposition, andone that did not easily admit of calumnies against other men.


* That the famous Antipater's or Antipas' father was also Antipater or 4ntipas(which two may justly be esteemed one and the same name, the former with aGreek or Gentile, the latter with a Hebrew or Jewish termination,) Josephus hereassures us, though Eusebius indeed says it was Herod.







OCR Output








212 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIII.


"were satisfied about it from the sacred writings, yet did"not we think fit, first to begin the claim of this relation to you,"lest we should seem too early in taking to ourselves the glory"which is now given us by you. It is a long time since this"relation of ours to you hath been renewed; and when we,"upon holy and festival days, offer sacrifices to God, we pray"to him for your preservation and victory. As to ourselves,"although we have had many wars that have compassed us"around, by reason of the covetousness of our neighbours, yet"did we not determine to be troublesome either to you, or to"others that were related to us; but since we have now over-"come our enemies, and have occasion to send Numenius, the"son of Antiochus, and Antipater the son of Jason, who are"both honourable men belonging to our senate, to the Romans,"we gave them this epistle to you also, that they might renew"that friendship which is between us. You will therefore do"well yourselves to write to us, and send us an account of what"you stand in need of from us, since we are in all things, dis-"posed to act according to your desires." So the Lacedemo­nians received the ambassadors kindly, and made a decree forfriendship and mutual assistance and sent it to them.
9. At this time there were three sects among the Jews, whohad different opinions concerning human actions; the one wascalled the sect of the Pharisees, another the sect of the Sadducees,and the other the sect of the Essens. Now for the * Pharisees,


original being lost, we cannot certainly judge which was the truest version, only thecoherence favours Josephus. But if this were the Jews1 meaning, that they weresatisfied out of their Bible that the Jews and Lacedemonians were of kin, that partof their Bible is now lost, for we find no such assertion in our present copies.
* Those that suppose Josephus to contradict himself in his three several accountsof the notions of the Pharisees, this here, and that earlier one, which is the largest,of the War, B. II. chap. viii. sect. 14. vol. III. and the latter, Antiq.B. XVIII. chap,i. sect. 3. vol. III. as if he sometimes said they introduced an absolute fatality, anddenied all freedom of human actions, is almost wholly groundless; he ever, as thevery learned Casaubon here truly observes, asserting, ihat the Pharisees were be­tween the Essens and Sadducees, and did so far ascribe all to fate or divine provi­dence as was consistent with the freedom of human actions. However, their per­plexed way of talking about fate or providence, as overruling all things, made itcommonly thought they were willing to excuse their sins by ascribing them to fate,as in the Apostolical Constitutions, B. VI. chap. vi. Perhaps under the same gen­eral name some difference of opinions in this point might be propagated, as is verycommon in all parties, especially in points of metaphysical subtilty: However ourJosephus, who in his bean was a great admirer of the piety of the Essens, was yetin practice a Pharisee, as he himself informs us, in his own life, sect. 2. vol. 111. Andbis account of this doctrine of the Pharisees, is for certain agreeable to his ownopinion, who ever both fully allowed the freedom of human actions, and yet stronglybelieved the powerful interposition of divine providence. See concerning this mat­ter a remarkable clause, Antiq. B. XVI. chap. xi. sect. 7.







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES Of THE JEWS. 185


with greater security, he spake kind words to them all, and dis­coursed to each of them after an agreeable and pleasant manner,by which means he quickly had a great body of men and anarmy about him, although the greater part of them were of thewicked, and the deserters. With these, whom he used as hisservants and soldiers, he went all over the country, and slew allthat he could find of Judas' party. But when Judas saw thatAlcimus was already become great, and had destroyed many ofthe good and holy men of the country, he also went all over thecountry, and destroyed those that were of the other's party.But when Alcimus saw that he was not able to oppose Judas,nor was equal to him in strength, he resolved to apply himselfto king Demetrius for his assistance; so he came to Antioch, andirritated him against Judas, and accused him, alleging that hehad undergone a great many miseries by his means, and that hewould do more mischief unless he were prevented, and broughtto punishment, which must be done by sending a powerful forceagainst him.
4. So Demetrius, being already of opinion that it would be athing pernicious to his own affairs to overlook Judas, now hewas becoming so great, sent against him Nicanor, the most kindand most faithful of all his friends; for he it was who fled awaywith him from the city of Rome. He also gave him as manyforces as he thought sufficient for him to conquer Judas withal,and bid him not to spare the nation at all. When Nicanor wascome to Jerusalem, he did not resolve to fight Judas immediately,but judged it better to get him into his power by treachery; sohe sent him a message of peace, and said, "there was no manner"of necessity for them to fight and hazard themselves; and that"he would give him his oath that he would do him no harm;"for that he only came with some friends, in order to let him"know what king Demetrius' intentions were, and what opin-"ion he had of their nation." When Nicanor had. deliveredthis message, Judas and his brethren complied with him, and sus­pecting no deceit, they gave him assurances of friendship, and re­ceived Nicanor and his army ; but while he was saluting Judas,and they were talking together; he gave a certain signal to his ownsoldiers, upon which they were to seize upon Judas; but he per­ceived the treachery, and ran back to his own soldiers, and fledaway with them. So upon this discovery of his purpose, andof the snares laid for Judas, Nicanor determined to make openwar -with him, and gathered his army together, and prepared forfighting him; and upon joining battle with him at a certain vil­lage called Capharsalama, he * beat Judas and forced him to flyto that citadel which was at Jerusalem.


* Joscphus' copies must hav« b««n corrupted when they her* give victory to Ni­







OCR Output








340 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. liook XV.


come upon him u danger that would hazard his entire domin­ions, after Antony had been beaten at the battle of Actium byCaesar [Octavian;} for at that time both Herod's enemies andfriends despaired of his affairs, for it was not probable that hewould remain without punishment, who had showed so muchfriendship for Antony. So it happened that his friends despair­ed, and had no hopes of his escape, but for his enemies, they alloutwardly appeared to be troubled at his case, but were privatelyvery glad of it, as hoping to obtain a change for the better.As for Herod himself, he saw that there was no one of royal dig­nity left but Hyrcanus, and therefore he thought it would be forhis advantage not to suffer him to be an obstacle in his way anylonger; for that in case he himself survived, and escaped the dan­ger he was in, he thought it the safest way to put it out of thepower of such a man to make any attempt against him, at such
C' mctures of affairs, as was more worthy of the kingdom thanimself; and in case he should bo slain by Caesar, his envyprompted him to desire to slay him that would otherwise beking after him.
2. While Herod had these things in his mind, there was a cer­tain occasion afforded him; for Hyrcanus was of so mild a tem­per, both then and at other times, that he desired not to meddlewith public affairs, nor to concern himself with innovations,but left all to fortune, and contented himself with what that af­forded him: But Alexandra [his daughter] was a lover of strifeand was exceeding desirous of a change of the government, andspake to her father not to bear for ever Herod's injurious treat­ment of their family, but to anticipate their future hopes, as hesafely might; and desired him to write about these matters toMalchus, who was then governor of Arabia, to receive them,and to secure them [from Herod,] for that if they went away,and Herod's affairs proved to be, as it was likely they would be,by reason of Caesar's enmity to him, they should then be the on­ly persons that could take the government, and this both on ac­count of the royal family they were of, and on account of thegood disposition of the multitude to them. While she used thesepersuasions, Hyrcanus put off her suit; but as she showed thatshe was a woman, and a contentious woman too, and would notdesist either night or clay, but would always be speaking to himabout these matters, and about Herod's treacherous designs, sheat last prevailed with him to entrust Dositheus, one of his friends,with a letter, wherein his resolution was declared; and he de­sired the Arabian governor to send to him some horsemen, whoshould receive him, and conduct him to the lake Asphaltites,which is from the bounds of Jerusalem three hundred furlongs:and he did therefore trust Dositheus with this letter, because he







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


"ties be taken from their proper receivers, I farther enjoin, that"the same be exactly returned to the Jews in that place."
6. " Caius Norbanus Flaccus, proconsul, to the magistrates"of the Sardians, sendeth greeting: Caesar hath written to me,"and commanded me not to forbid the Jews, how many soever"they be, from assembling together according to the custom of"their forefathers, nor from sending their money to Jerusalem:"I have therefore written to you, that you may know that both"Caesar and I would have you act accordingly."
7. Nor did Julius Antonius, the proconsul, write otherwise,"To the magistrates, senate, and people of the Ephesians, send-"eth greeting: As I was dispensing justice at Ephesus, on the"ides of February, the Jews that dwell in Asia demonstrated"to me, that Augustus and Agrippa had permitted them to"use their own laws and customs, and to offer those their first"fruits -which every one of them freely offers to the Deity on"account of piety, and to carry them in a company together"to Jerusalem without disturbance. They also petitioned me,"that I also would confirm what had been granted by Augus-"tus and Agrippa by my own sanction. I would therefore"have you take notice, that according to the will of Augustus"and Agrippa, I permit them to use and do according to the"customs of their forefathers without disturbance."
8. I have been obliged to set down these decrees, because thepresent history of our own acts will go generally among theGreeks; and I have hereby demonstrated to them that we haveformerly been in great esteem, and have not been prohibited bythose governors we were under from keeping any of the laws ofour forefathers; nay, that we have been supported by them,while we followed our own religion, and the worship we paidto God: and I frequently make mention of these decrees, in or­der to reconcile other people to us, and to take away the causesof that hatred which unreasonable men bear to us. As for our* customs, there is no nation which always makes use of thesame, and in every city almost we meet with them differentfrom one another; but natural justice is most agreeable to theadvantage of all men equally, both Greeks and Barbarians, towhich our laws have the greatest regard, and thereby render us,if we abide in them after a pure manner, benevolent and friendly


* The remaining part of this chapter is a remarkable one, as justly distinguish­ing natural justice, religion, and morality, from positive institutions in allcountries, and evidently preferring the former before the latter, as did the trueprophets of Ood always under the Old Testament, and Christ and his Apostlesalways under the New; whence our Josephns seems to have been at this timenearer Christianity than wen. th* Scrifces and Pharisees ot his age, who, as w«know from the New Testament, v«re entirely of a different opinion and practice.







OCR Output








121 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XT.


any one prepares against another, he without knowing of it,first contrives it against himself.
12. Wherefore Haman, who had immoderately abused the ho­nour he had from the king, was destroyed after this manner, andthe king granted his estate to the queen. He also called for Mor-decai, (for Esther had informed him that she was akin to him)and gave that ring to Mordecai which he had before given toHaman. The queen also gave Haman's estate to Mordecai; andprayed the king to deliver the nation of the Jews from the fearof death, and showed him what had been written over allthe country by Haman the son of Ammedatha: for that ifher country were destroyed, and her countrymen were toperish, she could not bear to live herself any longer. So theking promised her, that he could not do any thing that shouldbe disagreeable to her, nor contradict what she desired, but hebid her write what she pleased about the Jews, in the king'sname, and seal it with his seal, and send it to all his kingdom,for that those who read epistles whose authority is secured byhaving the king's seal to them, would no way contradict whatwas written therein. So he commanded the king's scribes to besent for, and to write to the nations on the Jews' behalf, and tohis lieutenants and governors, that were over his hundred twen­ty and seven provinces, from India to Ethiopia. Now the con­tents of this epistle were these: "* The great king Artaxerxes"to our rulers, and those that are our faithful subjects, sendeth"greeting: many men there are, who, on account of the great-a ness of the benefits bestowed on them, and because of the ho-"nour which they have obtained from the wonderful kind treat-"ment of those that bestowed it, are not only injurious to their"inferiors, but do not scruple to do evil to those that have been"their benefactors, as if they would take away gratitude from"among men, and by their insolent abuse of such benefits as they"never expected, they turn the abundance they have against"those that are the authors of it, and suppose they shall lie con-"cealed from God in that case, and avoid that vengeance which"comes from him. Some of these men, when they have had"the management of affairs committed to them by their friends,"and bearing private malice of their own against some others,"by deceiving those that have the power, persuade them to be"angry at such as have done them no harm, till they are in


* The true reason why king Artaxerxes did not here properly revoke his formerbarbarous decree for the universal slaughter of the Jews, but only empowered andencouraged the Jews to fight for their lives, to kill their enemies, if they attemptedtheir destruction, seems to have been that old law of the Mules and Persians, nutyet laid aside, that whatever decree was signed both by the king and his lords,could not be changed, but remained unalterable, Daniel vi. 7, 8, 9, 12, 15, 17.Esther i. 19. and viii. 8. And Haman having engrossed the royal favour, mightperhaps have himself signed this decree for the Jews' slaughter instead of the anciiutlords, and so might have rendered it by their rules irrevocable.







OCR Output








108 ANTIQUITIES or THE JEWS'. Book XI-


"Persia to have compassion on them, that he would also for-"give them their sins they had now committed, which, though"they deserved death, yet it was agreeable to the mercy of"God, to remit even to these the punishment due to them."
4. After Esdras had said this, he left off praying; and whenall those that came to him with their wives and children wereunder lamentation, one whose name was Jechonias a principalman in Jerusalem, came to him, and said, that they had sinned.in marrying strange wives; and he persuaded him to adjurethem all to cast those wives out, and the children born of theravand that those should be punished who would not obey the law.So Esdras hearkened to this advice, and made the heads of thepriests, and of the Levites, and of the Israelites, swear that theywould put away those wives and children; according to the ad­vice of Jechonias. And when he had received their oaths, hewent in haste out of the temple into the chamber of Johanan, theson of Eliasib, and as he had hitherto tasted nothing at all forgrief, so he abode there that day. And when proclamation wasmade, that all those of the captivity should gather themselves to­gether to Jerusalem, and those that did not meet there in two orthree days should be banished from the multitude, and that theirsubstance should be appropriated to the uses of the temple, ac­cording to the sentence of the elders, those that were of the tribesof Judah and Benjamin came together in three days, viz. on thetwentieth day of the ninth month, which according to the He­brews, is called Tebeth, and according to the Macedonians, Apel-leus. Now, as they were sitting in the upper room of the tem­ple, where the elders also were present, but were uneasy becauseof the cold, Esdras stood up, and accused them, and told them thatthey had sinned in marrying wives that were not of their ownnation; but that now they would do a thing both pleasing toGod, and advantageous to themselves, if they would put those'wives away. Accordingly they all cried out, that " they would"do so. That however the multitude was great, and that the"season of the year was winter, and that this work would re-"quire more than one or two days. Let their rulers, therefore,"[said they], and those that have married strange wives, come"hither at a proper time, while the elders of every place, that"are in common to estimate the number of those that have thus"married, are to be there also." Accordingly, this was resolv­ed on by them, and they began the inquiry after those that hadmarried strange wives on the first day of the next month, andcontinued the inquiry to the first day of the tenth month, andfound a great many of the posterity of Jeshua the high priest,and of the priests, and Levites, and Israelites, who had * a greater


* This procedure of Ezra, and of the best part of the Jewish nation, after theirreturn from the Babylonish captivity, of reducing the Jewish marriages once for ail.







OCR Output








166 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIT.


admitted him into it, on account of the riches that lay in thetemple; but led by his covetous inclination, (for he saw therewas in it a great deal of gold, and many ornaments that hadbeen dedicated to it of very great value,) and in order to plunderits wealth, he ventured to break the league he had made. So heleft the temple bare; and took away the golden candlesticks, andthe golden altar [of incense,] and table [of shew-bread,] and thealtar [of burnt-offering;] and did not abstain from even the vails,which were made of fine linen and scarlet. He also emptied itof its secret treasures, and left nothing at all remaining; and bythese means cast the Jews into great lamentation, for he forbadethem to offer those daily sacrifices which they used to offer toGod, according to the law. And when he had pillaged the wholecity, some of the inhabitants he slew, and some he carried cap­tive, together with their wives and children, so that the multi­tude of those captives that were taken alive amounted to aboutten thousand. He also burnt down the finest buildings; andwhen he had overthrown the city walls, he built * a citadel inthe lower part of the city, for the place was high, and over­looked the temple, on which account he fortified it with highwalls and towers; and put into it a garrison of Macedonians.However, in that citadel dwelt the impious and wicked part ofthe [Jewish] multitude, from whom it proved that the citizenssuffered many and sore calamities. And when the king had builtan idol altar upon God's altar, he slew swine upon it, and so of­fered a sacrifice neither according to the law, nor the Jewish re­ligious worship in that country. He also compelled them to for­sake the worship which they paid their own God, and to adorethose whom he took to be gods, and made them build temples,and raise idol altars in every city and village, and offer swineupon them every day. He also commanded them not to cir­cumcise their sons, and threatened to punish any that should befound to have transgressed his injunctions. He also appointedoverseers, who should compel them to do what he commanded.And indeed many Jews there were who complied with the king'scommands, either voluntarily or out of fear of the penalty thatwas denounced: but the best men, and those of the noblest souls,did not regard him, but did pay a greater respect to the customs


* This Citadel, of which we have such frequent mention in the following history,both in the Maccabees and in Josephus, seems to have been a castle built on a hill,lower than mount Zion, though upon its skirts, and higher than mount Mcriah, be­tween them both; which hill the enemies of the Jews now got possession of, andbuilt on it this citadel and fortified it, till a good while afterwards the Jews regainedit, and levelled the hill itself with the common ground, that their enemies mightno more recover it, and might thence overlook the temple itself, and do them suchmischief as they had long undergone from it, Antiq. B. XIII. chap. vi. sect. 6, Vol. II.







OCR Output








Chap. III. ANTIQUITIES or THE JEWS. 153


"tus. We also discharge them for the future from a third"part of their taxes, that the losses they have sustained may"be repaired. And all those citizens that have been carried"away, and are become slaves, we grant them and their chil-"dren their freedom; and give order that their substance be"restored to them."
4. And these were the contents of this epistle. He also pub­lished a decree, through all his kingdom, in honour of the tem­ple, which contained what follows: "It shall be lawful for"no foreigner to come within the limits of the temple round"about; which thing is forbidden also to the Jews, unless to"those who, according to their own custom, have purified"themselves. Nor let any flesh of horses, or of mules, or of"asses, be brought into the city, whether they be wild, or"tame; nor that of leopards, or foxes, or hares, and in"general, that of any animal which is forbidden for the Jews to"eat. Nor let their skins be brought into it; nor let any such"animal be bred up in the city. Let them only be permitted"to use the sacrifices derived from their forefathers, with"which they have been obliged to make acceptable atonements"to God. And he that transgresseth any of these orders, let him"pay to the priests three thousand drachmae of silver." More­over, this Antiochus bare testimony to our piety and fidelity, inan epistle of his, written when he was informed of a sedition inPhrygia and Lydia, at which time he was in the superior pro­vinces, wherein he commanded Zeuxis, the general of his for­ces, and his most intimate friend, to send some of our nationout of Babylon into Phrygia. The epistle was this:
"King ANTIOCHUS to ZEUXIS his father, sendeth greeting."
"If you are in health it is well. I also am in health. Hav-"ing been informed that a sedition is arisen in Lydia and"Phrygia, I thought that matter required great care: And"upon advising with my friends what was fit to be done, it"hath been thought proper to remove two thousand families of"Jews, with their effects, out of Mesopotamia and Babylon,"unto the castles and places that lie most convenient; for I am"persuaded that they will be well disposed guardians of our"possessions, because of their piety towards God, and because"I know that my predecessors have borne witness to them, that"they are faithful, and, with alacrity, do what they are desired"to do-. I will, therefore, though it be a laborious work, that"thou remove these Jews; under a promise, that they shall be"permitted to use their own laws. And when thou shalt have"brought them to the places forementioned, thou shalt give"every one of their families a place for building their houses,







OCR Output








276 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. BookXIV.


threatened him beforehand, if he did not do it. Which epistleof his was the occasion of Hyrcanus' delivering Herod fromsuffering any harm from the sanhedrim, for he loved him as hisown son. But when Herod stood before the sanhedrim withhis body of men about him, he affrighted them all, and no one ofhis former accusers durst after that bring any charge against him,but there was a deep silence, and nobody knew what was to bedone. When affairs stood thus, one whose name was * Semeas, arighteous man he was, and for that reason above all fear, who roseup, and said, "O you that are assessors with me, and O thou"that art our king, I neither have ever myself known such a case,"nor do I suppose that any one of you can name its parallel, that"one who is called to take his trial by us ever stood in such a"manner before us; but every one whosoever he be, that comes"to be tried by this sanhedrim, presents himself in a submissive"manner, and like one that is in fear of himself, and that en-"deavours to move us to compassion, with his hair dishevelled,"and in a black mourning garment: but this admirable man"Herod, who is accused of murder, and called to answer so heavy"an accusation, stands here clothed in purple, and with the hair"of his head finely trimmed, and with his armed men about him,"that if we shall condemn him by our law, he may slay us, and"by overbearing justice, may himself escape death. Yet do not"I make this complaint against Herod himself: he is to be sure"more concerned for himself than for the laws; but my com-"plaint is against yourselves, and your king, who gave him a"license so to do. However, take you notice, that God is"great, and that this very man, whom you are going to absolve"and dismiss, for the sake of Hyrcanus, will one day pun-"ish both you and your king himself also." Nor did Semeasmistake in any part of this prediction; for when Herod had re­ceived the kingdom, he slew all the members of this sanhedrim,and Hyrcanus himself also, excepting Semeas, for he had a greathonour for him on account of his righteousness, and because,when the city was afterwards besieged by Herod and Sosius, hepersuaded the people to admit Herod into it; and told them,"That for their sins they would not be able to escape his"hands." Which things will be related by us in their properplaces.
5. But when Hyrcanus saw that the members of the sanhe­drim were ready to pronounce the sentence of death upon He­rod, he put off the trial to another day, and sent privately toHerod, and advised him to fly out of the city, for that by thismeans he might escape. So he retired to Damascus, as though


* This account, as Hol:md observes, is confirmed by the Talmudiits, who call thisSemeas, Simeon the ton of Shetach.







OCR Output








Chap. XL ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 87


ment of them, he procured the belief of their truth, and theopinion of [a sort of] divinity for himself, among the multitude.He also wrote and left behind him what made manifest the ac­curacy and undeniable veracity of his predictions; For he saith,That " when he was in Susa, the metropolis of Persia, and went"out into the field with his companions, there was, on the sud-"den, a motion and concussion of the earth, and that he was"left alone by himself, his friends flying away from him; and"that he was disturbed, and fell on his face, and on his two"hands, and that a certain person touched him, and, at the same"time, bid him rise, and see what would befall his countrymen"after many generations. He also related, that when he stood"up, he was shown a great ram, with many horns growing out"of his head, and that the last was higher than the rest: that"after this he looked to the west, and saw a he-goat carried"through the air from that quarter; that he rushed upon the"ram with violence, and smote him twice with his horns, and*' overthrew him to the ground, and trampled upon him; that"afterward he saw a very great horn growing out of the head"of the he-goat, and that when it was broken off, four horns"grew up that were exposed to each of the four winds, and he"wrote that out of them arose another lesser horn, which, as he"said, waxed great; and that God showed to him, that it should"fight against his nation, and take their city by force, and bring"the temple-worship to confusion, and forbid the sacrifices to"be offered for one thousand two hundred and ninety-six days."Daniel wrote that he saw these visions in the plain of Susa; andhe hath informed us, that God interpreted the appearance of thisvision after the following manner; "He said that the ram signi-"fied the kingdoms of the Medes and Persians, and the horns*' those kings that were to reign in them: and that the last^' horn signified the last king, and that he should exceed all the"kings in riches and glory: that the goat signified that one"should come and reign from the Greeks, who should twice"fight with the Persian, and overcome him in battle, and should"receive his entire dominion; that by the great horn which"sprang out of the forehead of the he-goat was meant the first"king; and that the springing up of four horns upon its falling"off', and the conversion of every one of them to the four quar-"ters of the earth, signified the successors that should arise after"the death of the first king, and the partition of the kingdom"among them, and that they should be neither his children, nor"of his kindred, that should reign over the habitable earth for"many years; and that from among them there should arise"a certain king that should overcome our nation and their laws,"and should take away their political government, and should







OCR Output








136 ANTIQUITIES OF TH£ JEWS. Book XII.


the kingdom of Egypt, and held it forty years within one.He procured the * law to be interpreted; and set free those thatwere come from Jerusalem into Egypt, and were in slaverythere, who were an hundred and twenty thousand. The occa­sion was this: Demetrius Phalerius, who was library keeper tothe king, was now endeavouring, if it were possible, to gathertogether all the books that were in the habitable earth, andbuying whatsoever was any where valuable, or agreeable tothe king's inclination, (who was very earnestly set upon collect­ing of books;) to which inclination of his Demetrius was zeal­ously subservient. And when once Ptolemy asked him, Howmany ten thousands of books he had collected? he replied, Thathe had already about twenty times ten thousand, but that, in alittle time, he should have fifty times ten thousand. But hesaid, he had been informed that there were many books of lawsamong the Jews, worthy of inquiring after, and worthy of theking's library, but which being written in characters and in adialect of their own, will cause no small pains in getting themtranslated into the Greek tongue; that the character in whichthey are written seems to be like to that which is the propercharacter of the Syrians, and that its sound, when pronounced,is like theirs also; and that this sound appears to be peculiar tothemselves. Wherefore he said, that nothing hindered, whythey might not get those books to be translated also, for whilenothing is wanting that is necessary for that purpose, we mayhave their books also in this library. So the king thought thatDemetrius was very zealous to procure him abundance of-books,and that he suggested what was exceeding proper for him to do;and therefore he wrote to the Jewish high priest, that he should'act accordingly.
2. Now there was one Aristeus, who was among the king'smost intimate friends, and on account of his modesty veryacceptable to him. This Aristeus resolved frequently, and thatbefore now, to petition the king, that he would set all the cap­tive Jews in his kingdom free; and he thought this to be a con­venient opportunity for the making that petition. So he dis­coursed, in the first place, with the captains of the king's guards,Sosibius of Tarentum, and Andreas; and persuaded them toassist him in what he was going to intercede with the king for


* Of the translation of the other parts of the Old Testament by seventy EgyptianJews, in the reign of Ptolemy the son of Lagus, and Philadelphia; as also of the







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIgUITIES OF THE JEWS. 169


"other nations would obey the commands of Antiochus, either"out of fear, or to please him, yet would not he nor his sons"leave the religious worship of their country." But as soon ashe had ended his speech, there came one of the Jews into themidst of them, and sacrificed, as Antiochus had commanded. Atwhich Mattathias had great indignation, and ran upon him vio­lently, with his sons, who had swords with them, and slew boththe man himself that sacrificed, and Apelles the king's general,who compelled them to sacrifice, with a few of his soldiers. Healso overthrew the idol altar; and cried out, "If, said he, any"one be zealous for the laws of his country, and for the worship"of God, let him follow me." And when he had said this, hemade haste into the desert with his sons, and left all his substancein the village. Many others did the same also, and fled withtheir children and wives into the desert, and dwelt in caves.But when the king's generals heard this, they took all the forcesthey then had in the citadel at Jerusalem, and pursued the Jewsinto the desert; and when they had overtaken them, they in thefirst place endeavoured to persuade them to repent, and to choosewhat was most for their advantage, and not put them to thenecessity of using them according to the law of war. But whenthey would not comply with their persuasions, but continued tobe of a different mind, they fought against them on the Sabbath-day, and they burnt them, as they were in the caves, without re­sistance, and without so much as stoppingup the entrances of thecaves. And they avoided to defend themselves on that day,because they were not willing to break in upon the honour theyowed the Sabbath, even in such distresses, for our law requiresthat we rest upon that day. There were about a thousand, withtheir wives and children, who were smothered, and died in thesecaves; but many of those that escaped joined themselves to Mat­tathias, and appointed him to be their ruler, who taught themto fight, even on the Sabbath-day; and told them, that " unless"they would do so, they would become their own enemies, by"observing the law [so rigorously,] while their adversaries would"still assault them on this day, and they would not then defend"themselves, and that nothing could then hinder but they must"all perish without fighting." This speech persuaded them.And this rule continues among us to this day, that if there bea necessity, we may fight on Sabbath-days. So Mattathias gota great army about him, and overthrew their idol altars, andslew those that broke the laws, even all that he could get underhis power, for many of them were dispersed among the nationsround about them for fear of him. He also commanded, thatthose boys which were not yet circumcised should be circumcisednow; and he drove those away that were appointed to hinder suchtheir circumcision.







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. - 113


they had indignation at it: But when Nehemiah saw that thecity was thin of people, he exhorted the priests and the Levites,that they would leave the country, and remove themselves tothe city, and there continue: and he built them houses at hisown expense: and he commanded that part of the people whichwere employed in cultivating the land to bring the tithes ottheir fruits to Jerusalem, that the priests and Levites havingwhereof they might live perpetually, and might not leave thedivine worship ; who willingly hearkened to the constitutions otNehemiah, by which means the city Jerusalem came to be fullerof people than it was before. So when Nehemiah had donemany other excellent things, and things worthy of commenda­tion in a glorious manner, he came to a great age, and thendied. He was a man of a good and righteous disposition, andvery ambitious to make his own nation happy: and he hath leftthe walls of Jerusalem as an eternal monument for himself.Now this was done in the days of Xerxes.
CHAP. VI.
Concerning Esther, and Mordecai, and Human : and how in thereign of Artaxerxes, the 'whole nation of the Jews, loas indanger of perishing,
§ 1. AFTER the death of Xerxes, the kingdom came to betransferred to his son Cyrus, whom the Greeks called Artaxer­xes. When this man had obtained the government over thePersians, the whole * nation of the Jews, with their wives and


* Since some sceptical persons are willing to discard this book of Esther as notrue history; and even our learned and judicious Dr. Wall, in his late posthumouscritical notes upon all the other Hebrew books of the Old Testament, gives us noneupon the Canticles, or upon Esther, and seems thereby to give up this book, as wellas he gives up the Canticles, as indefensible: 1 shall venture to say, that almost allthe objections against this book of Esther are gone at once, if, as we certainly oughtto do, and as Dean Prideaux has justly done, we place this history under Artaxet-xes Longimanus, as doth both the Septuagint interpreters and Josephus. Thelearned Dr. Lee, in his posthumous dissertation on the second book of Esdras, page25. also says, That "the truth of this history is demonstrated by the feast of Furini,"kept up from that time to this very day. And this surprising providential revolu-"tion in favour of a captive people, thereby constantly commemorated, standeth even"upon a firmer basis than that there ever was such a man as king Alexander [the11 Great] in the world, of whose reign there is no such abiding monument at this djiy"to be found any where. Nor will they, I dare say, who quarrel at this or any other"of the sacred histories, find it a very easy matter to reconcile the different accounts"which were given by historians of the affairs of this king, or to confirm any one"fact of his whatever with the same evidence which is here given for the principal"fact in the sacred book, or even so much as to prove the^existence of such a person,"of whom so creat things are related, but upon granting this book of Esther, or"sixth of Esdras, (as it is placed in some of the most ancient copies of the Vulgate,)"to be a most true and certain history," &c.







OCR Output








Chap. VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 401


him, touching upon nothing but what tended to his glory, andopenly excusing many of his notorious crimes, and very diligentlyconcealing them. And as he was desirous to put handsomecolours on the death of Mariamne, and her sons, which werebarbarous actions in the king, he tells falsehoods about the in­continence of Mariamne, and the treacherous designs of his sonsupon him,; and thus he proceeded in his whole work, making apompous encomium upon what just actions he had done, but ear­nestly apologizing for his unjust ones. Indeed, a man, as I said,may have a great deal to say by way of excuse for Nicolaus; forhe did not so properly write this as a history for others, assomewhat that might be subservient to the king himself. Asfor ourselves, who come of a family nearly allied to the Asamoneankings, and on that account have an honourable place, which is thepriesthood, we think it indecent to say any thing that is falseabout them, and accordingly we have described their actions afteran unblemished and upright manner. And although we rever­ence many of Herod's posterity, who still reign, yet do we payA greater regard to truth than to them, and this though it some­times happens that we incur their displeasure by so doing.
2. And indeed Herod's troubles in his family seemed to beaugmented by reason of this attempt he made upon David's se­pulchre, whether divine vengeance increased the calamities he layunder, in order to render them incurable, or whether fortunemade an assault upon him in those cases, wherein the seasonable-ness of the cause made it strongly believed that.the calamitiescame upon him for his impiety; for the tumult was like a civil.war in his palace, and their hatred towards one another waslike that where each one strove to exceed another in calumnies.However, Antipater used stratagems perpetually against hisbrethren, and that very cunningly: While abroad he loaded themwith accusations, but still took upon him frequently to apologizefor them, that this apparent benevolence to them might make himbe believed, and forward his attempts against them, by which meanshe, after various manners, circumvented his father, who believedthat all he did was for his preservation. Herod also recommend­ed Ptolemy, who was a great director of the . affairs of his king­dom, to Antipater; and consulted with his mother about the pub­lic affairs also. And indeed these were all in all, and did whatthey pleased, and made the king angry against any other persons,as they thought it might be to their own advantage: but still thesons of Mariamne were in a worse and worse condition perpetu­ally, and while they were thrust out, and set in a more dishonour­able rank, who yet by birth were the most noble, they could notbear the dishonour. And for the women; Glaphyra, Alexan­der's wife, the daughter of Archelaus, hated Salome, both be­







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWg. 285


20. "The magistrates of the Laodiceans to Caius Rubilius,"the son of Caius, the consul, sendeth greeting: Sopater the"ambassador of Hyrcanus, the high priest, hath delivered us an"epistle from thee, whereby he lets us know, that certain am-"bassadors were come from Hyrcanus, the high priest of the"Jews, and brought an epistle written concerning their nation,"wherein they desire that the Jews may be allowed to observe"their Sabbaths, and other sacred rites, according to the laws"of their forefathers, and that they may be under no command,"because they are our friends and confederates, and that no-"body may injure them in our provinces. Now although the"Trallians there present contradicted them, and were not"pleased with these decrees, yet didst thou give order that they"should be observed, and informedst us that thou hadst been"desired to write this to us about them. We therefore, in obe-"dience to the injunctions we have received from thee, have"received the epistle which thou sentest us, and have laid it"up by itself among our public records. And as to the other"things about which thou didst send to us, we will take care"that no complaint be made against us."
21. "Publius Servillius, the son of Publius, of the Galban"tribe, the proconsul to the magistrates' senate, and people of"the Milesians, sendeth greeting: Prytanes the son of Hermes,"a citizen of yours, came to me when I was at Tralles, ano!"held a court there, and informed me that you used the Jews"in a way different from my opinion, and forbade them to ce-"lebrate their Sabbaths, and to perform the sacred rites re-"ceived from their forefathers, and to manage the fruits of the"land, according to their ancient custom, and that he had him-"self been the promulger of your decree, according as your"laws require: I would therefore have you know, that upon"hearing the pleadings on both sides, I gave sentence that the"Jews should not be prohibited to make use of their own cus-"toms."
22. The decree of those of Pergamus. When Cratippus wasprytanis, on the first day of the month Desius, the decree of thepretors was this: "Since the Romans, following the conduct of"their ancestors, undertake dangers for the common safety of"all mankind, and are ambitious to settle their confederates and"friends in happiness, and in firm peace; and since the nation"of the Jews, and their high priest Hyrcanus, sent as ambas-"sadors to them, Strato, the son of Theodatus, and Apollonius,"the son of Alexander, and Eneas, die son of Antipater, and"Aristobulus, the son of Amyntus, and Sosipater, the son of"Philip, worthy and good men, who gave a particular account"of their affairs, the senate thereupon made a decree about what







OCR Output








Chap. II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 143


figure, every angle had the same disposition of its sculptures, thatwhen you turned them about, the very same form of themwas turned about without any variation. Now that part ofthe crown-work that was inclosed under the table had itssculptures very beautiful, but that part which went round onthe outside was naore elaborately adorned with most beautifulornaments, because it was exposed to sight, and to the view ofthe spectators; for which reason it was that both those sideswhich were extant above the rest, were acute; and none of theangles, which we before told you were three, appeared less thananother, when the table was turned about. Now into the cord-work thus turned were precious stones inserted in rows parallelone to the other, inclosed in golden buttons, which had ouchesin them; but the parts which were on the side of the crown, andwere exposed to the sight, were adorned with a row of ovalfigures obliquely placed, of the most excellent sort of preciousstones, which imitated rods laid close; and encompassed the tableround about. But under these oval figures, thus engraven, theworkmen had put a crown all round it, where the nature of allsorts of fruit was represented, insomuch that the bunches ofgrapes hung up. And when they had made the stones to re­present all the kinds of fruit before mentioned, and that each inits proper colour, they made them fast with gold round the wholetable. The like disposition of the oval figures, and of theengravedrods, was framed under the crown, that the table might on eachside show the same appearance of variety, and elegancy of itsornaments, so that neither the position of the wave-work nor ofthe crown, might be different, although the table were turned onthe other side, but that the prospect of the most artificial contri­vances might be extended as far as the feet; for there was madea plate of gold of four fingers broad, through the entire breadthof the table, into which they inserted the feet, and then fastenedthem to the table by buttons, and button-holes, at the placewhere the crown was situate, that so on what side soever of thetable one should stand, it might exhibit the very same view ofthe exquisite workmanship, and of the vast expenses bestowedupon it: but upon the table itself they engraved a meander, in­serting into it very valuable stones in the middle, like stars of va­rious colours: the carbuncle and the emerald, each of which sentout agreeable rays of light to the spectators; with such stones ofother sorts also as were most curious, and best esteemed, asbeing most precious in their kind. Hard by this meander atexture of net-work ran round it, the middle of which appearedlike a rhombus, into which were inserted rock chrystal, and am­ber, which, by the great resemblance of the appearance theymade, gave wonderful delight to those that saw them. The







OCR Output








90 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XL


Cyrus read this, and admired the divine power, an earnest de­sire and ambition seized upon him, to fulfil what was so written;so he called for the most eminent Jews that were in Babylon,and said to them, that "he gave them leave to go back to their"own country, and to rebuild * their city Jerusalem, and the"temple of God, for that he would be their assistant, and that"he would write to the rulers and governors that were in the"neighbourhood of their country of Judea, that they should"contribute to them gold and silver for the building of the"temple, and besides that, beasts for their sacrifices."
3. When Cyrus had said this to the Israelites, the rulers ofthe two tribes of Judah and Benjamin, with the Levites, andpriests, went in haste to Jerusalem, yet did many of them stayat Babylon, as not willing to leave.their possessions; and whenthey were come thither, all the king's friends assisted them, andbrought in, for the building of the temple, some gold and somesilver, and some a great many cattle and horses. So they per­formed their vows to God, and offered the sacrifices that hadbeen accustomed of old time; I mean this upon the rebuilding oftheir city, and the revival of the ancient practices relating totheir worship. Cyrus also sent back to them the vessels of Godwhich king Nebuchadnezzar had pillaged out of the temple, andhad carried to Babylon. So he committed these things to Mith-ridates, the treasurer, to be sent away, with an order to givethem to Sanabassar, that he might keep them till the templewas built; and when it was finished, he might deliver them tothe priests and rulers of the multitude, in order to their beingrestored to the temple. Cyrus also sent an epistle to the gov­ernors that were in Syria, the contents whereof here follow:
"King CYRUS to SISINNES and SATHRABUZANES, sendetk"greeting.
"I have given leave, to as many of the Jews that dwell in my"country as please to return to their own country, and to re-"build their city, and to build the temple of God at Jerusalem,"on the same place where it was before. I have also sent my
i


* This leave to build Jerusalem, sect. 2, 5. and the epistle of Cyrus to Sisinnes andSitlmilmzimes, to the came purpose, are most unfortunately omitted in all our co­pies, but this best and completes! copy of Josephus, and by such omission the fa­mous prophecy of Isaiah, Isa. xliv. 23. where we are informed, that God said of, orto Cyrus, " He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure; even saying toJerusalem, Ihou shall be built, and to the temple, thy foundation shall be laid,"could not hitherto be demonstrated from the sacred history to have been completelyfulfilled; I mean as to that part of it which concerned his giving leave or commis­sion for rebuilding the city Jerusalem as distinct from the temple, whose rebuildingk alone permitted or directed in the decree of Cyrus in all our copies.







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 159


as much land as his father had appointed him to sow, and re­turned to him. And when he was come back, his father wasmightily pleased with his sagacity, and commended the sharp­ness of his understanding, and his boldness in what he did. Andhe still loved him the more, as if he were his only genuine son,while his brethren were much troubled at it.
7. But when one told him that Ptolemy had a son just born,and that all the principal men of Syria, and the other countriessubject to him, were to keep a festival, on account of the child'sbirthday, and went away in haste with great retinues to Alex­andria, he was himself indeed hindered from going by old age,but he made trial of his sons, whether any of them would bewilling to go to the king. And when the elder sons excusedthemselves from going, and said, they were not courtiers goodenough for such conversation, and advised him to send their bro­ther Hyrcanus, he gladly hearkened to that advice; and calledHyrcanus, and asked him, whether he would go to the king; andwhether it was agreeable to him to go or not? And upon hispromise that he would go, and his saying that he should not wantmuch money for his journey, because he would live moderately,and that ten thousand drachmae would be sufficient, he was plea­sed with his son's prudence. After a little while, the son advisedhis father not to send his presents to the king from thence,but to give him a letter to his steward at Alexandria, that hemight furnish him with money, for purchasing what should bemost excellent and most precious. So he thinking that the ex­pense of ten talents would be enough for presents to be made theking; and commending his son as giving him good advice, wroteto Arion his steward, that managed all his money matters atAlexandria; which money was not less than three thousand talentson his account, for Joseph sent the money he received in Syriato Alexandria. And when the day appointed for the paymentof the taxes to the king came, he wrote to Arion to pay them.So when the son had asked his father for a letter to this steward,and had received it, he made haste to Alexandria. And whenhe was gone, his brethren wrote to all the king's friends, thatthey should destroy him.
8. But when he was come to Alexandria, he delivered his let­ter to Arion, who asked him how many talents he would have?(hoping he would ask for no more than ten, or a little more,) hesaid he wanted a thousand talents. At which the steward wasangry and rebuked him, as one that intended to live extravagant­ly; and he let him know how his father had gathered together hisestate by pains-taking, and resisting his inclinations, and wishedhim to imitate the example of his father: he assured him withal,that he would give him but ten talents, and that for a present







OCR Output








Chap. I. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 49


't
bis country, he fell upon his face, and besought God, and entreat­ed him to assist them, now they had no other hope of relief. Healso sent some of his friends, and some of the priests, to the pro­phet Isaiah, and desired, that he would pray to God, and offersacrifices for their common deliverance, and so'put up supplica­tions to him, that he would have indignation at the expectationsof their enemies, and have mercy on his people. And whenthe prophet had done accordingly, an oracle came from God tohim, and encouraged the king and friends that were abouthim; and foretold, that "their enemies should be beaten with-"out fighting, and should go away in an ignominious manner,"and not with that insolence which they now show, for that"God would take care that they should be destroyed." He alsoforetold, that "Sennacherib the king of Assyria, should fail of"his purpose against Egypt, and that when he came home he"should perish by the sword."
4. About the same time also, the king of Assyria wrote anepistle to Hezekiah, in which he said, "he was a foolish man in"supposing that he should escape from being his servant, since"he had already brought under many and great nations; and he"threatened, that when he took him, he would utterly destroy"him, unless be now opened the gates, and willingly received his"army into Jerusalem." When he read this epistle, he despisedit on account of the trust that he had in God, but he rolled upthe epistle, and laid it up within the temple. And as he madehis farther prayers to God for the city, and for the preservationof all the people, the prophet Isaiah said, that " God had heard"his prayer, and that he should not be * besieged at this time by"the king of Assyria; that for the future he might be secure"'of not being at all disturbed by him; and the people might"go on peaceably, and without fear, with their husbandry and"other affairs." But after a little while, the king of Assyria, whenhe had failed of his treacherous designs against the Egyptians,returned home without success, on the following occasion: Hespent a long tune in the siege of Pelusium ; 'and when the banks


* What Josephus says here, how Isaiah the prophet assured Hezekiah, that "at"this time he should not be besieged by the king of Assyria, that for the future he"might be secure of being not at all disturbed by him; and that [afterward] the"people might go on peaceably, and without fear, with their husbandry and other"affaire," is more distinct in our other copies, both of the Kings and of Isaiah, anddeserves very great consideration. The words are these: "This shall be a sign unto"thee; ye shall eat this year such as groweth of itself; and the second year that which."springeth of the same; and in the third year sow ye, and reap, and plant vine-"yards, and eat the fruit thereof," 2 Kings xix. 20. Isa. xxxvii. 30. which seemto me plainly to design a sabbatic year, a year of Jubilee, next after it, and thesucceeding usual labours and fruits of them on the third and following years.







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 229


his attack against it, and besieged it with a great deal of pains,for he was greatly displeased with the Samaritans for the injuriesthey had done to the people of Merissa, a colony of the Jews,and confederate with them, and this in compliance to the kingsof Syria. When he had therefore drawn a ditch, and built adouble wall round the city, which were fourscore furlongs long,he set his sons Antigonus and Aristobulus over the siege, whichbrought the Samaritans to that great distress by famine, that theywere forced to eat what used not to be eaten, and to call for An-tiochus Cyzicenus to help them, who came readily to their assist­ance, but was beaten by Aristobulus, and when he was pursuedas far as Scythopolis by the two brethren, he got away: So theyreturned to Samaria, and shut them again within the wall, tillthey were forced to send for the same Antiochus a second timeto help them, who procured about six thousand men from Pto­lemy Lathyrus, which were sent them without his mother'sconsent, who had then in a manner turned him out of his go­vernment. With these Egyptians Antiochus did at first over­run and ravage the country of Hyrcanus after the manner of arobber, for he durst not meet him in the face to fight with him,as not having an army sufficient for that purpose, but only fromthis supposal, that by thus harassing his land he should forceHyrcanus to raise the siege of Samaria; but because he fell in­to snares, and lost many of his soldiers therein, he went awayto Tripoli, and committed the prosecution of the war againstthe Jews to Callimander and Epicrates.
3. But as to Callimander, he attacked the enemy too rashly,and was put to flight, and destroyed immediately; and as to E-picrates, he was such a lover of money, that he openly betrayedScythopolis, and other places near it, to the Jews, but was notable to make them raise the siege of Samaria. And when Hyr­canus had taken that city, which was not done till after a year'ssiege, he was not contented with doing that only, but he demo­lished it entirely, and brought rivulets to it to drown it, for hedug such hollows as might let the water run under it; nay, hetook away the very marks that there had ever been such a citythere. Now a very surprising thing is related of this high priestHyrcanus, how God came to discourse with him: for they say,that on the very same day on which his sons fought with An­tiochus Cyzicenus, he was alone in the temple, as high priest of­fering incense, and heard a voice, that " his sons had just then"overcome Antiochus." And this he openly declared beforeall the multitude upon his coming out of the temple; and it ac­cordingly proved true: and in this posture were the affairs ofHyrcanus.







OCR Output













OCR Output








Chap. XIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 241


upon the inhabitants of Gaza, and gave them leave to punishthem; so some went one way, and some went another, and slewthe inhabitants of Gaza; yet were not they of cowardly hearts;but opposed those that came to slay them, and slew as many ofthe Jews; and some of them, when they saw themselves de­serted, burnt their own houses, that the enemy might get noneof their spoils; nay, some of them with their own hands, slewtheir children and their wives, having no other way but this ofavoiding slavery for them; but the senators, who were in allfive hundred, fled to Apollo's temple (for this attack happenedto be made as they were sitting,) whom Alexander slew; andwhen he had utterly overthrown their city, he returned to Je­rusalem, having spent a year in that siege.
4c. About this very time * Antiochus, who was called Gry-pus died. His death was caused by Heracleon's treachery, whenhe had lived forty-five years, and had reigned f twenty-nine.His son Seleucus succeeded him in his kingdom; and made warwith Antiochus, his father's brother, who was called AntiochusCyzicenus, and beat him, and took him prisoner, and slew him.But after a while | Antiochus, the son of Cyzicenus, who wascalled Pius, came to Aradus, and put the diadem on his own head;and made war with Seleucus, and beat him, and drove him outof all Syria. But when he fled out of Syria, he came to Mop-suestia again, and levied money upon them; but the people ofMopsuestia had indignation at what he did, and burnt downhis palace, and slew him, together with his friends. Butwhen Antiochus, the son of Cyzicenus, was king of Syria,§ Antiochus the brother of Seleucus, made war upon him andwas overcome, and destroyed, he and his army. After him, hisbrother Philip put on the diadem, and reigned over some partof Syria; but Ptolemy Lathyrus sent for his fourth brother De­metrius, who was called Eucerus from Cnidus, and made himking of Damascus. Both these brothers did Antiochus vehe­mently oppose, but presently died; for when he was come as anauxiliary to Laodice, |] queen of the Gileadites, when she was


* This account of the death of Antiochus Grypus is confirmed by Appian, Syriac.p. 152. here cited by Spanheim.
f Porphyry says, that this Antiochui Grypus reigned but 26 years, as Dr Hudsonobserves.
| The copies of Josepbus, both Greek and Latin, have here so grossly false areading, Antiochus and Antoninus, or Antanms Plus for Antiochus J'ius, that theeditors are forced to correct the text from the other historians, who all agree that thisking's name was nothing more than Antiochus Pius,
§ These two brothers, Antiochus and Philippus, are called twins by Porphyry;the fourth brother was king of Damascus. Both which are the observations ofSpanheim.
| This Laodicea was a c'ty of Gilead beyond Jordan. However Porphyry







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 163


Joseph, the people grew seditious, on account of his sons; For'whereas the elders made war against Hyrcanus, who was theyoungest of Joseph's sons, the multitude was divided, but thegreater part joined with the elders in this war; as did Simonthe high priest, by reason he was of kin to them. However,Hyrcanus determined not to return to Jerusalem any more,but seated himself beyond Jordan; and was at perpetual warwith the Arabians, and slew many of them, and took manyof them captives. He also erected a strong castle, and builtit entirely of white stone to the very roof; and had ani­mals of a prodigious magnitude engraven upon it. He alsodrew round it a great and deep canal of water. He also madecaves of many furlongs in length, by hollowing a rock that wasover against him: and then he made large rooms in it, some forfeasting, and some for sleeping and living in. He introducedalso a vast quantity of waters which ran along it, and which werevery delightful and ornamental in the court. But still he madethe entrances at the mouth of the caves so narrow, that no morethan one person could enter by them at once: And the reasonwhy he built them after that manner was a good one; it wasfor his own preservation, lest he should be besieged by his bre­thren and run the hazard of being caught by them. Moreover,he built courts of greater magnitude than ordinary, which headorned with vastly large gardens. And when he had broughtthe place to this state, he named it Tyre. This place is betweenArabia and Judea, beyond Jordan, not far from the country ofHeshbon. And he ruled over those parts for seven years, evenall the time that Seleucus was king of Syria. But when he wasdead his brother Antiochus, who was called Epiphanes, tookthe kingdom. Ptolemy also the king of Egypt, died, who wasbesides called Epiphanes. He left two sons, and both young inage; the elder of which was called Philometer, and the youngestPhyscon. As for Hyrcanus, when he saw that Antiochus hada great army, and feared lest he should be caught by him, andbrought to punishment for what he had done to the Arabians,he ended his life, by slaying himself with his own hand; whileAntiochus seized upon all his substance.


VOL. II. X 19







OCR Output








222 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIII.


was in from them, and made haste into the city [Jerusalem,] asrelying on the good-will of the multitude, because of the bene­fits they had received from his father, and because of the ha­tred the same multitude bare to Ptolemy; so that when Ptolemywas endeavouring to enter the city by another gate, they drovehim away, as having already admitted of Hyrcanus.
CHAP. VIII.
Hyrcanus receives the high priesthood, and ejects Ptolemy out ofthe country. Antiochus makes war against Hyrcanus, and af­terwards makes a league with him.
§ 1. So Ptolemy retired to one of the fortresses that wasabove Jericho, which was called Dagon: but Hyrcanus havingtaken the priesthood that had been his father's before, and inthe first place propitiated God by sacrifices, he then madean expedition against Ptolenyy; and when he made his. at­tacks upon the place, in other points he was too hard for. him,but was rendered weaker than he, by the commiseration he hadfor his mother and brethren, and by that only, for Ptolemybrought them upon the wall, and tormented them in the sightof all, and threatened that he would throw them down headlong,unless Hyrcanus would leave off the siege. And as he thought,that so far as he relaxed as to the siege and taking of the place,so much favour did he show to those that were dearest to him bypreventing their misery, his zeal about it was cooled. How­ever, his mother spread out her hands, and begged of him thathe would not grow remiss on her account, but indulge his in­dignation so much the more, and that he would do his utmost totake the place quickly, in order to get their enemy under hispower, and then to avenge upon him what he had done to thesethat were dearest to himself; for that death would be to hersweet, though with torment, if that enemy of theirs might butbe brought to punishment for his wicked dealings to them.Now, when his mother said so, he resolved to take the fortressimmediately; but when he saw her beaten, and torn to pieces,his courage failed him, and he could not but sympathize withwhat his mother suffered, and was thereby overcome. And asthe siege was drawn out into length by this means, that yearon which the Jews use to rest came on, for the Jews observe thisrest every seventh year, as they do every seventh day; so that
»nd to be now utterly lost. See Sixtus Senensis* account of it, of its manyHebraisms, and its great agreement with Josephus' abridgment, in the Authem.Rec. part. I. 2O6, 207, 208.







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS, 77


'" excellent iii themselves, to be put to death, when thou cnjoinedst"them to do what was entirely above the reach of human wis-"dom, and requiredst of them what was the work only of God."Wherefore, as thou in thy sleep was solicitous concerning those"that should succeed thee in the government of the whole"world, God was desirous to show thee all those that should"reign after thee, and to that end exhibited to thee the follow-"ing drtam: Thou seemedst to see a great image standing be-"fore thee, the head of which proved to be of gold, the shoulders"and arms of silver, and the belly and thethighs of brass, but the"legs and the feet of iron ; after which thou sawest a stone bro-"ken off from a mountain, which fell upon the image and threw"it down and brake it to pieces, and did not permit any part of"it to remain whole, but the gold, the silver, the iron, and die"brass, became smaller than meal, which upon the blast of a vio-"lent wind, was by force carried away, and scattered abroad,"but the stone did increase to such a degree, that the whole earth"beneath it seemed to be filled therewith. This is the dream"which thou sawest, and its interpretation is as follows: The"head of gold denotes thee, and the kings of Babylon that have"been before theej but the two hands and arms signify this,"that your government shall be dissolved by two kings.; but an-*' other king that shall come from the west, armed with brass,"shall destroy that government; and another government that"shall be like unto iron shall put an end to the power of the far-"mer, and shall have dominion over all the earth, on account <«"the nature of iron, which is stronger than that of gold, of sil-"ver, and of brass." Daniel did also declare the meaning ofthe * stone to the king, but I do not think proper to relate it, sinceI have only undertaken to describe things past or things present,-tut not things that are future-: yet if any one be so .very-.desi­rous of knowing truth, as not to wave such points of .curiosity,and cannot curb his inclination for understanding the uncertain­ties of futurity, and whether they will happen or not,'let him bediligent in reading the book of Daniel, .which he will find amongthe sacred writings.
5. When Nebuchadnezzar heard this, and recollected his dream,lie was astonished at the nature of Daniel, and fell upon his face,


* Of this most remarkable passage in Josophus, concerning the stone cut out nj themountain, and destroyed the image, which he would not explain, hut intimated v> be* prophecy of futurity, and probably not safe for him to explain, as belonging to thedestruction of the Roman empire by Jesus Christ, the true Messiah of the Jews,tike the words of Havercamp, chap. x. sect. 4. "Nor is this to be wondei ed at, that"he would not now meddle with titings future, for he had no mind to provoke the"Romans, liy sneaking" of the destruction of that city which, tlwy calluUhe eternal.""







OCR Output








508 ANTlgUITJES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


Antigonus' garrisons withdrew themselves, and had great plentyof provisions. He also went thence, and resolved to destroythose robbers that dwelt in the caves, and did much mischief inthe country: so he sent a troop of horsemen, and three compa­nies of armed footmen against them. They were very neflr toa village called Arbela; and on the fortieth day after, he camehimself with his whole army; and as the enemy sallied outboldly upon him, the left wing of his army gave way, but heappearing with a body of men, put those to flight who wei e al­ready conquerors, and recalled his men that ran away. He al­so pressed upon his enemies, and pursued them as far as theriver Jordan, though they ran away by different roads. So heDrought over to him all Galilee, excepting those that dwelt inthe caves, and distributed money to every one of his soldiers,giving them a hundred and fifty drachmae a-piece, and muchmore to their captains, and sent them into winter quarters: atwhich time Silo came to him, and his commanders with him,because Antigonus would not give him provisions any longer,for he supplied them for no more than one month; nay, he hadsent to all the country about, and ordered them to carry off theprovisions that were there, and retire to the mountains, thatthe Romans might have no provisions to live upon, and so mightperish by famine: but Herod committed the care of that mat­ter to Pheroras, his youngest brother, and ordered him to re­pair Alexandrium also. Accordingly, he quickly made the sol­diers abound with great plenty of provisions, and rebuilt Alex­andrium, which had been before desolate.
5. About this time it was that Antony continued some timeat Athens, and that Ventidius, who was now in Syria, sent forSilo, and commanded him to assist Herod in the first place, tofinish the present war, and then to send for their confederates,for the war they were themselves engaged in ; but as for Herod,he went in haste against the robbers that were in the caves, andsent Silo away to Ventidius, while he marched against them.These caves were in mountains that were exceeding abrupt, andin their middle were no other than precipices, with certain en­trances into the caves, and those caves were encompassed withsharp rocks, and in these did the robbers lie concealed, with alltheir families about them; but the king caused certain chests tobe made, in order to destroy them, and to be hung down, boundabout with iron chains, by an engine, from the top of the moun­tain, it being not possible to get up to them, by reason of thesharp ascent of the mountains, nor to creep down to them fromabove. Now these chests were filled with armed men, whohadlonghooks in their hands, by which they might pull out such as re­sisted them, and then tumble them down, and kill them by so







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 17


their former miseries, but had such plenty, that two seahs ofbarley were bought for a shekel, and a seah of fine fkur for ashekel, according to the prophecy of Elisha. Now a seah isequal to an Italian modius and a half. The captain of the thirdband was the only man that received no benefit by this plenty;for as he was appointed by the king to oversee the gate, that hemight prevent the too great a crowd of the multitude, that theymight not endanger one another and perish, by treading on oneanother in the press, he suffered himself in that very way, anddied in that very manner, as Elisha had foretold such his death,when he alone of them all disbelieved what he said concerningthat plenty of provisions which they should soon have.
6. Hereupon, when Benhadad, the king of Syria, had escapedto Damascus, and understood that it was God himself that castall his army into this fear and disorder, and that it did not arisefrom the invasion of enemies, he was mightily cast down at hishaving God so greatly for his enemy, and fell into a distemper.Now it happened that Elisha the prophet, at that time, wasgone out of his own country to Damascus, of which Benhadadwas informed; he sent Hazael, the most faithful of all his ser­vants to meet him, and to carry him presents, and bade him in­quire of him about his distemper, and whether he should escapethe danger that it threatened. So Hazael came to Elisha withforty camels, that carried the best and most precious fruits thatthe country of Damascus afforded, as well as those which theking's palace supplied. He saluted him kindly, and said, That"he was sent to him by king Benhadad, and brought presents"with him, in order to inquire concerning his distemper, whe-"ther he should recover from it or not?" Whereupon theprophet bid him tell the king no melancholy news, but still hesaid he would die. So, the king's servant was troubled to hearit; and Elisha wept also, and his tears ran down plenteously athis foresight of what miseries his people would undergo afterthe death of Benhadad. And when Hazael asked, what wasthe occasion of this confusion he was in? he said, That " he"wept out of his commiseration for the multitude of the Israel-"ites, and what terrible miseries they will suffer by thee; for"thou wilt slay the strongest of them, and will burn their"strongest cities, and will destroy their children, and dash them"against the stones, and will rip up their women with child."And when' Hazael said, "How can it be that I should have"power enough to do such things? the prophet replied, "That"God had informed him that he should be king of Syria." Sowhen Ha?ael was come to Benhadad, he told him good newsconcerning his distemper; * but on the next day he spread a


Since Elijah did not live to anoint Hazaei king of Syria himself, as hsnpowored to do, 1 Kings xix. 15. it was most probably now done, iu bis







OCR Output








182 ANTICJUITJES or THE JEWS. Book XII.


to his end, when he had first courageously destroyed many ofhis enemies.
5. But Judas, seeing the strength of the enemy, retired to Je­rusalem, and prepared to endure a siege. As for Antiochus, hesent part of his army to Bethsura, to besiege it, and with therest of his army he came against Jerusalem; but the inhabitantsof Bethsura were terrified at his strength; and seeing that theirprovisions grew scarce, they delivered themselves up on the se­curity of oaths, that they should suffer no hard treatment fromthe king. And when Antiochus had thus taken the city, hedid them no other harm than sending them out naked. He alsoplaced a garrison of his own in the city. But as for the templeof Jerusalem, he lay at its siege a long time, while they withinbravely defended it, for what engines soever the king set againstthem, they set other engines again to oppose them. But thentheir provisions failed them; what fruits of the ground they hadlaid up were spent, and the land being not ploughed that year,continued unsowed, because it was the seventh year, on which,by our laws, we are obliged to let it lie uncultivated. And withalso many of the besieged ran away for want of necessaries, thatbut a few only were left in the temple.
6. And these happened to be the circumstances of such aswere besieged'in the temple. But then, because Lysias, thegeneral of the army, and Antiochus the king, were informedthat Philip was coming upon them out of Persia; and was en­deavouring to get the management of public affairs to himself,they came into these sentiments, to leave the siege, and to makehaste to go again to Philip; yet did they resolve not to let thisbe known to the soldiers nor to the officers: But the king com­manded Lysias to speak openly to their soldiers and the officers,without saying a word about the business of Philip: and to in­timate to them, that the siege would be very long: that theplace was very strong; that they were already in want of pro­visions; that many affairs of the kingdom wanted regulation:and that it was much better to make a league with the besieged,and to become friends to their whole nation, by permitting themto observe the laws of their fathers, while they broke out intothis war only because they were deprived of them, and so to de­part home. When Lysias had discoursed thus to them, boththe army and the officers were pleased with this resolution.
7. Accordingly the king sent to Judas, and to those that werebesieged with them, and promised to give them peace, and topermit them to make use of, and live according to the laws oftheir fathers. And they gladly received his proposals: andwhen they had gained security upon oath, for their perform­ance, they went out of the temple. But when Antiochus came







OCR Output








224 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIII.


those great numbers did nothing, he separated the useless partand excluded them out of the city, and retained that part onlywhich were in the flower of their age, and fit for war. How­ever Antiochus would not let those that were excluded go away,who therefore wandering about between the walls, and consum­ing away by famine, died miserably; but when the feast of ta­bernacles was at hand, those that were within commiserated theircondition, and received them in again. And when Hyrcanussent to Antiochus, and desired there might be a truce, for sevendays, because of the festival, he gave way to his piety towardsGod, and made that truce accordingly: and besides that, he sentin a magnificent sacrifice, bulls with their * horns gilded withall sorts of sweet spices, and with cups of gold and silver. Sothose that were at the gates received the sacrifices from thosethat brought them, and led them to the temple, Antiochus themeanwhile feasting his army; which was a quite different con­duct from Antiochus Epiphanes, who, when he had taken thecity, he offered swine upon the altar, and sprinkled the templewith the broth of their flesh, in order to violate the laws of theJews, and the religion they derived from their forefathers; forwhich reason our nation made war with him, and would neverbe reconciled to him: but for this Antiochus, all men calledhim Antiochus the Pious, for the great zeal he had about re­ligion.
3. Accordingly Hyrcanus took this moderation of his kindly;and when he understood how religious he was towards the Deity,he sent an embassage to him, and desired that he would restorethe settlements they received from their forefathers. So herejected the counsel of those that f would have him utterlydestroy the nation by reason of their way of living, which wasto others unsociable, and did not regard what they said. Butbeing persuaded that all they did was out of a religious mind,he answered the ambassadors, That if the besieged would deliverup their arms and pay tribute for Joppa, and the other citieswhich bordered upon Judea, and admit a garrison of his, onthese terms he would make war against them no longer. Butthe Jews, although they were content with the other conditions,did not agree to admit the garrison, because they could not as­sociate with other people, nor converse with them; yet were theywilling, instead of the admission of the garrison, to give him


* Dr. Hudson tells us here, that this custom of gilding the horns of those oxenthat were to be sacrificed, is a known thing both in the poets and orators.
f Thiii account in Josephus, that the present Antiochus, was persuaded, though invain, not to make peace with the Jews, but to cut them off utterly, is fully confirm­ed by Diodorus Siculus, in I'hotius' extracts out of his 34th Book.







OCR Output








270 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


sand of the Jews, armed men: He had also taken care the princi­pal men of the Arabians should come to his assistance; and onhis account it was that all the Syrians assisted him also, asnot willing to appear behind hand in their alacrity for Caesar, viz.Jamblicus the ruler, and Ptolemy his son, and Thoiomy the sonof Sohemus, who dwelt at mount Libanus, and almost all thecities. So Mithridates marched out of Syria, and came to Pe-lusium; and when its inhabitants would not admit him, he be­sieged the city. Now Antipater signalized himself here, and wasthe first who plucked down a part of the wall, and so opened away to the rest, whereby they might enter the city, and by thismeans Pelusium was taken: but it happened that the Egyp­tian Jews, who dwelt in the country called Onion, would not letAntipater and Mithridates, with their soldiers, pass to Caesar, butAntipater persuaded them to come over to their party, becausehe was of the same people with them, and that chiefly by show­ing them the epistles of Hyrcanus the high priest, wherein heexhorted them to cultivate friendship with Caesar, and to sup­ply his army with money, and all sorts of provisions which theywanted: and accordingly, when they saw Antipater and the highpriest of the same sentiments, they did as they were desired.And when the Jews about Memphis heard that these Jews werecome over to Caesar, they also invited Mithridates to come tothem; so he came and received them also into his army.
2. And when Mithridates had gone over all Delta, as theplace is called, he came to a pitched battle with the enemy, nearthe place called the Jewish camp. Now Mithridates had theright wing, and Antipater the left; and when it came to a fightthat wing where Mithridates was gave way, and was likely tosuffer extremely, unless Antipater had come running to himwith his own soldiers along the shore, when he had alreadybeaten the enemy that opposed him: so he delivered Mithri­dates, and put those Egyptians, who had been too hard for him, toflight. He also took their camp, and continued in the pursuitof them. He also recalled Mithridates, who had been worsted,and was retired a great way off; of whose soldiers eight hundredfell, but of Antipater's fifty. So Mithridates sent an account ofthis battle to Caesar, and openly declared, that Antipater was theauthor of his victory, and of his own preservation, insomuchthat Caesar commended Antipater then, and made use-of him allthe rest of that war in the most hazardous undertakings, he hap­pened also to be wounded in one of those engagements.
3. However, when Caesar, after some time, had finished thatwar, and was sailed away for Syria, he honoured Antipatergreatly, and confirmed Hyrcanus in the high priesthood; andbestowed on Antipater the privilege of a citizen of Rome, and*







OCR Output








Clmp. IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 157


to hear that offer; and because it augmented his revenues, hesaid he would confirm the sale of the taxes to him. But thenhe asked him this question, Whether he had any sureties thatwould be bound for the payment of the money? he answeredvery pleasantly, I will give such security, and those of personsgood and responsible, and which you shall have no reason to dis­trust. And when he bid him name them, who they were, hereplied, I give thee no other persons, O king, for my sureties,than myself and this thy wife; and you shall be security forboth parties. So Ptolemy laughed at the proposal, and grantedhim the farming of the taxes without any sureties. This pro­cedure was a sore grief to those that came from the cities intoEgypt, who were utterly disappointed; and they returned everyone to their own country with shame.
5. But Joseph took with him two thousand foot soldiers fromthe king, for he desired he might have some assistance, in orderto force such as were refractory in the cities to pay. And bor­rowing of the king's friends at Alexandria five hundred talents,he made haste back into Syria. And when he was at Askelon,and demanded the taxes of the people of Askelon, they refusedto pay any thing; and affronted him also: upon which he seizedupon about twenty of the principal men, and slew them, and ga­thered what they had together, and sent it all to the king: andinformed him what he had done. Ptolemy admired the pru­dent conduct of the man, and commended him for what he haddone; and gave him leave to do as he pleased. When the Sy­rians heard of this, they were astonished: and having beforethem a sad example in the men of Askelon that were slain, theyopened their gates, and willingly admitted Joseph, and paid theirtaxes. And when the inhabitants of Scythopolis attempted toaffront him, and would not pay him those taxes which they for­merly used to pay, without disputing about them, he slew alsothe principal men of that city, and sent their effects to the king.By this means he gathered great wealth together, and made vastgains by this farming of the taxes: and he made use of whatestate he had thus gotten, in order to support his authority, asthinking it a piece of prudence to keep what had been the oc­casion and foundation of his present good fortune; and this hedid by the assistance of what he was already possessed of, for heprivately sent many presents to the king, and to Cleopatra, andto their friends, and to all that were powerful about the court,and thereby purchased their good-will to himself.
6. This good fortune he enjoyed for twenty-two years: andwas become the father of seven sons, by one wife: he had alsoanother son, whose name was Hyrcanus, by his brother Soly-mius' daughter, whom he married on the following occasion.







OCR Output








Chap. IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 71


preparation, while the season lasted, of corn, and wine, and oil,that they might have whereon to feed during the winter. Whenhe had thus discoursed to them, he dismissed them, that everyone might dwell in what place of the country he pleased.
3. Now when this report was spread abroad as far as the na­tions that bordered on Judea, that Gedaliah kindly entertainedthose that came to him, after they had fled away, upon this (on­ly) condition, that they should pay tribute to the king of Baby­lon, they also came readily to Gedaliah, and inhabited the coun­try. And when Johanan and the rulers that were with himobserved the country, and the humanity of Gedaliah, they wereexceedingly in love with him, and told him that Baalis, theking of the Ammonites, -had sent Ishmael to kill him by treach­ery, and secretly, that he might have the dominion over the Is- -raelites, as being of the royal family; and they said that hemight deliver himself from this treacherous design, if he wouldgive them leave to slay Ishmael, and nobody should know it, forthey told him they were afraid that when he was killed by theother, the entire ruin of the remaining strength of the Israeliteswould ensue: But he professed, That " he did not believe what"they said, when they told him of such a treacherous design, in"a man that had been well treated by him; because it was not"probable that one who, under such a want of all things, had** failed of nothing that was necessary for him, should be found"so wicked and ungrateful towards his benefactor, that when*' it would be an instance of wickedness in him not to save him,"had he been treacherously assaulted by others to endeavour,"and that earnestly, to kill him with his own hand: That how-*' ever, if he ought to suppose this information to be true, it"was better for himself to be slain by the other, than to de-"stray a man who fled to him for refuge, and entrusted his own<( safety to him, and committed himself to his disposal."
4. So Johanan, and the rulers that were with him not beingable to persuade Gedaliah, went away : but after the interval 01thirty days was over, Ishmael came again to Gedaliah, to thetity Mispah and ten men with him, and when he had feastedIshmael, and those that were with him in a splendid manner, athis table, and had given them presents, he became disordered indrink, while he endeavoured to be very merry with them;and when Ishmael saw him in that case, and that he was drownedin his cups to the degree of insensibility, and fallen asleep, herose on a sudden, with his ten friends, and slew Gedaliahand those that were with him at the feast, and when he had slainthem, he went out by night, and slew all the Jews that were inthe city, and those soldiers also which were left therein by the'Babylonians: -But the next day fourscore men came out of the







OCR Output








Chnp. IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JF.W8. 179


may well wonder at this concerning the misfortune that befellthe forces commanded by Joseph and Azarias, which he under­stood would happen, if they broke any of the injunctions he hadgiven them. But Judas and his brethren, did not leave off fight­ing with the Idumeans, but pressed upon them on all sides, andtook from them the city of Hebron, and demolished all its forti­fications, and set all its towers on fire, and burnt the country ofthe foreigners, and the city Marissa. They came also to Ash-dod, and took it, and laid it waste, and took away a great dealof the spoils and prey that were in it, and returned to Judea.
CHAP. IX.
Concerning the death of Antiochus Epiphanes. How AntiochusEupator fought against Judas, and besieged him in the temple,and afterwards made peace with him and departed. Of Alci-mus and Onias.
§ 1. ABOUT this time it was that king Antiochus, as he wasgoing over the upper countries, heard, that there was a veryrich city in Persia, called Etymais ,' and therein a very richtemple of Diana, and that it was full of all sorts of donationsdedicated to it; as also weapons and breastplates, which,upon inquiry, he found had been left there by Alexander,the son of Philip, king of Macedonia. And being incited bythese motives, he went in haste to Elymais, and assaulted it, andbesieged it. But as those that were in it were not terrified athis assault, nor at his siege, but opposed him very courageously,he was beaten off his hopes; for they drove him away from thecity, and went out and pursued after him; insomuch that he fledaway as far as Babylon, and lost a great many of his army. Andwhen he was grieving for this disappointment, some personstold him of the defeat of his commanders whom he had left behindhim to fight against Judea, and what strength the Jews hadalready gotten: When this concern about these affairs was addedto the former, he was confounded, and by the anxiety he was in,fell into a distemper, which, as it lasted a great while, and as hispains increased upon him, so he at length perceived he shoulddie in a little time; so he called his friends to him, and toldthem, thathisdistemperwas severe upon him; and confessed with­al, that this calamity was sent upon him for the miseries he hadbrought upon the Jewish nation, while he plundered their tem­ple, and contemned their God, and when he had said this, hegave up the ghost. Whence one may wonder at Polybius ofMegalopolis, who, though otherwise a good man, yet saith,That " Antiochus died because he had a purpose to plunderVOL. n. z 21







OCR Output













OCR Output








Chap. XI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. S71


"rate them to you, since you well know them yourselves; but"as to that undertaking which 1 have a mind to set about at"present, and which will be a work of the greatest piety, and"excellence, that can possibly be undertaken by us, I will now"declare it to you. Our fathers indeed, when they were return-"ed from Babylon, built this temple to God Almighty, yet does"it want sixty cubits of its largeness in altitude; for so much did"that first temple which Solomon built exceed this temple; nor"let any one condemn our fathers for their negligence or want"of piety herein, for it was not their fault that the temple was"no higher; for they were Cyrus, and Darius the son of Hystas-"pes, who determined the measures for its rebuilding; and it"hath been by reason of the subjection of those fathers of ours"to them, and to their posterity, and after them to the Macedo-"nians, that they had not the opportunity to follow the origi-"nal model of this pious edifice, nor could raise it to its ancient"altitude: but since I am now, by God's will, your governor,"and I have had peace a long time, and have gained great rich-"es, and large revenues, and, what is the principal thing of all,"I am at amity with, and well regarded by, the Romans, who,"if I may so say, are the rulers of the whole world, I will do"my endeavour to correct that imperfection, which hath arisen"from the necessity of our affairs, and the slavery we have"been under formerly, and to make a thankful return, after the"most pious manner, to God, for what blessings I have received"from him, by giving me this kingdom, and that by rendering"his temple as complete as I am able."
2. And this was the speech which Herod made to them : butstill this speech affrighted many of the people, as being unex­pected by them; and, because it seemed incredible, it did not en-1courage them, but put a damp upon them, for they were afraidthat he would pull down the whole edifice, and not be able tobring his intentions to perfection for its rebuilding; and thisdanger appeared to them to be very great, and the vastness ofthe undertaking to be such as could hardly be accomplishedBut while they were in this disposition, the king encouragedthem, and told them, "he would not pull down their temple"till all things were gotten ready for building it up entirely"again." And as he promised them this beforehand, so he didnot break his word with them, but got ready a thousand wag­gons, that were to bring stones for the building, and chose outteti thousand of the-most skilful workmen, and brought a thou­sand sacerdotal garments for as many of the priests, and hadsome of them taught the arts of stone-cutters, and others ofcarpenters, and then began to build, but this not till everything was well prepared for the work.
VOL. 11. 3 A 27







OCR Output








Chap. XII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 237


to persuade men to do as he would have them, and a leader ofthe populace, made those of Ptolemais change their opinions:and said to them, That " it was better to run the hazard of be-"ing subject to the Jews, than to admit of evident slavery by"delivering themselves up to a master: and besides that, to"have not only a war at present, but to expect a much greater"war from Egypt, for that Cleopatra would not overlook an"army raised by Ptolemy for himself out of the neighbourhood,"but would come against them with a great army of her own,"and this because she was labouring to eject her son out of Cy-"prus also; that as for Ptolemy, if he fail of his hopes he can"still retire to Cyprus, but that they will be left in the greatest"danger possible." Now Ptolemy, although he had heard ofthe change that was made in the people of Ptolemais, yet did hestill go on with his voyage, and came to the country called Sy­camine, and there set his army on shore. This army of his inthe whole, horse and foot together, were about thirty thousand,with which he marched near to Ptolemais, and there pitched hiscamp: But when the people of Ptolemais neither received hisambassadors, nor would hear what they had to say, he was un- .der a very great concern.
4. But when Zoilus and the people of Gaza came to him, anddesired his assistance, because their country was laid waste bythe Jews, and by Alexander, Alexander raised the seige, for fearof Ptolemy: And when he had drawn off his army into his owncountry, he used a stratagem afterwards, by privately invitingCleopatra to come against Ptolemy, but publicly pretending todesire a league of friendship and mutual assistance with him; andpromising to give him four hundred talents of silver, he desiredthat, by way of requital, he would take off' Zoilus the tyrant,and give his country to the Jews. And then indeed Ptolemy,with pleasure, made such a league of friendship with Alexander,and subdued Zoilus; but when he afterward heard that he hadprivily sent to Cleopatra his mother, he broke the league withhim, which yet he had confirmed with an oath, and fell uponhim, and besieged Ptolemais, because it would not receive him.However, leaving his generals, with some part of his forces, togo on with the siege, he went himself immediately with the restto lay Judea waste ; and when Alexander understood this to bePtolemy's intention, he also got together about fifty thousandsoldiers out of his own country; nay, * as some writers have


* From these and otjier occasional expressions, dropped by Josephus, we may learn,that where the sacred books of the Jews were deficient, he had several other historiesthen extant, but now most of them lost, which he faithfully followed in his ownhistory.—Nor indeed have we any other records of those times, relating to Judea, thatcan be compared to these accounts of Josej hus, though when we do meet with authen­tic fragments of such original records, they do almost always confirm his history.







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 161


"he came to have so many bones before him?" he replied,"Very rightfully, my lord: for they are dogs that eat the flesh"and the bones together, as these thy guests have done, (looking"in the mean time at those guests), for there is nothing before"them; but they are men that eat the flesh, and cast away the"bones, as I, who am also a man, have now done." Upon whichthe king admired at his answer, which was so wisely made; andbid them all make an acclamation, as a mark of their approba­tion of his jest, which was truly a facetious one. On the nextday Hyrcanus went to every one of the king's friends, andof the men powerful at court, and saluted them; but stillinquired of the servants what present they would make theking on his son's birth-day? and when some said that theywould give twelve talents, and that others of greater dignitywould every one give according to the quantity of their riches,he pretended to every one to be grieved that he was not able tobring so large a present; for that he had no more than five ta­lents. And when the servants heard what he said, they told theirmasters, and they rejoiced in the prospect that Joseph would bedisapproved, and would make the king angry, by the smallness ofhis present. When the day came, the others, even those thatbrought the most, offered the king not above twenty talents; butHyrcanus gave to every one of the hundred boys, and hundredmaidens that he had bought, a talent a-piece, for them to carry,and introduced them, the boys to the king, and the maidens toCleopatra: every body wondering at the unexpected richness ofthe presents, even the king and queen themselves. He also pre­sented those that attended about the king with gifts to the valueof a great number of talents, that he might escape the dangerhe was in from them; for to these it was that Hyrcanus'brethren had written to destroy him. Now Ptolemy admiredat the young man's magnanimity; and commanded him to askwhat gift he pleased. But he desired nothing else to be done forhim by the king than to write to his father and brethren abouthim. So when the king had paid him very great respects, andhad given him very large gifts, and had written to his fatherand his brethren, and all his commanders, and officers about him,he sent him away. But when his brethren heard that Hyrca­nus had received such favours from the king, and was return­ing home with great honour, they went out to meet him, andto destroy him, and that with the privity of their father: for hewas angry at him for the [large] sum of money that he bestowedfor presents, and so had no concern for his preservation.However, Joseph concealed the anger he had at his son, out offear of the king. And when Hyrcanus' brethren came to fighthim, he slew many others of those that were with them; as also







OCR Output








CLap. VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 12?


riches they had. Now there was slain by the Jews that werein the country, and in the other cities, seventy-five thousand oftheir enemies, and these were slain on the thirteenth day of themonth, and the next day they kept as a festival. In like mannerthe Jews that were in Shushan gathered themselves together,and feasted on the fourteenth day and that which followed it;whence it is, that even now all the Jews that are in the hab­itable earth keep these days festival, and send portions to oneanother,. Mordecai also wrote to those Jews that lived in thekingdom of Artaxerxes to observe these days, and celebrate themas festivals, and to deliver them down to posterity, that this festi­val might continue for all time to come, and that it might neverbe buried in oblivion, for since they were about to be destroy­ed on these days by Haman, they would do a right thing, uponescaping the danger in them, and on them inflicting punishmentson their enemies, to observe those days, and give thanks to Godon them: for which cause the Jews still keep the foremention-ed days, and call them * days of Phurim [or Purim."] AndMordecai became a great and illustrious person with the king,and assisted him in the government of the people. He alsolived with the queen: so that the affairs of the Jews were bytheir means, better than they could ever have hoped for. Andthis was the state of the Jews under the reign of Artaxerxes.f


CHAP. VII.
How John slew his brother Jesus in the temple; and how Bagosesoffered many injuries to the Jews, and what Sanballat did.
j 1. WHEN Eliashab the high priest was dead, his sonJudas succeeded in the high priesthood: and when he was dead,his son John took that dignity; on whose account it was also


* Take here part of Reland's note on this disputed passage: "In Josephus*"copies these Hebrew words days nf Pvrim or Lots, as in Ihe Greek copies of"Esther, chap. ix. 26, 28—32. is read days of plnirim, or days of protection, but"ought to be read days ofpurim, as in the Hebrew; than which emendation, says"he, nothing is more certain." And had we any assurance that Josephus' copymentioned the casting af lots, as our other copies do. Esth. iii. 7. I should fullyagree with Reland, but as it now stands it seems to me by no means certain.
f As to this whole book of Esther in the present Hebrew copy, it is so very im­perfect, in a case where the providence of God was so very remarkable, and theSeptuagint and Josephus have so much of religion, that it has not so much as thename of God once in it; and it is hard to say who made that epitome which theMasorites have given us for the genuine book itself: no religious Jews could wellbe the authors of it, whose education obliged them to have a constant regard to Godand whatsoever related to his worship; nor do we know that there ever was so im­perfect a copy of it in the world till after the day* of Barchocab, in the secondcentury.







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE jtws. 29


/
ed, for the good counsel he had given them, and how he perish­ed after a most severe and violent manner for the good deedshis father had done to Jehoash.
4. However, it was not long before the king suffered punish­ment for his transgression; for when Hazael, king of Syria,made an irruption into his country, and when he had overthrownGath, and spoiled it, he made an expedition against Jerusalem:upon which Jehoash was afraid, and emptied all the treasures ofGod, and of the kings [before him], and took down the giftsthat had been dedicated, [in the temple], and sent them to theking of Syria, and procured so much by them, that he was notbesieged, nor his kingdom quite endangered, but Hazael was in­duced by the greatness of the sum of money not to bring his ar­my against Jerusalem: yet Jehoash fell into a severe distempter,and was set upon by his friends, in order to revenge the death ofZachariah the son of Jehoiada. These laid snares for the kingand slew him. He was indeed buried in Jerusalem, but not inthe royal sepulchres of his forefathers, because of his impiety;He lived forty-seven years, and Amaziah his son succeeded himin the kingdom.
5. In the one and twentieth year of the reign of Jehoash, Je-hoahaz, the son of Jehu, took the government of the Israelites inSamaria, and held it seventeen years. He did not [properly]imitate his father, but was guilty of as wicked practices as thosethat first had God in contempt: but the king of Syria broughthim low, and by an expedition against him did so greatly reducehis forces, that there remained no more of so great an army thanten thousand armed men, and fifty horsemen. He also tookaway from him his great cities, and many of them also, anddestroyed his army. And these were the things that the peopleof Israel suffered, according to the prophecy of Elisha, when heforetold that Hazael would kill his master, and reign over the ,Syrians and Damascenes. But when Jehoahaz was under such!unavoidable miseries, he had recourse to prayer and supplicationto God, and besought him to deliver him out of the hands ofHazael, and not overlook him, and give him up into his hands.Accordingly, God accepted of his repentance instead of virtue,and being desirous rather to admonish those that might repent,and not to determine that they should be utterly destroyed, hegranted him deliverance from wars and dangers. So the countryhaving obtained peace, returned again to its former condition,and flourished as before.
6. Now after the death of Jehoahaz, his son Joash took thekingdom, in the thirty-seventh year of Jehoash, the king of thetribe of Judak. This Joash then took the kingdom of Israel inSamaria, for he had the same name with the king of Jerusalem,







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ' ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 23


Jehu sent two epistles, the one to them that brought up the chil­dren, the other to the rulers-of. Samaria, which said, That"they should set up the most valiant of Ahab's sons for king,"for that they had abundance of chariots, and horses, and ar-"mour, and a great army, and fenced cities, and that by so do-"ing they might avenge the murder of Ahab." This he wrotet.o try the' intentions ;of those of Samaria. Now when the ru­lers, and those that had brought up the children, had read theletter, they were afraid, and,considering that they were not at allable to oppose him, and that he had already subdued two verygreat kings, they returnedhim thisanswer, That "they owned him"for their lord, and would do whatsoever he bade. them." Sohe wrote back to them, such a reply as enjoined them to obeywhat he gave order for, and to cut off the heads of Ahab's sons,and send them to him. Accordingly, the rulers sent for thosethat brought up the sons of Ahab, and commanded them to slaythem, to cut off their heads, and send them to Jehu. So theydid whatsoever they were commanded, without omitting anything at all, and put them up in wicker baskets, and sent themto Jezreel. And when Jehu, as he was at supper with his friends,was informed that the heads of Ahab's sons were brought, heordered them to make two heaps of them, one before each ofthe gates, and in the morning he went out to take a view ofthem, and when he saw them, he began to say to the people thatwere present, That "he dkl himself make an expedition against"his master [Joram], and slew him, but that it was not"he that slew all these: and he desired them to take notice,"that as to Ahab's family, all things had come to pass accord-"ing to God's prophecy, and his house was perished, according"as Elijah had foretold." And when he had farther destroy­ed all the kindred of Ahab that were found in Jezreel, he wentto Samaria; and as he was upon the road, he met the relationsof Ahaziah king of Jerusalem, and asked them, whether they weregoing? they replied, that they came to salute Joram, and theirown king Ahaziah, for they knew not that he had slain themboth: So Jehu gave orders that they should catch these, and killthem, being in number forty-two persons.
6. After these, there met him a good and a righteous man,whose name was Jehonadab ,' and who had been his friend of old.He saluted Jehu, and began to commend him, because he haddone every thing according to the will of God, in extirpating thehouse of Ahab. So Jehu desired him to come up into his cha­riot, and make his entry with him into Samaria; and toldhim, That "he would not spare one wicked man, but would"punish the false prophets, and false priests, and those that de-"ceived the multitude, and persuaded them to leave the wor-"ship of God Almighty, and to worship foreign gods : and that







OCR Output








Chap. II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 145


more by the diligence and generosity of the king, who not onlysupplied the artificers abundantly, and with great generosity,with what they wanted, but he forbade public audiences for thetime, and came and stood by the workmen, and saw the wholeoperation. And this was the cause why the workmen were soaccurate in their performance, because they had regard to theking, and to his great concern about the vessels, and so the moreindefatigably kept close to the work.
11. And these were what gifts were sent by Ptolemy to Je­rusalem, and dedicated to God there. But when Eleazar thehigh priest had devoted them to God, and had paid due respectto those that brought them, and had given them presents to becarried to the king, he dismissed them. And when they werecome to Alexandria, and Ptolemy heard that they were come, andthat the seventy elders, were come also, he presently sent for An­dreas and Aristeus, his ambassadors, who came to him, and de­livered him the epistle which they had brought him from the highpriest, and made answer to all the questions he put to them byword of mouth. He then made haste to meet the elders thatcame from Jerusalem, for the interpretation of the laws; and hegave command, that every body, who came on occasions, shouldbe sent away, which was a thing surprising, and what he did notuse to do, for those that there were drawn thither upon such oc­casions used to come to him on the fifth day, but ambassadors atthe month's end. But when he had sent those away, he waited forthese that were sent by Eleazar; but as the old men came in withthe presents, which the high priest had given them to bring tothe king, and with the membranes, upon which they had theirlaws written * in golden letters, he put questions to them con­cerning those books; and when they had taken off the coverswherein they were wrapt up, they showed him the membranes.So the king stood admiring the thinness of those membranes,and the exactness of the junctures; which could not be perceiv­ed, (so exactly were they connected one with another); and thishe did for a considerable time. He then said that he returnedthem thanks for coming to him, and still greater thanks to himthat sent them ; and, above all, to that God whose laws they ap­peared to be. Then did the elders, and those that were presentwith them, cry out with one voice, and wished all happinessto the king. Upon which he fell into tears by the violence ofthe pleasure he had, it being natural to men to afibrd the sameindications in great joy, that they do under sorrows. And when .he had bid them deliver the books to those that were appointed


* The Talmudists say, that it is not lawful to write the law in letters of gold,contrary to > this certain and very ancient example. See Hudson's and Reland'snotes here.







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. S9S


"them." He also exhorted Herod to lay all such suspicionsaside, and to be reconciled to his sons; for that it was not just togive any credit to such reports concerning his own children; andthat this repentance on both sides might still heal those breachesthat had happened between them, and might improve theirgood-will to one another, whereby those on both sides, excusingthe rashness of their suspicions, might resolve to bear a greaterdegree of affection towards each other than they had before. Af­ter Caesar had given them this admonition, he beckoned to theyoung men. When therefore they were disposed to fall downto make intercession to their father, he took them up, and em­braced them, as they were in tears, and took each of them dis­tinctly in his arms, till not one of those that were present,whether freeman or slave, but was deeply affected with whatthey saw.
5. Then did they return thanks to Caesar, and went awaytogether; and with them went Antipater, with a hypocriticalpretence that he rejoiced at this reconciliation. And in the lastdays they were with Caesar, Herod made him a present of threehundred talents, as he was then exhibiting shows andjargesses tothe people of Rome: and Caesar made him a present of half therevenue of the copper mines in Cyprus, and committed the careof the other half to him, and honoured him with other gifts andincomes: And as to his own kingdom, he left it in his ownpower to appoint which of his sons he pleased for his successor,or to distribute it in parts to every one, that the dignity mightthereby come to them all. And when Herod was disposed tomake such a settlement immediately, Caesar said, "He would"not give him leave to deprive himself, while he was alive, of"the power over his kingdom, or over his sons."
6. After this Herod returned to Judea again, but during hisabsence no small part of his dominions about Trachon had re­volted, whom yet the commanders he left there had vanquished,and compelled to a submission again. Now, as Herod was sail­ing with his sons, and was come over against Cilicia, to [theisland] Eleusa, which hath now changed its name for Sebaste,he met with Archelaus, king of Cappadocia, who received himkindly, as rejoicing that he was reconciled to his sons, and thatthe accasation against Alexander, who had married his daugh­ter, was at an end. They also made one another such presentsas it became kings to make. From thence Herod came to Judea,and to the temple, where he made a speech to the people, con­cerning what had been done in this his journey: " He also dis-"coursed to them about Caesar's kindness to him, and about as"many of the particulars he had done, as he thought it for his"advantage other people should be acquainted with. At last he







OCR Output








590 ANTIQUITIES or THE JEWS. Bodk XVI.


"the vilest things, and would certainly suffer the greatest pun-"ishments that were ever known among mankind."
2. These were the accusations which Herod laid with greatvehemency against his sons before Caesar. Now, the youngmen, both while he was speaking, and chiefly at his concluding,wept, and were in confusion. For, as to themselves, they knewin their own consciences they were innocent, but because theywere accused by their father, they were sensible, as the truth was,that it was hard for them to make their apology, since, thoughthey were at liberty to speak their minds freely as the occasionrequired, and might with force and earnestness refute the accusa­tion, yet was it not now decent so to do. There was thereforea difficulty how they should be able to speak, and tears, and atlength a deep groan followed, while they were afraid, that ifthey said nothing, they should seem to be in this difficulty froma consciousness of guilt, nor had they any defence ready, by rea­son of their youth, and the disorder they were under; yet wasnot Caesar unapprised, when he looked upon them in the con­fusion they were in, that their delay to make their defence didnot arise from any consciousness of great enormities, but fromtheir unskilfulness and modesty. They were also commiseratedby those that were there in particular, and they moved their fa­ther's affections in earnest, till he had much ado to conceal them.
3. But when they saw there was a kind disposition arisen bothin him and in Caesar, and that every one of the rest did eithershed tears, or at least did all grieve with them, the one of them,whose name was Alexander, called to his father, and attempted toanswer his accusation and said, " O father, the benevolence thou"hast showed to us is evident, even in this very judicial proce-"dure,for hadst thou had any pernicious intentions about us thou"hadst not produced us here before the common saviour of all,"for it was in thy power, both as a king, and as a father, to"punish the guilty, but by thus bringing us to Rome, and mak-"ing Caesar himself a witness to what is done, thou intimatest"-that thou intendest to save us, for no one that hath a design to"slay a man will bring him to the temples, and to the altars:"yet are our circumstances still worse, for we cannot endure to"live ourselves any longer, if it be believed that we have injur-"ed such a father; nay, perhaps it would be worse for us to"live with this suspicion upon us, that we have injured him,"than to die without such guilt: and if our open defence may"be taken to be true, we shall be happy, both in pacifying thee,"and in escaping the danger we are in, but if this calumny so"prevails, it is more than enough for us that we have seen the"sun this day ; which why should we see, if this suspicion be"fixed upon us? Now it is easy to say of young men, that they







OCR Output








218 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. BlX)k XIII.


hindered him from coming to Jerusalem; whereupon Tryphoremoved thence, and came into Celesyria, and falling vehement­ly upon the land of Gilead, he slew Jonathan there, and whenhe had given order for his burial, he returned himself to Anti-och. However, Simon sent some to the city Basea to bringaway his brother's bones, and buried them in their own cityModin; and all the people made great lamentation over him.Simon also erected a very large monument for his father and hisbrethren, of white and polished stone, and raised it a great height,and so as to be seen a long way off, and made cloisters about it,and set up pillars, which were of one stone a-piece; a work it waswonderful to see. Moreover, he built seven pyramids also forhis parents and his brethren, one for each of them, which weremade very surprising, both for their largeness and beauty, andwhich have been preserved to this day; and we know that it wasSimon who bestowed so much zeal about the burial of Jonathan,and the building of these monuments for his relations. NowJonathan died when he had been high priest * four years, andhad been also the governor of his nation. And these were thecircumstances that concerned his death.
7. But Simon, who was made high priest by the multitude,on the very first year of his high priesthood set his people freefrom their slavery under the Macedonians, and permitted themto pay tribute to them no longer; which liberty and freedomfrom tribute they obtained after a f hundred and seventy yearsof the kingdom of the Assyrians, which was after Seleucus, who


* There is some error in the copies here, when no more than four years are as­cribed to the high priesthood of Jonathan. We know by Josephus' last Jewishchronology, Antiq. B. XX. chap. x. vol. III. that there was an interval of sevenyears between the death of Alcimus or Jacimus, the last high priest, and the realpriesthood of Jonathan, to whom yet those seven years seem here to be ascribed, asa p:irt of them were to Judas before, Antiq. B. XII. chap. 3t. sect. 6. vol. II. Nowsince, besides these seven years' interregnum in the pontificate, we are told, Antiq.B. XX. chap. z. that Jonathan's real high priesthood lasted seven years more; thesetwo seven years will make up fourteen years, which I suppose was Josephus' ownnumber in this place, instead of the four in our present copies.
'(' These 17O years of the Assyrians mean no more, as Josephus explains himselfhere, than from the sera of Seleucus, which, as it is known to have began on the312th year before the Christian a;ra, from its spring in the first book of Maccabees,and from its autumn in the second book of Maccabees, so did it not begin at Baby­lon till the next spring, on the 311th year. See Prid. at the year 312. And it istruly observed by Dr. Hudson on this place, that the Syrians and Assyrians aresometimes confounded in ancient authors, according to the words of Justin theepitomizer of Trogus Pompeius, who says, That "the Assyrians were afterwardscalled Syrians," B. I. ch. xi. See Of the War, B. V. ch. ix. sect. 4. vol. IV. wherethe Philistines themselves, at the very south limit of Syria, in its utmost extent, ancalled Assyrians by Josephus, as Spanheim observes.







OCR Output








364 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEW*. Book XV.


be sufficient for a haven, wherein the great ships might lie insafety; and this he effected by letting down vast stones of abovefifty feet in length, not less than eighteen in breadth, and nine indepth, into twenty fathom deep, and as some were lesser, so wereothers bigger than those dimensions. This mole which he builtby the sea side was two hundred feet wide, the half of which wasopposed to the current of the waves, so as to keep off those waveswhich were to break upon them, and so was called Procymatia,or the first breaker of the waves, but the other half had upon ita wall, with several towers, the largest of which was namedDrusus, and was a work of very great excellence, and had itsname from Drusus, the son-in-law of Caesar, who died young.There were also a great number of arches where the marinersdwelt. There were also before them a key [or landing place,]which ran round the entire haven, and was a most agreeablewalk to such as had a mind to that exercise; but the entrance ormouth of the port was made on the north quarter, on which side'was the stillest of the winds of all in this place: and the basis ofthe whole circuit on the left hand, as you enter the port, sup­ported a round turret, which was made very strong, in order toresist the greatest waves, while on the right hand, as you enter,stood two vast stones, and those each of them larger than theturret, which was over against them: these stood upright, andwere joined together. Now there were edifices all along thecircular haven, made of the polished stone, with a certain eleva­tion, whereon was erected a temple, that was seen a great wayoff by those that were sailing for that haven, and had in it twostatues, the one of Rome, the other of Caesar. As the city it­self was called Caasarea, which was also itself built of fine ma­terials, and was of a fine structure; nay, the very subterraneanvaults and cellars had no less of architecture bestowed on themthan had the buildings above ground. Some of these vaults car­ried things at even distances to the haven and to the sea, but oneof them ran obliquely, and bound all the rest together, that boththe rain and the filth of the citizens were together carried offwith ease, and the sea itself, upon the flux of the tide fromwithout, came into the city, and washed it all clean. Herod alsobuilt therein a theatre of stone; and on the south quarter,behind the port, an amphitheatre also, capable of holding avast number of men, and conveniently situated for a prospectto the sea. So this city was thus finished in * twelve years;


* Cxsarea being here said to be rebuilt and adorned in twelve years, and soonafterwards in ten years, Antiq. B. XVI. ch. v. sect. 1. there must be a mistake inone of the places as to the true number, but which of them it is hard positively todetermine.







OCR Output








318 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book X V .


BOOK XV.
CONTAINING THE INTERVAL OF EIGHTEEN YEARS.
[FROM THE DEATH OF ANTIGONUS TO THE FINISHING OFTHE TEMPLE BY HEROD.]


CHAP. I.
Concerning Pollio and Sameas. Herod slays the principal ofAntigonus' friends, and spoils the city of its wealth, Antonybeheads Antigonus.
§ 1. H ow Sosius and Herod took Jerusalem by force; and,besides that, how they took Antigonus captive, has been relatedby us in the foregoing book. We will now proceed in the nar­ration. And since Herod had now the government of all Judeaput into his hands, he promoted such of the private men in thecity as had been of his party, but never left off avenging andpunishing every day those that had chosen to be of the party ofhis enemies: But Pollio, the Pharisee, and Sameas, a disciple ofhis, were honoured by him above all the rest, for when Jerusa­lem was besieged, they advised the citizens to receive Herod,for which advice they were well requited; but this Pollio, atthe time when Herod was once upon his trial of life and death,foretold, in way of reproach, to Hyrcanus and the other judges,how this Herod, whom they suffered now to escape, would after­ward inflict punishment on them all; which had its completionin tune, while God fulfilled the words he had spoken.
2. At this time Herod, now he had got Jerusalem under hispower, carried off all the royal ornaments, and spoiled the weal­thy men of what they had gotten; and when, by these means,he had heaped together a great quantity of silver and gold, hegave it all to Antony, and his friends that were about him. Healso slew forty-five of the principal men of Antigonus' party,and set guards at the gates of the city, that nothing might becarried out together with their dead bodies. They also searchedthe dead, and whatsoever was found, either of silver or gold,or other treasure, it was carried to the king; nor was there anyend of the miseries he brought upon them, and this distress wasin part occasioned by the covetousness of the prince regent, whowas still in want of more, and in part by the sabbatic year, which







OCR Output













OCR Output








5J4 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book IX.


"it was a most excellent and most pleasing sight to a good and"a righteous man to see the wicked punished." So Jehonadabwas persuaded by these arguments and came up into Jehu'schariot, and came to Samaria. And Jehu sought out for allAhab's kindred, and slew them. And being desirous that noneof the false prophets nor the priests of Ahab's god, might es­cape punishment, he caught them deceitfully by this wile: forhe gathered all the people together, and said, That " he would"worship twice as many gods as Ahab worshipped, and desired"that his priests, and prophets, and servants might be present"because he would offer costly and great sacrifices to Ahab's"god, and that if any of his priests were wanting, they should"be punished with death." Now Ahab's god.was called Baal.And when he had appointed a day on which he would offer thosesacrifices, he sent messengers through all the country of the Is­raelites, that they might bring the priests of Baal to him. SoJehu commanded to give all the priests vestments; and whenthey had received them, he went into the house [of Baal,] withhis friend Jehonadab, and gave orders to make search whetherthere were not any foreigner or stranger among them, for hewould have no one of a different religion to mix among theirsacred offices. And when they said that there was no strangerthere, and they were beginning their sacrifices, he set fourscoremen without,- they being such of his soldiers as he knew to bemost faithful to him, and bid them slay the prophets, and nowvindicate the laws of their country, which had been a long timein disesteem. He also threatened, that if any one of them es­caped, their own lives should go for them. So they slew themall with the sword, and burnt the house of Baal; and by thatmeans purged Samaria of foreign customs, [idolatrous worship.]Now this Baal was the god of the Tyrians; and Ahab, in orderto gratify his father-in-law, Ethbaal, who was the king of Tyreand Sidon, built a temple for him in Samaria, and appointed himprophets, and worshipped him with all sorts of worship, although,tvhen this god was demolished, Jehu permitted the Israelites toworship the golden heifers. However, because he had done thus,and taken care to punish the wicked, God foretold by his pro­phet, that his sons should reign over Israel for four generations:And in this condition was Jehu at this time.
CHAP. VII.
flow Athaliah reigned over Jerusalem for Jive [six] years, whenJehoiada the high priest slew her, and made Jehoash the sonof Ahaziah king.
§ 1. jN ow when Atnaliah, the daughter of Ahab heard ofthe death of her brother Jnram. and of her son Ahaziah,







OCR Output








30 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book IX.


and he retained the kingdom sixteen years. He was a * good manand in his disposition was not at all like his father. Now atthis time it was, that when Elisha the prophet, who was alreadyvery old, and was now fallen into a disease, the king of Israelcame to visit him; and when he found him very near death he be­gan to weep in his sight, and lament, "to call him his father,"and his weapons, because it was by his means that he never"made use of his weapons against his enemies, but that he over-"came his own adversaries by his prophecies, without fighting;"and that he was now departing this life, and leaving him to the"Syrians, that were already armed, and to other enemies of his"that were under their power: so he said it was not safe for"hun to live any longer, but that it would be well for him to"hasten to his end, and depart out of this life with him." As theking was thus bemoaning himself, Elisha comforted him, andbid the king bend a bow that was brought him; and when theking had fitted the bow for shooting, Elisha tookhold of his handsand bid him shoot; and when he had shot three arrows, and thenleft off", Elisha said, " If thou hadst shot more arrows thou hadst"cut the kingdom of Syria up by the roots, but since thou hast"been satisfied with shooting three times only, thou shalt fight"and beat the Syrians no more times than three, that thou may-"est recover that country which they cut off from thy king-"dom in the reign of thy father." So when the king had heardthat, he departed; and a little while after, the prophet died. Hewas a man celebrated for righteousness; and in eminent favourwith God. He also performed wonderful and surprising worksby prophesy, and such as were gloriously preserved in memoryby the Hebrews. He also obtained a magnificent funeral, sucha one indeed as it was fit a person so beloved of God should have.Jt also happened, that at that time certain robbers cast a manwhom they had slain into Elisha's grave, and upon his dead body,


* This character of Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, that he was a good man,"and in his disposition not at all like to his father," seems a direct contradictionto our ordinary copies, which say, 2 Kings xiii. 11. that "he did evil in thesight of the Lord; and that he departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam, theson of Nebat, who wade Israel to sin, he walked therein.'* Which copies arehere the truest, it is hard positively to determine. If Josephus' be true, this Jo-ash is the single instance of a good king over the ten tribes: If the other be true,we have not one such example. The account that follows in all copies, of Elisha<he prophet's concern for him, and his concern for Elisha, greatly favour Josephus'copies, and suppose this king to have been then a good man, and no idolater, withwhom God's piophets used not to be so familiar. Upon the whole, since it appearseven by Josephus' own account, that Amaziah the good king of Judah, while hewas a good king, was forbidden to make use of the 100,000 auxiliaries, he had ofthis Joash the king of Israel, as if he and they were then idolaters, 2 Chron. xxv.6—9. It is most likely that these different characters of Joash suited the differentparts of his reign, and that according to our common copies, he was at first a wickedking, and afterwards was reclaimed, and became a good one, according to Josephus,







OCR Output








Chap.V. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 207


"to pay any of these taxes from this time to all futurity."Take care therefore that a copy of this epistle be taken, and"given to Jonathan, and be set up in an eminent place of their"holy temple." And these were the contents of this writing.And now when Demetrius saw that there was peace everywhere; and that there was no danger, nor fear of war, he dis­banded the greatest part of his army, and diminished their pay,and even retained in pay no others but such foreigners as cameup with him from Crete, and from the other islands. How­ever, this procured him ill-will and hatred from the soldiers,on whom he bestowed nothing from this time, while the kingsbefore him used to pay them in time of peace, as they did be­fore, that they might have their good-will, and that they mightbe very ready to undergo the difficulties of war, if any occasionshould require it.
CHAP. V.
How Trypho, after he had beaten Demetrius, delivered the king­dom to Antiochus, the son of Alexander, and gained Jonathanfor his assistant: And concerning the actions and embassies ofJonathan.
§ 1. JN ow there was a certain commander of Alexander'sforces, an Apenemian by birth, whose name was Diodotus, andwas also called Trypho, took notice of the ill-will the soldiersbare to Demetrius, and went to Malchus the Arabian, whobrought up Antiochus the son of Alexander, and told him whatill-will the army bare Demetrius, and persuaded him to give himAntiochus, because he would make him king, and recover tohim the kingdom of his father. Malchus at the first opposedhim in this attempt, because he could not believe him, but whenTrypho lay hard at him for a long time, he over-persuaded him,to comply with Trypho's intentions and entreaties. And thiswas the state Trypho was now in.
2. But Jonathan the high priest, being desirous to get clearof those that were in the citadel at Jerusalem, and of the Jew­ish deserters, and wicked men, as well as of those in all the gar­risons in the country, sent presents and ambassadors to Deme­trius, and entreated him to take away his soldiers out of thestrong holds of Judea. Demetrius made answer, That after thewar, which he was now deeply engaged in, was over, he wouldnot only grant him that, but greater things than that also, andhe desired he would send him some assistance; and informed himthat his .army had deserted him. So Jonathan chose out threethousand of his soldiers, and sent them to Demetrius.







OCR Output








88 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book IX.


omitting the utmost instances of cruelty and barbarity; for heused such severity upon his own countrymen, as would not bepardonable with regard to strangers, who had been conqueredby him. And after this manner it was that this Menahem con­tinued to reign with cruelty and barbarity for ten years: Butwhen Pul, king of Assyria, had made an expedition against him,he did not meet to fight or engage in battle with the Assyrians,but he persuaded him to accept of a thousand talents of silver,and to go away, and so put an end to the war. This sum themultitude collected for Menahem, by * exacting fifty drachmaeas poll money for every head: after which he died, and wasburied in Samaria, and left his son Pekahiah his successor inthe kingdom, who followed the barbarity of his father, and soruled but two years only, after which he was slain with hisfriends at a feast, by the treachery of one Peknh, the general ofhis horse, and the son of Remaliah, who laid snares for him.Now this Pekah held the government twenty years, and proveda wicked man, and a transgressor. But the king of Assyria,whose name was Tiglath-Pilcser, when he had made an expedi­tion against the Israelites, and had" overrun all the land of Gi-lead, and the region beyond Jordan, and the adjoining country,which is called- Galilee, and Kadesh and Hazor, he made the in­habitants prisoners, and transplanted them into his own king­dom. And so much shall suffice to have related here concerningthe king of Assyria.
2. Now Jotham the son of Uzziah, reigned over the tribe of Ju-dah in Jerusalem, being a citizen thereof by his mother, whosename was Jerusha. This king was not defective in any virtue,but was religious towards God, and righteous towards men, andcareful of the good of the city, (for what parts soever wanted tobe repaired or adorned, he magnificently repaired and adornedthem.) He also took care of the foundations of the cloisters inthe temple, and repaired the walls that were fallen down, andbuilt very great towers, and such as were almost impregnable;and if any thing else in his kingdom had been neglected, he tookgreat care of it. He also made an expedition against the Ammon­ites, and overcame them in battle, and ordered them to pay


* Dr. Wall in hk critical notes on 2 Kings xv. 20. observes, "That whenthis Menahem is said to have exacted the money of Israel of all the mighty'men of wealth, of each man 50 shekels of silver, to give Pul, the king of Assy-'ria 1000 talents, this is the first public money raised by any [Israelite] king by'tax on the people; that they used before to raise it out of the treasures <A'the house of the Lord, or of their own house; that it was a poll money on the'rich men [and them only] to raise £353,000, or as others count a talent'£400,000 at the rate of £6 or £7 per head; and that God commanded, by Eze-'kiel, chap. xlv. 8. and xlvi. 18. that no such thing should be done fat the Jews"restoration,] but the king should hare land of his own."







OCR Output








56 ANTIQUITIES OF THX JEWS. Book X.


he made one Maaseiah the governor of the city, and Shaphanthe scribe, and Joash the recorder, and Eliakim the high priest,curators of the temple, and of the charges contributed thereto.'who made no delay, nor put off the work at all, but prepar­ed architects, and whatsoever was proper for those repairs, andset closely about the work. So the temple was repaired bythis means, and became a public demonstration of the king'spiety.
2. But when he was now in the eighteenth year of his reign,he sent to Eliakim the high priest, and gave order, that out ofwhat money was overplus, he should cast cups and dishes, andvials, for ministration [in the temple]; and besides, that theyshould bring all the gold and silver which was among the trea­sures, and expend that also in making cups and the like vessels:But as tie high priest was bringing out the gold, he light uponthe holy books of Moses that were laid up hi the temple, andwhen he had brought them out, he gave them to Shaphan thescribe, who, when he had read them, came to the king, and in­formed him that all was finished which he had ordered to bedone. He also read over the books to him, who, when he hadheard them read, rent his garment: and called for Eliakim thehigh priest, and for [Shaphan] the scribe, and for certain [other]of his most particular friends, and sent diem to Huldah the pro­phetess, the wife of Shall um, (which Shallum was a man of dig­nity and of an eminent family), and bid them go to her and say,That [he desired] " she would appease God, and endeavour to"render him propitious to them, for that there was cause to"fear, lest, upon the transgression of the laws of Moses by their*' forefathers, they should "be in peril of going into captivity,"and of being cast out of their own country; lest they should"be in want of all things, and so end their days miserably."When the prophetess had heard this from the messengers thatwere sent to her by the king, she bid them go back to the king,and say, that " God had already given sentence against them,"to destroy the people, and cast them out of their country, and"deprive them of all the happiness they enjoyed; which sen-"tence none could set aside by any prayers of theirs, since it was"passed on account of the transgressions of the laws, and ol"their not having repented in so long a time, while the pro-*' phets had exhorted them to amend, and had foretold the pu-"nishment that would ensue on their impious practices; which"threatening God would certainly execute upon them that*' they might be persuaded that he is God, and had not deceived"them in any-respect as to what he had denounced by his pro-"phets: that yet because Josiah was a righteous man, he"would- at present delay those calamities, but that after his







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 419


"their father's advantage so to do, lest some too severe proce-"dure should be gone upon, in that anger and disorder thev"were in, on occasion of the present suspicions; but that still"he had not promised to send them to Caesar: and that he had"not promised any thing else to the young men that could"show ill-will to him."
8. When these ambassadors were come to Rome, they had afit opportunity of delivering their letters to Caesar; because theyfound him reconciled to Herod; for the circumstance of Nico-laus' embassage had been as follows: As soon as he was cometo Rome, and was about the court, he did not first of all setabout what he was come for only, but he thought fit also toaccuse Sylleus. Now the Arabians, even before he came to talkwith them, were quarrelling one with another, and some of themleft Sylleus' party, and joining themselves to Nicolaus, inform­ed him of all the wicked things that had been done; and pro­duced to him evident demonstrations of the slaughter of a greatnumber of Obodas' friends by Sylleus, for when these men leftSylleus, they had carried off with them those letters wherebythey could convict him. When Nicolaus saw such an oppor­tunity afforded him, he made use of it, in order to gain his ownpoint afterward, and endeavoured immediately to make a recon­ciliation between Caesar and Herod; for he was fully satisfied, thatif he should desire to make a defence for Herod directly, heshould not be allowed that liberty; but that if he desired to accuseSylleus, there would an occasion present itself of speaking onHerod's behalf. So when the cause was ready for a hearing,and the day was appointed, Nicolaus, while Aretas' ambassadorswere present, accused Sylleus, and said, That "he imputed to"him the destruction of the king [Obodas,] and of many others"of the Arabians: that he had borrowed money, for no good"design; and he proved that he had been guilty of adultery, not"only with the Arabians, but Roman women also." And headded, That "above all the rest he had alienated Caesar from"Herod; and that all that he had said about the actions of He-"rod were falsities." When Nicolaus was come to this topic, Cae­sar stopped him from going on, and desired him only to spe:ikto this aflair of Herod's; and to show that " he had not led an"army into Arabia, nor slain two thousand five hundred men"there, nor taken prisoners, nor pillaged the country." To whichNicolaus made this answer, " I shall principally demonstrate,"that either nothing at all, or but a very little, of those imputa-"tions are true, of which thou hast been informed, for had they"been true, thou mightest justly have been still more angry"at Herod." At this strange assertion Caesar was very at­tentive; and Nicolaus said, That there was a debt due to He
VOL. II. 3 G 27







OCR Output








Chap. V. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 1H


wanted, and as he pleased. "Leave off thy sorrow then, said"the king, and be cheerful in the performance of thy office"hereafter." So Nehemiah worshipped God; and gave theking thanks for his promise, and cleared up his sad and cloudycountenance, by the pleasure he had from the king's promises.Accordingly, the king called for him the- next day, and gavehim an epistle to be carried to Adeus, the governor of Syria,and Phenicia, and Samaria; wherein he sent to him to pay duehonour to Nehemiah, and to supply him with what he wantedfor his building.
7. Now when he was come to Babylon and had taken withhim many of his countrymen, who voluntarily followed him,he ca«i« to Jerusalem in the twenty and fifth year of the reignof Xerxes: And when he had shown the * epistles to God, hegave them to Adeus, and to the other governors. He also calledtogether "all the people to Jerusalem, and stood in the midstof the temple, and made the following speech to them: "You"know, O Jews, that God hath kept our fathers Abraham, and"Isaac, and Jacob, in mind continually; and for the sake of their"righteousness hath not left off the care of you: Indeed he hath"assisted me in gaining this authority of the king to raise up our"wall, and finish what is wanting of the temple. I desire you,"therefore, who well know the ill-will our neighbouring nations"bear to us; and that when once they are made sensible that we"are in earnest about building, they will come upon us, and"contrive many ways of obstructing our works, that you will, in"the first place, put your trust in God, as in him that will assist"us against their hatred, and to intermit building neither night"nor day, but to use all diligence, and to hasten on the work;"now we have this especial opportunity for it." When he hadsaid this, he gave order that the rulers should measure the wall,and part the work of it among the people, according to their vil­lages and cities, as every one's abilities should require. Andwhen he had added this promise, that he himself, with his ser­vants, would assist them, he dissolved the assembly. So the Jewsprepared for the work: That is the name they are called by fromthe day that they came up from Babylon, which is taken from thetribe of Judah, which came first to these places, and thenceboth they and the country gained that appellation.
8. But now when the Ammonites, and Moabites, and Sama-


* This showing king Xerxes* epistles to God, or laying them open before God inthe temple, is very like the laying open the epistles of Sennacherib before him alsoty Hezekiah, 2 Kings xix. 14. Jsa xxxvii. 14. although this last was for a memo­rial, lo put him in mind of the enemies, in order to move that divine compassion,and the present a" a token of gratitude for mercies already received, as Havcvcamp'''til observes on this place.







OCR Output








S4G ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XV.


2. And now Herod sailed home with joy, at the unexpectedgood success he had had: and went first of all, as was proper, tothis his wife, and told her, and her only, the good news, as pre­ferring her before the rest, on account of his fondness for her,and the intimacy there had been between them, and saluted her;but so it happened, that as he told her of the good success he hadhad, she was so far from rejoicing at it, that she rather was sorryfor it; nor was she able to conceal her resentments, but, de­pending on her dignity, and the nobility of her birth, in returnfor his salutations, she gave a groan, and declared evidently thatshe rather grieved than rejoiced at his success, and this till He­rod was disturbed at her, as affording him not only marks ofher suspicion, but evident signs of her dissatisfaction. This muchtroubled him, to see that this surprising hatred of his wife tohim was not concealed, but open; and he took this so ill, and yetwas so unable to bear it, on account of the fondness he had for her,that he could not long continue in any one mind, but sometimeswas angry at her, and sometimes reconciled himself to her, butby always changing one passion for another, he was still in greatuncertainty, and thus was he entangled between hatred and love,and was frequently disposed to inflict punishment on her for herinsolence towards him, but being deeply in love with her in hissoul, he was not able to get quit of this-woman. In short as hewould gladly have her punished, so was he afraid lest ere he wereaware, he should, by putting her to death, bring a heavier pun­ishment upon himself at the same time.
3. When Herod's sister and mother perceived that he was inthis temper with regard to Mariamne, they thought they hadnow got an excellent opportunity to exercise their hatred againsther, and provoked Herod to wrath by telling him such long sto­ries and calumnies about her, as might at once excite his hatredand his jealousy. Now, though he willingly enough heardtheir words, yet had not he courage enough to do any thingto her, as if he believed them, but still he became worseand worse disposed to her, and these ill passions were more andmore inflamed on both sides, while she did not hide her disposi­tion towards him, and he turned his love to her into wrathagainst her. But when he was just going to put this matter pastall remedy, he heard the news that Caesar was the victor in thewar, and that Antony and Cleopatra were both dead, and thathe had conquered Egypt, whereupon he made haste to go to meetCaesar, and left the affairs of his family in their present state.However Mariamne recommended Sohemus to him, as he wassetting out on his journey, and professed that she owed himthanks for the care he had taken of her, and asked of the kingfor him a place in the government; upon which an honourable







OCR Output








216 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JKWS. Book XIII.


3. But when the people of Jerusalem heard that Jonathan wastaken, and that the soldiers who were with him were destroyed,they deplored his sad fate, and there was earnest inquiry madeabout him by every body, and a great and just fear fell uponthem, and made them sad, lest, now they were deprived of thecourage and conduct of Jonathan, the nations about them shouldbear them ill-will; and as they were before quiet on account otJonathan, they should now rise up against them, and by makingwar with them, should force them into the utmost dangers. Andindeed what they suspected really befell them, for when those na­tions heard of the death of Jonathan, they began to make warwith the Jews as now destitute of a governor; and Trypho him­self got an army together, and had an intention to go up to Judea;and make war against its inhabitants. But when Simon saw thatthe people of Jerusalem were terrified at the circumstances theywere in, he desired to make a speech to them, and thereby torender them more resolute in opposing Trypho when he shouldcome against them. He then called the people together into thetemple, and thence began thus to encourage them, "O my coun-"trymen, you are not ignorant that our father, myself, and my"brethren, have ventured to hazard our lives, and that willingly"for the recovery of your liberty; since I have therefore such"plenty of examples before me, and we of our family have de-"termined with ourselves to die for our laws, and our divine"worship, there shall no terror be so great as to banish this re-"solution from our souls, nor to introduce in its place a love of"life, and a contempt of glory. Do you therefore follow me"with alacrity whithersoever I shall lead you, as not destitute"of such a captain as is willing to suffer, and to do the great-"est things for you; for neither am I better than my brethren"that I should be sparing of my own life, nor so far worse than"they as to avoid and refuse what they thought the most honour-"able of all things, I mean to undergo death for your laws, and
for that worship of God which is peculiar to you; I will there­fore give such proper demonstrations as will show that I amtheir own brother; and I am so bold as to expect that I shallavenge their blood upon our enemies, and deliver you all withyour wives and children, from the injuries they intend againstyou, and with God's assistance, to preserve your temple from"destruction by them, for I see that these nations have you in"contempt, as being without a governor, and that they thence"are encouraged to make war against you."
4. By this speech of Simon's he inspired the multitude withcourage, and as they had been before dispirited through fear, theywere now raised to a good hope of better things, insomuch, that thewhole multitude of the people cried out all at once, that Simon







OCR Output








352 ANTIQUITIES OF THE IEWS. Book XV.


over the Idumeans, and somewhat more also; for he raised hishopes still higher, as having no small pretences, both by hisbirth and by these riches, which he had gotten by his constantattention to filthy lucre; and accordingly it was not a smallmatter that he aimed at. So Cleopatra desired this country ofAntony, but failed of her purpose. An account of this wasbrought to Herod, who was thereupon ready to kill Costobarus,yet upon the entreaties of his sister and mother, he forgave him,and vouchsafed to pardon him entirely, though he still had a sus­picion of him afterward for this his attempt.
10. But some time afterward, when Salome happened to quar­rel with Costobarus, she * sent him & bill of divorce, and dis=j.solved her marriage with him, though this was not according tothe Jewish laws; for with us it is lawful for a husband to doso; but a wife, if she departs from her husband, cannot of her­self be married to another, unless her former husband put heraway. However, Salome chose to follow not the law of herCountry, but the law of her authority, and so renounced herwedlock: and told her brother Herod, that she left her husbandAut of her good-will to him, because she perceired that he, with>wintipater and Lysimachus, and Dositheus, were raising a sedi-e- tion against him: as an evidence whereof, she alleged the caseof the sons of Babas, that they had been by him preserved alivealready for the interval of twelve years; which proved to betrue. But when Herod thus unexpectedly heard of it, he wasgreatly surprised at it, and was the more surprised, because therelation appeared incredible to him. As for the fact relating tothese sons of Babas, Herod had formerly taken great pains tobring them to punishment, as being enemies to his government,but they were now forgotten by him, on account of the length oftime [since he had ordered them to be slain.] Now, the causeof his ill-will and haired to them arose hence, that while Anti-gonus was king, Herod with his army, besieged the city of Je-


* Here is a plain example of a Jewibh lady giving a bill of divorce lo her hus-hand, though in the days of Josephus it was not esteemed lawful for a woman so tod<>. See the like among the Parthians, Antiq. B. XVIII. ch. ix. sect. 6. However,the Christian law, when it allowed divorce for adultery, Matt. v. 32. allowed theinnocent wife to divorce her guilty husband, as well as the innocent husband to di­vorce his guilty wit'i-, as we learn from the shepherd of Hermes, Aland. B. IV. andfjom the second apology of Justin Martyr, where a persecution was brought uponthe Christians upon such a divorce; and I think the Roman laws permitted it atthat time, as well as the laws of Christianity. Now this Bal-as, who was one of therace of the Asamoncans or Maccabees, as the latter end of this section informs us, isrelated by ihe Jews, as Dr. Hudson here remarks, to have been «o eminently religiousin the Jewish way, that the day following th« tenth of Tisri, the great day ofatonement, when he seems to hare supposed all his sins entirely forgiven, he usedevery day of the whole year to oiler a sacrifice for his sins of ignorance, or such ashe supposed he had been guilty of, but did not distinctly rcmcmler. See somewhatlike it of Agrippathc Great, Aniiq. B. XIX. ch. iii. sect. 3. vol. III. and Job. i. 4, S.







OCR Output








iiOO ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XI11.


They desired therefore the king to sit with his friends, and hearthe debates about these matters, and punish those with deathwho were baffled. Now Sabbeus and Theodosius managed theargument for the Samaritans, and Andronicus the son of Mes-salamus, for the people of Jerusalem; and they took an oath byGod and the king, to make their demonstrations according tothe law; and they desired of Ptolemy, that whomsoever heshould find that transgressed what they had sworn to, he wouldput him to death. Accordingly the king took several of hisfriends into the council, and sat down, in order to hear whatthe pleaders said. Now the Jews that were at Alexandria werein great concern for those men; whose lot it was to contend forthe temple at Jerusalem; for they took it very ill that any shouldtake away the reputation of that temple, which was so ancient,and so celebrated all over the habitable earth. Now when Sab­beus and Theodosius had given leave to Andronicus to speakfirst, he began to demonstrate out of the law, and out of thesuccessions of the high priests, how they every one in successionfrom his father had received that dignity, and ruled over thetemple; and how all the kings of Asia had honoured that templewith their donations, and with the most splendid gifts dedicatedthereto: But as for that at Gerizzim, he. made no account of it,nor regarded it, as if it had never had ateing. By this speech,and other arguments, Andronicus persuaded the king to * deter­mine that the temple at Jerusalem was built according to thelaws of Moses, and to put Sabbeus and Theodosius to death.And these were the events that befell the Jews at Alexandria inthe days of Ptolemy Philometer.


* A very unfair disputation this! while the Jewish disputant, knowing that hecould not properly prove out of the Pentateuch, that the place which the Lord theirCod shall choose t(\ place his name there, so often referred to in the book of Deuter­onomy, was Jerusalem any more than Gerizzim, that being not determined till thedays of David, Autiq. B. VII. ch. xiii. §. 4. vol. I. proves only, what the Samaritansdid not deny, that the temple at Jerusalem was much more ancient, and much morecelebrated and honoured than that at Gerizzim, which was nothing to the presentpurpose. The whole evidence, by the very oaths of both parties, being, we see, ob­liged to be confined to the law of Moses, or to the Pentateuch alone. Howeverworldly policy and interest, and the multitude prevailing, the court gave sentence,as usual on the stronger side, and poor Sabbeus and Theodosius, the Samaritan dis­putants, were martyred, and this so far as appears, without any direct hearing at all,which is like the usual practice of such political courts about matters of religion.Our copies say, (hat the body of the Jews were in a great concern about those menin the plural, who were to dispute for their temple at Jerusalem, whereas it seemshere they had but one disputant, Andronicus by name: perhaps more were prepar­ed to speak on the Jews' side; but the first having answered to his name, and msr-come the Samaritans, there was no necessity for any other defender of the Jerusa­lem temple.







OCR Output








832 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XV'


'' was of the highest dignity of any of her sex at that time in'' the world: and as to any advantage to be expected from such*' an undertaking, if any such could be supposed in this case, it'' would appear to deserve condemnation, on account of the in-'' solence he must take upon him in doing it. Which consider-'' ations made it very plain that in so doing he would find his'' government filled with mischiefs, both great and lasting,"both to himself and his posterity, whereas it was still in his"power to reject that wickedness she would persuade him to,"and to come off honourably at the same time." So by thusaffrighting Herod, and representing to him the hazard he must,in all probability, run by this undertaking, they restrained himfrom it. So he treated Cleopatra kindly, and made her presents,and conducted her on her way to Egypt.
3. But Antony subdued Armenia, and sent Artabazes, theson of Tigranes, in bonds with his children and procurators, toEgypt, and made a present of them, and of all the royal orna­ments which he had taken out of that kingdom, to Cleopatra.And Artaxias, the eldest of his sons, who had escaped at thattime, took the kingdom of Armenia; who yet was ejected byArchelaus and Nero Caesar, when they restored Tigranes, hisyounger brother, to that kingdom: But this happened a goodwhile afterward.
4. But then, as to the tributes which Herod was to pay Cleo­patra for that country which Antony had given her, he acted(airly with her, as deeming it not safe for him to afford anycause for Cleopatra to hate him. As for the king of Arabia,whose tribute Herod had undertaken to pay her, for some timeindeed he paid him as much as came to two hundred talents,but he afterward became very niggardly, and slow in his pay­ments, and could hardly be brought to pay some parts of it, andwas not willing to pay even them, without some deductions.
CHAP. V.
How Herod made war with the king of Arabia, and after theyhad fought many battles, at length conquered him, and leaschosen by the Arabs to be governor of that nation: As alsoconcerning a great earthquake.
4 1. HEREUPON Herod held himself ready to go against theking of Arabia, because of his ingratitude to him, and be­cause, after all, he would do nothing that was just to him, al­though Herod made the Roman war an occasion of delaying hisown, for the battle at Actium, was now expected, which fell in­to the hundred eighty and seventh Olympiad, where Caesar and







OCR Output








388 /iimgoiTiES OF THE JEWS. Book XVI.


whom he delivered to Agrippa, that he might take him alongwith him. together with many presents, that so he might be­come Caesar's friend, insomuch, that things already looked asif he had all his father's favour, and that the young men wereentirely rejected from any hopes of the kingdom.
CHAP. IV.
How, during Antipater's abode at Home, Herod brought Alex­ander and Aristobulus before C&sar, and accused them. Alex­ander's defence of himself before Caesar, and reconciliation tohisfather.
§ 1. AND now what happened during Antipater's absence,augmented the honour to which he had been promoted, andhis apparent eminence above his brethren, for he had made agreat figure in Rome, because Herod had sent recommendationsof him to all his friends there, only he was grieved that he wasnot at home, nor had proper opportunities of perpetually calum­niating his brethren; and his chief fear was, lest his father shouldalter his mind and entertain a more favourable opinion of thesons of Mariamne; and as he had this in his mind he did notdesist from his purpose, but continually sent from Rome anysuch stories as he hoped might grieve and irritate his fatheragainst his brethren, under pretence indeed of a deep concern forhis preservation, but in truth, such as his malicious mind dictated,in order to purchase a greater hope of the succession, which yetwas already great in itself; and thus he did till he hadexcitedsucha degree of anger in Herod, that he was already become very illdisposed towards the young men; but still, while he delayed toexercise so violent a disgust against them, and that he might noteither be too remiss, or too rash, and so offend, he thought it bestto sail to Rome, and there accuse his sons before Caesar, and notindulge himself in any such crime as might be heinous enoughto be suspected of impiety; but as he was going up to Rome, ithappened that he made such haste as to meet with Caesar at the *city Aquilei: So when he came to the speech of Caesai., he ask­ed for a time for hearing this great cause, wherein he thought


* Although Herod met Augustus at Aquilei, yet was this accusation of his sonsdeferred till they came to Rome, as sect. 3. assures, and as we are particularly in­formed in the history of the War, B. I. ch. xxiii. sect. 3. voL III. though what he heresays belonged distinctly to Alexander the elder brother. I mean his being broughtto Rome, is here justly extended to both the brothers, and that not only in ourcopies, but that in Zonoras also: nor is there reason to doubt but they were bothat this solemn hearing of Augustus, although the defence was made by Alexander(lone, who was the eldest brother, and one that could speak very well.







OCR Output








Chap. XII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 39


tribute a hundred talents and ten thousand cori of wheat, andas many of barley, every year, and so augmented his kingdom,that his enemies could not despise it, and his own people livedhappily.
3. Now there was at that time a prophet, whose name was Na-hum, who spake after this manner concerning the overthrow ofthe Assyrians, and Nineveh: "* Nineveh shall be a pool of"water in motion; so shall all her people be troubled, and toss-"ed, and go away by flight, while they say one to another, Stand,"stand still, seize their gold and silver, for there shall be no one"to wish them well, for they will rather save their lives than"their money; for a terrible contention shall possess them one"with another, and lamentation; and loosing of the members,"and their countenances shall be perfectly black with fear."And there will be the den of the lions, and the mother of the"young lions! God says to thee. Nineveh, that they shall de-"face thee, and the lion shall no longer go out from thee to give"laws to the world." And indeed this prophet prophesiedmany other things besides these concerning Nineveh, which I donot think necessary to repeat, and I here omit them that I maynot appear troublesome to my readers; all which things hap­pened about Nineveh a hundred and fifteen years afterwards;so this may suffice to have spoken of these matters.
CHAP. XII.
Haw upon the death of Jotham, Ahaz reigned in his stead ,' a-gainst whom Rezin, king of Syria, and PeJcah, king of Israelmade war ,' and how Tiglath-Pileser, king of Assyria, came tothe assistance of Ahaz, and laid Syria waste, and removingthe Damascenes into Media placed other nations in their room.
$ 1. _N ow Jotham died when he had lived forty-one years,and of them reigned sixteen, and was buried in the sepulchresof the kings; and the kingdom came to his son Ahaz, whoproved most impious towards God, and a transgressor of thelaws of his country. He imitated the kings of Israel, and rear­ed altars in Jerusalem, and offered sacrifices upon them to idols;to which also he offered his own son as a burnt-offering, accord­ing to the practices of the Canaanites. His other actions were


* This passage is taken out of the prophet Nahum, chap. ii. 8—13. and isthe principal, or rather the only one that is given us almost verbatim, but alittle abridged, in all Josephus' known writings: By which quotation, we learnthat he himself always asserts, viz, that he made use of the Hebrew original,[and not of the Greek vertionl ; as also we learn, that his Hebrew copy consider­ably differed from ours. See all three texts particularly set down and comparedtogether in the Essay on the Old Test. page. 187.







OCR Output








Chap. V. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 333


Antony were to fight for the supreme power of the world; butHerod having enjoyed a country that was very fruitful, and thatnow for a long time, and having received great taxes, and raisedgreat armies therewith, got together a body of men, and care­fully furnished them with all necessaries, and designed them asauxiliaries for Antony: But Antony said, he had no want of hisassistance; but he commanded him to punish the king of Arabia;for he had heard both from him, and from Cleopatra, how per­fidious he was; for this was what Cleopatra desired, who thoughtit for her own advantage, that those two kings should do oneanother as great a mischief as possible. Upon this message fromAntony, Herod returned back, but kept his army with him, inorder to invade Arabia immediately. So when his army ofhorsemen and footmen was ready, he marched to Diospolis,whither the Arabians came also to meet them, for they werenot unapprised of this war that was coming upon them; and af­ter a great battle had been fought, the Jews had the victory.But afterward there were gotten together another numerous ar­my of the Arabians, at Cana, which are places at Coelesyria. He­rod was informed of this beforehand: so he came marchingagainst them with the greatest part of the forces he had; andwhen he was come near to Cana, he resolved to encamp himself,and he cast up a bulwark, that he might take a proper seasonfor attacking the enemy, but as he was giving those orders, themultitude of the Jews cried out, that he should make no delay,but lead them against the Arabians. They went with great spi­rit, as believing they were in very good order, and those espe­cially were so that had been in the former battle, and had beenconquerors, and had not permitted their enemy so much as tocome to a close fight with them. And when they were so tu­multuous, and showed such great alacrity, the king resolved tomake use of that zeal the multitude then exhibited; and whenhe had assured them he would not be behindhand with them incourage, he led them on, and stood before them all in his ar­mour, all the regiments following him in their several ranks:Whereupon a consternation fell upon the Arabians; for whenthey perceived that the Jews were not to be conquered, and werefull of spirit, the greater part of them ran away, and avoidedfighting, and they had been quite destroyed, had not Athenionfallen upon the Jews, and distressed them, for this man wasCleopatra's general over the soldiers she had there, and was atenmity with Herod, and very wistfully looked on to see whatthe event of the battle would be: He had also resolved, that incase the Arabians did any thing that was brave and successful,he would He still, but in case they were beaten, as it really hap­pened, he would attack the Jews with those forces he had of his







OCR Output








Chap. VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 84>7


employment was bestowed upon him accordingly. Now, whenHerod was come into Egypt, he was introduced to Caesar withgreat freedom, as already a friend of his, and received very greatfavours from him; for he made him a present of those fourhundred Galatians who had been Cleopatra's guards, and restor­ed that country to him again, which by her means, had beentaken away from him. He also added to his kingdom, Gadara,Hippos, and Samaria: and, besides those, the maritime cities,Gaza, and Anthedon, and Joppa, and Strato's Tower.
4. Upon these new acquisitions, he grew more magnificent,and conducted Caesar as far as Antioch; but upon his return, asmuch as his prosperity was augmented by the foreign additionsthat had been made him, so much the greater were the distressesthat came upon him in his own family, and chiefly in the affairof his wife, wherein he formerly appeared to have been mostof all fortunate; for the affection he had for Mariamne wasno way inferior to the affections of such as are on that accountcelebrated in history, and this very justly. ^As for her, she wasin other respects a chaste woman, and faithful to him; yet hadshe somewhat of a woman rough by nature, and treated her hus­band imperiously enough, because she saw he was so fond of heras to be enslaved to her. She did not also consider seasonablywith herself that she lived under a monarchy, and that she was atanother's disposal, and accordingly would behave herself after asaucy manner to him, which yet he usually put off' in a jestingway, and bore with moderation and good temper. She wouldalso expose his mother and his sister openly, on account of themeanness of their birth, and would speak unkindly of them, in­somuch, that there was before this a disagreement and unpardon­able hatred among the women, and it was now come to greaterreproaches of one another than formerly, which suspicions in­creased, and lasted a whole year after Herod returned from Cae­sar. However, these misfortunes, which had been kept undersome decency for a great while, burst out all at once upon suchan occasion as was now offered; for as the king was one dayabout noon lain down on his bed to rest him, he called for Ma­riamne, out of the great affection he had always for her. Shecame in accordingly, but would not lie down by him: and whenhe was very desirous of her company, she showed her contemptof him; and added, by way of reproach, that he had caused * her


* Whereas Mariamne is here represented as reproaching Herod with the murderof \icrfather [Alexander,] as well as her brother [Aristobulus,] while it was hergrandfather Hyrcanus, ana not her father Alexander, whom be caused to be slain,fas Josephus himself informs us, ch. vi. sect. 2.) we must either take Zonora's read­ing, which is here grandfather rightly, or else we must, :u before, ch. i. sect. 1. allowa slip of Josephus' pen, or memory, in the place before us.
VOL. II XX . . 25







OCR Output








266 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


mdeed an eminent person and one of a great soul. However,the senate let his children go, upon Gabinius' writing to them,that he had promised their mother so much when she deliveredup the fortresses to him; and accordingly they then returned intoJudea.
2. Now when Gabinius was making an expedition against theParthians, and had already passed over Euphrates, he changedhis mind and resolved to return into Egypt, in order to * re­store Ptolemy to his kingdom. This hath also been related else­where. However, Antipater supplied his army, which he sentagainst Archelans, with corn and weapons, and money. Healso made those Jews who were above Felusium, his friends andconfederates, and had been the guardians of the passes that ledinto Egypt. But when he came back out of Egypt, he foundSyria in disorder, with seditions and troubles; for Alexander,the son of Aristobulus, having seized on the government asecond time by force, made many of the Jews revolt to him, andso he marched over the country with a great army, and slew allthe Romans he could light upon, and proceeded to besiege themountain called Gerrizzim, whither they had retreated.
3. But when Gabinius found Syria in such a state, he sent An­tipater who was a prudent man, to those that were seditious,to try whether he could cure them of their madness, and per­suade them to return to a better mind, and when he came tothem, he brought many of them to a sound mind, and inducedthem to do what they ought to do, but he could not restrainAlexander, for he had an army of thirty- thousand Jews, andmet Gabinius, and joining battle with him, was beaten, and lostten thousand of his men about mount Tabor.
4. So Gabinius settled the affairs which belonged to the cityJerusalem, as was agreeable to Antipater's inclination, and wentagainst the Nabateans, and overcame them in battle. He alsosent away in a friendly manner Mithridates and Orsanes, whowere Parthian deserters, and came to himr though the reportwent abroad that they had run away from him. And when Ga­binius had performed great and glorious actions, in his manage­ment of the affairs of war, he returned to Rome, and deliveredthe government to Crassus. Now, Nicolaus of Damascus, andStrabo of Cappadocia, both describe the expeditions of Pompeyand Gabinius against the Jews, while neither of them say anything new which is not in the other.
» Tliis history is best illustrated by Dr. Hudson out of Livy, who says,"That A. Gabinius the proconsul, restored Ptolemy to his kingdom of Egypt,"and ejected Archelaus, whom they had set up for king," &c. See Prid. at theyears 64 and 65.







OCR Output








10 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEW'S. Book IX.


ail went in haste, as to an advantage already gained, and cameto the enemies' camp, as supposing them destroyed already.But their hope deceived them, for as their enemies stoodround about them, some of them were cut to pieces, and othersof them were dispersed, and fled to their own country. Andwhen the kings fell into the land of Moab, they overthrew thecities that were in it, and spoiled their fields, and marred them,filling them with stones out of the brooks, and cut down thebest of their trees, and stopped up their fountains of water, andoverthrew their walls to their foundations. But the king ofMoab, when he was pursued, endured a siege, and seeing hiscity in danger of being overthrown by force, made a sally, andwent out with seven hundred men, in order to break throughthe enemies' camp with his horsemen, on that side where thewatch seemed to be kept most negligently : and when, upon trial,he could not get away, for he light upon a place that was care­fully watched, he returned into the city, and did a thing thatshowed despair and the utmost distress; for he took his eldestson, who was to reign after him, and lifting him up upon thewall, that he might be visible to all the enemies, he offered himas a whole burnt-offering to God, whom, when the kings saw,they commiserated the distress that was the occasion of it, andwere so affected, in way of humanity and pity, that they raisedthe siege, and every one returned to his own house. So Jeho-shaphat came to Jerusalem, and continued in peace there, andout-lived this expedition but a little time, and then died, havinglived in all sixty years, and of them reigned twenty-five. Hewas buried in a magnificent manner in Jerusalem, for he hadimitated the actions of David.
CHAP. IV.
Jehoram succeeds Jehoshaphat.- how Joram, his namesake, king ofIsrael, fought with the Syrians ,- and what wonders were doneby the prophet Elisha.
§ 1. JEHOSHAPHAT had a good number of children; buthe appointed his eldest son Jehoram, to be his successor, whohad the same name with his mother's brother, that was king ofIsrael, and the son of Ahab. Now when the king of Israel wascome out of the land of Moab to Samaria, he had with him Elishathe prophet, whose acts I have a mind to go over particularly,for they were illustrious and worthy to be related, as we haveset them down in the sacred books.
2. For they say that the * widow of Obadiah, Ahab's steward,


* That this woman who cried to Elisha, and who in our Bible is styled thewrfc of one of the sans of the jtrojihets, 2 Kings iv. 1. was no other than the







OCR Output








0t ANTIQUITIES OF THK JEWS. Book X,


phecy; but he was also made blind, and brought to Babylon,but did not see it, according to the prediction of Ezekiel.
3. We have said thus much, because it was sufficient to showthe nature of God to such as are ignorant of it, that it is various,and acts many different ways, ami that aU events happen aftera regular manner, in their proper season, and that foretells whatmust come to pass. It is also sufficient to show the ignoranceand incredulity of men, whereby they are not permitted to fore­see any thing that is future, and are, without any guard, ex­posed to calamities, so that it is impossible for them- to avoidthe experience of those calamities.
4. And after this manner have the kings of David's race endedtheir lives, being in number twenty-one, until the last king, whoaltogether reigned five hundred and fourteen years, and sixmonths, and ten days; of whom Saul, who was their first king,retained the government twenty years, though he was not of thesame tribe with the rest.
5. And now it was that the king of Babylon sent Nebuzara-dan, the general of his army, to Jerusalem, to pillage the temple,who had it also in command to burn it and the royal palace, andto lay the city even with the ground, and to transplant the peo­ple into Babylon. Accordingly, he came to Jerusalem in theeleventh year of king Zedekiah, and pillaged the temple, and car­ried out the vessels of God, both gold and silver, and particular­ly that large laver which Solomon dedicated, as also the pillars o«brass, and their chapiters, with the golden tables and the candle­sticks; and when he had carried these off, he set fire to the tem­ple in the fifth month, the first day of the month, on the eleventhyear of the reign of Zedekiah, and in the eighteenth year of Ne­buchadnezzar; he also burnt the palace, and overthrew thecity. Now the temple was burnt four hundred and seventyyears, six months and ten days, after it was built. It wasthen one thousand and sixty-two years, six months and ten days,from the departure out of Egypt; and from the deluge to thedestruction of the temple, the whole interval was one thousandnine hundred fifty-seven years, six months and ten days; but fromthe generation of Adam, until this befell the temple, there werethree thousand five hundred and thirteen years, six months andten days; so great was the number of years hereto belonging.And what actions were done during these years, we have parti­cularly related. But the general of tfie Babylonian king now over­threw the city to the very foundations, and removed all the peo­ple, and took for prisoners the liigh priest Seraiah, and Zepha-niah the priest that was next to him, and the rulers that guardedthe temple, who were three in number, and the eunuch who wasovw the armed men, and seven friends of Zedekiah, and his







OCR Output








S?4« ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book X.


good and a just man to give what he had promised, although theevents were of n melancholy nature. Accordingly, the king de­termined so to do. Now after a little while, both himself, andthe city, were taken by Cyrus, the king of Persia, who foughtagainst him j for it was Baltasar, under whom Babylon wastaken, when he had reigned seventeen years. And this is thecud of the posterity of king Nebuchadnezzar, as history informsus; but when Babylon was taken by Darius, and when he,with his kinsman Cyrus, had put an end to the dominion of theBabylonians, he was sixty-two years old. He wag the sou ofAstyages, and had another name among the Greeks. More­over, he took Daniel the prophet, and carried him with himinto Media, and honoured hirti very greatly, and kept him'withhim; for he was one of the three presidents whom he set overhis three hundred and sixty provinces, for into so many didDarius part them.
5. However, while Daniel was in so great a dignity, and in sogreat favour with Darius, and was alone intrusted with everything by him, as having somewhat divine in him, he was enviedby the rest; for those that see others in greater honour thanthemselves with kings, envy- them: and when those thatwere grieved at the great favour Daniel was in with Da­rius, sought for au occasion against him, he afforded themno occasion at all, for he was above all the temptations ofmoney, and despised bribery, and esteemed it a very base thingto take any thing by way of reward, even when it might bejustly given him, he afforded those that envied him not the leasthandle for an accusation. So when they could find nothing forwhich they might calumniate him to the king; nothing that wasshameful or reproachful, and thereby deprive him of the hon­our he was in with him, they sought for some other methodwhereby they might destroy him. When therefore they saw'that Dani«l prayed to God three times a-day, they thought they
had gotten an occasion by which they might ruin him; so theycame to Darius, and told him, That "the princes and governors"had thought proper to allow the multitude a relaxation for"thirty days, that no one might offer a petition or prayer either"to himself, or to the gods, but that he who shall transgress this"decree shall 'be cast into the den of lions, and there perish."
6. Whereupon, the king, being not acquainted with theirwicked design, nor suspecting that it was a contrivance of theirsagainst Daniel, said, he was pleased with this decree of theirs,and he promised to confirm what they "desired; he also publishedan edict to promulgate to the people that decree which the princeshad made. Accordingly, all the rest took care not to transgressthose injunctions, and rested in quiet; but Daniel had no regard







OCR Output








Chap. V. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 167


of their country, than concern as to the punishment which hethreatened to the disobedient; on which account they every dayunderwent great miseries, and bitter torments, for they werewhipped with rods, and their bodies were torn to pieces, andwere crucified, while they were still alive, and breathed: Theyalso strangled those women and their sons whom they had cir­cumcised, as the king had appointed, hanging their sons abouttheir necks as they were upon the crosses. And if there wereany sacred book of the law found, it was destroyed, and thosewith whom they were found, miserably perished also.
5. When the Samaritans saw the Jews under these sufferings,they no longer confessed that they were of their kindred, nor thatthe temple on mount Gerizzim belonged to Almighty God.This was according to their nature, as we have already shown.And they now said, that they were a colony of Medes and Per­sians: and indeed they were a colony of theirs. So they sentambassadors to Antiochus, and an epistle; whose contents arethese: "To king Antiochus the god, Epiphanes, a memorial"from the Sidonians, who live at Shechem. Our forefathers,"upon certain frequent plagues, and as following a certain an-"cient superstition, had a custom of observing that day which"by the Jews is called the Sabbath.* And when they had"erected a temple at the mountain called Gerizzim, though"without a name, they offered upon it the proper sacrifices."Now, upon the just treatment of these wicked Jews, those"that manage their affairs, supposing that we were of kin to"them, and practised as they do, make us liable to the same ac-"cusations, although we be originally Sidonians, as is evident"from the public records. We therefore beseech thee, our bene-"factor and saviour, to give order to Appollonius, the gover-"nor of this part of the country, and to Nicanor, the pro-"curator of thy affairs, to give us no disturbance, nor to lay to"our charge what the Jews are accused for, since we are aliens"from their nation, and from their customs; but let our tem-"pie, which at present hath no name at all, be named, The"temple of Jupiter Hellenius. If this were once done, we should"be no longer disturbed, but should be more intent on our own"occupation with quietness, and so bring in a greater revenue"to thee." When the Samaritans had petitioned for this, theking sent them back the following answer, in an epistle: " King"Antiochus to Nicanor. The Sidonians, who live at Shechem,"have sent me the memorial inclosed. When therefore we"were advising with our friends about it, the messengers sent


* This allegation of the Samaritans is remarkable, that though they were notJews, yet did they, from ancient times, observe the Sabbath-day, and as theyelsewhere pretend, the Sabbatic year also, Antiq. B. XII. chap. vii. sect. 6. Vol. II.







OCR Output








210 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIII.


was in it. When the inhabitants of Gaza saw themselves in thisstate of affliction, and that no assistance came to them from De­metrius, that what distressed them was at hand, but what shouldprofit them was still at a great distance, and it was uncertainwhether it would come at all or not, they thought it would beprudent conduct to leave off any longer continuance .with him,and to cultivate friendship with the other; so they sent to Jona­than, and professed they would be his friends, and afford himassistance; for such is the temper of men, that before they havehad the trial of great afflictions, they do not understand what isfor their advantage; but when they find themselves under suchafflictions, they then change their minds, and what it had beenbetter for them to have done before they had been at all dam­aged, they choose to do, but not till after they have sufferedsuch damages. However, he made a league of friendship withthem, and took from them hostages for their performance ofit, and sent these hostages to Jerusalem, while he went himselfover all the country as far as Damascus.
6. But when he heard that the generals of Demetrius' forceswere come to the city Kadesh with a numerous army, (theplace lies between the land of the Tyrians and Galilee,) for theysupposed they should hereby draw him out of Syria, in orderto preserve Galilee, and that he would not overlook the Gali­leans, who were his own people, when war was made upon them,he went to meet them, having left Simon in Judea, who raisedas great an army as he was able out of the country, and thensat down before Bethsura, and besieged it, that being the strong­est place in all Judea; and a garrison of Demetrius' kept it,as we have already related. But as Simon was raising banks,and bringing his engines of war against Bethsura, and was veryearnest about the siege of it, the garrison was afraid lest theplace should be taken of Simon by force, and they put to thesword; so they sent to Simon, and desired the security 'of hisoath, that they should come to no harm from him, and thatthey would leave the place, and go away to Demetrius. Ac­cordingly he gave them his oath, and ejected them out of thecity, and he put therein a garrison of his own.
7. But Jonathan removed out of Galilee, and from the wa­ters which are called Gennesar, for there he was before en­camped, and came into the plain that is called Asor, withoutknowing that the enemy was there. When therefore Deme­trius' men knew a day beforehand, that Jonathan was comingagainst them, they laid an ambush in the mountain, who wereto assault him on the sudden, while they themselves met himwith an army in the plain: which army when Jonathan sawready to engage him, he also got ready his own soldiers for the







OCR Output








/ >J • t ATI I -"A- t


h&l
'Jay'


^ -
ANTIQUITIES


JEWS.


BOOK IX.


CONTAINING THE INTERVAL OF ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-
SEVEN YEARS.
[FROM THE DEATH OF AHAB TO THE CAPTIVITY OF THETEN TRIBES.]


CHAP. I.
Concerning Jehoshaphat again; homo he constituted- judges, andby God's assistance, overcame his enemies.
§ 1. WHEN Jehoshaphat the king was come to Jerusa­lem, from the assistance he had afforded Ahab, the king ofIsrael, when he fought with Benhadad, king of Syria, the pro­phet Jehu met him, and accused him for assisting Ahab, aman both impious and wicked; and said to him, That " God"was displeased with him for so doing, but that he delivered"him from the enemy, notwithstanding he had sinned, because"of his own proper disposition, which was good." Whereuponthe king betook himself to thanksgivings and sacrifices to God:after which he presently went over all that country which heruled round about; and taught the people, as well the lawswhich God gave them by Moses, as that religious worshipthat was due to him. He also constituted judges in every oneof the cities of his kingdom; and charged them " to have regard"to nothing so much in judging the multitude as to do justice,"and not to be moved by bribes, nor by the dignity of men"eminent for either their riches or their high birth, but to"distribute justice equally to all, as knowing that God is con-"scious of every secret action of theirs." When he had him­self instructed them thus, and gone over every city of the twotribes, he returned to Jerusalem. He there also constituted
VOL. II. A 15







OCR Output








396 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVI.


at Actium: and for the Antiochians, the inhabitants of theprincipal city in Syria, where a broad street cuts through theplace lengthways, he built cloisters along it on both sides; andlaid the open road- with polished stone, and was of very greatadvantage to the inhabitants. And as to the Olympic games,which were in a very low condition, by reason of the failure oftheir revenues, he recovered their reputation, and appointed re­venues, for their maintenance, and made that solemn meetingmore venerable, as to the sacrifices and other ornaments: andby reason of this vast liberality, he was generally declared intheir inscriptions to be one of the perpetual managers of thosegames.
4. Now some there are who stand amazed at the diversity ofHerod's nature and purposes; for when we have respect to hismagnificence, and the benefits which he bestowed on all mankind,there is no possibility for even those that had the least respect forhim, to deny, or not openly to confess, that he had a nature vastlybeneficent; but when any one looks upon the punishments heinflicted, and the injuries he did, not only to his subjects, but tohis nearest relations, and takes notice of his severe and unrelent­ing disposition there, he will be forced to allow, that it was brut­ish, and a stranger to all humanity, insomuch that these mensuppose his nature to be different, and sometimes at contradic­tion with itself: but 1 am myself of another opinion, and ima­gine that the occasion of both these sort of actions was one andthe same: for being a man ambitious of honour, and quite over­come by that passion, he was induced to be magnificent, where-ever there appeared any hopes of a future memorial, or of re­putation at present; and as his expenses were beyond his abili­ties, he was necessitated to be harsh to his subjects; for the per­sons on whom he expended his money were so many, that theymade him a very bad procurer of it: and because he was con­scious that he was hated by those under him, for the injuries hedid them, he thought it not an easy thing to amend his offences,for that it was convenient for his revenue, he therefore stroveon the other side to make their ill-will an occasion of his gains.As to his own court, therefore, if any one was not very obsequiousto him in his language, and would not confess himself to be hisslave, or but seemed to think of any innovation in his govern­ment, he was not able to contain himself, but prosecuted his verykindred and friends, and punished them as if they were ene­mies; and this wickedness he undertook out of a desire that hemight be himself alone honoured. Now for this my assertionabout that passion of his, we have the greatest evidence, by whathe did to honour Caesar and Agrippa, and his other friends ; forwith what honours he paid his respects to them who were his







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


occasion' of this tumult? and when they perceived that it-was fromthe Jews, who had been carried captive to .Babylon, and were re­building their temple, they came to Zorobabel and to Jeshua, andto the heads of the families, and desired that they would givethem leave to build the temple with them, and to be partnerswith -them in building it; for they said, "We worship your God,"and especially pray to him, and are desirous of your religious"settlement, and this ever since Shalmaneser, the king of Assy-"ria, transplanted us out of Cuthah and Media to this place."When they said thus, Zorobabel and Jeshua the high priest, andthe heads of the families of. the Israelites, replied to them, that"it was impossible for .them to permit them to be their partners,"while they [only] had been appointed to build that temple at"first by Cyrus, and now by Darius, although it was indeed"lawful for them to come ahd worship there -if they pleased,"and that they could allow them nothing but that in common"with them, which was common to-them with all other men,"to .come to their temple and worship God there."
4. WThen the Cutheans heard this, for the Samaritans have.that appellation, •they had indignation at it, and persuaded the.nations of Syria to desire of the governors, in the same manneras they had done formerly in the days of Cyrus, and again in thedays of Cambyses afterwards, to put a stop to the building ot.the temple, and to endeavour to delay and protract the Jews iutheir zeal about it. Now at this time Sisinues, the governer QI.Syria and Phenicia, and Sathrabuzanes, with certain others,jcame up to Jerusalem, and asked the .rulers of the Jews, "By." whose grant it was that they built the temple in this manner.,." since it was more like to a citadel than a temple? and for what;" reason it was that they built cloisters and walls, and those"strong ones too, about the city?" To which Zorobabel andJeshua the high priest replied, "that they- were -the servants ot"God Almighty: that this temple -was .built for him .by >» Jung"of theirs, that lived in great prosperity, and one that exceeded"all men hi virtue, and that it continued a long.time, but that"because of their father's impiety towards God, Nebuchadnez-- " zar, king of the Babylonians, and of the Chaldeans, .took their"city by force, and destroyed it and pillaged the temple^ and"burnt U down, and transplanted the people whom he had." made -captives, and removed them to Babylon: that Cyrus,:" who aftejr him was king of Babylonia- and Persia, wrote to"them to build the temple, and committed the gifts and ves-"sels, and whatsoever Nebuchadnezzar had carried out of it,"to Zorobabel and Mithridates the treasurer; and gave order"to have them carried to Jerusalem, and to have them restored." to their own temple, when it was. built; for he had sent to







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 115


rose up and called for those seven who had the interpretation ofthe laws committed to them, and accused his wife, and said,that he had been affronted by her, because that when she wasfrequently called by him to his feast, she did not obey him once,He therefore gave order, that they should inform him what couldbe done by the law against her. So one of them, whose namewas Memucan, said, That "this affront was offered not to him"alone, but to all the Persians, who were in danger of leading"their lives very ill with their wives, if they must be thus des-"pised by them; for that none of their wives would have any"reverence for their husbands, if they had such an example of"arrogance in the queen towards thee, who rulest over all."Accordingly, he exhorted him to punish her, who had beenguilty of so great an affront to him, after a severe manner; andwhen he had so done, to publish to the nations what had beendecreed about the queen. So the resolution was to put Vashtiaway, and to give her digniiy to another woman.
2. But the king having been fond of her, did not well bear aseparation, and yet by the law he could not admit of a reconci­liation, so he was under trouble, as not having it in his powerto do what he desired to do. But when his friends saw him souneasy, they advised him to cast the memory of his wife, andhis love for her, out of his mind, but to send abroad over all'the habitable earth, and to search out for comely virgins, and totake her whom he should like best for a wife, because his pas­sion for his former wife would be quenched by the introductionof another, and the kindness he had to Vashti would be with­drawn from her, and be placed on her that was with him. Ac­cordingly, he was persuaded to follow this advice, and gave or­der to certain persons to choose out of the virgins that were inhis kingdom those that were esteemed the most comely. So whena great number of these virgins were gathered together, therewas found a damsel in Babylon, both whose parents were dead,and she was brought up with her uncle Mordecai, for that washer uncle's name. This uncle was of the tribe of Benjamin, andwas one of the principal persons among the Jews. Now it provedthat this damsel, whose name was Esther, was the most beau­tiful of all the rest, and that the grace of her countenance drewthe eyes of the spectators principally upon her: So she was com­mitted to one of the eunuchs to take the care of her: and shewas very exactly provided with sweet odours, in great plenty,and with costly ointments, such as her body required to beanointed withal: and this was used for six months by the vir­gins, who were in number four hundred. And when the eu­nuch thought the virgins had been sufficiently purified, in theforementioned time, and were now fit to go to the king's bed,
VOL. u. p 19







OCR Output








294 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


"and of great wickedness towards the gods; for the sake of which"we suppose it was that the * sun turned away his light from us,"as unwilling to view the horrid crime they were guilty of in"the case of Caesar. We have also overcome their conspiracies,"which threatened the gods themselves, which Macedonia re-"ceived, as it is a climate peculiarly proper for impious and in-"solent attempts: and we have overcome that confused rout of"men, half mad with spite against us, which they got together"at Philippi in Macedonia, when they seized on the places that"were proper for their purpose, and as it were, walled them"round with mountains to the very sea, and where the passage"was open only through a single gate. This victory we gained"because the gods had condemned these men for their wicked"enterprizes. Now Brutus, when he had fled as far as Philip-"pi, was shut up by us, and became a partaker of the same per-"dition with Cassius; and now, these have received their pun-"ishment, we suppose, that we may enjoy peace for the time to"come, and that Asia may be at rest from war. We therefore"make that peace which God hath given us common to our con-"federates also, insomuch, that the body of Asia is now recover-"ed out of that distemper it was under by the means of our"victory. I, therefore, bearing in mind both thee and your"nation, shall take care of what may be for your advantage. I"have also sent epistles in writing to the several cities, that if"any persons, whether freemen or bondmen, have been sold un-"der the spear by Caius Cassius, or his subordinate officers,"they may be set free. And I will that you kindly make use of"the favours which I and Dolabella have granted you. I also"forbid the Tyrians to use any violence with you; and for what"places of the Jews they now possess, I order them to restore"them, I have withal accepted of the crown which thou sentest"me."
4. " Marcus Antonius, imperator, to the magistrates, senate,"andpeopleof Tyre,sendethgreeting: TheambassadorsofHyr-"canus the high priest and ethnarch [of the Jews] appeared be-"fore me at Ephesus, and told me, that you are in possession of"part of their country, which you entered upon under the go-"vernment of our adversaries. Since, therefore, we have un-"dertaken a war for the obtaining the government, and have"taken care to do what was agreeable to piety and justice, and"have brought to punishment those that had neither any re-"membrance of the kindnesses they had received, nor have kept


» This clause plainly alludes to that well known but unusual and very long dark­ness of the sun, which happened upon the murder of Julius Csesar, by Brutus andCassius, which is greatly taken notice of by Virgil, Pliny, and other Roman authors.See Virgil's Georgics, Book I. just before the end; and Pliny's Nat, Hist. B. IL
ilt. XXX.







OCR Output








Chap- II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 139


ber of the talents paid for the captives being above four hundredand sixty, and this, because their masters required the [hundredand] twenty drachmae for the children also, the king having ineffect, commanded, that these should be paid for, when he saidin his decree, that they should receive the forementioned sumfor every slave.
4. Now when this had been done after so magnificent amanner, according to the king's inclinations, he gave orderto Demetrius to give him in writing his sentiments con­cerning the transcribing of the Jewish books, for no part ofthe administration is done rashly by these kings, but all thingsare managed with great circumspection. On which account Ihave subjoined a copy of these epistles, and set down the multi­tude of the vessels sent as gifts [to Jerusalem] and the construc­tion of every one, that the exactness of the artificer's workman^ship, as it appeared to those that saw them, and which workmanmade every vessel, may be made manifest, and this on accountof the excellency of the vessels themselves. Now the copy ofthe epistle was to this purpose; "Demetrius to the great king:"\Vhen thou, O king, gavest me a charge concerning the col-"lection of books-that were wanting to fill your library, and"concerning the care that ought to be taken about such as are"imperfect, I have used the utmost diligence about those mat-"ters. And I let you know, that we want the books of the"Jewish legislation, with some others; for they are written in"the Hebrew characters, and being in the language of that na-"tion, are to us unknown. It hath also- happened to them,"that they have been transcribed more carelessly than they"ought to have been, because they have not had hitherto royal"care taken about them. Now it is necessary that thou shouldest"have accurate copies of them. And indeed this legislation is"full of hidden wisdom, and entirely blameless, as being the"legislation of God: For which cause it is, as Hecateus of Ab-"dera says, that the poets and historians make no mention of"it, nor of those men who lead their lives according to it, since"it is a holy law, and ought not to be published by profane"mouths. If then it please thee, O King, thou mayest write"to the high priest of the Jews, to send six of the elders out of"every tribe, and those such as are most skilful of the laws,"that by their means we may learn the clear and agreeing sense"of these books; and may obtain an accurate interpretation of"their contents, and so may have such a collection of these as"may be suitable to thy desire."
5. When this epistle was sent to the king, he commanded thatan epistle should be drawn up for Eleazar, the Jewish highpriest, concerning these matters; and that they should inform
VOL. II. S 19







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 287


"the Hebrews, as we have [also] found it set down in our pub-"lie records."
23. The decree of those of Helicarnasus. When Memnon theson of Oristidas by descent, but by adoption of Eunonymus, waspriest, on the * * * day of the month Aristerion, the decree ofthe people, upon the representation of Marcus Alexander, wasthis: "Since we have ever a great regard to piety towards God,"and to holiness, and since we aim to follow the people of the"Romans, who are the benefactors of all men, and what they"have written to us about a league of friendship and mutual"assistance between the Jews and our city, and that their sa-"cred offices, and accustomed festivals and assemblies may be"observed by them, we have decreed, that as many men and"women of the Jews as are willing so to do, may celebrate their"Sabbaths, and perform their holy offices, according to the"Jewish laws: and may make their proseuchffl at the seaside,"according to the customs of their forefathers; and if any one,"whether he be a magistrate or private person, hindereth them"from so doing, he shall be liable to a fine, to be applied to the"uses of the city."
24. The decree of the Sardians. This decree was made bytl»e senate and people, upon the representation of the pretors;"Whereas those Jews, who are our fellow-citizens, and live"with us in this city, have ever had great benefits heaped upon"them by the people, and have come now into the senate, and"desired of the people that upon the restitution of their law"and their liberty, by the senate and people of Rome, they may"assemble together, according to their ancient legal custom,"and that we will not bring any suit against them about it; and"that a place may be given them where they may have their"congregations, with their wives and children, and may offer,"as did their forefathers, their prayers and sacrifices to God;"' now the senate and people have decreed to permit them to as-"semble together on the days formerly appointed, and to act"according to their own laws; and that such a place be set"apart for them by the pretors, for the building and inhabiting"the same, as they shall esteem fit for that purpose. And that"those that take care of the provisions for the city, shall take"care that such sorts of food as they esteem fit for their eating,"may be imported into the city."
25. The decree of the Ephesians. When Menophilus wasprytanis, on the first day of the month Artemisius, this decreewas made by the people: "Nicanor the son of Euphemius, pro-"nounced it, upon the representation of the pretors. Since the"Jews that dwell in this city have petitioned Marcus Julius"Pompeius, the son of Brutus, the proconsul, that they might







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 125


"danger of perishing, and this by laying accusations and calum-
'" nies: Nor is this state of things to be discovered by ancient
"examples, or such as we have learned by report only; but by
"some examples of such impudent attempts under our own eyes,
"so that it is not fit to attend any longer to calumnies and accu-
"sations, nor to the persuasions of others, but to determine
"what any one knows of himself to have been really done, and
"to punish what justly deserves it, and to grant favours to such
"as are innocent. This hath been the case of Haman, the son
"of Ammedatha, by birth an Amalekite, and alien from the
"blood of the Persians, who, when he was hospitably entertained
"by us, and partook of that kindness which we bear to all men, to
"so great a degree, as to be called my father, and to be all alone
"worshipped, and to have honour paid him by all in the second
"rank after the royal honour due to ourselves, he could not
"bear his good fortune, nor govern the magnitude of his pros-
"perity with sound reason; nay, he made a conspiracy against
"me and my life, who gave him his authority, by endeavouring to
"take away Mordecai, my benefactor, andmy saviour, and by base-
"ly and treacherously requiring to have Esther, the partner of my
'life, and of my dominion, brought to destruction; for he contri-
'ved by this means to * deprive me of my faithful friends, and
'transfer the government to others: But since I perceived that
'these Jews, that were by this pernicious fellow devoted to de-
'struction, were not wicked men, but conducted their lives af-
"ter the best manner, and were men dedicated to the worship of
"that God who hath preserved the kingdom to me and to my
"ancestors, I do not only free them from the punishment which
"the former epistle, which was sent by Haman, ordered to be
"inflicted on them, to which if you refuse obedience, you shall
"do well, but I will that they have all honour paid to them. Ac-
"cordingly, I have hanged up the man that contrived such things
"against them, with his family, before the gates of Shushan,
"that punishment being sent upon him by God, who seeth all
"things. And I give you in charge, that you publicly propose
"a copy of this epistle through all my kingdom, that the Jews
"may be permitted peaceably to use their own laws, and that


* These words give an intimation as if Artaxerxes suspected a deeper design inHaman than openly appeared, viz. That knowing the Jews would be faithful to him,and that he could never transfer the crown to his own family, who was an Agagite,Esth. iii. 1, 10. or of the posterity of A gag, the old king of the Amalekites, 1 Sam.xv. 8, 32, 33. while they were olive, and spread over all his dominions, he there­fore endeavoured to destroy them. Nor is it to me improbable, that those 73,800of the Jews' enemies which were soon destroyed by the Jews, on the permission ofthe king, which must be on some great occasion, were Amalekites, their old andhereditary enemies, Exod. xvii. 14, 15. and that thereby was fulfilled Balaam:prophecy, "Amalek was the first of the nations, but his Utter end shall be, that he"perish for ever." Num. xxiv. 20.







OCR Output








Chap. XVI. ANTIQUITIES OK THE JEWS. 317


solemnity of the fast, as if n periodical revolution of calamitieshad returned, since that which befell the Jews under Pompey, forthe Jews were taken by him on the same day, and this was aftertwenty-seven years' time. So when Sosius had dedicated a crownof gold to God, he marched away from Jerusalem, and carriedAntigonus with him in bonds to Antony; but Herod was afraidlest Antigonus should be kept in prison [only] by Antony, andthat when he was carried to Rome by him, he might get hiscause to be heard by the senate, and might demonstrate, as hewas himself of the royal blood, and Herod but a private man,that therefore it belonged to his sons however to have the king­dom, on account of the family they were of, in case he had him­self offended the Romans by what he had done. Out of Herod'sfear of this it was, that he, by giving Antony a great deal ofmoney, endeavoured to persuade him to have Antigonus slain,which if it were once done, he should be free from that fear. Andthus did the government of the Asamoneans cease, a hundredtwenty and six years after it was first set up. This family wasa splendid and an illustrious one, both on account of the nobilityof their stock, and of the dignity of the high priesthood, as alsofor the glorious actions their ancestors had performed for ournation: but these men lost the government by their dissentionsone with another, and it came to Herod the son of Antipater,who was of no more than a vulgar family, and of no eminentextraction, but one that was subject to other kings; and this iswhat history tells us was the end of the Asamonean family.







OCR Output








186 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XII.


5, And when Nicanor came down from the citadel untothe temple, some of the priests and elders met him, and salutedhim; and showed him the sacrifices which they said they of­fered to God for the king: upon which he blasphemed, andthreatened them, that unless the people would deliver up Judasto him, upon his return he would pull down their temple.And when he had thus threatened them, he departed from Je­rusalem: But the priests fell into tears out of grief of what hehad said, and besought God to deliver them from their ene­mies. But now for Nicanor, when he was gone out of Je­rusalem, and was at a certain village called Bethhoron, he therepitched his camp, another army out of Syria having joinedhim: And Judas pitched his camp at Adasa, another village,which was thirty furlongs distant from Bethhoron, having nomore than one thousand soldiers. And when he had encour­aged them not to be dismayed at the multitude of their enemies,nor to regard how many they were against whom they were go­ing to fight, but to consider who they themselves were, and forwhat great rewards they hazarded themselves, and to attack theenemy courageously, he led them out to fight, and joining bat­tle with Nicanor, which proved to be a severe one, he overcamethe enemy, and slew many of them; and at last Nicanor himself,as he was fighting, gloriously fell. Upon whose fall the armydid not stay, but when they had lost their general they were putto flight and threw down their arms; Judas also pursued themand slew them; and gave notice by the sound of the trumpets tothe neighbouring villages, that he had conquered the enemy;which, when the inhabitants heard, they put on their armourhastily, and met their enemies in the face as they were runningaway, and slew them, insomuch that not one of them escaped outof this battle, and were in number nine thousand. This victoryhappened to fall on the thirteenth day of that month, whichby the Jews is called Adar, and the Macedonians Dystrus;and the Jews thereon celebrate this victory every year, andesteem it as a festival day. After which the Jewish nationwere, for a while, free from wars, and enjoyed- peace; butafterward they returned into their former state of wars andhazards.
6. But now as the high priest Alcimus was resolving to pulldown the wall of the sanctuary, which had been there of old time,


cnnor contrary to the words following, which imply, that he who was beaten fled in­to (he citadel, which for certain belonged to the city of David, or to Mount Zion,and was in the possession of Nicanor's garrison, and not of Judas': As also it iscontrary to the express words of Josephus' original author, 1 Mac-nib- vii. 32. whosays that Nicanor lost about 500O men, and fled to the city of David.







OCR Output








Chap. II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 319


was still going on, and forced the country to lie still uncultivated,since we are forbidden to sow our land in that year. Now whenAntony had received Antigonus as his captive, he determinedto keep him against his triumph; but when he heard that the na­tion grew seditious, and that, out of their hatred to Herod,they continued to bear good-will to Antigonus, he resolved tobehead him at Antioch, for otherwise the Jews could no waybe brought to be quiet. And Strabo of Cappadocia attests towhat I have said, when he thus speaks: "Antony ordered An-"tigonus the Jew to be brought to Antioch, and there to be"beheaded: And this Antony seems to me to have been the"very first man who beheaded a king, as supposing he could"no other way bend the minds of the Jews, so as to receive He-"rod, whom he had made king in his stead, for by no torments"could they be forced to call him king, so great a fondness"they had for their former king; so he thought that this dis-"honourable death would diminish the value they had for An-"tigonus' memory, and at the same time would diminish their"hatred they bare to Herod." Thus far Strabo.
CHAP. II.
Hem Hyrcanus was set at liberty by the Parthians, and returnedto Herod; and what Alexandra did when she heard that Ana-nelus was made high priest.
} 1. .N ow after Herod was in possession of the kingdom,Hyrcanus the high priest, who was then a captive among theParthians, came to him again, and was set free from his captivi­ty, in the manner following: Barzapharnes and Pocorus, thegenerals of the Parthians, took Hyrcanus, who was first madehigh priest and afterward king, and Herod's brother, Phasaelus,captives, and were carrying them away into Parthia. Phasaelusindeed could not bear the reproach of being in bonds, and think­ing that death with glory was better than any life whatsoever,he became his own executioner, as I have formerly related.
2. But when Hyrcanus was brought into Parthia, the kingPhraates treated him after a very gentle manner, as having al­ready learned of what an illustrious family he was; on whichaccount he set him free from his bonds, and gave him a habi­tation at * Babylon, where there was Jews in great numbers.


* The city here called Babylon by Josephus, seems to be one which was built bysome of the Seleucidse upon the Tigris, which long after the utter destruction of oldBabylon was commonly so called, and I suppose not far from Seleucia; just as thelatter adjoining city Bngdat lias been, and is often called by the came old name ofBabylon till this very day.







OCR Output








Chap. II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 137


Accordingly Aristeus embraced the same opinion with those thathave been before mentioned; and went to the king, and madethe following speech to him: "It is not fit for us, O king, to"overlook things hastily, or to deceive ourselves, but to lay"the truth open; For since we have determined not only to get"the laws of the Jews transcribed, but interpreted also, for thy"satisfaction, by what means can we do this, while so many of"the Jews are now slaves in thy kingdom? Do thou then what"will be agreeable to thy magnanimity, and to thy good na-"ture; free them from the miserable condition they are in, be-"cause that God, who supporteth thy kingdom, was the au-"thor of their laws, as I have learned by particular inquiry;"for both these people, and we also, worship the same God, the"framer of all things. We call him, and that truly, by the name"of ZTJWZ, [or life, or Jupiter,] because he breathes life into all"men. Wherefore do thou restore these men to their own coun-"try and this do to the honour of God, because these men pay a"peculiarly excellent worship to him. And know this farther,"that though I be not of kin to them by birth, nor one of the"same country with them, yet do I desire these favours to be"done them, since all men are the workmanship of God; and"I am sensible that he is well pleased with those that do good."I do therefore put up this petition to thee, to do good to"them."
3. When Aristeus was saying thus, the king looked uponhim with a cheerful and joyful countenance, and said, "How"many ten thousands dost thou suppose there are of such as"want to be made free?" To which Andreas replied, as hestood by, and said, " A few more than ten times ten thousand."The king made answer, "And is this a small gift that thou"askest, Aristeus?" But Sosibius, and the rest that stood by,said, That "he ought to offer such a thank-offering, as was"worthy of his greatness of soul, to that God who had given"him his kingdom. With this answer he was much pleased;and gave order, that when they paid the soldiers their wages,they should lay down [a * hundred and] twenty drachmae for


* Although this number 120 drachma (of Alexandria, or 60 Jewish shekels) behere three times repeated, and that in all Josephus' copies, Greek and Latin, yetsince all the copies of Aristeus, whence Josephus took his relation, have this sumseveral times, and still as no more than 20 drachmae, or 10 Jewish shekels; andsince the sum of the talents, to be set down presently, which is little above 460,for somewhat more than 100,000 slaves, and is nearly the same in Josephus andAristeus, does better agree to 20 than to 120 drachmae: and smce the value of aslave of old was, at the utmost but 3O shekels, or 60 drachmae, see Exod. xxi. 32.while in the present circumstances of these Jewish slaves, and those so very numer­ous, Philadelphus would rather redeem them at a cheaper, than at a dearer rate,there is great reason to prefer here Aristeus' copies before Josephus.







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 417


under ground, and these convicted the king's chief hunter,that he had given the young men the royal hunting spears, andweapons to Alexander's dependents, at Alexander's command.
4>. After these, the commander of the garrison of Alexandriumwas caught and tortured; for he was accused to have promisedto receive the young men into his fortress, and to supply themwith that money of the king's which was laid up in that fortress,yet did he not acknowledge any thing of it himself; but his soncame in, and said it was so, and delivered up the writing, which,so far as could be guessed, was in Alexander's hand. Its con­tents were these: " When we have finished, by God's help, all"that we have proposed to do, we will come to you; but do"your endeavours, as you have promised, to receive us into"your fortress." After this writing was produced, Herod hadno doubt about the treacherous designs of his sons against him.But Alexander said, that Diophantus the scribe, had imitatedhis hand, and that the paper was maliciously drawn up byAntipater; for Diophantus appeared to be very cunning in suchpractices, and as he was afterward convicted of forging otherpapers, he was put to death for it.
S. So the king produced those that had been tortured beforethe multitude at Jericho, in order to have them accuse the youngmen; which accusers many of the people stoned to death; andwhen they were going to kill Alexander, and Aristobulus like­wise, the king would not permit them to do so, but restrained themultitude, by the means of Ptolemy and Pheroras. However,the young men were put under a guard, and kept in custody,that nobody might come at them; and all that they did or saidwas watched, and the reproach and fear they were in was littleor nothing different from those of condemned criminals: and oneof them, who was Aristobulus, was so deeply affected, that hebrought Salome, who was his aunt, and his mother-in-law, tolament with him for his calamities, and to hate him who had suf­fered things to come to that pass; when he said to her, "Art'* not thou in danger of destruction also, while the report goes"that thou hadst disclosed beforehand all our affairs to Sylleus,"when thou wast in hopes of being married to him?" But sheimmediately carried those words to her brother; upon this he wasout of patience, and gave command to bind him; and enjoinedthem both, now they were kept separate one from the other, towrite down the ill things they had done against their father, andbring the writings to him. So when this was enjoined them,they wrote this, that they had laid no treacherous designs, noimade any preparations against their father, but that they hadintended to fly away; and that by the distress they were in,their lives being now uncertain and tedious to them.







OCR Output








ISO ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XI.


pencd that Snnballat was then in years. But there was now agreat disturbance among the people of Jerusalem, because manyof those priests and Levites were entangled in such matches;for they all revolted to Manasseh, and Sanballat affordedthem money, and divided among them land for tillage, andhabitations also, and all this in order every way to gratify hisson-in-law.
3. About this time it was that Darius heard how Alexanderhad passed over the Hellespont, and had beaten his lieutenantsin the battle of Granicum, and was proceeding farther : where­upon he gathered together an army of horse and foot, and deter­mined that he would meet the Macedonians before they shouldassault and conquer all Asia. So he passed over the river Eu-
Ehrates, and came over Taurus, the Cicilian mountain, and atssus of Cilicia he waited for the enemy, as ready there to givehim battle. Upon which Sanballat was glad that Darius wascome down; and told Manasseh that he would suddenly performhis promises to him, and this as soon as ever Darius shouldcome back; after he had beaten his enemies; for not he only,but all those that were in Asia also, were persuaded that theMacedonians would not so much as come to a battle with thePersians, on account of their multitude. But the event provedotherwise than they expected, for the king joined battle with theMacedonians, and was beaten, and lost a great part of his army.His mother also, and his wife and children, were taken captives,and he fled into Persia. So Alexander came into Syria, and tookDamascus; and when he had obtained Sidon, he besieged Tyre,when he sent an epistle to the Jewish high priest, "To send him"some auxiliaries, and to supply his army with provisions;"and that what presents he formerly sent to Darius, he would"now send to him, and choose the friendship of the Macedonians*' and that he should never repent of so doing." But the highpriests answered the messengers, That" he had given his oath to"Darius not to bear arms against him; and he said, that he"would not transgress this while Darius was in the land of the"living." Upon hearing this answer, Alexander was very an­gry; and though he determined not to leave Tyre, which wasjust ready to be taken, yet as soon as he had taken it, he threat­ened that he would make an expedition against the Jewish highpriest, and through him teach all men to whom they must keeptheir oaths. So when he had with a good deal of pains, duringthe siege, taken Tyre, and had settled its affairs, he came to thecity of Gaza, and besieged both the city, and him who was go­vernor of the garrison, whose name was Babemeses.
4. But Sanballat thought he had now gotten a proper oppor­tunity to make his attempt, so he renounced Darius, and, takingwith him seven thousand of his own subjects, he came to Alex­







OCR Output








148 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XII.


selves, they betook themselves to the interpretation of the laws.Now when the law was transcribed, and the labour of interpre­tation was over, which came to its conclusion in seventy-twodays, Demetrius gathered all the Jews together to the placewhere the laws were translated, and where the interpreters were,and read them over. The multitude did also approve of thoseelders that were the interpreters of the law. They withalcommended Demetrius for his proposal, as the inventor ofwhat was greatly for their happiness; and they desired that hewould give leave to their rulers also to read the law. More­over, they all, both the priest and the ancientest of the elders,and the principal men of their commonwealth, made it theirrequest, that since the interpretation was happily finished, itmight continue in the state it now was, and might not be altered.And when they all commended that determination of theirs,they enjoined, that if any one observed either any thing super­fluous, or any thing omitted, that he would take a view of itagain, and have it laid before them, and corrected; which wasa wise account of theirs, that when the thing was judged to havebeen well done, it might continue for ever.
13. So the king rejoiced, when he saw that his design of thisnature was brought to perfection to so great advantage: and hewas chiefly delighted with hearing the laws read to him, andwas astonished at the deep meaning and wisdom of the legislator.And he began to discourse with Demetrius, "How it came"to pass, that when this legislation was so wonderful, no one,"either of the poets or of the historians, had made mention of"it." Demetrius made answer, that "no one durst be so bold"as to touch upon the description of these laws, because they"were divine and venerable, and because some that had attempt-"ed it were afflicted by God." He also told him, that " Theo-"pompouse was desirous of writing somewhat about them, but"was thereupon disturbed in his mind for above thirty days'"time; and upon some intermission of his distemper, he appeas-"ed God [by prayer] as suspecting that his madness proceed-"ed from that cause." Nay, indeed, hefurthersawinadream, thathis distemper befell him while he indulged too great a curiosityabout divine matters, and was desirous of publishing them amongcommon men; but when he left off that attempt, he recoveredhis understanding again. Moreover, he informed him ofTheodectes, the tragic poet, concerning whom it was reported,


compared with the like practice of Peter the apostle, in the recognitions ofClement, B. IV. chap. iii. and B. V. chap, xxxvi. and with the places of theProseuthaj, or of prayer, which were sometimes built near the sea or riversalso. Of which matter, see Antiq. B. XIV. ch. x. sect. 23. Vol. II. and Acts xvi.13, 16.







OCR Output













OCR Output








098 ANTIO.UITH.S OF TO.S, JEWS. Book XVI.


i
"receivers at Jerusalem ; and that they be not obliged to go be-"fore any judge on the Sabbath day, nor on the * day of the"preparation to it, after the ninth hour: but if any one be'-* caught stealing their holy books, or their sacred money, whe-"ther it be out of the synagogue, or public school, he shall be"deemed a sacrilegious person, and his goods shall be brought"into the public treasury of the Romans. And 1 give order,"that the testimonial which they have given me, on account of"my regard to that piety which I exercise toward all mankind,"and out of regard to Caius Marcus Censorinus, together with"the present decree, be proposed in that most eminent place"which hath been consecrated to me, by the community of"Asia at Ancyra. And if any one transgress any part of"what is above decreed, he shall be severely punished." Thiswas inscribed upon a pillar in the temple of Caesar.
3. " Caesar to Norbanus Flaccus, sendeth greeting: Let"those Jews, how many soever they be, who have been used"according to their ancient custom, to send their sacred money"to Jerusalem, do the same freely." These were the decreesof Caesar.
4. Agrippa also did himself write after the manner following,on behalf of the Jews: "Agrippa, to the magistrates, senate,"and people of the Ephesians, sendeth greeting: I will that"the care and custody of the sacred money that is carried to"the temple at Jerusalem be left to the Jews of Asia, to do"with it according to their ancient custom; and that such as"steal that sacred money of the Jews, and fly to a sanctuary,"shall be taken thence and delivered to the Jews, by the same"law that sacrilegious persons are taken thence. I have also"written to Sylvanus the pretor, that no one compel the Jews"to come before a judge on the Sabbath day."
5. " Marcus Agrippa, to the magistrates, senate, and people"of Cyrene, sendeth greeting: The Jews of Cyrene have inter-"ceded with me for the performance of what Augustus sent"orders about to Flavius, the then pretor of Lybia, and to the"other procurators of that province, that the sacred money may"be sent to Jerusalem freely, as hath been their custom from"their forefathers, they complaining that they are abused by"certain informers, and under pretence of taxes which were"not due, are hindered from sending them, which I command"to be restored, without any diminution or disturbance given"to them: And if any of that sacred money in the ci­


* This is authentic evidence, that the Jews, in the days of Augustus, began toprepare for the celebration of the Sabbath at the ninth hour on Friday, as the tradi­tion of the elders did, it seems, then require of them.







OCR Output








Chap. II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 147


on which an acclamation was made by the whole company, withjoy and a great noise; and when that was over, they fell to eat­ing their supper, and to the enjoyment of what was set beforethem. And at a little interval afterward, when the king thoughta sufficient time had been interposed, he began to talk philoso­phically to them, and he asked every one of them a * philoso­phical question, and such an one as might give light in those in­quiries; and when they had explained all the problems that hadbeen proposed by the king about every point, he was well pleasedwith their answers. This took up the twelve days in which theywere treated: and he that pleases may learn the particular ques­tions in that book of Aristeus', which he wrote on this veryoccasion.
13. And while not the king only, but the philosopher Mene-demus also admired them, and said, " that all things were go-"verned by providence : and that it was probable that thence"it was that such force or beauty was discovered in these"men's words," they then left off asking any more such ques­tions. But the king said that he had gained very great advan­tages by their coming, for that he had received this profit fromthem, that he had learned how he ought to rule his subjects.And he gave order that they should have every one three ta­lents given them, and that those that were to conduct them totheir lodging should do it. Accordingly, when three days wereover, Demetrius took them, and went over the causeway sevenfurlongs long: It was a bank in the sea to an island. And whenthey had gone over the bridge, he proceeded to the northernparts and showed them where they should meet, which was ira house which was built near the shore, and was a quiet place,and fit for their discoursing together about their work. Whenhe had brought them thither, he entreated them, (now they hadall things about them which they wanted for the interpretationof their law) that they would suffer nothing to interrupt themin their work. Accordingly, they made an accurate interpre­tation, with great zeal and great pains, and this they continuedto do till the ninth hour of the day; after which time they re­laxed, and took care of their body, while their food was pro­vided for them in great plenty: besides, Dorotheus, at the king'scommand, brought them a great deal of what was provided forthe king himself. But in the morning they came to the court,and saluted Ptolemy and then went away to their former place,where, when they hadf washed their hands, and purified them­


* They were rather political questions and answers, tending to the good and re­ligious government of mankind.
')' This purification of the interpreters by washing in the sea, before theyprayed to God every morning, and I efore they set about translating., may be
VOL. II. T 19







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THt JEWS. 203


behind them: which when Jonathan perceived, he was underno consternation, but ordering his army to stand in a square bat­tle array, he gave them a charge to fall on the enemy on bothsides, and set them to face those that attacked them both beforeand behind: And while the fight lasted till the evening, he gavepart of his forces to his brother Simon, and ordered him toattack the enemies, but for himself, he charged those that werewith them to cover themselves with their armour, and receivethe darts of the horsemen, who did as they were commanded;so that the enemies' horsemen, while they threw their darts tillthey had no more left, did them no harm, for the darts that werethrown did not enter into their bodies, being thrown upon theshields, that were united and conjoined together, the closenessof which easily overcame the forces of the darts, and they flewabout without any effect. But when the enemy grew remiss inthrowing their darts from morning till late at night, Simonperceived their weariness, and fell upon the body of men beforehim; and because his soldiers showed great alacrity, he put theenemy to flight, and when the horsemen saw that the footmenran away, neither did they stay themselves, but they being veryweary, by the duration of the fight till the evening, and theirhope from the footmen being quite gone, they basely ran away,and in great confusion also, till they were separated one fromanother, and scattered over all the plain. Upon which Jonathanpursued them as far as Ashdod, and slew a great many of them,and compelled the rest, in despair of escaping, to fly to the tem­ple of Dagon, which was at Ashdod; but Jonathan took the cityon the first onset, and burnt it, and the villages about it, nordid he abstain from the temple of Dagon itself, and burnt it al­so, and destroyed those that had fled to it. Now the entire mul­titude of the enemies that fell in the battle, and were> consumedin the temple, were eight thousand. When Jonathan thereforehad overcome so great an army, he removed from Ashdod, andcame to Askelon: and when he had pitched his camp withoutthe city, the people of Askelon came out and met him, bringinghim hospitable presents, and honouring him; so he accepted oftheir kind intentions, and returning thence to Jerusalem with agreat deal of prey, which he brought thence when he conqueredhis enemies: but when Alexander heard that Apollonius thegeneral of his army, was beaten, he pretended to be glad of it,because he had fought with Jonathan his friend and ally againsthis directions. Accordingly, he sent to Jonathan, and gavetestimony to his worth; and gave him honorary * rewards, as a


* Dr. Hudson here observes, that the Phenicians and Romans used to rewardsuch as had deserved well of them, by presenting to them a golden button. Seechap. v. sect. 4.
VOL. II. C C 21







OCR Output








336 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XV.


"were in danger of losing their own government of themselves,"and of being slaves to Cleopatra, what others were they that"freed them from that fear? For it was the friendship I had"with Antony, and the kind disposition he was in towards us"that hath been the occasion that even these Arabians have not"been utterly undone, Antony being unwilling to undertake any"thing which might be suspected by us of unkindness: but"when he had a mind to bestow some parts of each of our"dominions on Cleopatra, I also managed that matter so, that"by giving him presents of my own, I might obtain a security"to both nations, while I undertook myself to answer for the"money, and gave him two hundred talents, and became surety"for those two hundred more which were imposed upon the land"that was subject to this tribute : and this they have defrauded us"of, although it was not reasonable that Jews should pay tribute"to any man living, or allow part of their land to be taxable;"but although that was to be, yet ought we not to pay tribute"for these Arabians, whom we have ourselves preserved; nor"is it fit that they, who have professed, and that with great in-"tegrity and sense of our kindness, that it is by our means that"they keep their principality, should injure us, and deprive us"of what is our due, and this while we have been still not their"enemies but their friends. And whereas observation of co-"venants takes place among the bitterest enemies, but among"friends is absolutely necessary, this is not observed among"these men, who think gain to be the best of all things, let it be"by any means whatsoever, and that injustice is no harm, if"they may but get money by it; is it therefore a questipn with"you, Whether the unjust are to be punished or not? When"God himself hath declared his mind that so it ought to be, and"hath commanded us that we ever should hate injuries and injus-"tice, which is not only just but necessary in wars between se-"veral nations; for these Arabians have done what both the"Greeks and Barbarians own to be an instance of the grossest"wickedness, with regard to our ambassadors, which they have"beheaded, while the Greeks declare that such ambassadors"are * sacred and inviolable. And for ourselves we have learn-"ed from God the most excellent of our doctrines, and the most"holy part of our law by angels, or ambassadors; for this name"brings God to the knowledge of mankind, and is sufficient to"reconcile enemies one to another. What wickedness then can"be greater than the slaughter of ambassadors, who come to


* Herod says here, that as ambassadors were sacred, when they carried messagesto others, so did the laws of the Jews derive a sacred authority by being deliveredfrom God, by angels [or divine ambassadors] which is St. Paul's expression, aboutthe same laws, Gal. iii. 19. Heb. ii. 2.







OCR Output








132 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XI.


for Alexander, when he saw the multitude at a distance, in whitegarments, while the priest stood clothed with fine linen, and thehigh priest in purple and scarlet clothing, with his mitre on hishead, having the golden plate whereon the name of God wasengraved, he approached by himself, and adored that name, andfirst saluted the high priest. The Jews also did altogether, withone voice, salute Alexander, and encompass him about: Where­upon the king of Syria, and the rest, were surprised at whatAlexander had done, and supposed him disordered in his mind.However, Parmenio alone went up to him, and asked him,"How it came to pass, that when all others adored him, he"should adore the high priest of the Jews?" To whom he re­plied, " I did not adore him, but that God who hath honoured"him with his high priesthood; for I saw this very person in"a dream, in this very habit, when I was at Dios in Mace-"donia, who, when I was considering with myself how I might"obtain the dominion of Asia, exhorted me to make no delay,"but boldly to pass over the sea thither, for that he would eon-"duct my army, and would give me the dominion over the"Persians; whence it is, that having seen no other in that ha-"bit, and now seeing this person in it, and remembering that"vision, and the exhortation which I had in my dream, I believe"that I bring this army under the divine conduct, and shall"therewith conquer Darius, and destroy the power of the Per-"sians, and that all things will succeed according to what is in"my own mind." And when he had said this to Parmenio,and had given the high priest his right hand, the priests ranalong by him, and he came into the city. And when he went upinto the temple, he offered sacrifice to God, according to thehigh priest's direction; and magnificently treated both the highpriest and the priests. And when the * book of Daniel wasshowed him, wherein Daniel declared that one of the Greeksshould destroy the empire of the Persians, he supposed that him­self was the person intended: And as he was then glad, he dis­missed the multitude for the present, but the next day he calledthem to him, and bid them ask what favours they pleased ofhim; whereupon the high priest desired that they might enjoythe laws of their forefathers, and might pay no tribute on theseventh year. He granted all they desired. And when theyentreated him that he would permit the Jews in Babylon andMedia to enjoy their own laws also, he willingly promised to dohereafter what they desired. And when he said to the multi­tude, that if any of them would list themselves in his army, onthis condition that they should continue under the laws of their


* The place showed Alexander, might be Dan. vii. 3—8, 20, 21, 22. xi. 3.tome or all of them very olain oredii'tions of A lexander's conriuoits and successors.







OCR Output








248 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIII.


and as to the affairs of the kingdom, and thereby pacified theiranger against Alexander, and made them bear good-will andfriendship to him; who then came among the multitude, andmade speeches to them, and laid before them the actions of Alex­ander, and told them that they had lost a righteous king; andby the commendation they gave him, they brought them togrieve, and to be in heaviness for him, so that he had a funeralmore splendid than had any of the kings before him. Alexanderleft behind him two sons, Hyrcanus, and Aristobulus, but com­mitted the kingdom to Alexandra. Now, as to these two sons,Hyrcanus was indeed unable to manage public affairs, and de­lighted rather in a quiet life; but the younger, Aristobulus,was an active and a bold man; and for this woman herself,Alexandra, she was loved by the multitude, because she seemeddispleased at the offences her husband had been guilty of.
2. So she made Hyrcanus high priest, because he was theelder, but much more because he cared not to meddle with poli­tics, and permitted the Pharisees to do every thing; to whomalso she ordered the multitude to be obedient. She also restoredagain those practices which the Pharisees had introduced, ac­cording to the traditions of their forefathers, and which herfather-in-law, Hyrcanus, had abrogated. So she had indeed thename of the Regent, but the Pharisees had the authority; for itwas they who restored such as had been banished, and set such aswere prisoners at liberty, and, to say all at once, they differedin nothing from lords. However, the queen also took care ofthe affairs of the kingdom, and got together a great body ofmercenary soldiers, and increased her own army to such a de­gree, that she became terrible to the neighbouring tyrants, andtook hostages of them: And the country was entirely at peace,excepting the Pharisees; for they disturbed the queen, and de­sired that she should kill those who persuaded Alexander to slaythe eight hundred men; after which they cut the throat of oneof them, Diogenes: and after him they did the same to several,one after another, till the men that were the most potent cameinto the palace, and Aristobulus with them, for he seemed to bedispleased at what was done, and it appeared openly, that if hehad an opportunity, he would not permit his mother to go onso. "These put the queen in mind what great dangers they had"gone through, and great things they had done, whereby they"had demonstrated the firmness of their fidelity to their master,"insomuch that they had received the greatest marks of favour"from him; and they begged of her, that she would not ut-"terly blast their hopes, as it now happened, that when they"had escaped the hazards that arose from their [open] enemies,"they were to be cut off at home, by their [private] enemies,







OCR Output








18 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book IX.


wet cloth, in the nature of a net over him, and strangled him,and took his dominion. He was an active man, and had thegood-will of the Syrians, and of the people of Damascus to agreat degree; by whom both Benhadad himself, and Hazael,who ruled after him, are honoured to this day as gods by rea­son of their benefactions, and their building them temples, bywhich they adorned the city of the Damascenes. They also everyday do with great pomp pay their worship * to these kings, andvalue themselves upon their antiquity; nor do they know thatthese kings are much later than they imagine, and that they arenot yet eleven hundred years old. Now when Joram, the kingof Israel, heard that Benhadad was dead, he recovered out of theterror and dread he had been in on his account, and was veryglad to live in peace.
CHAP. V.
Concerning the wickedness of Jehoram king of Jerusalem. Hisdefeat and death.
§ 1. Now Jehoram the king of Jerusalem, for we have saidbefore that he had the same name with the king of Israel, as soonas he had taken the government upon him, betook himself to theslaughter of his brethren, and his father's friends, who were go­vernors under him, and thence made a beginning, and a de­monstration of his wickedness; nor was he at all better thanthose kings of Israel who at first transgressed against the lawsof their country, and of the Hebrews, and against God'sworship. And it was Athaliah, the daughter of Ahab, whomhe had married, who taught him to be a bad man in other re­spects, and also to worship foreign gods. Now God would notquite root out this family, because of the promise he had made


by his servant and successor Elisha: Nor does it seem to me otherwise, but thatBenhadad immediately recovered of his disease, as the prophet foretold; andthat Hazael, upon his being anointed to succeed him, though he ought to havestaid till he died by the course of nature, or some other way of divine punish­ment, as did David for many years in the like case, was too impatient, and thevery next day, smothered or strangled him, in order to come directly to the suc­cession.
* What Mr. Le Clerc pretends here, that it i< more probable that Hazael andhis son were worshipped by the Syrians, and people of Damascus, till the days ofJoseplms, than Benhadad and Hazael, because under Benhadad they had greatlysuffered, and because it is almost incredible, that both a king, and that king'smurderer should be worshipped by the same Syrians, is of little force against thoserecords out of which Joscphus drew his history, especially when it is likely thatthey thought Benhadad died of the distemper he laboured under, and not byHazacl's treachery. Besides the reason that Josephus gives for this adoration, andthat these two kings had been great benefactors to the inhabitants of Damascus, andhad built them temples, is too remote from the political suspicions of Le Clcrcjnor ought such weak suspicions to be deemed of any force against authentic testi­monies of antiquity.







OCR Output








Chap. V. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 337


"treat about doing what is right. And when such have been"their actions, how is it possible they can either live securely"in common life, or be successful in war? in my opinion this is"impossible; but perhaps some will say, that what is holy and"what is righteous, is indeed on our side, but the Arabians"are either more courageous, or more numerous than we are."Now, as to this, in the first place, it is not fit for us to say so,"for with whom is what is righteous, with them is God him-"self; now, where God is, there is both multitude and courage."But to examine our own circumstances a little, we were con-"querors in the first battle; and when we fought again, they"were not able to oppose us, but ran away, and could not en-"dure our attacks, or our courage; but when we had conquered"them, then came Athenion, and made war against us with-"out declaring it; and pray, is this an instance of their man-"hood? or is it not a second instance of their wickedness and"treachery? Why are we therefore of less courage, on account*' of that which ought to inspire us with stronger hopes? andM why are we terrified at these, who, when they fight upon the"level, are continually beaten, and when they seem to be con-"querors, they gain it by wickedness? and if we suppose"that any one should deem them to be men of real courage, will"not he be excited by that very consideration to do his utmost"against them? for true valour is not shown by fighting against"weak persons, but in being able to overcome the most hardy."But then, if the distresses we are ourselves under, and the mi-"series that hath come by the earthquake, hath affrighted any"one, let him consider in the first place, that this very thing"will deceive the Arabians, by their supposal that what hath"befallen us is greater than it really is. Moreover, it is not"right that the same thing that emboldens them should discour-"age us; for these men, you see, do not derive their alacrity"from any advantageous virtue of their own, but from their"hope, as to us, that we are quite cast down by our misfbr-"tunes; but when we boldly march against them, we shall soon"pull down their insolent conceit of themselves, and shall gain"this by attacking them, that they will not be so insolent when"we come to the battle, for our distresses are not so great, nci"is what hath happened an indication of the anger of God"against us, as some imagine, for such things are accidental, and"adversities that come in the usual course of things; and if we"allow that this was done by the will of God, we must al-"low that it is now over by his will also, and that he is satis-"fied with what hath already happened, for'had he been willing"to afflict us still more thereby, he had not changed his mind"so soon. And as for the war we are engaged in, he hath him-"self demonstrated, that he is willing it should go on, and that







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. S55


this was no better than a dissolution of those customs for whichthey had so great a veneration. It appeared also no better thanan instance of barefaced impiety, to throw men to wild beasts,for the affording delight to the spectators, and it appealed aninstance of no less impiety, to change their own laws for suchforeign exercises : but, above all the rest, the trophies gave mostdistaste to the Jews, for as they imagined them to be images,included within the armour that hung round about them, theywere sorely displeased at them, because it was not the custom oftheir country to pay honours to such images.
2. Nor was Herod unacquainted with the disturbance theywere under; and as he thought it unseasonable to use violencewith them, so he spoke tosome of them by way of consolation, andin order to free them from that superstitious fear they wereunder; yet could not he satisfy them, but they cried out with oneaccord, out of their great uneasiness at the offences they thoughthe had been guilty of, that although they should think of bear­ing all the rest, yet would they never bear images of men intheir city, meaning the trophies, because this was disagreeableto the laws of their country. Now when Herod saw them insuch a disorder, and that they would not easily change their re­solution unless they received satisfaction in this point, he call­ed to him the most eminent men among them, and broughtthem upon the theatre, and showed them the trophies, and askedthem, what sort of things they took these trophies to be? Andwhen they cried out, that they were the images of men, he gaveorder that they should be stripped of these outward ornamentswhich were about them, and showed them the naked pieces ofwood ; which pieces of wood, now without any ornament, becamematter of great sport and laughter to them, because they had be­fore always had the ornaments of images themselves in derision.
3. When therefore Herod had thus got clear of the multitude,and had dissipated the vehemency of passion under which theyhad been, the greatest part of the people were disposed to changetheir conduct, and not to be displeased at him any longer; butstill some of them continued in their displeasure against him, forhis introduction of new customs, and esteemed the violation ofthe laws of their country as likely to be the origin of very greatmischiefs to them, so that they deemed it an instance of pietyrather to hazard themselves [to be put to death,] than to seem
and to bring them in love with Paganish idolatry, and Paganish conduct of life, butto the dissolution of the law of Moses, and accordingly were greatly and justly con­demned by them, as appears here and every where else in Jcsephus. Nor is the caseof our modern masquerades, plays, operas, and the like pomps and vanitiet of thiiwicked world, of any butter tendency under Christianity.
vou iI. y Y 25







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 415


CHAP. X.
How Eurycles falsely accused Herod's sons ', and hc/w their fatherbound them and wrote to Caesar about them. Of Sylleus, andhow he was accused by Nicolaus.
J 1. IKE disorders about Herod's family and childrenabout this time grew much worse; for it now appeared certain,nor was it unforeseen beforehand, that fortune threatened the
Greatest and most insupportable misfortunes possible to hisingdom. Its progress and augmentation at this time arose onthe occasion following: One Eurycles, a Lacedemonian, (a per­son of note there, but a man of a perverse mind, and so cunningin his ways of voluptuousness and flattery, as to indulge both,and yet seem to indulge neither of them,) came in his travels toHerod, and made him presents, but so that he received morepresents from him. He also took such proper seasons for in­sinuating himself into his friendship, that he became'one ofthe most intimate of the king's friends. He had his lodging inAntipater's house; but he had not only access, but free conver­sation with Alexander, as pretending to him that he was in greatfavour with Archelaus, the king of Cappadocia; whence hepretended much respect to Glaphyra, and, in an occult manner,cultivated a friendship with them all, but always attending towhat was said and done, that he might be furnished with ca­lumnies to please them all. In short, he behaved himself so toevery body in his conversation, as to appear to be his particularfriend, and he made others believe that his being any where wasfor that person's advantage. So he won upon Alexander, whowas but young; and persuaded him, that he might open hisgrievances to him with assurance, and with nobody else. So hedeclared his grief to him, how his father was alienated fromhim. He related to him also the affairs of his mother, and ofAntipater; that he had driven them from their proper dignity,and had the power over every thing himself; that no part ofthis was tolerable, since his father was already come to hatethem; and he added, that he would neither admit them to histable, nor to his conversation. Such were the complaints, aswas but natural, of Alexander, about the things that troubledhim: and these discourses Eurycles carried to Antipater; andtold him, he did not inform him of this on his own account, butthat, being overcome by his kindness, the great importance ofthe thing obliged him to do it: and he warned him to have acare of Alexander, for that what he said was spoken with ve-hemency, and that, in consequence of what he said, he wouldcertainly kill him with his own hand. Whereupon Antipater,







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 84-1


was a careful attender on him, and on Alexandra, and had nosmall occasions to bear ill-will to Herod: for he was a kinsmanof one Joseph, whom he had slain, and a brother of those thatwere formerly slain at Tyre by Antony: yet could not these mo­tives induce Dositheus to serve Hyrcanus in this affair, for prefer -ing the hopes he had from the present king to those he had fromhim, he gave Herod the letter. So he took his kindness in goodpart, and bid him besides do what he had already done, that is, goon in serving him, by rolling up the epistle and sealing it again,and delivering it to Malchus, and then to bring back his letterin answer to it; for it would be much better if he could knowMalchus' intentions also. And when Dositheus was very readyto serve him in this point also, the Arabian governor returnedback for answer, that he would receive Hyrcanus, and all thatshould come -with him, and even all the Jews that were of hisparty: that he would, moreover, send forces sufficient to securethem in their journey, and that he should be in no want of anything he should desire. Now as soon as Herod had receivedthis letter, he immediately sent for Hyrcanus, and questionedhim about the league he had made with Malchus : and when hedenied it, showed his letter to the sanhedrim, and put the manto death immediately.
3. And this account we give the reader, as it is contained inthe commentaries of king Herod: but other historians do notagree with them, for they suppose that Herod did not find, butrather make this an occasion for thus putting him to death, andthat by treacherously laying a snare for him; for thus do theywrite; That Herod and he were once at a treat, and that Herodhad given no occasion to suspect [that he was displeased at him,]but put this question to Hyrcanus, Whether he had received anyletters from Malchus? And when he answered, that he had re­ceived letters, but those of salutation only; and when he askedfarther, whether he had not received any presents from him ? andwhen he had replied, that he had received no more than fourhorses to ride on, which Malchus had sent him; and they pre­tend that Herod charged these upon him as the crimes of brib­ery and treason, and gave order that he should be led away andslain. And in order to demonstrate that he had been guilty ofno offence, when he was thus brought to his end, they allegedhow mild his temper had been, and that even in his youth hehad never given any demonstration of boldness or rashness, andthat the case was the same when he came to be king, but thathe even then committed the management of the greatest part ofpublic affairs to Antipater; and that he was now above four­score years old, and knew that Herod's government was in a se­cure state. He also came over Euphrates and left those who







OCR Output








Chap. XI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 423


reproaches, he cried out most of all, and exaggerated what theysaid, as if they had confessed thc design against him, and tookhis oath that he had rather lose his life than hear such reproach­ful words. At last he said, That "he had sufficient authority"both by nature, and by Cajsar's grant to him, [to do what he"thought fit.] He also added an allegation of a law of their"country which enjoined this. That if parents laid their hands"on the head of him that was accused, the standers by were obli-"ged to cast stones at him, and thereby toslay him, which though"he was ready to do in his own country and kingdom, yet did"he wait for their determination: that yet they came thither"not so much as judges, to condemn them for such manifest"designs against him, whereby he had almost perished by his"sons' means, but as persons that had an opportunity of showing"their detestation of such practices, and declaring how unworthy"a thing it must be in any, even the most remote, to pass"such treacherous designs [without punishment."]
3. When the king had said this, and the young men had notbeen produced to make any defence for themselves, the assessorsperceived there was no room for equity and reconciliation, sothey confirmed his authority. And in the first place, Saturni-nus, a person that had been consul, and one of great dignity,pronounced his sentence, but with great moderation and trou­ble; and said, "That he condemned Herod's sons, but did not"think they should be put to death. He had sons of his own,"and to put one's son to death, is a greater misfortune than"any other that could befall him by their means." After himSaturninus' sons, for he had three sons that followed him, andwere his legates, pronounced the same sentence with their fa­ther : on the contrary, Volumnius' sentence was to inflict deathon such as had been so impiously undutiful to their father; andthe greatest part of the rest said the same, insomuch that theconclusion seemed to be, that the young men were condemned todie. Immediately after this Herod came away from thence, andtook his sons to Tyre, where Nicolaus met him in his voyagefrom Rome: of whom he inquired, after he had related to himwhat had passed at Berytus, what his sentiments were about hissons, and what his friends at Rome thought of that matter?His answer was, "That what they had determined to do to thee"was impious, and that thou oughtest to keep them in prison;"and if thou thinkest any thing farther necessary, thou mayest"indeed so punish them, that thou mayest not appear to indulge"thy anger more than to govern thyself by judgment; but it"thou inclinest to the milder side, thou mayest absolve them,"lest perhaps thy misfortunes be rendered incurable: and this"is the opinion of the greatest part of thy friends at Rome







OCR Output








Chap. IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 69


acribe, and sixty other rulers, all which, together with the ves­sels which they had pillaged, he carried to. the king of Babylonto Riblah, a city of Syria. So the king commanded the headsof the high priest and of the rulers to be cut ofl' there; but hehimself led all the captives, and Zedekiah to Babylon. He al­so led Josedek the high priest away bound. He was the son ofSeraiah the high priest, whom the king of Babylon had slain inRiblah, a city of Syria, as we have just now related.. 6. And now, because we have enumerated the succession ofthe kings, and who they were, and how long they reigned, I thinkit necessary to set down the names of the high priests, and whothey were that succeeded one another in the high priesthood un­der the kings. The first high priest then at the temple whichSolomon built, was Zadoc; after him his son Achimas -receivedthat dignity; after Achimas was Azarias; his son was Joram,and Joram's son was Isus, after him was Axioramus; his sonwas Phideas, and Phideas' son was Sudeas, and Sudeas' sonwas Juelus, and Juelus' son was Jotham, and Jotham's son wasUrias, and Urias' son was Nerias, and Nerias' son was Odeas,and his son was Sallumus, and Sallumus' son was Elcias, andhis son * [was Azarias, and his son] was Sareas, and his sonwas Josadoc, who was carried captive to Babylon. All thesereceived the high priesthood by succession, the sons from theirfather.
7. When the king was come to Babylon, he kept Zedekiahin prison until he died, and buried him magnificently, and de­dicated the vessels he had pillaged out of the temple of Jerusa­lem to his own gods, and planted the people in the country ofBabylon, but freed the high priest from his bonds.


CHAP. IX.
How Nebuzaradan set Gedaliah over the Jews that were left inJudea, which Gedaliah was a little afterward slain by Ishmael:and how Johanan, after Ishmael was thriven away, .went downinto Egypt with the people, which people Nebuchadnezzar, whenTie made- an expedition against t'he Egyptians, took captive, andbrought them away to Babylon.
Ww -yj - <- ''
iflif ikJlLY -'".J^K JN ow the general of the army, Nebuzaradan, when
he had carried the people of the Jews into captivity, left the


* I hfcve here inserted in bracket? this high priest Azarias, though he be omittedin all Josephus' copies, out of the Jewish chronicle, Sedar Olam, of how little au­thority soever I generally esteem such late rabbinical historians, because we knowfrom Josephus himself, that the number of the high priests belonging to this inter­val was eighteen, Antiq. B. XX. chap. x. whereat his copies have here but ssventecn.







OCR Output








104 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XI".


\
to the law of their country; and they offered the sacrifice whidiwas called the Passover, on the fourteenth day of the samemonth, and feasted seven days, and spared for no cost, but of­fered whole burnt-offerings to God, and performed sacrifices otthanksgiving, because God had led them again to the land ot"their fathers, and to the laws thereto belonging, and had ren­dered the mind of the king of Persia favourable to them. Sothese men offered the largest sacrifices on these accounts, andused great magnificence in the worship of God, and dwelt inJerusalem, and made use of a form of government that wasaristocratical, but mixed with an oligarchy, for the high priestswere at the head of their affairs, until the posterity of the Asa-moneans set up kingly government; for before their captivity,and the dissolution of their polity, they at first had kinglygovernment from Saul and Davidj for five hundred and thirty-two years, six months, and ten days; but before those kings,such rulers governed them as were called Judges and Monarchs.Under this form of government they continued for more thanfive hundred years, after the death of Moses, and of Joshua theircommander. And this is the account I had to give of the Jewswho had been carried into captivity, but were delivered from itin the times of Cyrus and Darius.
9. * But the Samaritans, being evil and enviously disposed tothe Jews, wrought them many mischiefs, by reliance on theirriches, and by their pretence that they were allied to the Per­sians, on account that thence they came; and whatsoever it wasthat they were enjoined to pay the Jews by the king's order outof their tributes, for the sacrifices, they would not pay it. Theyhad also the governors favourable to them and assisting themfor that purpose; nor did they spare to hurt them, either bythemselves, or by others; as far as they were able. So the Jewsdetermined to send an embassage to king Darius, in favour ofthe people of Jerusalem, and in order to accuse the .Samaritans,The ambassadors were Zorobabel, and four others of the rulers:and as soon as the king knew from the ambassadors the accusa­tions and complaints they brought against the Samaritans, hegave them an epistle to be carried to the governors and councilof Samaria. The cpntents of which epistle were these: " King"Darius to Tanganas and Sambabas, the governors of the Sa-"maritans, to Sadraces and Bobelo, and the rest of their fell.ow-"servants that are in Samaria; Zorobabel, Ananias, and Mor-"decai, the ambassadors ofthe Jews, complain of you, that you"obstruct them in the building of the temple, and do not sup-


* The history contained in this section is entirely wanting in all our otherboth of Ezra and Esdras.







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 357


undaunted courage in this conspiracy. So they were led awayto execution by the king's guards that stood about them, andpatiently underwent all the torments inflicted on them till theydied. Nor; was it long before that spy who had discovered themwas seized on by some of the people, out of the hatred they boreto him, and was not only slain by them, but pulled to pieceslimb from limb, and given to the dogs. This execution was seeiby many of the citizens, yet would not one of them discoveithe doers of it, till upon Herod's making a strict scrutiny afterthem, by bitter and severe tortures, certain women that weretortured, confessed whatthey had seen done; the authors of whichfact were so terribly punished by the king, that their entirefamilies were destroyed for this their rash attempt, yet did notthe obstinacy of the people, and that undaunted constancy theyshowed in the defence of their laws, make Herod any easier tothem, but he still strengthened himself after a more secure man­ner, and resolved to encompass the multitude every way, lestsuch innovations should end in an open rebellion.
5. Since, therefore, he had now the city fortified by the pa­lace in which he lived, and by the temple,- which had a strongfortress by it, called Antonia, and was rebuilt by himself, hecontrived to make Samaria a fortress for himself also against allthe people, and called it Sebaste, supposing that this place wouldbe a strong hold against the country, not inferior to the former.So he fortified that place, which was a day's journey distant fromJerusalem, and which would be useful to him in common, tokeep both the country and the city in awe. He also builtanother fortress for the whole nation; it was of old called Siiato'sTower, but was by him named Caesarea. Moreover, he choseout some select horsemen, and placed them in the great plain:and built [for them] a place in Galilee called Gaba, with He-sebonitis, in Perea. And these were the places which he parti­cularly built, while he always inventing somewhat farther for hisown secuiity, and encompassing the whole nation with guards,that they might by no means get from under his power, nor fallinto tumults, which they did continually upon any small com­motion; and that if they did make any commotions he mightknow of it, while some of his spies might be upon them fromthe neighbourhood, and might both be able to know what theywere attempting, and to prevent it. And when he went aboutbuilding the wall of Samaria, he contrived to bring thithermany of those that had been assisting to him in his wars, andmany of the people in that neighbourhood also, whom he madefellow-citizens with the rest. This he did out of an ambitiousdesire of building a temple, and out of a desire to in.-ike thecity more eminent than it hod been before, but principally be-







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 389


himself very miserable, and presented his sons there, and accus­ed them of their mad actions, and of their attempts against him:That " they were enemies to him; and by all the means they were"able, did their endeavours to show their hatred to their own"father, and would lake away his life, and so obtain his king-"dom, after the most barbarous manner; that he had power"from Caesar to dispose of it, not by necessity, but by choice,"to him who shall exercise the greatest piety towards him, while"these my sons are not so desirous of ruling, as they are, upon"a disappointment thereof, to expose their own life; if so be"they may but deprive their father of his life, so wild and pollu-"ted is their mind by time become, out of their hatred to him;"that whereas he had a long time borne this his misfortune,"he was now compelled to lay it before Caesar, and to pollute"his ears with such language, while he himself wants to know"what severity they have ever suffered from him? or what"hardships he hath ever laid upon them to make them com-"plain of him? and how they can think it just, that he should"not be lord of that kingdom, which he in a long time, and"with great danger, had gained, and not allow him to keep it"and dispose of it to him who should deserve it best ? and this,"with other advantages, he proposes as a reward for the piety"of such a one as will hereafter imitate the care he hath taken"of it, and that such a one may gain so great a requittal as"that is; and that it is an impious thing for them to pretend to"meddle with it beforehand, for he who hath ever the king-"dom in his view, at the same time reckons upon procuring"the death of his father, because otherwise he cannot come"at the government; that as for himself, he had hitherto given"them all that he was able, and what was agreeable to such"as are subject to the royal authority, and the sons of a"king: what ornaments they wanted, with servants and deli-"cate fare, and had married them into the most illustrious"families, the one [Aristobulus] to his sister's daughter, but"Alexander to the daughter of king Archelaus; and what was"the greatest favour of all, when their crimes were so very bad,"and he had authority to punish them, yet had he not made"use of it against them, but had brought them before Caesar"their common benefactor, and had not used the severity which"either as a father who had been impiously abused, or as a"king who had been assaulted treacherously, he might have"done, he made them stand upon the level with him in judg-"ment; that, however, it was necessary that all this should not"be passed over without punishment, nor himself live in the"greatest fears; nay, that it was not for their own advantage"to see the light of the- sun after what they have done,"although they should escaue at this time, since they had done







OCR Output








418 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVI.


6. About this time there came an ambassador out of Cappa-docia from Archelaus, whose name was Melas; he was one ofthe prmcipal rulers under him. So Herod being desirous toshow Archelaus' ill-will to him, called for Alexander, as hewas in his bonds, and asked him again concerning his flight,whither and how they had resolved to retire? Alexander re­plied, "To Archelaus, who had promised to send them away"to Rome, but that they had no wicked nor mischievous de-"signs against their father, and that nothing of that nature'' which their adversaries had charged upon them was true;"and that their desire was, that he might have examined Ty-"rannus, and Jucundus, more strictly, but that they had been"suddenly slain by the means of Antipater, who put his own"friends among the multitude [for that purpose]."
7. When this was said, Herod commanded that both Alexan-der and Melas should be carried to Glaphyra, Archelaus' daugh­ter, and that she should be asked, whether she did not knowsomewhat of Alexander's treacherous designs against Herod?Now as soon as they were come to her, and she saw Alexanderin bonds, she beat her head, and in a great consternation, gavea deep and moving groan. The young man also fell into tears.This was so miserable a spectacle to those present, that, for agreat while, they were not able to say or do any thing; but atlength Ptolemy, who was ordered to bring Alexander, bid himsay, whether his wife were conscious of his actions? He re­plied, " How is it possible that she, whom I love better than my"own soul, and by whom I have had children, should not know"what I do?" Upon which she cried out, That "she knew of"no wicked designs of his; but that yet, if her accusing herself"falsely would tend to his preservation, she would confess it"all." Alexander replied, "There is no such wickedness as"those (who ought the least of all so to do) suspect, which either"I have imagined, or thou knowest of, but this only, that we"had resolved to retire to Archelaus, and from thence to Rome."Which she also confessed. Upon which Herod, supposing thatArchelaus' ill-will to him was fully proved, he sent a letter byOlympus and Volumnius; and bid them, as they sailed by, totouch at Eleusa of Cilicia, and give Archelaus the letter. Andthat when they had expostulated with him that had a handin his son's treacherous design against him, they should fromthence sail to Rome; and that, in case they found Nicolaus hadgained any ground, and that Czesar was no longer displeasedat him, he should give him his letters, and the proofs which hehad ready to show against the young men. As to Archelaus hemade this defence for himself, That " he had promised to re-"ceive the young men, because it was both for their own and







OCR Output








318 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XV.


father and her brother to be slain. And when he took this in­jury very unkindly, and was ready to use violence to her, in aprecipitate manner, the king's sister Salome, observingthathe wasmore than ordinarily disturbed, sent into the king his cup-bearer,who had been prepared long beforehand for such a design,and bid him tell the king, how Mariamne had persuaded him togive his assistance in preparing a love potion for him; and if heappear to be greatly concerned, and to ask what that love potionwas? to tell him, that she had the potion, and that he was de­sired only to give it him: but that in case he did not appear to bemuch concerned at this potion, to let the thing drop, and that i.he did so, no harm should thereby come to him. When she hadgiven him, these instructions, she sent him in at this time to makesuch a speech. So he went in, after a composed manner, to gaincredit to what he should say, and yet somewhat hastily, and said,that " Mariamne had given him presents, and persuaded him to"give him a love potion." And when this moved the king,he said, that " this love potion was a composition that she had"given him, whose effects he did not know, which was the reason"of his resolving to give him this information, as the safest"course he could take, both for himself and for the king." WhenHerod heard what he said, and was in an ill disposition before,his indignation grew more violent: and he ordered that eunuchof Mariamne's who was most faithful to her, to be brought totorture about this potion, as well knowing it was not possiblethat any thing small or great could be done without him. Andwhen the man was under the utmost agonies, he could say no­thing concerning the thing he was tortured about, but so far he:new that Mariamne's hatred against him was occasioned bysomewhat that Sohemus had said to her. Now, as he was say­ing this, Herod cried out aloud, and said, that " Sohemus, who"had been at all other times most faithful to him, and to his go-"vernment, would not have betrayed what injunctions he had"given him; unless he had had a nearer conversation than ordin-"ary with Mariamne." So he gave order that Sohemus shouldbe seized on and slain immediately; buthe allowed his wife to takeher trial: and got together those that were most faithful to him,and laid an elaborate accusation against her for this love potionand composition, which had been charged upon her by way ofcalumny only. However, he kept no temper in what he said,and was in too great a passion for judging well about this matter.Accordingly, when the court was at length satisfied that he wasso resolved, they passed the sentence of death upon her: but'when the sentence was passed upon her, this temper was suggest­ed by himself, and by some others of the court, that she shouldnot be thus hastily put to death, but be laid in prison in one ot







OCR Output








208 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIII.


3. Now the people of Antioch hated Demetrius, both on ac­count of what mischief he had himself done them, and becausethey were his enemies also on account of his father Demetrius,who had greatly abused them, so they watched some opportu­nity which they might lay hold on, to fall upon him. Andwhen they were informed of the assistance that was coming toDemetrius from Jonathan, and considered at the same time thathe would raise a numerous army, unless they prevented him,and seized upon him, they took their weapons immediately, andencompassed his palace in the way of a siege, and seizing uponall the ways of getting out, they sought to subdue their king.And when he saw that the people of Antioch were become hisbitter enemies, and that they were thus in arms, he took themercenary soldiers, which he had with him, and those Jewswho were sent by Jonathan, and assaulted the Antiochians; buthe was overpowered by them, for they were many ten thou­sands, and was beaten. But when the Jews saw that the An­tiochians were superior, they went up to the top of the palace,and shot at them from thence; and because they were so re­mote from them by their height, that they suffered nothing ontheir side, but did great execution on the others, as fighting fromsuch an elevation, they drove them out of the adjoining houses,and immediately set them on fire, whereupon the flames spreaditself over the whole city, and burnt it all down. This hap­pened by reason of the closeness of the houses, and because theywere generally built of wood: so the Antiochians, when theywere not able to help themselves, nor to stop the fire, were putto flight And as the Jews leaped from the top of one house tothe top of another, and pursued them after that manner, itthence happened that the pursuit was so very surprising. Butwhen the king saw that the Antiochians were very busy insaving their children and their wives, and so did not fight anylonger, he fell upon them in the narrow passages, and foughtthem, and slew a great many of them, till at last they wereforced to throw down their arms, and to deliver themselves upto Demetrius. So he forgave them this their jnsolent beha­viour, and put an end to the sedition: and when he had givenrewards to the Jews out of the rich spoils he had gotten, andhad returned them thanks, as the cause of his victory, he sentthem away to Jerusalem, to Jonathan, with an ample testimonyof the assistance they had afforded him. Yet did he prove anill man to Jonathan afterward, and broke the promises he hadmade; and he threatened that he would make war upon him,unless he would pay all that tribute which the Jewish nationowed to the first kings [of Syria.] And this he had done, ifTrypho had not hindered him, and diverted his preparations







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








Chap. III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 329


Herod was supposed to be dead, yet was not that purpose oftheirs a secret; but when the king had conducted Antony on hisway against the Parthians, he returned to Judea, when both hissister Salome, and his mother informed him of Alexandra's in­tentions. Salome also added somewhat farther against Joseph,though it were no more than a calumny, that he had often hadcriminal conversation with Mariamne. The reason of her say­ing so was this, that she for a long time bare her ill-will, forwhen they had differences with one another, Mariamne tookgreat freedoms and reproached the rest for the meanness of theirbirth. But Herod, whose affection to Mariamne was alwaysvery warm, was presently disturbed at this, and could not bearthe torments of jealousy, but was still restrained from doing anyrash thing to her by the love he had for her: yet did his vehe­ment affection and jealousy together make him ask Mariamne byherself about this matter of Joseph; but she denied it upon heroath, and said all that an innocent woman could possibly say inher own defence, so that by little and little the king was prevail­ed upon to drop the suspicion, and left off his anger at her; andbeing overcome with his passion for his wife, he made an apolo­gy to her for having seemed to believe what he had heard abouther, and returned her a great many acknowledgments of her mo­dest behaviour, and professed the extraordinary affection andkindness he had for her, till at last, as is usual between lovers,they both fell into tears, and embraced one another with a mosttender affection. But as the king gave more and more assur­ances of his belief of her fidelity, and endeavoured to draw her toa like confidence in him, Mariamne said, "Yet was not that"command thou gavest, that if any harm came to thee from"Antony, I, who had been no occasion of it, should perish with"thee, a sign of thy love to me." When these words were fall­en from her, the king was shocked at them, and presently let hergo out of his arms, and cried out, and tore his hair with his ownhands, and said, that " now he had an evident demonstration that"Joseph had had criminal conversation with his wife, for that"he would never have uttered what he had told him alone by"himself, unless there had been such a great familiarity and firm"confidence between them." And while he was in this passionhe had like to have killed his wife, but being still overborne byhis love to her, he restrained this his passion, though not with­out a lasting grief, and disquietness of mind. However, he gaveorder to slay Joseph, without permitting him to come into hissight; and as for Alexandra, he bound her, and kept her incustody, as the cause of all this mischief.







OCR Output








Chap, II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 38S


"do what we ourselves force nobody to do; for these privileges"of ours are not only according to justice, but have formerly"been granted us by you. And we are able to read to you"many decrees of the senate, and the tables that contain them,"which are still extant in the capitol, concerning these things,"which it is evident were granted after you had experience of"our fidelity towards you, and which ought to be valued, though"no such fidelity had been; for you have hitherto preserved"what people were in possession of, not to us only, but almost"to all men, and have added greater advantages than they could"have hoped for, and thereby your government is become a"great advantage to them. And if any one were able to enu-"merate the benefits you have conferred on every nation,"which they possess by your means, he could never put an end"to his discourse; but that we may demonstrate that we are"not unworthy of all those advantages we have obtained, it"will be sufficient for us to say nothing of other things, but to"speak freely of this king who now governs us, and is now"one of thy assessors: and indeed, in what instance of good-will,"as to your house, hath he been deficient? What mark of"fidelity to it hath he omitted? What token of honour hath he"not devised? What occasion for his assistance of you hath he"not regarded at the very first? What hindereth, therefore,"but that your kindnesses may be as numerous as his so great"benefits to you have been. It may also perhaps be fit here not"to pass over in silence the valour of his father Antipater, who,"when Caesar made an expedition into Egypt, assisted him with"two thousand armed men, and proved inferior to none, neither"in the battles on land, nor in the management of the navy;"and what need I say any thing of how great weight those sol-"diers were at that juncture? or how many, and how great"presents they were vouchsafed by Caesar? And truly I ought"before now to have mentioned the epistles which Caesar wrote"to the senate; and how Antipater had honours, and the free-"dom of the city of Rome, bestowed upon him, for these are"demonstrations both that we have received these favours by"our own deserts, and do on that account petition thee for thy"confirmation of them, from whom we had reason to hope for"them, though they had not been given us before, both out of"regard to our king's disposition towards you, and your dispo-"sition towards him. And farther, we have been informed by"those Jews that were there, with what kindness thou came"into our country, and how thou offered the most perfect sa-"crifices to God and honoured him with remarkable vows,"and how thou gave the people a feast, and accepted of their"own hospitable presents to thee. We ought to esteem all these







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 205


account of the injuries his father Demetrius had done them;yet did he bring this about; for as the people of Antioch hatedAlexander on Ammonius' account, as we have showed already,they were easily prevailed with to cast him out of Antioch; whothus expelled out of Antioch, came into Cilicia. Ptolemy camethen to Antioch, and was made king by its inhabitants, and bythe army; so that he was forced to put on two diadems, the oneof Asia, the other of Egypt: but being naturally a good and arighteous man, and not desirous of what belonged to others, andbesides these dispositions, being also a wise man in reasoningabout futurities, he determined to avoid the envy of the Romans,so he called the people of Antioch together to an assembly, andpersuaded them to receive Demetrius; and assured them, that"he would not be mindful of what they did to his father in case"he should now be obliged by them; and he undertook that he"would himself be a good monitor and governor to him; and"promised that he would not permit him to attempt any bad"actions; but that for his own part, he was contented with the"kingdom of Egypt." By which discourse he persuaded thepeople of Antioch to receive Demetrius.
8. But now Alexander made haste with a numerous and greatarmy, and came out of Cilicia into Syria, and burnt the countrybelonging to Antioch, and pillaged it; whereupon Ptolemy, andhis son-in-law Demetrius, brought their army against him, (forhe had already given him his daughter in marriage,) and beatAlexander, and put him to flight: and accordingly he fled intoArabia. Now it happened, in the time of battle, that Ptolemy'shorse, upon hearing the noise of an elephant, cast him ofi* hisback, and threw him on the ground; upon the sight of whichaccident, his enemies fell upon him, and gave him many woundsupon his head, and brought him into danger of death; for whenhis guards caught him up, he was so very ill, that for four days'time he was not able either to understand, or to speak. How­ever, Zabdiel, a prince among the Arabians, cut off Alexander'shead, and sent it to Ptolemy, who recovering of his wounds, andreturning to his understanding on the fifth day, heard at once amost agreeable hearing, and saw a most agreeable sight, whichwere the death and the head of Alexander; yet a little afterthis his joy for the death of Alexander, with which he was sogreatly satisfied, he also departed this life. Now, Alexander,who was called Balas, reigned over Asia five years; as we haveelsewhere related.
9. But when Demetrius, who was styled * Nicator, hadtaken the kingdom, he was so wicked as to treat Ptolemy's sol­


* This name Demetrius Nicator, or Demetrius the amfueror, is so written on







OCR Output








400 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVI.


to all men: on which account we have reason to expect thelike return from others, and to inform them that they oughtnot to esteem difference of positive institutions a sufficient causeof alienation, but [join with us in] the pursuit of virtue andprobity, for this belongs to all men in common, and of itselfalone is sufficient for the preservation of human life. I nowreturn to the thread of my history.
CHAP. VII.
How upon Herod's going down into David's sepulchre, the sedi­tion in his family greatly increased.
§ 1. As for Herod he had spent vast sums about the cities,both without and within his own kingdom: and as he had beforeheard that Hyrcanus, who had been king before him, hadopened David's sepulchre, and taken out of it three thousandtalents of silver, and that there was a much greater numberleft behind, and indeed enough to suffice all his wants, he hada great while an intention to make the attempt; and at this timehe opened that sepulchre by night, and went into it, and endea­voured that it should not be at all known in the city, but tookonly his most faithful friends with him. As for any money, hefound none, as Hyrcanus had done, but that furniture of gold,and those precious goods that were laid up there; all which hetook away. However, he had a great desire to make a morediligent search, and to go farther in, even as far as the very bodiesof David and Solomon; where two of his guards were slain, bya flame that burst out upon those that went in, as the report was.So he was terribly affrighted, and went out and built a propi­tiatory monument of that fright he had been in, and this ofwhite stone at the mouth of the sepulchre, and that at great ex­pense also. And even * Nicolaus his historiographer makesmention of this monument built by Herod, though he does notmention his going dovn into the sepulchre, as knowing that ac­tion to be of ill repute; and many other things he treats of inthe same manner in his book; for he wrote in Herod's lifetime,and under his reign, and so as to please him, and as a servant to


* It is here worth our observation, how careful Josephus was to the discoveryof truth in Herod's history, since he would not follow Njcolaus of Damascus him­self, so great a historian, where there was great reason to suspect that he flatteredHerod; which impartiality in history Josephus here solemnly professes, and ofwhich impartiality he has given more demonstrations than almost any historian whom­soever: But as to Herod's taking great wealth out of David's sepulchre, though Icannot prove it, yet do I strongly suspect it was this very history.







OCR Output








Chap. II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 113


"sonable superstition." This is what Agathafchides relates ofour nation. But when Ptolemy had taken a great many cap-*tives, both from the mountainous parts of Judea, and from theplaces about Jerusalem and Samaria, and the places near mountGerizzim, he led them all into *Egypt^ and settled them there^And as he knew that the people of Jerusalem were f most faith­ful in the observation of oaths and covenants; and this from-the answer they made to Alexander, when he sent an ambassageto them, after he had beaten Darius in battle; so he distributedmany of them into garrisons, and at Alexandria gave them-equal privileges of citizens with the Macedonians themselves; andrequired of them to take their oaths, that they would keep theirfidelity to the posterity of those who committed these placesto their care. Nay, there were not a few other Jews, who, oftheir own accord, went into Egypt, as invited by the goodnessof the soil, and by the liberality of Ptolemy. How'ever, therewere disorders among their posterity, with relation to the Sa­maritans, on account of their resolution to preserve that con­duct of life which was delivered to them by their forefathers,and they thereupon contended one with another; while those ofJerusalem said, that their temple was holy, and resolved to sendtheir sacrifices thither; but the Samaritans were resolved thatthey should be sent to mount Gerizzim.


CHAP. II.
How Ptolemy Philadelphia procured the laws of the Jews to betranslated into the Greek tongue ,' and set many captives free /and dedicated many gifts to God.
§ 1. \\ HEN Alexander had reigned twelve years, and af­ter him Ptolemy Soter forty years, Philadelphus then took


* The great number of the Jews and Samaritans that were formerly carried intoEgypt by Alexander, and now by Ptolemy the son of Lagus, appear afterwards inIhe vast multitude, who, as we shall see presently, were soon ransomed hy Phila­delphus, and by him made free, before he sent for the seventy-two interpreters: inthe many garrisons, and oilier soldiers of that nation in Egypt; in the famous set­tlement of Jews, and the number of their synagogues at Alexandria, long afterward;and in the vehement contention between the Jews and Samaritans under Philometer,about the place appointed for public worship in the law of Moses: whether at theJewish temple at Jerusalem, or at the Samaritans temple at Gerizzim: of all whichour author treats hereafter. And as to the Samaritans carried into Egypt underthe same princes, Scaliger supposes, that these who have a great synagogue at Cairo,as also those whom the Arabic geographer speaks of, as having seized on an islandin the Red Sea, are remains of them at this very day, as the notes here inform us.
f Of the sacrednesa of oaths among the Jews in the Old Testament, see ScripturePolitics, p. 54,65.







OCR Output








Cluvp. XIV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 303


yet was she not able to prevail with him to stay there, becausehe was making haste to Rome, even though the weather wasstormy, and he was informed that the affairs of Italy were verytumultuous and in great disorder.
3. So he set sail from thence to Pamphylia, and falling into aviolent storm, he had much ado to escape to Rhodes, with theloss of the ship's burden; and there it was that two of his friends,Sappinas and Ptolemeus, met with him: and as he found thatcity very much damaged in the war against Cassius, though hewei-e in necessity himself, he neglected not to do it a kindness,but did what he could to recover it to its former state. He alsobuilt there a three-decked ship, and set sail thence, with hisfriends, for Italy, and came to the port of Brundusium; andwhen he was come from thence to Rome, he first related to An­tony what had befallen him in Judea, and how Phasaelus hisbrother was seized on by the Parthians, and put to death by them;and how Hyrcanus was detained captive by them, and howthey had made Antigonus king, who had promised them a sumof money, no less than a thousand talents, with five hundred wo­men, who were to be of the principal families, and of the Jew­ish stock, and that he had carried off the women by night, andthat by undergoing a great many hardships, he had escaped thehands of his enemies; as also, that his own relations were in dan­ger of being besieged and taken, and that he had sailed througha storm, and contemned all these terrible dangers of it, in orderto come, as soon as possible to him, who was his hope andonly succour at this time.
4. This account made Antony commiserate * the change thathad happened in Herod's condition; and reasoning with himselfthat this was a common case among those that are placed in suchgreat dignities, and that they are liable to the mutations thatcome from fortune, he was very ready to give him the as­sistance he desired, and this because he called to mind the friend­ship he had had with Antipater, because Herod offered him mo­ney to make him king, as he had formerly given it him to makehim tetrarch, and chiefly because of his hatred to Antigonus, forhe took him to be a seditious person, and an enemy to the Ro­mans. Caesar was also the forwarder to raise Herod's dignity,and to give him his assistance in what he desired, on account ofthe toils of war which he had himself undergone with Antipaterhis fathei in Egypt, and of the hospitality he had treated him


* Concerning the chronology of Herod, and the time when he was fiW madeking at Rome, and concerning the time when he began his second reign, without arival, upon the conquest and slaughter of Antigonus, both principally derived fromthis and the two next chapters in .Joseplms, see the note on sect. 6, and chap. xv.»i;t. 10.







OCR Output








176 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Bouk XII.


and rose up together, and destroyed many of them, as gainingadvantage over them by laying snares for them, and making se­cret conspiracies against them. Judas made perpetual expedi­tions against these men, and endeavoured to restrain them fromthose incursions, and to prevent the mischiefs they did to theJews. So he fell upon the Idumeans, the posterity of Esau,at Acrabattene, and slew a great many of them, and took theirspoils. He also shut up the sons of Bean, that laid wait for theJews, and he sat down about them, and besieged them, and burnttheir towers, and destroyed the men [that were in them]. Af­ter this he went thence in haste against the Ammonites, who hada great and a numerous army; of which Timotheus was thecommander. And when he had subdued them, he seized on thecity Jazer, and took their wives and their children captives, andburnt the city, and then returned into Judea. But when theneighbouring nations understood that he was returned, they gottogether in great numbers, in the land of Gilead, and cameagainst those Jews that were at their borders, who then fled tothe garrison of Dametha; and sent to Judas to inform him thatTimotheus was endeavouring to take the place whither theywere fled. And as these epistles were reading, there came othermessengers out of Galilee, who informed him that the inhabitantsof Ptolemais, and of Tyre and Sidon, and strangers of Galilee,were gotten together.
2. Accordingly Judas, upon considering what was fit to bedone, with relation to the necessity both these cases required,gave order that Simon his brother should take three thousandchosen men, and go to the assistance of the Jews in Galilee, whilsthe and another of his brothers, Jonathan, made haste into theland of Gilead, with eight thousand soldiers. And he left Jo­seph, the son of Zacharias, and Azarius, to be over the rest ofthe forces; and charged them to keep Judea very carefully, andto fight no battles with any persons whomsoever until his re­turn. Accordingly, Simon went into Galilee, and fought theenemy, and put them to flight, and pursued them to the verygates of Ptolemais, and slew about three thousand of them; andtook the spoils of those that were slain, and those Jews whomthey had made captives, with their baggage; and then returnedhome.
3. Now as for Judas Maccabeus, and his brother Jonathan,they passed over the river Jordan; and when they had gonethree days' journey, they light upon the Nabateans, who cameto meet them peaceably, and who told them how the affairs ofthose in the land of Gilead stood; and how many of them werein distress, and driven into garrisons, and into the cities of Ga­lilee: and exhorted him to make haste to go against the foreign­







OCR Output








178 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIt.


that lay upon the road, (and as it was not possible for him to goany other way, so he was not willing to go back again), he thensent to the inhabitants, and desired that they would open theirgates, and permit them to go on their way through the city, forthey had stopped up the gates with stones, and cut off their pas­sage through it. And when the inhabitants of Ephron would notagree to this proposal, he encouraged those that were with him,and encompassed the city round, and besieged it, and lyinground it by day and night, took the city, and slew every malein it, and burnt it all down, and so obtained a way through it;and the multitude of those that were slain was so great, that theywent over the dead bodies. So they came over Jordan, and ar­rived at the great plain, over against which is situate the cityBethshan, which is called by the Greeks * Scythopolis. Andgoing away hastily from thence, they came into Judea, singingpsalms and hymns as they went, andindulging such tokens of mirthas are usual in triumphs upon victory. They also offered thank-offerings, both for their good success, and for the preservation oftheir army, for -f- not one of the Jews was slain in these battles.
6. But as to Joseph, the son of Zacharias, and Azarias, whomJudas left generals [of the rest of the forces] at the same timewhen in Galilee, fighting against the people of Ptolemais, andJudas himself and his brother Jonathan, were in the land of Gi-lead, did these men also affect the glory of being courageous ge­nerals in war, in order whereto they took the army that wasunder their command, and came to Jamnia. There Gorgias, thegeneral of the forces of Jamnia, met them; and upon joining bat­tle with him, they lost \. two thousand of their army, and fledaway, and were pursued to the very borders of Judea. And thismisfortune befell them by their disobedience to what injunctionsJudas had given them, "Not to fight with any one before his"return." For besides the rest of Judas' sagacious counsels, one


* The reason why Betbsban was called Scythopolis, is well known from Hero­dotus, B. I. p. 105, and Syncellus, p. 214. that the Scythians, when they overranAsia, in the days of Josiah, seized on this city, and kept it as long as they continuedin Asia, from which time it retained the name of Scythopolis, or the city of the Scy­thians.
f This roost providential preservation of all the religious Jews in this expedition,which was according to the will of God, is observable often among God's peoplethe Jews; and somewhat very like it in the changes of the four monarchies, whichwere also providential. See Prideaux at the years 331, 333, and 334.
\ Here is another great instance of providence, that when, even at the very timethat Simon, and Judas, and Jonathan, were so miraculously preserved, and blessedin the just defence of their laws and religion, these other generals of the Jews whowent to fight for honour, in a vain-glorious way, and without any commission fromGod, or the family he had raised up to deliver them, were miserably disappoiutcdand defeated. See 1 Maccab. v. 61, 62.







OCR Output








Chap. III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 327


dered ; but Cleopatra, as she had formerly been desirous to giveher what satisfaction she could, and commiserating Alexandra'smisfortunes, made the case her own, and would not let Antonybe quiet, but excited him to punish the child's murder; for thatit was an unworthy thingthat Herod, who had been by him madeking of a kingdom that no way belonged to him, should be guiltyof such horrid crimes against those that were of the royal bloodin reality. Antony was persuaded by these arguments; andwhen he came to Laodicea, he sent and commanded Herod tocome and make his defence, as to what he had done to Aristo-bulus, for that such a treacherous design was not well done, if hehad any hand in it. Herod was now in fear, both of the ac­cusation, and of Cleopatra's ill-will to him, which was such, thatshe was ever endeavouring to make Antony hate him. Hetherefore determined to obey his summons, for he had no pos­sible way to avoid it: so he left his uncle, Joseph, procuratorfor his government, and for the public affairs, and gave him aprivate charge, that if Antony should kill him he also shouldkill Mariamne immediately; for that he had a tender affectionfor this his wife, and was afraid of the injury that should be of­fered him, if, after his death, she, for her beauty, should be en­gaged to some other man: but his intimation was nothing butthis at the bottom, that Antony had fallen in love with herwhen he had formerly heard somewhat of her beauty: Sowhen Herod had given Joseph this charge, and had indeed nosure hopes of escaping with his life^he went away to Antony.
6. But as Joseph was administering the public affairs of thekingdom, and for that reason was very frequently with Ma­riamne, both because his business required it, and because ofthe respects he ought to pay to the queen, he frequently let him­self into discourses about Herod's kindness, and great affectiontowards her; and when the women, especially Alexandra,used to turn his discourses into feminine raillery, Joseph wasso over desirous to demonstrate the king's inclinations, that heproceeded so far as to mention the charge he had received, andthence drew his demonstration, that Herod was not able tolive without her; and that if he should come to any ill end, hecould not endure a separation from her, even after he was dead.Thus spoke Joseph. But the women, as was natural, did nottake this to be an instance of Herod's strong affection for them,but of hfe severe usage of them, that they could not escape de-structionAor a tyrannical death, even when he was dead him­self: an Jwhis saying [of Joseph's] was a foundation for thewomen'sMvere suspicions about him afterwards.
7. At^pis time a report went about the city Jerusalem,among Herod's enemies, that Antony had tortured Herod, and







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 891


"desire to reign; and to say farther, that this evil proceeds from"the case of our unhappy mother. This is abundantly sufficient"to produce our misfortune out of the former; but consider"well, whether such an accusation does not suit all such young"men, and may not be said of them all promiscuously? for"nothing can hinder him that reigns, if he have children, and"their mother be dead, but the father may have a suspicion upon"all his sons, as intending some treachery to him: but a sus-"picion is not sufficient to prove such an impious practice. Now"let any man say, whether we have actually and insolently at-"tempted any such thing, whereby actions otherwise incredible,"use to be made credible. Can any body prove that poison"hath been prepared? or prove a conspiracy of our equals, or"the corruption of servants, or letters .written against thee?"though indeed there are none of those things but have some-"times been pretended by way of calumny, when they were"never done; for a royal family that is at variance with itself"is a terrible thing; and that which thou callest a reward of"piety, often becomes, among very wicked men, such a founda-"tion of hope, as makes them leave no sort of mischief untried:"Nor does any one lay any wicked practices to our charge;"but to calumnies by hearsay, how can he put an end to them,"who will not hear what we have to say? Have we talked"with too great freedom? yes; but not against thee, for that"would be unjust, but against those that never conceal any thing"that is spoken to them. Hath either of us lamented our mother?"yes; but not because she is dead, but because she was evil"spoken of by those who had no reason so to do. Are we"desirous of that dominion which we know our father is pos.-"sessed of? For what reason can we be so? If we already"have royal honours, as we have, should not we labour in vain?"And if we have them not, yet, are not we in hopes of them'"Or, supposing that we had killed thee, could we expect to ob-"tain thy kingdom? while neither the earth would let us tread"upon it, nor the sea let us sail upon it, after such an action as"that: nay, the religion of all your subjects, and the piety of"the whole nation, would have prohibited parricides from as-"suming the government, and from * entering into that most


* Since some prejudiced men have- indulged a wild suspicion, as we have sup­posed already, Antiq. B. XV. ch. xi. seet. 7. that Josephus" history of Herod'srebuilding the temple is no better than a fable, it may not be amiss to takenotice of the occasional clause in the speed) of Alexander before his father Herod,in his and his brother's vindication, which mentions the temple as known by everybody to have been built by Herod. See John ii. 20. See also another speechof Herod's own to the young men that pulled down his golden eagle from thefront of the temple, where he takes notice, " How the building of the temple cost







OCR Output








114 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XL


children, were in danger of perishing: the occasion whereof weshall declare in a little time, for it is proper, in the first place,to explain somewhat relating to this king, and how he came tomarry a Jewish wife, who was herself of the royal family also,and who is related to have saved our nation; for when Artax-erxes had taken the kingdom, and had set governors over thehundred and twenty and seven provinces, from India even untoEthiopia, in the third year of his reign, he made a costly feastfor his friends, and for the nations of Persia, and for theirgovernors, such an one as was proper for a king to make, whenhe had a mind to make a public demonstration of his riches, andthis for a hundred and fourscore days; after which he made afeast for other nations, and for their ambassadors at Shushan,for seven days. Now this feast was ordered after the mannerfollowing: he caused a tent to be pitched, which was supportedby pillars of gold and silver, with curtains of linen and purplespread over them, that it might afford room for many ten thou­sands to sit down. The cups with which the waiters ministeredwere of gold, and adorned with precious stones, for pleasure, andfor sight. He also gave order to the servants that they should- not force them to drink, by bringing them wine continually, asis the practice of the Persians, but to permit every one of theguests to enjoy himself according to his own inclination.Moreover, he sent messengers through the country, and gave or­der that they should have a remission of their labours, and shouldkeep a festival many days, on account of his kingdom. In likemanner, did Vashti the queen gather her guests together, andmade them a feast in the palace. Now the king was desirousto show her, who exceeded all other women in beauty, to thosethat feasted with him, and he sent some to command her to cometo his feast. But she out of regard to the laws of the Persians,which * forbid the wives to be seen by strangers, did not go tothe king; and though he oftentimes sent the eunuchs to her, shedid nevertheless stay away, and refused to come, till the kingwas so much irritated, that he broke up the entertainment, and


* If the Cbaldee paraphrase be in the right, that Artaxerxes intended to showVashti to his guests naked, it is no wonder at all that she would not submit to suchan indignity ; but still if it were not so gross as that, yet it might, in the king's cups,be done in a way so indecent, as the Persian laws would not then bear, no more thanthe common laws of modesty. And that the king had some such design, seems Hotimprobable, for otherwise the principal of these royal guests could be no strangers tothe queen, nor unapprized of h«r beauty, so far as decency admitted. However,«ince Providence was now paving the way for the introduction of a Jewess into theking's affections, in order to bring about one of the most wonderful deliveranceswhich the Jewish or any nation ever had, we need not be farther solicitous aboutthe motives by which the king was induced to divorce V;ishti, and marry Esther.







OCR Output








Chap. XI. ANTIQUIT1KS OF THE JEWS. 291


ought not to he admitted, when the multitude were purifyingthemselves. But Herod had little regard to the messengers, thatwere sent to him, and entered the city in the night time, and af­frighted Malichus, yet did he remit nothing of his former dissi­mulation, but wept for Antipater, and bewailed him as a friendof his, with a loud voice: But Herod and his friends thought itproper, not openly to contradict Malichus' hypocrisy, but togive him tokens of mutual friendship, in order to prevent hissuspicion of them.
6. However, Herod sent to Cassius, and informed him of themurder of his father; who knowing what sort of man Malichuswas as to his morals, sent him back word, that he should revengehis father's death; and also sent privately, to the commandersof his army at Tyre, with orders to assist Herod in the executionof a very just design of his. Now when Cassius had taken Lao-dicea, they all went together to him, and carried him garlandsand money; and Herod thought that Malichus might be punish­ed while he was there; but he was somewhat apprehensive ofthe thing, and designed to make some great attempt, and becausehis son was then an hostage at Tyre, he went to that city, andresolved to steal him away privately, and to march thence intoJudea; and as Cassius was in haste to march against Antony, hethought to bring the country to revolt, and to procure the go­vernment for himself. But providence opposed his counsels;and Herod being a shrewd man, and perceiving what his inten­tion was, he sent thither beforehand a servant, in appearanceindeed to get a supper ready, for he had said before, that hewould feast them all there, but in reality to the commanders ofthe army, whom he persuaded to go out against Malichus, withtheir daggers. So they went out and met the man near the city,upon the seashore, and stabbed him. Whereupon Hyrcanuswas so astonished at what had happened, that his speech failedhim; and when, after some difficulty, he had recovered himselfhe asked Herod, what the matter could be, and who it was thatslew Malichus? and when he said that it was done by the com­mand of Cassius, he commended the action; for that Malichuswas a very wicked man, and one that conspired against his owncountry. And this was the punishment that was inflicted onMalichus for what he wickedly did to Antipater.
7. But when Cassius was marched out of Syria, disturbancesarose in Judea: for Felix, who was left at Jerusalem with anarmy, made a sudden attempt against Phasaelus, and the peoplethemselves rose in arms; but Herod went to Fabius, the prelectof Damascus, and was desired to run to his brother's assistance,but was hindered by a distemper that seized upon him, till Pha­saelus by himself had been too hard for Felix, and had shut him
VOL. II. O O 23







OCR Output








Gimp. VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 173


"desirable, by its affording us the liberty of worshipping God."Since therefore you are in such circumstances at present, that"you must either recover that liberty, and so regain a happy"and blessed way of living, which is that according to our laws"and customs of our country, or to submit to the most op-"probrious sufferings; nor will any seed of your nation remain"if you be beat in this battle. Fight, therefore, manfully; and"suppose that you must die, though you do not fight. But be-"lieve, that besides such glorious rewards as those of the liber-"ty of your country, of your laws, of your religion, you shall"then obtain everlasting glory. Prepare yourselves therefore,"and put yourselves into such an agreeable posture, that you"may be ready to fight with the enemy as soon as it is day to-"morrow morning."
4. And this was the speech which Judas made to encouragethem. But when the enemy sent Gorgias, with five thousandfoot, and one thousand horse, that he might fall upon Judas bynight, and had for that purpose certain of the runagate Jews asguides, the son of Mattathias perceived it, and resolved to fallupon those enemies that were in their camp, now their forceswere divided. When they had therefore supped in good time,and had left many fires in their camp he marched all night tothose enemies that were at Emmaus; so that when Gorgiasfound no enemy in their camp, but suspected that they were re­tired and had hidden themselves among the mountains, he resol­ved to go and seek them wheresoever they were. But aboutbreak of day, Judas appeared to those enemies that were at Em­maus, with only three thousand men, and those ill armed, by rea­son of their poverty, and when he saw the enemy very well andskilfully fortified in their camp, he encouraged the Jews, andtold them "that they ought to fight, though it were with their"naked bodies, for that God had sometimes of old given such"men strength, and that against such as were more in number,"and were armed also, out of regard to their great courage."So he commanded the trumpeters to sound for the battle: andby thus falling upon the enemies when they did not expect it,and thereby astonishing and disturbing their minds, he slewmany of those that resisted him, and went on pursuing the rest asf !'r as Gadara, and the plains of Idumea, andAshdod, and Jamnia:and of these there fell about three thousand. Yet did Judas ex­hort his soldiers not to be too desirous of the spoils, for that stillthey must have a contest and a battle with Gorgias, and the for­ces that were with him; but that when they had once overcomethem, then they might securely plunder the camp, because theywere the only enemies remaining, and they expected no others,just as he was speaking to his soldiers, Gorgias' men look-







OCR Output








92 jwmguiTiES OF THE JEWS. Book X,


bouring nations, and especially the Cutheans, whom Shalman-ezer, king of Assyria, had brought out of Persia and Media,and had planted- in- Samaria, when he carried the peopk ofIsrael captives, besought the governors, and those that had thecare of such affairs, that they would interrupt the Jews, bothhi the rebuilding of their city, and in the building of their tem­ple. Npw as these men were corrupted by them with money,they sold the Cutheans their interest for rendering this buildinga slow and a careless work, for Cyrus, who was busy aboutother wars, knew nothing of all this; and it so happened, thatwhen he had led his army against the * Massagetae he ended hislife. But when Cambyses, the son of Cyrus, had taken thekingdom, the governor in Syria, and Pnenicia, and in thecountries of Ammon, and Moab, and Samaria, wrote an epis­tle to Cambyses; whose contents were as follows: " To OUF Lord"Cambyses; we thy servants, Rathunms the historiographer,H and Semellius the scribe, and the rest that are thy judges in"Syria and Phenicia, sendeth greeting: If is fit, O King,"that thou shouldest know that these Jews which were car-"ried to Babylon, are come into our country, and are build-"ing that rebellious and wicked city, and its market places,"and setting up its walls, and raising up the temple: know"therefore, that when these things are finished, they will not*' be willing to pay tribute, nor will they submit to thy com-"mands, but will resist kings, and will choose rather to rule overM others, than be ruled over themselves. We therefore thought"it proper to write to thee, O king, while tire works about;"the- temple are going on so fast, and not to overlook this"matter, that thou mayest search into the books of thy fathers,"for thou wilt find in them, that the Jews have been rebels,"and enemies to kings, as hath their city been also, which,"for that reason, hath been till now laid waste. We thought"proper also to inform thee of this matter, because thou niay-"est otherwise perhaps be ignorant of it, that if this city be


* Josi-phus here follows Herodotus, and those that related how Cyrus m«dewar with the Scythians and Massagets, rear the Caspian sea, and perished in it;while Xenophon's account, which appears never to have been seen by Josephus,that Cyrus died in peace, in his own country of Persia, is attested to by thewriters of the affairs of Alexander the Great, when they agree that he foundCyrus" sepulchre at Pasargadas, near Perscpolis. This account of Xenophon'sis also conHrmcd by the circumstances of Cambyses, upon his succession toCyrus, who, instead of a war to- avenge his father's death upon the Scythians andMassagets, and to prevent those nations from overruning his northern pro­vinces, which would have been the natural consequence of his father's ill successand death there, went immediately to an Egyptian war, long ago begun by Cyrus,according to Xenophon, page 644, and conquered that kingdom, nor is there, that1 ever heard of the least mention in the reign of Cambyses of any war against theScythians and Massagets that lie was ever engaged in all his life.
- I







OCR Output








408 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVI.


somewhat to purpose, when every one that could oppose himwas taken away. When therefore Andromachus and his friendswere driven away, and had no discourse nor freedom with theking any longer, the king in the first place, examined by tortureall whom he thought to be faithful to Alexander, whether theyknew of any of his attempts against him; but these died with­out having any thing to say to that matter, which made the kingmore zealous [after discoveries,] when he could not find outwhat evil proceedings he suspected them of. As for Antipater,he was very sagacious to raise a calumny against those that werereally innocent, as if their denial was only their constancy andfidelity [to Alexander,] and thereupon provoked Herod to disco­ver, by the torture of great numbers, what attempts were still con­cealed. Now there was a certain person among the many thatwere tortured, who said, that he knew that the young man had of­ten said, that when he was commended as a tall man in his body,and a skilful marksman, and that in his> commendable exerciseshe exceeded all men, these qualifications given him by nature,though good in themselves, were not advantageous to him, be­cause his father was grieved at them, and envied him for them; andthat when he walked along with his father he endeavoured to de­press and shorten himself that he might not appear too tall, andthat when he shot at any thing as he was hunting, when his fatherwas by, he missed his mark on purpose, for he knew how ambitioushis father was of being superior in such exercises. So when theman was tormented about this saying, and had ease given hisbody after it, he added, that he had his brother Aristobulus forhis assistance, and contrived to lie in wait for their father, as theywere hunting, and kill him: and when they had done so, to flyto Rome, and desire to have the kingdom given them. Therewere also letters of the young man found, written to his brother,wherein he complained, that his father did not act justly in giv­ing Antipater a country, whose [yearly] revenues amounted totwo hundred talents. Upon these confessions Herod presentlythought he had somewhat to depend on, in his own opinion, asto his suspicion about his sons: So he took up Alexander andbound him: yet did he still continue to be uneasy, and was notquite satisfied of the truth of what he had heard; and when hecame to recollect himself, he found that they had only made ju­venile complaints and contentions, and that it was an incrediblething, that when his son should have slain him, he should openlygo to Rome [to beg the kingdom,] so he was desirous to havesome surer mark of his son's wickedness, and was very solicitousabout it, that he might not appear to have condemned him to beput in prison too rashly; so he tortured the principal of Alex­ander's friends, and out not a few of them to death, without get-







OCR Output








96 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XL


"deed is there any thing which we do not receive from them:"for these women weave garments for us, and our household"affairs are by their means taken care of, and preserved in"safety; nor can we live separate from women. And when"we have gotten a great deal of gold and silver, and any other"thing that is of great value, and deserving regard, and see a"beautiful woman, we leave all these things, and with open"mouth fix our eyes upon her countenance, and are willing to"forsake what we have, that we may enjoy her beauty, and".procure it to ourselves. We also leave father, and mother,*- and the earth that nourishes us, and frequently forget our"dearest friends, for the sake of women: nay, we are so hardy"as to lay down our lives for them. But what will chiefly"make you take notice of the strength of women is this that"follows: Do not we take pains, and endure a great deal of trou-"ble, and that both by land and sea, and when we have pro-"cured somewhat as the fruit of our labours, do we not bring"them to the women, as to our mistresses; and bestow them"upon them? nay, I once saw the king, who is lord of so"many people, smitten on the face by Apame, the daughter of"Rabsases Themasius, his concubine, and his diadem taken"away from him, and put upon her own head, while he bore"it patiently; and when she smiled he smiled, and when she"was angry he was sad; and according to the change of her"passions, he flattered his wife, and drew her to reconciliation"by the great humiliation of himself to her, if at any time he"saw her displeased at him."
6. And when the princes and rulers looked one upon another,he began to speak about truth; and he said, "I have already"demonstrated how powerful women are; but both these wo-*' men themselves, and the king himself, are weaker than truth;"for although the earth be large, and the heaven high, and"the course of the sun swift, yet are all these moved according"to the will of God, who is true and righteous, for which cause"we also ought to esteem truth to be strongest of all things,"and that what is unrighteous is of no force against it. More-"over, all things else that have any strength are mortal, and"short-lived, but truth is a thing that is immortal, and eternal."It affords us not indeed such a beauty as will -wither away by"time, nor such riches as may be taken away by fortune, but"righteous rules and laws. It distinguishes them from injustice,"and puts what is unrighteous to rebuke."*


* The reader is to note, that although the speeches or papers of these threeof the king's guard are much the same, in the third book of Esdias, chap. iii. andiv. as they are here in Josephus, yet that the introduction of them is entirelydifferent, while in our Esdras the whole is. related as the contrivance of the







OCR Output








128 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XI.


'that Bagoses, the general of * another Artaxerxes' army,polluted the temple, and imposed tributes on the Jews, that outof the public stock, before they offered the daily sacrifices, theyshould pay for every lamb fifty shekels. Now Jesus was thebrother of John, and was a friend of Bagoses, who had promisedto procure him the high priesthood. In confidence of whose sup­port, Jesus quarrelled with John in the temple, and so provokedhis brother, that in his anger his brother slew him. Now it wasa horrible thing for John, when he was high priest, to perpe­trate so great a crime; and so much the more horrible, that therenever was so cruel and impious a thing done, neither by theGreeks nor Barbarians. However, God did not neglect itspunishment, but the people were on that very account enslavedand the temple was polluted by the Persians. Now when Ba­goses, the general of Artaxerxes' army, knew that John, thehigh priest of the Jews, had slain his own brother Jesus in th'etemple, he came upon the Jews immediately, and began in angerto say to them, "Have you had the impudence to perpetrate a." murder in your temple!" And as he was aiming to go intothe temple, they forbade him so to do; but he said to them,"Am not I purer than he that was slain in the temple?" And'when he had said these words, he went into the temple. Ac­cordingly, Bagoses made use of this pretence, and punished theJews seven years for the murder of Jesus.
2. Now when John had departed this life, his son Jaddua suc­ceeded in the high priesthood. He had a brother, whose namewas Manasseh. Now there was one Sanballat, who was sent byDarius, the last king [of Persia,] into Samaria. He was aCuthean by birth; of which stock were the Samaritans also. Thisman knew that the city Jerusalem was a famous city, and thattheir kings had given a great deal of trouble to the Assyrians,and the people ot Celesyria; so that he willingly gave his daugh­


* Concerning this other Artaxerxes, called Mnemon, and the Persian afflictiwiand captivity of the Jews under him occasioned by the murder of the high priest'sbrother in the holy house itsetf, see Authent. Rec. at large, page 49. And if anywonder why Josephus wholly omits the rest of the kings of Persia after ArtaxIMnemon, till he came to their last king Darius, who was conquered by Alex-the Great, I shall give them Vossius' and Dr. Hudson's answer, though iiown word'-, viz. That Josephus did not do ill in omitting those kings of 1 ,-.,.,.with whom the Jews had no concern; because he was giving the history of the Jews,and not of the Persians: [which is a sufficient reason also why he entirely omitsthe history and the book of Job, as not particularly relating to that nation.] Hejustly, therefore, returns to the Jewish affairs after the death of Longimanus, with­out any mention of Darius II. before Artaxerxes Mnemon, or of the Ochus orArogus, as the Canon of Ptolemy names them after him. Nor had he probablymentioned this other Artaxerxes unless liagcties, one of the governors and comman­ders under him, had occasioned the pollution of the Jewish temple, and had greatly- distressed the Jews upon that pollution.
Artaxerxesnderin myPersia







OCR Output








Chap. I. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 191


athan said, that he was ready to die for them, and was indeedesteemed no way inferior to his brother, he was appointed to bethe general of the Jewish army.
2. When Bacchides heard this, he was afraid that Jonathanmight be very troublesome to the king and the Macedonians, asJudas had been before him, he sought how he might slay him bytreachery: But this invention of his was not unknown to Jona­than, nor to his brother Simon: but when these two were ap­prized of it, they took all their companions, and presently fledinto that wilderness which was nearest to the city; and whenthey were come to a lake called Asphar, they abode there. Butwhen Bacchides was sensible that they were in a low state, andwere in that place, he hasted to fall upon them with all his for­ces, and pitching his camp beyond Jordan, he recruited his ar­my: But when Jonathan knew that Bacchides was coming uponhim, he sent his brother John, who was also called Gaddis, tothe Nabatean Arabs, that he might lodge his baggage with themuntil the battle with Bacchides should be over, for they werethe Jews' friends. And the sons of Ambri laid an ambush forJohn from the city Medaba, and seized upon him, and uponthose that were with him, and plundered all that they had withthem : They also slew John, and all his companions. However,they were sufficiently punished for what they now did by John'sbrethren, as we shall relate presently.
3. But when Bacchides knew that Jonathan had pitched hiscamp among the lakes of Jordan, he observed when their Sab­bath day came, and then assaulted him as supposing that hewould not fight because of the law [for resting on that day:]but he exhorted his companions [to fight;] and told them thattheir lives were at stake, since they were encompassed by theriver, and by their enemies, and had no way to escape, for thattheir enemies pressed upon them before, and the river was behindthem. So after he had prayed to God to give them the victory,he joined battle with the enemy, of whom he overthrew many;and as he saw Bacchides coming up boldly to him, he stretchedout his right hand to smite him, but the other foreseeing andavoiding the stroke, Jonathan with his companions leaped intothe river, and swam over it, and by that means escaped beyondJordan, while the enemy did not pass over that river: but Bac­chides returned presently to the citadel at Jerusalem, having lostabout two thousand of his army. He also fortified many citiesof Judea, whose walls had been demolished, Jericho, and Em-maus, and Bethoron, and Bethel, and Tirana, and Pharatho,and Tekoa, and Gazara, and built towers in every one of thesecities, and encompassed them with strong walls, that were verylarge also, and put garrisons into them, that they might issue







OCR Output








ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVI.


"number of benefits which this government hath bestowed on"them in order to their happiness, this is instead of all the rest,"that they appear to be no longer in a state of slavery, but of"freedom. Now the privileges we desire, even when we are"in the best circumstances, are not such as deserve to be en-"vied, for we are indeed in a prosperous state by your means,"but this is only in common with others; and it is no more"than this which we desire, to preserve our religion without"any prohibition; which as it appears not in itself a privilege"to be envied us, so it is for the advantage of those that grant"it to us; for if the divinity delights in being honoured, he must"delight in those that permit them to be honoured: and there"are none of our customs which are inhuman, but all tending"to piety, and devoted to the preservation of justice; nor do"we conceal those injunctions of ours, by which we govern our"lives, they being memorials of piety, and of a friendly con-"versation among men: And * the seventh day we set apart from"labour; it is dedicated to the learning of our customs and"laws, we thinking it proper to reflect on them, as well as on"any [good] thing else, in order to our avoiding of sin. If any"one, therefore, examine into our observances, he will find they"are good in themselves, and that they are ancient also, though"some think otherwise, insomuch, that those who have received"them, cannot easily be brought to depart from them, out of"that honour they pay to the length of time they have Ve-"ligiously enjoyed them, and observed them. Now our adver-"saries take these our privileges away, in the way of injustice:"they violently seize upon that money of ours which is offered"to God, and called sacred money, and this openly, after a sa-"criligious manner; and they impose tributes upon us, and"bring us before tribunals on holy-days, and then require"other like debts of us, not because the contracts require it, or"for their own advantage, but because they would put an af-*' front on our religion, of which they are conscious as well as"we, and have indulged themselves in an unjust, and, to them"involuntary, hatred; for your government over all is one,"tending to the establishing of benevolence, and abolishing of"ill-will among such as ate disposed to it. This is therefore"what we implore from thee, most excellent Agrippa, that we"may not be ill treated; that we may not be abused; that we"may not be hindered from making use of our own customs;"nor be despoiled of our goods; nor be forced by these men to


* We may here observe the ancient practice of the Jews of dedicating the Sab­bath-da; not to idleness, but to the learning their sacred rites and religious customs,and to die meditation on the law of Moses. The like to which we meet with else­where in Jotephus, also against A pion, 6. I. sect . 22.







OCR Output








374" ANTIQUITIES OF THE JBWS. Book XV.


asked for, ajid obtained, the power over them from the emperor,who gave command to Vitellius, who was then commander inSyria, to give it them accordingly. Before that time, they werekept under the seal of the high priest, and of the treasurers ofthe temple; which treasurers, the day before a festival, wentup to the Roman captain of the temple guards, and viewedtheir own seal, and received the vestments; and again, whenthe festival was over, they brought them to the same place, andshowed the captain of the temple guards their seal, which cor­responded with his seal, and reposited them there. And thatthese things were so, the afflictions that happened to us after­ward [about them] are sufficient evidence: But for the tgvyeritself, when Herod the king of the Jews had fortified it morefirmly than before, in order to secure and guard the temple, hegratified Antonius, who was his friend, and the Roman ruler,and then gave it the name of the Tower pf Antonia.
5. Now in the western quarters of the enclosure of the tem­ple there were four gates; the first led to the king's palace,and went (o a passage over the intermediate valley; two moreled to the suburbs of the city; and the last led to the othercity, where the roqd descended down info the valley by a greatnumber of steps, and thence up again by the ascent, for the:ity lay over against the temple in the manner of a theatre, andwas encompassed with a deep valley along the entire southquarter; but the fourth front of the temple, which was south­ward, had indeed itself gates in its middle, as also it had the royalcloister, with three walks which reached in length from theeast valley unto that on the west, for it was impossible it shouldreach any farther: and this cloister deserves to be mentionedbetter than any other under the sun; for while the valley wasvery deep, and its bottom could not be seen, if you looked fromabove into the depth, this farther vastly high elevatioji of the*cloister stood upon that height, insomuch, that if any one look­ed down from the top of the battlements, or down both thosealtitudes, he would be giddy, while his sight could not reachto such an immense depth. This cloister had pillars that stoodin four rows one over against the other all along, for the fourthrow was interwoven into the wall, which [also was built ofstone;] and the thickness of each pillar was such, that threemen might, with their arms extended, fathom it round, andjoin their hands again, while its length was twenty-seven feetwith a double spiral at its basis; and the number of all the piL-lars [in that court] was a hundred and sixty-two. Their chap­iters were made with sculptures after the Corinthian order,and caused an amazement [to the spectators,] by reason of thegrandeur of the whole. These four rows of pillars included







OCR Output








870 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XV.


replies, and gave Manahem his hand, and dismissed him, and fromthat time he continued to honour all the Essens. We havethought it proper to relate these facts to our readers, how strangesoever they be, and to declare what hath happened among us,because many of the Essens have by their excellent virtue, beenthought worthy of his knowledge of divine revelations.
CHAP. XI.
Haw Herod rebuilt the temple, and raised it higher, and madeit more magnificent than it was before ,' as also concerning thattower which he called Antonia.
% 1. AND now Herod, in the eighteenth year of his reign,and after the acts already mentioned, undertook a very greatwork, that is, to build of himself the * temple of God, andmade it larger in compass, and to raise it to a most magnificentaltitude, as esteeming it to be the most glorious of all his ac­tions, as it really was, to bring it to perfection, and this wouldbe sufficient for an everlasting memorial of him; but as he knewthe multitude were not ready nor willing to assist him in so vasta design, he thought to prepare them first by making a speech tothem, and then set about the work itself; so he called them to­gether, and spake thus to them: "I think I need not speak to"you, my countrymen, about such other works as I have done"since I came to the kingdom, although I may say they have"been performed in such a manner as to bring more security"to you than glory to myself; for I have neither been negligent"in the most difficult times about what tended to ease your ne-"cessities, nor have the buildings I have made been so proper to"preserve me as yourselves from injuries; and I imagine that,"with God's assistance, I have advanced the nation of the Jews"to a degree of happiness which they .never had before; and"for the particular edifices belonging to your own country, and"your own cities, that we have lately acquired, which we have"erected and greatly adorned, and thereby augmented the dig-"nity of your nation, it seems to me a needless task to enume­


* We may here observe, that the fancy of the modern Jews, in calling thistemple, which was really the third of their temples, the second temple, follow­ed so long by later Christians, seems to be without any solid foundation. Thereason why the Christians here followed the Jews, is, because the prophecy ofHaggai ii. C—9. which they expound of ihe Messiah's coming to the second orZorobabel's temple, of which they suppose this of Herod's to be only a continua­tion, which is meant, I think, of his coming to the/o«r(A and last temple, or tothat future, largest, and most glorious one, described by Ezekiel: whence 1 take theformer notion, how general soever, to be a great mistake. See Lit. Accomp. ofTroph. p. 24.







OCR Output








264 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


considerable actions: and particularly made war with Alexander,since Hyrcanus was not yet able to oppose his power, but wasalready attempting to build the walls of Jerusalem, whichPompey had overthrown, although the Romans, which werethere, restrained him from that his design. However, Alexan­der went over all the country round about, and armed manyof the Jews, and suddenly got together ten thousand armedfootmen, and fifteen hundred horsemen, and fortified Alexan-drium, a fortress near to Corae and Macherus, near the moun­tains of Arabia. Gabinius therefore came upon him, having'sent Marcus Antonius, with other commanders before. Thesearmed such Romans as followed them; and, together with them,such Jews as were subject to them, whose leaders were Pitho-laus and Malichus, and they took with them also their friendsthat were with Antipater, and met Alexander, while Gabiniushimself followed with his legion. Hereupon Alexander retiredto Jerusalem, where they fell upon one another, and it came toa pitched battle, in which the Romans slew of their enemiesabout three thousand, and took a like number alive.
3. At which time Gabinius came to Alexandrium, and in­vited those- that were in it to deliver it up on certain conditions,and promised that then their former offences should be forgiven:But as a great number of the enemy had pitched their campbefore the fortress, whom the Romans attacked. Marcus An­tonius fought bravely, and slew a great number, and seemed tocome off with the greatest honour. So Gabinius left part ofhis army there, in order to take the place, and he himself wentinto other parts of Judea, and gave order to rebuild all thecities that he met with that had been demolished; at which timewere rebuilt Samaria, Ashdod, Scythopolis, Anthedon, Raphia,and Dora; Marissa also, and Gaza, and not a few others be­sides. And as the men acted according to Gabinus' com­mand, it came to pass, that at this time these cities were secure­ly inhabited, which had been desolate for a long time.
4. When Gabinius had done thus in the country, he return­ed to Alexandrium ; and when he urged on the siege of the place,Alexander sent an embassage to him, desiring that he would par­don his former offences ; he also delivered up the fortresses, Hyr-cania, and Macherus; and at last Alexandrium itself, which for­tresses Gabinius demolished. But when Alexander's mother,who was of the side of the Romans, as having her husband andother children at Rome, came to him, he granted her whatsoevershe asked; and when he had settled matters with her he broughtHyrcanus to Jerusalem, and committed the care of the templeto him: And when he had ordained five councils, he distributedthe same nation into the same number of parts: So these coun­







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES OK THE JEWS. 231


* Eleazar, a man of an ill temper, and delighting in seditiouspractices. This man said, "since thou desirest to know the"truth, if thou wilt be righteous in earnest, lay down the high"priesthood, and content thyself with the civil government of"the people." And when he desired to know for what causehe ought to lay down the high priesthood, the other replied,"We have heard it from old men, that thy mother had been"a captive under the reign of Antiochus Epiphanes." Thisstory was false, and Hyrcanus was provoked against him; andall the Pharisees had a very great indignation against him.
6. Now there was one Jonathan, a very great friend of Hyr­canus', but of the sect of the Sadducees, whose notions are quitecontrary to those of the Pharisees. He told Hyrcanus, that"Eleazar had cast such a reproach upon him, according to the"common sentiments of all the Pharisees, and that this would"be made manifest, if he would but ask them the question, what"punishment they thought this man deserved? for that he might"depend upon it, that the reproach was not laid on him with their"approbation, if they were for punishing him as his crime de-"served." So the Pharisees made answer, that " he deserved"stripes and bonds, but that it did not seem right to punish re-"proaches with death." And indeed the Pharisees, even uponother occasions, are not apt to be severe in punishments. Atthis gentle sentence, Hyrcanus was very angry, and thought thatthis man reproached him by their approbation. It was this Jona­than who chiefly irritated him, and influenced him so far, thathe made him leave the party of the Pharisees, and abolish thedecrees they had imposed on the people, and to punish those thatobserved them. From this source arose that hatred which heand his sons met with from the multitude; but of these matterswe shall speak hereafter. What I would now explain is this,that the Pharisees have delivered to the people a great many ob­servances by succession from their fathers, which are not writ­ten in the laws of Moses; and for that reason it is that the Sad­ducees reject them, and say, that we are to esteem those observ­ances to be obligatory which are in the written word, but arenot to observe what are derived from the tradition of our fore­fathers. And concerning these things it is that great disputesand differences have arisen among them, while the Sadducees areable to persuade none but the rich, and have not the populaceobsequious to them, but the Pharisees have the multitude on


* This slander, that arose from a Pharisee, has been preserved by their successorsthe Rabbins, to these later ages, for Dr. Hudson assures us, that David Gantz, inbis Chronology, S. pr. p. 77. in Vorstius* version, relates that Hyrcanus' motherwas taken captive in mount Modiith. See chap. xiii. sect. 5.







OCR Output








Chap. XV. . ANTIQUITIES OI' THE JEWS. 307


3. And now it was that Silo discovered that he had takenbribes: for he set a good number of his soldiers to complainaloud of want of provisions they were in, and to require moneyto buy them food, and that it was fit to let them go intoplaces proper for winter quarters, since the places near the citywere a desert, by reason that Antigonus' soldiers had carriedall away; so he set the army upon removing, and endeavouredto march away: But Herod pressed Silo not to depart; and ex­horted Silo's captains and soldiers not to desert him, when Cae­sar and Antony, and the senate, had sent him thither, for thathe would provide them plenty of all the things they wanted,and easily procure them a great abundance of what they re­quired; after which entreaty, he immediately went out intothe country, and left not the least pretence to Silo for his de­parture, for he brought an unexpected quantity of provisions,and sent to those friends of his who inhabited about Samaria,to bring down corn, and wine, and oil, and cattle, and all otherprovisions, to Jericho, thnt there might be no want of a supplyfor the soldiers for the time to come. Antigonus was sensibleof this, and sent presently over the country such as might re­strain and lie in ambush for those that went out for provisions.So these men obeyed the orders of Antigonus, and got togethera great number of armed men about Jericho, and sat upon themountains, and watched those that brought the provisions. How­ever, Herod was not idle in the meantime, for he took tenbands of soldiers, of whom five were of the Romans, and five ofthe Jews, with some mercenaries among them, and with somefew horsemen, and came to Jericho; and as they found the citydeserted, but that five hundred of them had settled themselveson the tops of the hills, with their wives and children, those hetook and sent away; but the Romans fell upon the city, andplundered it, andfound the houses full of all sorts of good things:So the king left a garrison at Jericho, and came back again, andsent the Roman army to take their winter quarters in the coun­tries that were come over to him, Judea and Galilee, and Sa­maria. And so much did Antigonus gain of Silo for the bribeshe gave him, that part of the army should be quartered at Lid-da, in order to please Antony. So the Romans laid their wea­pons aside, and lived in plenty of all things.
4. But Herod was not pleased with lying still, but sent outhis brother Joseph against Idumea with two thousand armedfootmen, and four hundred horsemen, while he himself cameto Samaria, and left his mother and his other relations there, forthey were already gone out of Massada, and went into Galilee,to take certain places which were held by the garrisons ot Anti­gonus; and he passed on to Senphoris, as God sent a snow, while
VOL. II. Q Q 26







OCR Output








Chap. IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 273


"obliging manner, and sees that they are conducted back in"safety, of which we have had several former testimonies, it"is now also decreed, at the report of Theodosius, the son of"Theodorus, and upon his putting the people in mind of the"virtue of this man, and that his purpose is to do us all the"good that is in his power, to honour him with a crown of gold,"the usual reward according to the law, and to erect his statue"in brass in the temple of Demus, and of the graces; and that"this present of a crown shall be proclaimed publicly in the"theatre, in the Dionysian shows, while the new tragedies are"acting; and in the Panathenean, and Eleusinian, and Gymni-"cal shows also; and that the commanders shall take care, while"he continues in his friendship, and preserves his good-will to"us, to return all possible honour and favour to the man for"his affection and generosity; that by this treatment it may"appear how our people receive the good kindly; and repay"them a suitable reward; and he may be induced to proceed"in his affection towards us, by the honours we have already"paid him. That ambassadors be also chosen out of all the"Athenians, who shall carry this decree to him, and desire him"to accept of the honours we do him, and to endeavour always"to be doing some good to our city." And this shall sufficeus to have spoken as to the honours that were paid by the Ro­mans and the people of Athens to Hyrcanus.
CHAP. IX.
How Antipater committed the care of Galilee to Herod, and. thatof Jerusalem to Phasaelus; as also, how Herod, upon the Jews'envy at Antipater, was accused before Hyrcanus.
§ 1. .Now when Caesar had settled the affairs of Syria, hesailed away; And as soon as Antipater had conducted Caesarout of Syria, he returned to Judea. He then immediatelyraised up the wall which had been thrown down by Pompey;and, by coming thither, he pacified that tumult which hadbeen in the country; and this by both threatening and advisingthem to be quiet: For that "If they would be of Hyrcanus'"side, they would live happily, and lead their lives without"disturbance, in the enjoyment of their own possessions; but if"they were addicted to the hopes of what might come by in-"novation, and aimed to get wealth thereby, they should have"him a severe master, instead of a gentle governor, and Hyr-"canus a tyrant, instead of a king, and the Romans, together"with Caesar, their bitter enemies, instead of rulers, for that"they would never bear him to be set aside whom they had ap»







OCR Output








368 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


temple, should send their money to Cos, nor is it likely thatthe Jews, who are inhabitants of Alexandria, should do so nei­ther, since they were in no fear of Mithridates. And Strabohimself bears witness to the same thing in another place, that atthe same time that Sylla passed over into Greece, in order to fightagainst Mithridates, he sent Lucullus to put an end to a seditionthat our nation, of whom the habitable earth is full, had raisedin Cyrene; where he speaks thus: "There were four classes of"men among those of Cyrene, that of citizens, that of hus-"bandmen, the third of strangers, and the fourth of Jews. Now"these Jews are already gotten into all cities, and it is hard to"find a place in the habitable earth that hath not admitted this"tribe of men, and is not possessed by it: And it hath come to"pass that Egypt and Cyrene, as having the same governors,"and a great number of other nations, imitate their way of"living, and maintain great bodies of these Jews in a peculiar"manner, and grow up to greater prosperity with them, and"make use of the same laws with that nation also. Accord-"ingly the Jews have places assigned them in Egypt, wherein"they inhabit, besides what is peculiarly allotted to this nation"at Alexandria, which is a large part of that city. There is"also an ethnarch allowed them, who governs the nation; and"distributes justice to them, and takes care of their contracts,"and of the laws to them belonging, as if he were the ruler of"a free republic. In Egypt, therefore, this nation is power-"ful, because the Jews were originally Egyptians, and because"the land wherein they inhabit, since they went thence, is near"to Egypt. They also removed into Cyrene, because that this"land adjoined to the government of Egypt, as well as does"Judea, or rather was formerly under the same government."And this is what Strabo says.
3. So when Crassus had settled all things as he himself pleas­ed, he marched into Parthia, where both he himself and all hisarmy perished, as hath been related elsewhere. But Cassiusas he fled from Rome to Syria, took possession of it, and was animpediment to the Parthians, who by reason of their victoryover Crassus, made incursions upon it: And as he came back toTyre, he went up into Judea also, and fell upon Tarichae, andpresently took it, and carried about thirty thousand Jews cap­tives; and slew Pitholaus, who succeeded Aristobulus in his se­ditious practices, and that by the persuasion of Antipater, whoproved to have great interest in him, and was at that time in'great repute with the Idumeans also: Out of which nation hemarried a wife, who was the daughter of one of their eminentmen, and her name was * Cypros, by whom he had four sons,


* ^>r. Hudson observes, that the name of this wife of Antipater's in Josephuswas Cyprus, as an Hebrew termination, but not Cj/pris, the Greek name for Venu%as some critics were ready to corrtct it.







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS 177


ers, and to endeavour to save his own countrymen out of theirhands. To this exhortation Judas hearkened and returned intothe wilderness; and in the first place fell upon the inhabitants otBosor, and took the city, and beat the inhabitants, and destroyedall the males, and all that were able to fight, and burnt the city.Nor did he stop -even when night came on, but he journeyed init to the garrison where the Jews happened to be then shut up,and where Timotheus lay round the place with his army: andJudas came upon the city in the morning; and when he foundthat the enemy were making an assault upon the walls, and thatsome of them brought ladders, on which they might get uponthose walls, and that others brought engines to [batter them],he bid the trumpeter to sound his trumpet, and he encouragedhis soldiers cheerfully to undergo dangers for the sake of theirbrethren and kindred; he also parted his army into three bo­dies, and fell upon the backs of their enemies. But when Ti­motheus' men perceived that it was Maccabeus that was uponthem, of both whose courage and good success in war they .hadformerly had sufficient experience, they were put to flight; butJudas followed them with his army, and slew about eight thou­sand of them. He then turned aside to a city of the foreignerscalled Mails, and took it, and slew all the males, and burnt thecity itself. He then removed from thence, and overthrew Cas-peom, and Bosor, and many other cities of the land of Gilead.
4. But not long after this Timotheus prepared a great army,and took many others as auxiliaries, and induced some of theArabians, by the promise of rewards, to go with him in thisexpedition, and came with his army beyond the brook, overagainst the city Raphon. And he encouraged his soldiers, if itcame to a battle with the Jews, to fight courageously, and tohinder their passing over the brook: for he said to them before­hand, That "if they come over it, we shall be beaten." Andwhen Judas heard that Timotheus prepared himself to fight, hetook all his own army, and went in haste against Timotheus hisenemy; and when he had passed over the brook, he fell uponhis enemies, and some of them met him, whom he slew, andothers of them he so terrified, that he compelled them to throwdown their arms, and fly; and some of them escaped, but someof them fled to what was called the temple at Carnaim, andhoped thereby to preserve themselves; but Judas took the city,and slew them, and burnt the temple, and so used several waysof destroying his enemies.
5. When he had done this, he gathered the Jews together,with their children, and wives, and the substance that belongedto them, and was going to bring them back into Judea: but assoon as he was come to a certain city, whose name was Ephron.







OCR Output








OJF TH* JEWS. Book IX,


.brought their o.wn gods into Samaria; and by worshippmg them,.as was the custom of their own countries, they provoked Almigh­ty God to be angry and displeased at them, for a plague .seized.upon them, by which they were destroyed; and when they foundno cure for their miseries, they learned by the oracle that they.ought to worship Almighty God, as the method for their deliv­erance. So they sent ambassadors to l|he king of Assyria, ianddesired him to send them some of those priests of-the Israelites'whom he had taken .captive. And when he thereupon sent them,and the people were by them taught the laws, and the holy wor-ship of God, they worshipped him in a respectful manner, andthe plague ceased immediately; and indeed they continue tomake use of the very same customs to this very time, and are-called in the Hebrew tongue Cutheans, but in the Greek tongueSamaritans. And when they see the Jews in prosperity, theypretend that they are changed, and allied to them, and call themkinsmen, as though they were derived from Joseph, and had bythat means an original alliance with them: but when they seethem falling into a low condition, they say they are no way re-Jated to them, and that the Jews have no right tp expect anykindness or marks of kindred from them, but they declare thatthey are sojourners, that come from other .countries. But ofthese we shall have a more seasonable opportunity to discoursehereafter.







OCR Output








2S6 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIII.


of his sons should be his successor? Upon God's representingto him the countenance of Alexander, he was grieved that hewas to be the heir of all his goods, and suffered him to bebrought up in * Galilee. However, God did not deceive Hyr-canus, for after the death of Aristobulus, he certainly took thekingdom, and one of his brethren, who affected the kingdom,he slew, and the other, who chose to live a private and quietlife, he had in esteem.
2. When Alexander Janneus had settled the government inthe manner that he judged best, he made an expedition againstPtolemais; and having overcome the men in battle, he shutthem up in the city, and sat round about it, and besieged it;for of the maritime cities there remained only Ptolemais andGaza to be conquered, besides Strato's Tower, and Dora, whichwere held by the tyrant Zoilus. Now while Antiochus Phih>meter, and Antiochus who was called Cyzicenus, were makingwar one against another, and destroying one another's armies,the people of Ptolemais could have no assistance from them; butwhen they were distressed with this siege, Zoilus, who possessedStrato's Tower and Dora, and maintained a legion of soldiers,and on occasion of the contest between the kings, affected tyran­ny himself, came and brought some small assistance to the peo­ple of Ptolemais; nor indeed had the kings such a friendship forthem, as that they should hope for any advantage from them:Both these kings were in the case of wrestlers, who rindingthemselves deficient in strength, and yet being ashamed to yield,put off the fight by laziness and by lying still as long as theycould. The only hope they had remaining was from the king ofEgypt, and from Ptolemy Lathyrus, who now held Cyprus,and who came to Cyprus when he was driven from the govern­ment of Egypt, by Cleopatra his mother: So the people of Pto­lemais sent to this Ptolemy Lathyrus, and desired him to comeas a confederate, to deliver them, now they were in such dan­ger, out of the hands of Alexander. And as the ambassadorsgave him hopes, that if he would pass over into Syria, he wouldhave the people of Gaza, on the side of those of Ptolemnis; asalso they said, that Zoilus, and besides these the Sidonians, andmany others, would assist them, so he was elevated at this, andgot his fleet ready as soon as possible.
3. But in this interval Demenetus, one that was of abilities


* The reason why Hyrcanus suffered not this son of his, whom he did not love,to come to Judta, but ordered him to be brought up in Galilee, is su gesifd |)V ur.Hudson, that Galilee was not esteemed so happy and well cultivated a country asJudea, Matt. xxvi. 73. John vii. 52. Acts ii. 7. although another obvious iva-nr.occurs also, that he was farther out of his sight in Galilee than be would have been inJudea.







OCR Output








Chap. XIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 239


these people after this manner, as I have already related.Ptolemy also took Ptolemais by force, as we have declaredelsewhere.
CHAP. XIII.
How Alexander, upon the league of mutual defence 'which Cleo­patra had agreed with him, made an expedition against Cele-syria, and utterly overthrew the city of Gaza ,' and how he slewmany ten thousands of Jews that rebelled against him: Alsoconcerning Antiochus Grypus, Seleucus, Antiochus Cyzicenus,and Antiochus Pius, and others.
§ 1. W HEN Cleopatra saw that her son was grown great,and laid Judea waste without disturbance, and had gotten theeity of Gaza under his power, she resolved no longer tooverlook what he did, when he was almost at her gates; andshe concluded, that now he was so much stronger than before,he would be very desirous of the dominion over the Egyptians;but she immediately marched against him with a fleet at sea,and an army of foot on land, and made Chelsias and Ananias theJews, generals of her whole army, while she sent the greatestpart of her riches, her grand-children, and her testament, to thepeople of * Cos. Cleopatra also ordered her son Alexander tosail with a great fleet to Phenicia: and when that country hadrevolted, she came to Ptolemais; and because the people of Pto­lemais did not receive her, she besieged the city; but Ptolemywent out of Syria, and made haste into Egypt, supposing thathe should find it destitute of an army and soon take it, thoughhe failed of his hopes. At this time Chelcias, one of Cleopatra'sgenerals, happened to die in Celesyria, as he was in pursuitof Ptolemy.
2. When Cleopatra heard of her son's attempt, and that hisEgyptian expedition did not succeed according to his expecta­tions, she sent thither part of her army, and drove him out ofthat country, so when he was returried out of Egypt again,he abode during the winter at Gaza, in which time Cleopatratook the garrison that was in Ptolemais by siege, as well as thecity; and when Alexander came to her, he gave her presents,and such marks of respect as were but proper, since under themiseries he endured by Ptolemy, he had no other refuge but her.


* The city, or island Cos, is not that remote island in the Egean Sea, famousfor the birth of the great Hippocrates, but a city or island of the same name,adjoining to Kgypt, mentioned both by Stephanus and Ptolemy, as Dr. Hudsoninforms us. Of which Cos, and the treasures there laid up by Cleopatra and theJews, see Antiq. B. XIV. ch. vii. § 2.







OCR Output








iy6 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIII.


"you from the greatest part of the tributes and taxes which"you formerly paid to the kings my predecessors, and to my-"self; and I do now set you free from those tributes which"you have ever paid; and besides, I forgive you the tax upon"salt, and * the value of the crowns which you used to offer to"me; and instead of the third part of the fruits [of the field],"and the half of the fruits of the trees, I relinquish my part 01"them from this day: And as to the poll-money, which ought"to be given me for every head of the inhabitants of Judea,"and of the three toparchies that adjoin to Judea, Samaria, and"Galilee, and Perea, that I relinquish to you for this time, and"for all time to come. I will also that the city of Jerusalem"be holy and inviolable; and free from the tythe, and from the"taxes, unto its utmost bounds : And I so far recede from my"title to the citadel, as to permit Jonathan your high priest to"possess it, that he may place such a garrison in it as he ap-"proves of for fidelity and good will to himself, that they may"keep it for us. I also make free all those Jews who have"been made captives and slaves in my kingdom. I also give"order that the beasts of the Jews be not pressed for our ser-"vice. And let their Sabbaths, and all their festivals, and three"days before each of them, be free from any imposition. In"the same manner, I set free the Jews that are inhabitants in"my kingdom, and order that no injury be done them. I also"give leave to such of them as are willing to list themselves in"my army, that they may do it, and those as far as thirty"thousand; which Jewish soldiers, wheresoever they go, shatl"have the same pay that my own army hath: and some of them"I will place in my garrisons, and some as guards about mine"own body, and as rulers over those that are in my court. I"give them leave also to use the laws of their forefathers, and"to observe them; and I will, that they have power over the"three toparchies that are added to Judea, and it shall be in the"power of the high priest, to take care that not one Jew shall"have any other temple for worship, but only that at Jerusa-"lem. I bequeath also, out of my own revenues, yearly, for"the expenses about the sacrifices, one hundred and fifty thou-"sand [drachmae;] and what money is to spare I will that it"shall be your own. I also release to you those ten thousand"drachmae which the kings received from the temple, because"they appertain to the priests that minister in that temple."And whosoever shall fly to the temple at Jerusalem, or to the


* Take Grotius" note here: "The Jews, says he, were wont to present"crowns to the kings [of Syria;] afterwards that gold, which was paid instead of"those crowns, or which was expended in making them, was called tho crown gold"and crown tax." On 1 Slaccab. z. 27.







OCR Output








2S8 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV


"be allowed to observe their Sabbaths, and to act in all things"according to the customs of their forefathers, without impedi-M ment from any body, the pretor hath granted their petition."Accordingly, it was decreed by the senate and people, that in"this affair that concerned the Romans, no one of them should"be hindered from keeping the Sabbath day, nor be fined for"so doing, but that they may be allowed to do all things accord-"ing to their own laws."
26. Now there are * many such decrees of the senate and im-perators of the Romans, and those different from these beforeus, which have been made in favour of Hyrcanus, and of ournation; as also, there have been more decrees of the city, andrescripts of the pretors, to such epistles as concerned our rightsand privileges: and certainly such as are not ill disposed to whatwe write, may believe that they are all to this purpose, andthat by the specimens which we have inserted; for since wehave produced evident marks that may still be seen, of the friend­ship we have had with the Romans, and demonstrated that thosemarks are engraven upon columns and tables of brass in thecapitol, that are still in being, and preserved to this day, wehave omitted to set them all down, as needless and disagreeable;for I cannot suppose any one so perverse as not to believe thefriendship we have had with the Romans, while they have de­monstrated the same by such a great number of their decreesrelating to; nor will they doubt of our fidelity as to the rest ofthose decrees, since we have showed the same in those we haveproduced. And thus have we sufficiently explained that friend­ship and confederacy we at those times had with the Romans.
CHAP. XI .
How f Marcus succeeded Sextus, when he had been slain byBassus' treachery ,' and how, after the death of Ctesar, Cassiascame into Syria, and distressed Judea - as also, how Molichusslew Antipater, and was himself slain by Herod.
J 1. JN ow it so fell out, that about this very time the affairsof Syria were in great disorder, and this on the occasion fol­


* If we compare Josephus" promise in sect. 1. to produce all the public decreesof the Romans in favour of the Jews with his excuse here for omitting many of them,we may observe, that when he came to transcribe all those decrees he had collected,he found them so numerous that he thought he should too much tire his readers if hehad attempted it, which he thought a sufficient apology for his omitting the rest ofthem; yet do those by him produced afford such a strong confirmation to his history,and give such great light to even the Roman Antiquities themselves, that I believethe curious are not a little sorry for such his omission.
f For Marcus the president of Syria, sent us successor to Sextus Caesar, the







OCR Output








144 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XII.


chapiters of the feet imitated the first buddings of lilies, whiletheir leaves were bent and laid under the table, but so that thechives were seen standing upright within them. Their baseswere made of a carbuncle; and the place at the bottom, whichrested on that carbuncle, was one palm deep, and eight fingersin breadth. Now they had engraven upon it with a very fine tool,and with a great deal of pains, a branch of ivy, and tendrils ofthe vine; sending forth clusters of grapes, that you would guessthey were no wise different from real tendrils, for they were sovery thin, and so very far extended at their extremities, thatthey were moved with the wind, and made one believe that they-were the product of nature, and not the representation of art.They also made the entire workmanship of the table appear tobe threefold, while the joints of the several parts were so unitedtogether as to be invisible, and the places where they joinedcould not be distinguished. Now the thickness of the table wasnot less than half a cubit. So that this gift, by the king's greatgenerosity, by the great value of the materials, and the varietyof its exquisite structure, and the artificer's skill in imitatingnature with graving tools, was at length brought to perfection,while the king was very desirous that though in largeness itwere not to be different from that which was already dedicatedto God, yet that in exquisite workmanship, and the novelty ofthe contrivances, and in the splendour of its construction, itshould far exceed it, and be more illustrious than that was.
10. Now of the cisterns of gold there were two, whose sculp­ture was of scale-work, from its basis to its belt-like circle, withvarious sorts of stones inchased in the spiral circles. Next towhich there was upon it a meander of a cubit in height; it wascomposed of stones of all sorts of colours. And next to this wasthe rod-work engraven; and next to that was a rhombus in atexture of net-work, drawn out to the brim of the bason, whilesmall shields made of stones, beautiful in their kind, and of fourfingers depth, filled up the middle parts. About the top of thebason were wreathed the leaves of lilies, and of the convolvulus,and the tendrils of vines, in a circular manner. And this wasthe construction of the two cisterns of gold, each containing twofirkins. But those which were of silver were much more brightand splendid than looking glasses, and you might in them seethe images that fell upon them more plainly than in the other.The king also ordered thirty vials; those of which the parts thatwere of gold, and not filled up with precious stones, were shadow­ed over with the leaves of ivy, and of vines, artificially engraven.And these were the vessels that were, after an extraordinarymanner, brought to this perfection, partly by the skill of theworkmen, who were admirable in such fine work, but much







OCR Output








Chap. XI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS


three intervals for walking in the middle of this cloister; twoof which walks were made parallel to each other, and were con­trived after the same manner ; the breadth of each of them wasthirty feet, the length was a furlong, and the height fifty feet,but the breadth of the middle part of the cloister was one anda half of the other, and the heig-ht was double, for it was muchhigher than those on each side; but the roofs were adorned withdeep sculptures in wood, representing many sorts of figures:the middle was much higher than the rest, and the wall of thefront was adorned with beams, resting upon pillars that wereinterwoven into it, and that front was all of polished stone; inTsomuch, that its fineness, to such as had not seen it, was incred­ible, and to such as had seen it, was greatly amazing. Thuswas the first enclosure, in the midst of which, and not far from,it, was the second, to be gone up to by a few steps; this, wasencompassed by a stone wall for a partition, with an inscription,'which forbade any foreigner to go in under pain of death. Now,this inner enclosure had on its southern and northern quartersthree gates [equally] distant one from another; but on the eastquarter, towards the sunrising, there was one large gate,through which such as were pure came in, together with their'wives, but the temple farther inward in that gate was notallowed to the women; but still more inward was there a third-[court of the] temple, whereinto it was not lawful for any butthe priests alone to enter. The temple itself was within this;and before that temple was the altar, upon which we offerour sacrifices and burnt-offerings to God. Into * none of thesethree did king Herod enter, for he was forbidden, because hewas not a priest. However, he took care of the cloisters, andthe outer enclosures, and these he built in eight years.
6. But the temple itself was built by the priests in a year andsix months: upon which all the people were full of joy; andpresently they returned thanks, in the first place to God, andin the next place, for the alacrity the king had showed. Theyfeasted, and celebrated this rebuilding of the temple: And forthe king, he sacrificed three hundred oxen to God, as did therest, every one according to his ability; the number of whichsacrifices is not possible to be set down, for it cannot be that weshould truly relate it: for at the same time with this celebra­


* Into none of these three Aid king Herod enter, i. e. 1. Not into Ihe court ofthe priests; 2. nor into the holy house itself; 3. nor into the separate place be.longing to the altar, as the words following imply, for none but priests, or theirattendants, the Levites, might come into any of them. See Antiq. B. XVJ. ch.iv. sect. 6. when Herod goes into the temple, and makes a speech in it to the peo­ple, but that could only be into the court of Israel, whither Uie people could cometo hear him.







OCR Output








Chap. II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 255


pie still supporting Hyrcanus, and assisting him in the siege, whilenone but the priests continued with Aristobulus. So Aretasunited the forces of the Arabians and of the Jews together, andpressed on the siege vigorously. As this happened at the timewhen the feast of unleavened bread was celebrated, which wecall the passover, the principal men among the Jews left the coun­try and fled into Egypt. Now there was one whose name wasOnias, a righteous man he was, and beloved of God, who, in acertain drought, had prayed to God to put an end to the intenseheat, and whose prayers God had heard, and had sent them rain.This man had hid himself, because he saw that this seditionwould last a great while. However they brought him to theJewish camp, and desired, that as by his prayers he had once putan end to the drought, so he would in like manner make impre­cations on Aristobulus, and those of his faction. And when,upon his refusal, and the excuses that he made, he was still by themultitude compelled to speak, he stood up in the midst of them,and said, "O God, the king of the whole world! since those that"stand now with me are thy people, and those that are besieged"are also thy priests, I beseech thee, that thou wilt neither"hearken to the prayers of those against these, nor bring to"effect what these pray against those." Whereupon such wick­ed Jews as stood about him, as soon as he had made this prayer,stoned him to death.
2. But God punished them immediately for this their barba­rity, and took vengeance of them for the murder of Onias, inthe manner following: While the priests and Aristobulus werebesieged, it happened that the feast called the Passover was come,at which it is our custom to offer a great number of sacrificesto God; but those that were with Aristobulus wanted sacrifices,and desired that their countrymen without would furnish themwith such sacrifices, and assured them they should have as muchmoney for them as they should desire; and when they requiredthem to pay a thousand drachmae for each head of cattle, Aristo­bulus and the priests willingly undertook to pay for them ac­cordingly, and those within let down the money over the walls,and gave it them. But when the others had received it, theydid not deliver the sacrifices, but arrived at that height of wick­edness as to break the assurances they had given, and to be guiltyof impiety towards God, by not furnishing those that wantedthem with sacrifices. And when the priests found they had beencheated, and that the agreements they had made were violated,they prayed to God, that he would avenge them on their coun­trymen. Nor did he delay that their punishment, but sent astrong and vehement storm of wind, that destroyed the fruits ofthe whole country, till a modius of wheat was then bought foreleven drachmas.







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 33


"fight against the Amalekites, thou growest so proud, as to"bring dangers upon thyself and upon thy kingdom."
3. When Amaziah had read this letter, he was more eagerupon this expedition, which, I suppose, was by the impulse ofGod, that he might be punished for his offence against him. Butas soon as he led out his army against Joash, and they were go­ing to join battle with him, there came such a fear and conster­nation upon the army of Amaziah, as God when he is displeas­ed, sends upon men, anddiscomfitted them, even before they cameto a close fight. Now it happened, that as they were scatteredabout by the terror that was upon them, Amaziah was left alone,and was taken prisoner by the enemy; whereupon Joash threat­ened to kill him, unless he would persuade the people of Jeru­salem to open their gates to him, and receive him and his armyinto the city. Accordingly, Amaziah was so distressed, and insuch fear of his life, that he made his enemy to be received intothe city. So Joash overthrew a part of the wall, of the lengthof four hundred cubits, and drove his chariot through the breachinto Jerusalem, and led Amaziah captive along with him: bywhich means he became master of Jerusalem, and took away thetreasures of God, and carried off all the gold and silver that wasin the king's palace, and then freed the king from captivity, andreturned to Samaria. Now these things happened to the peopleof Jerusalem in the fourteenth year of the reign of Amaziah,who after this had a conspiracy made against him by his friends,and fled to the city Lachish, and was there slain by the conspi­rators, who sent men thither to kill him. So they took up hisdead body, and carried it to Jerusalem, and made a royal funeralfor him. This was the end of the life of Amaziah, because ofhis innovations in religion, and his contempt of God, when hehad lived fifty-four years, and had reigned twenty-nine. Hewas succeeded by his son, whose name was Uzziah.
CHAP. X.
Concerning Jeroboam, king of Israel, and Jonah the prophet; andhovo, after the death of Jeroboam, his son Zechariah took thegovernment. How Uzziah, king of Jerusalem, subdued thenations, that were round about him,- and what befell him when heattempted to offer incense to God.
f 1. IN the fifteenth year of the reign of Amaziah, Jero­boam the son of Joash, reigned over Israel and Samaria, fortyyears. The king was guilty of * contumely against God, and


* What I have above noted concerning Jehoash, seems to me to have been'me also concerning his son Jeroboam 11. viz. that although he began wickcdlv,







OCR Output








Chap. VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 405


occasion coming to Herod, and supping with him, saw Salome,and set his heart upon her; and, understanding that she was awidow, he discoursed with her. Now because Salome was atthis time less in favour with her brother, she looked upon Syl-leus with some passion, and was very earnest to be married tohim; and on the days following there appeared many, and thosevery great, indications of their agreement together. Now thewomen carried this news to the king, and laughed at the inde­cency of it; whereupon Herod inquired about it farther of Phe-roras, and desired him to observe them at supper, how their be­haviour was one toward another; who told him, that by thesignals which came from their heads and their eyes, they bothwere evidently in love. After this Sylleus the Arabian beingsuspected, went away, but came again two or three months after­wards, as it were on that very design, and spoke to Herodabout it, and desired that Salome might be given him to wife;for that his affinity might not be disadvantageous to his affairs,by a union with Arabia, the government of which country wasalready in effect under his power, and more evidently would behis hereafter. Accordingly, when Herod discoursed with hissister about it, and asked her, whether she were disposed to thismatch? she immediately agreed to it. But when Sylleus wasdesired to come over to the Jewish religion, and then he shouldmarry her, and that it was impossible to do it on any other terms,he could not bear that proposal, and went his way; for he saidthat if he should do so, he should be stoned by the Arabs. Thendid Pheroras reproach Salome for her incontinency, as did thewomen much more; and said that Sylleus had debauched her.As for that damsel, whom the king had betrothed to his bro­ther Pheroras, but he had not taken her, as I have before re­lated, because he was enamoured of his former wife, Salomedesired of Herod she might be given to her son by Costobarus;which match he was very willing to, but was dissuaded from itby Pheroras, who pleaded, that this young man would not bekind to her, since his father had been slain by him, and that itwas more just that his son, who was to be his successor in thetetrarchy, should have her: So he begged his pardon, and per­suaded him to do so. Accordingly the damsel, upon this changeof her espousals, was disposed of to this young man, the son ofPheroras, the king giving for her portion a hundred talents.







OCR Output








Chap. XV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 309


doing: but the letting the chest down proved to be a matter ofgreat danger, because of the vast depth they were to be let down,although they had their provisions in the chests themselves: butwhen the chests were let down, and not one of those in themouths of the caves durst come rear them, but lay still out otfear, some of the armed men girt on their armour, and byboth their hands took h. Id of the chain, by which the chests werelet down, and went in'.o the moutl:s of the caves, because theyfretted that such c!ehiy w- s made by the robbers not daring tocome out of the caves; and when they were at any of thosemouths, they first killed many of those that were in the mouthswith their darts, and afterwards pulled those to them that resistedthem with their hooks, and tumbled them down the precipices,and afterwards went into the caves, and killed many more, andthen went into their chests again, and lay still there; but uponthis, terror seized the rest, when they heard the lamentationsthat were made, and they despaired of escaping: however,when the night came on, that put an end to the whole work; andas the king proclaimed pardon by a herald to such as deliveredthemselves up to him, many accepted of the offer. The samemethod of assault was made use of the next day; and they wentfarther, and got out in baskets to fight them, and sought themat their doors, and sent fire among them, and set their caves onfire, for there was a great deal of combustible matter within them.Now there was one old man who was caught within one of thesecaves, with seven children and a wife; these prayed him togive them leave to go out, and yield themselves up to the ene­my, but he stood at the cave's mouth, and always slew thatchild of his who went out, till he had destroyed them every one,and after that he slew his wife, and cast their dead bodies downthe precipice, and himself after them, and so underwent deathrather than slavery: but before he did this, he greatly reproach­ed Herod with the meanness of his family, although he wasthen king. Herod also saw what he was doing, and stretched outhis hand, and offered him all manner of security for his life: Bywhich means all these caves were at length subdued entirely.
6. And when the king had set Ptolemy over these parts ofthe country as his general, he went to Samaria, with six hun­dred horsemen, and three thousand armed footmen, as intend­ing to fight Antigonus. But still this command of the army did'not succeed well with Ptolemy, but those that had been trouble­some to Galilee before attacked him, and slew him; and whenthey had done this, they fled among the lakes and places al­most inaccessible, laying waste and plundering whatsoever theycould come at in those places. But Herod soon returned, andpunished them for what they had done; for some of these re­







OCR Output








Chap. VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 221


was not admitted by any of the cities on account of Trypho,'Cleopatra sent to him, and invited him to marry her, and to takethe kingdom. The reasons why she made this invitation werethese: That her friends persuaded her to it, and that she wasafraid for herself, in case some of the people of Seleucia shoulddeliver up the city to Trypho.
2. As Antiochus was now come to Seleucia, and his forcesincreased every day, he marched to fight Trypho; and havingbeaten him in the battle, he ejected him out of thellpper Syriainto Phenicia, and pursued him thither, and besieged him inDora, which was a fortress hard to be taken, whither he hadfled. He also sent ambassadors to Simon the Jewish high priest,about a league of friendship and mutual assistance; who readilyaccepted of the invitation, and sent to Antiochus great sums ofmoney, and provisions, for those that besieged Dora, and there­by supplied them very plentifully, so that for a little while hewas looked upon as one of his most intimate friends: but stillTrypho fled from Dora to Apamia, where he was taken duringthe siege, and put to death, when he had reigned three years.
3. However, Antiochus forgot the kind assistance that Simonhad afforded him in his necessity: by reason of his covetous andwicked disposition, and committed an army of soldiers to hisfriend Cendebeus, and sent him at once to ravage Judea, and toseize Simon. When Simon heard of Antiochus' breaking hisleague with him, although he were now in years, yet, pro­voked with the unjust treatment he had met with from Antio­chus, and taking a resolution brisker than his age could wellbear, he went like a young man to act as general of his army.He also sent his sons before among the most hardy of his sol­diers, and he himself marched on with his army another way,and laid many of his men in ambushes in the narrow vallevsibetween the mountains; nor did he fail of success in any one ofhis attempts, but was too hard for his enemies in every one ofthem. So he led the rest of his life in peace, and did also him­self make a league with the Romans.
4. Now he was the ruler of the Jews in all eight years; butat a feast came to his end. It was caused by the treachery ofhis son-in-law Ptolemy; who caught also his wife, and twoof his sons, and kept them in bonds. He also sent someto kill John the third son, whose name was Hyrcanus ,- but theyoung man perceiving them coming, he * avoided the danger he


* Here Josephus begins to follow, and to abridge the next sacred Hebrew book,Jtyledintheendof the first book of Maccabees, The Chronicle of John's [ffyrcanus']l/igh priesthood, but in some of the Greek copies the fourth book of Maccabeus. AGreek version of this chronicle was extant not very long ago, in the days of SantesFagninus and Sixtus Senensis, at Lyons, though it see?- to have been there burnt,







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. JS


other. He replied, that he was ready to serve them in whatthey desired, but he suspected that they would he discovered bythe king, from their meagre bodies, and the alteration of theircountenances, because it could not be avoided but their bodiesand colours must be changed with their diet, especially whilethey would be clearly discovered by the finer appearance of theother children, who would fare better, and thus they shouldbring him in danger, and occasion him to be punished: yet didthey persuade Arioch, who was thus fearful, to give them whatfood they desired for ten days, by wny of trial, and in case thehabit of their bodies were not altered, to go on in the same way>as expecting that they should not be hurt thereby afterwards, butif he saw them look meagre, and worse than the rest, he shouldreduce them to their former diet. Now, when it appeared thatthey were so far from becoming worse by the use of this food,that they grew plumper and fuller in body than the rest, inso­much that he thought those who fed on what came from the king'stable seemed less plump and full, while those that were with Da­niel looked as if they had lived in plenty, and all sorts of luxury;Arioch, from that time, securely took himself what the kingsent every day from his supper, according to custom^ to thechildren, but gave them the forementioned diet, while theyhad their souls in some measure more pure, and less burdened,and so fitter for learning, and had their bodies in better tunefor hard labour, for they neither had the former oppressed andheavy with variety of meats, nor were the other effeminate onthe same account; so they readily understood all the learningthat was among the Hebrews, and among the Chaldeans, as es­pecially did Daniel, who being already sufficiently skilful in wis­dom, was very busy about the interpretation of dreams; andGod manifested himself to him. - ,
3. Now two years after the destruction of Egypt, king Ne­buchadnezzar saw a wonderful dream, the accomplishment ofwhich God showed him in his sleep, but when he arose out ofhis bed, he forgot the accomplishment: So he sent for the Chal­deans and magicians, and the prophets, and told them, that hehad seen a dream, and informed them that he had forgotten theaccomplishment of what he had seen, and he enjoined them to tellhim, both what the dream was, and what was its signification;and they said that this was a thing impossible to be discoveredby men, but they promised him, that if he would explain to themwhat dream he had seen, they would tell him its signification.Hereupon he threatened to put them to death; unless they toldhim his dream: and he gave command to have them all put todeath, since they confessed they could not do what they werecommanded to do. Now when Daniel heard that the king had
VOL. II.







OCR Output








184 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XII.


together to him, and with them Alcimus the high priest, whoaccused the whole nation, and particularly Judas and his breth­ren; and said, That " they had slain all his friends, and that"those in his kingdom that were of his party, and waited for"his return, were by them put to death; that these men had"ejected them out of their own country; and caused them to be"sojourners in a foreign land; and they desired that he would"send some one of his own friends, and know from him what"mischief Judas' party had done."
2. At this Demetrius was very angry, and stnt Bacchides, afriend of Antiochus Epiphanes, * a good man; and one that hadbeen entrusted with all Mesopotamia, and gave him an army,and committed Alcimus the high priest to his care; and gavehim charge to slay Judas, and those that were with him. SoBacchides made haste, and went out of Antioch with his army;and when he was come into Judea, he sent to Judas and his breth­ren, to discourse with him about a league of friendship andpeace, 'for he had a mind to take him by treachery: But Judasdid not give credit to him, for he saw that he came with sogreat an army as men do not bring when they come to makepeace but to make war. However, some of the people acqui­esced in that Bacchides caused to be proclaimed; and supposingthey should undergo no considerable harm from Alcimus, whowas their countryman, they went over to them; and when theyhad received oaths from both of them, that neither they them­selves, nor those of the same sentiments, should come to anyharm, they entrusted themselves with them: But Bacchidestroubled himself not about the oaths he had taken, and slewthreescore of them, although by not keeping his faith with thesethat first went over, he deterred all the rest, who had intentionsto go over to him, from doing it. But as he was gone out ofJerusalem, and was at the village called Bethzetha, he sent outand caught many of the deserters, and some of the people also,and slew them all; and enjoined all that lived in the country tosubmit to AJcimus. So he left him there, with some part ofthe army that he might have wherewith to keep the country inobedience, and returned to Antioch, to king Demetrius.
3. But Alcimus was desirous to have the dominion more firm­ly assured to him; and understanding, that if he could bring itabout that the multitude should be his friends, he should govern


* It is no way probable that Josephus would call Bacchides, that bitter and bloodyenemy of the Jews, as our present copies have it, a good man, or kind and gentle*What the author of the first book of Maccabees, whom Josephus here follows, in-stead of that character, says of him, is that he was a great man in the kingdom, andfaitltful to his ting: which was very probably Josephus' meaning also,







OCR Output








300 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book. XIV.


be of good cheer, and not to give themselves up to sorrow, be­cause that would hinder them in their flight, which was nowthe only hope of safety that they had. Accordingly, they triedto bear with patience the calamity they were under, as he ex­horted them to do; yet was he once almost going to kill himself,upon the overthrow of a waggon, and the danger his mother wasthen in of being killed, and this on two accounts, because of hisgreat concern for her, and because he was afraid lest, by this de­lay, the enemy should overtake him in the pursuit; but as hewas drawing his sword, and going to kill himself therewith, thosethat were present restrained him, and being so many in num­ber, were too hard for him: and told him that he ought not todesert them, and leave them a prey to their enemies, for that itwas not the part of a brave man to free himself from the dis­tresses he was in, and to overlook his friends that were in thesame distresses also. So he was compelled to let that horrid at­tempt alone, partly out of shame at what they said to him, andpartly out of regard to the great number of those that would notpermit him to do what he intended. So he encouraged his mo­ther, and took all the care of her the time would allow, and pro­ceeded on the way he proposed to go with the utmost haste, andthat was to the fortress of Massada. And as he had many skir­mishes with such of the Parthians as attacked him, and pur­sued him, he was conqueror in them all.
9. Nor indeed was he free from the Jews all along as he wasin his flight; for by the time he had gotten sixty furlongs outof the city, and was upon the road, they fell upon him, andfought hand to hand with him, whom he also put to flight,and overcame, not like one that was in distress and in ne­cessity, but like one that was excellently prepared for war,and had what he wanted in great plenty. And in this veryplace where he overcame the Jews, it was that he sometime af­terward built a most excellent palace, and a city round about it,and called it Herodium. And when he was come to Idumea,at a place called Thressa, his brother Joseph met him, and hethen held a council to take advice about all his affairs, and whatwas fit to be done in his circumstances, since he had a greatmultitude that followed him, besides his mercenary soldiers, andthe place Massada, whither he proposed to fly, was too small tocontain so great a multitude; so he sent away the greater partof his company, being above nine thousand, and bid them gosome one way, and some another, and to save themselves inIdumea, and gave them what would buy them provisions intheir journey; but he took with him those that were the leastincumbered, and were most intimate with him, and came to thefortress, and placed there his wives, and his followers, being







OCR Output








338 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEVVh. Book XV.


"he knows it to be a just war; for while some of the people in"the country have perished, all you who were in arms have suf-"fered nothing, but are all preserved alive; whereby God"makes it plain to us, that if you had universally, with your"children and wives, been in the army, it had come to pass,"that you had not undergone any thing that would have much"hurt you. Consider these things, and what is more than allM the rest, that you have God at all times for your protector;"and prosecute these men with a just bravery, who, in point of"friendship are unjust, in their battles perfidious, towards am-"bassadors impious, and always inferior to you in valour."
4. When the Jews heard this speech, they were much raisedin their minds, and more disposed to fight than before. So He­rod, when he had * offered the sacrifices appointed by the law,made haste, and took them, and led them against the Arabians'and in order to that passed over Jordan, and pitched his campnear to that of the enemy. He also thought fit to seize upon acertain castle that lay in the midst of them, as hoping it wouldbe for his advantage, and would the sooner produce a battle, andthat if there were occasion for delay, he should by it have hiscamp fortified; and as the Arabians had the same intentionsupon that place, a contest arose about it; at first they were butskirmishes, after which there came more soldiers, and it proveda sort of fight, and some fell on both sides, till those of the Ara­bian side were beaten and retreated. This was no small encour­agement to the Jews immediately; and when Herod observedthat the enemies' army was disposed to any thing rather than tocome to an engagement, he ventured boldly to attempt the bul­wark itself, and to pull it to pieces, and so to get nearer to theircamp, in order to fight them; for when they were forced outof their trenches, they went out in disorder, and had not the leastalacrity, or hope of victory; yet did they fight hand to hand,because they were more in number than the Jews, and becausethey were in such a disposition of war that they were under anecessity of coming on boldly: so they came to a terrible battle,while not a few fell on each side. However, at length the Ara­


* This piece of religion, the supplicating God with sacrifices, by Herod, before hewent to this fight with the Arabians, taken notice of also in the first book of theWar, ch. xix. sect 5. vol. III. is worth remarking, because it is the only example otthis nature, so far as I remember, that Josephus ever mentions in all his large andparticular accounts of this Herod; and it was when he had been in mighty distress,and discouraged by a great defeat of his former army, and by a very great earthquakein Judea, such times of affliction making men most religious. Nor was he disap­pointed of his hopes here, but immediately gained a most signal victory over theArabians, while they who just before had been so great victors, and so much elevatedupon the earthquake in Judca as to venture to slay the Jewish ambassadors, wennow under a strange consternation, and hardly able to fight at all.







OCR Output








146 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIT.


to receive them, he saluted the men: and said, that it was butjust to discourse, in the first place, of the errand they were sentabout, and then to address himself to themselves. He promised,however, that he would make this day on which they came tohim remarkable and eminent every year through the wholecourse of his life; for their coming to him, and the victory whichhe gained over Antigonus by sea, proved to be on the very sameday. He also gave orders, that they should sup with him; andgave it in charge that they should have excellent lodgings pro­vided for them in the upper part of the city.
12. Now he that was appointed to take care of the receptionof strangers, Nicanor by name, called for Dorotheus, whoseduty it was to make provision for them, and bid him prepare forevery one of them what should be requisite for their diet and wayof living. Which thing was ordered by the king after this man­ner: he took care, that those that belonged to every city, whichdid not use the same way of living, that all things should be pre­pared for them according to the custom of those that came tohim, that being feasted according to the usual method of theirown way of living, they might be the better pleased, and mightnot be uneasy at any thing done to them, from which they werenaturally averse. And this was now done in the case of thesemen by Dorotheus, who was put into this office because of hisgreat skill in such matters belonging to common life ; for he tookcare of all such matters as concerned the reception of strangers,and appointed them double seats for them to sit on, accordingas the king had commanded him to do; for he had commandedthat half of their seats should be set at his hand, and the other halfbehind his table, and took care that no respect should be omittedthat could be shown them. And when they were thus set down,he bid Dorotheus to minister to all those that were come to himfrom Judea, after the manner they used to be ministered to: forwhich cause he sent away their sacred heralds, and those thatslew the sacrifices, and the rest that used to say grace : but call­ed to one of those that were come to him, whose name wasEleazar, who was a priest, and desired him to * say grace; whothen stood in the midst of them, and prayed, that " all prosperi-"ty might attend the king, and those that were his subjects." Up­


* This is the most ancient example I have met with, of a grace, or short prayer,or thanksgiving before meat; which, as it used to be said by an heathen priest,was now said by Eleazar, a Jewish priest, who was one of these seventy-two inter­preters. The next example I have met with is that of the Essenes, Of the War, B.II. chap. viii. sect. 5. vol. III. both before and after it; those of our Saviour beforeit. Mark viii. 6. John vi. 11. 23. and St. Paul, Acts xxvii. S3. and a form of such agrace or prayer for Christians, at the end of the fifth book of the Apostolical Con­stitutions, which seems to have been intended for both times, both before and aftermeat.







OCR Output








Chap. XIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEW8. 297


son, and Barzaphames, a commander of the Parthians, possessedthemselves of Syria. Ptolemy, the son of Menncus, also wasnow dead, and Lysanias his son took his goverment, and madea league of friendship with Antigonus, the son of Aristobulus;and in order to obtain it, made use of that commander, who hadgreat interest in him. Now Antigonus had promised to give theParthians athousand talents, and five hundred women, upon con­ditions they would take the government away from Hyrcanus,and bestow it upon him, and withal kill Herod. And althoughhe did not give them what he had promised, yet did the Par­thians make an expedition into Judea on that account, and car­ried Antigonus with them. Pacorus went along the maritimeparts, but the commander Barzapharnes, through the midland.Now the Tyrians excluded Pacorus, but the Sidonians, and thoseof Ptolemais, received him. However, Pacorus sent a troop ofhorsemen into Judea, to take a view of the state of the country,and to assist Antigonus; and sent also the king's butler, of thesame name with himself. So when the Jews that dwelt aboutmount Carmel came to Antigonus, and were ready to marchwith him into Judea, Antigonus hoped to get some part of thecountry by their assistance. The place is called Drymi; andwhen some others came and met them, the men privately fellupon Jerusalem; and when some more were come to them, theygot together in great numbers, and came against the king'spalace and besieged it. But as Phasaelus' and Herod's partycame to the other's assistance, and a battle happened betweenthem in the market-place, the young men beat their enemies,and pursued them into the temple, and sent some armed men in­to the adjoining houses, to keep them in, who yet being desti­tute of such as should support them, were burnt, and the houseswith them, by the people who rose up against them. But He­rod was revenged on these seditious adversaries of his a little af­terward for this injury they had offered him» when he foughtwith them, and slew a great number of them.
4. But while there were daily skirmishes, the enemy waitedfor the coming of the multitude out of'the country to Pentecost,a feast of ours so called: and when that day was come, manyten thousands of the people were gathered together about thetemple, some in armour, and some without. Now those thatcame, guarded both the temple and the city, excepting whatbelonged to the palace, which Herod guarded with a few of hissoldiers; and Phasaelus had the charge of the wall, while He­rod, with a body of his men, sallied out upon the enemy, wholay in the suburbs, and fought courageously, and put many tenthousands to flight, some flying into the city, and some into thetemple, and some into the outer fortifications, for some such







OCR Output








Chap. II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 381


* who have been the donors, will take care that those favours"you have already granted them may not be taken away from"them. We have received these favours from you, who"alone have power to grant them, but have them taken from"us by such as are no greater than ourselves, and by such as"we know are as much subjects as we are: and certainly, if"we have been vouchsafed great favours, it is to our own com-"mendation, who have obtained them, as having been found"deserving of such great favours; and if those favours be but"small ones, it would be barbarous for the donors not to con-"firm them to us; and for those that are the hinderance of the"Jews, and use them reproachfully, it is evident that they af-"front both the receivers, while they will not allow those"to be worthy men to whom their excellent rulers themselves"have borne their testimony, and the donors while they desire"those favours already granted may be abrogated. Now if"any one should ask these Gentiles themselves, which of the"two things they would choose to part with, their lives, or"the customs of their forefathers, their solemnities, their sa-"orifices, their festivals, which they celebrated in honour of"those they suppose to be gods? I know very well that they"would choose to suffer any thing whatsoever, rather than a"dissolution of any of the customs of their forefathers; for a"great many of them have rather chosen to go to war on that"account, as very solicitous not to transgress in those matters:"And indeed we take an estimate of that happiness which all"mankind do now enjoy by your means from this very thing,"that we are allowed every one to worship as our own institu-"tions require, and yet to live [in peace,] and although they"would not be thus treated themselves, yet do they endeavour"to compel others to comply with them, as if it were not as"great an instance of impiety, profanely to dissolve the reli-"gious solemnities of any others, as to be negligent in the obser-"vation of their own tov?ards their gods. And let us now con-"sider the one of these practices: Is there any people or city,"or community of men, to whom your government and the*' Reman power does not appear to be the greatest blessing? Is"there any one that can desire to make void the favours they"have granted? No one is certainly so mad: for there are no"men but such as have been partakers of their favours, both-' public and private; and indeed those that take away what'- you have granted, can have no assurance; but every one of"their own grants made them by you, may be taken from them"also; which grants of yours can yet never be sufficiently"valued; for if they consider the old governments, under kings,4' together with vour present government, besides the great







OCR Output








220 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEW!,. Book XIII.


into captivity, Trypho his governor destroyed Antiochus * theson of Alexander, who was also called f the God, and thiswhen he had reigned four years, though he gave it out that hedied under the hands of the surgeons. He then sent his friends,and those that were most intimate with him, to the soldiers;and promised that he would give them a great deal of moneyif they would make him king. He intimated to them thatDemetrius was made a captive by the Parthians; and that De­metrius' brother Antiochus, if he came to be king, would dothem a great deal of mischief, in way of revenge for their re­volting from his brother. So the soldiers, in expectation of thewealth they should get by bestowing the kingdom on Trypho,made him their ruler. However, when Trypho had gained themanagement of affairs, he demonstrated his disposition to bewicked; for while he was a private person, he cultivated a fa­miliarity with the multitude, and pretended to great modera­tion, and so drew them on artfully to whatsoever he pleased;but when he had once taken the kingdom, he laid aside anyfarther dissimulation, and was true Trypho, which behaviourmade his enemies superior to him, for the soldiery hated him,and revolted from him to Cleopatra the wife of Demetrius,who was then shut up in Seleucia with her children. But asAntiochus, the brother of Demetrius, who was called Soter,


to the crown, about the 140th year before the Christian sera, he granted great pri­vileges to the Jewish nation, and to Simon their high priest and ethnarch, whichprivileges Simon seems to have taken of his own accord about three years before.In particular, he gave him leave to coin money for his country with his own stamp;and as concerning Jerusalem, and the sanctuary, that they should be free, or as thevulgar Latin hath it, holy and free, 1 Maccab. xv. 6, 7. which I take to be the true,reading, as being the very words of his father's concession offered to Jonathan severalyears before, ch. x. 31. and Antiq. B. XIII. ch. ii. sect. 5. vol. II. Now whatmakes this date, and these grants, greatly remarkable, is the state of the remaininggenuine shekels of the Jews with Samaritan characters, w*iicb seem to have been(most of them at least) coined in the four first years of this Simon the Asamonean,and having upon them these words on one side, Jerusalem the holy, and on the re­verse, In the year of freedom, 1. or 2. or 3. or 4. which shekels therefore are origmalmonuments of these times, and undeniable marks of the truth of the history in thesechapters, though it be in a great measure omitted by Josephus. See Essay on theOld Test. p. 157, 158. The reason why I rather suppose that his copy of the Mac­cabees wanted these chapters, than that his own copies are here imperfect, is this, thatall their contents are not here omitted, though much the greatest part be.
* How Trypho killed this Antiochus, the epitome of Livy informs us, chap. 55.viz. that he corrupted his physicians or surgeons, who falsely pretending to the peo­ple that be was perishing with the stone, as they cut him for it, killed him, whichexactly agrees with Josephus.
f That this Antiochus, the son at Alexander Balas, was called the God, is evidentfrom his coins, which Spanheim assures us bear this inscription, Xing Antiochutthe God, Epiphanes the Victorious.







OCR Output








2SS ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


Aristobulus, and that he hath but a small part of the countryunder him, Aristobulus having taken away the rest from him byforce. He also accused him, that the incursions which had beenmade into their neighbours' countries, and the piracies that hadbeen at sea, were owing to him; and that the nation would nothave revolted, unless Aristobulus had been a man given to vio­lence and disorder: and there were no fewer than a thousandJews, of the best esteem among them, who confirmed this accu­sation: which confirmation was procured by Antipater. ButAristobulus alleged against him, that it was Hyrcanus' owntemper, which was inactive, and on that account contemptible,which caused him to be deprived of the government; and thatfor himself he was necessitated to take it upon him, for fear lestit should be transferred to others. And that as to his title [ofking,] it was no other than what his father had taken [beforehim.] He also called for witnesses of what he said, some per­sons who were both young and insolent: whose purple garments,fine heads of hair, and other ornaments, were detested [by thecourt,] and which they appeared in, not as though they wereto plead their cause in a court of justice, but as if they weremarching in a pompous procession.
3. When Pompey had heard the causes of these two, and hadcondemned Aristobulus for his violent procedure, he thenspake civilly to them, and sent them away; and told them, thatwhen he came again into their country he would settle all theiraffairs, after he had first taken a view of the affairs of the Na-bateans. In the mean time, he ordered them to be quiet; andtreated Aristobulus civilly, lest he should make the nation re­volt, and hinder his return: which yet Aristobulus did; forwithout expecting any further determination, which Pompeyhad promised them, he went to the city Delius, and thencemarched into Judea.
4. At this behaviour Pompey was angry; and taking withhim that army which he was leading against the Nabateans, andthe auxiliaries that came from Damascus, and the other parts ofSyria, with the other Roman legions which he had with him,he made an expedition against Aristobulus: but as he passed byPella, and Scythopolis, he came to Coreae, which is the first en­trance into Judea when one passes over the midland countries,where he came to a most beautiful fortress that was built onthe top of a mountain called Alexandrium, whither Aristobulushad fled, and thence Pompey sent his commands to him, that heshould come to him. Accordingly, at the persuasions of many,that he would not make war with the Romans, he cameclown: and when he had disputed with lu's brother about theright to the government; he went up again to the citadel, as







OCR Output








Chap. XL ANTIOUITII'.S OF THE JKWH. '4,<2l


9. This provoked Caesar more than'ever: so he turned toSylleus full of rage, and asked him how many of the Arabianswere slain? Hereupon he hesitated, and said he had been im­posed upon. The covenants also were read about the money hehad borrowed, and the letters of the presidents of Syria, and thecomplaints of the several cities, so many as had been injured bythe robbers. The conclusion was this, that Sylleus was con­demned to die, and that Caesar was reconciled to Herod, andowned his repentance for what severe things he had written tohim, occasioned by calumny, insomuch that he told Sylleus, thathe had compelled him, by his lying account of things, to beguilty of ingratitude against a man that was his friend. At thelast, all came to this; Sylleus was sent away to answer Herod'ssuit, and to repay the debt that he owed, and after that to bepunished [with death]: But still Caesar was offended with Are-tas, that he had taken upon himself the government, withouthis consent first obtained, for he had determined to bestowArabia upon Herod; but that the letters he had sent hinderedhim from so doing, for Olympus and Volumnius, perceivingthat Caesar was now become favourable to Herod, thought fitimmediately to deliver him the letters they were commandedby Herod to give him concerning his sons. When Csssar hadread them, he thought it would not be proper to add anothergovernment to him, now he was old, and in an ill state with re­lation to his sons, so he admitted Aretas' ambassadors; andafter he had just reproved him for his rashness, in not tarryingtill he received the kingdom from him, he accepted of his pre­sents, and confirmed him in his government.
CHAP. XI.
How Herod, by permission from Ctesar, accused his sons beforean assembly of judges at Berytus,- and what Tero suffered.Jar using a boundless and military liberty of speech. Con­cerning also the death of the young men, and their burial atAlexandrium.
5 1. So Caesar was now reconciled to Herod; and wrotethus to him, That "he was grieved for him on account of"his sons: and that in case they had been guilty of any profane"and insolent crimes against him, it would behove him to pu-"nish them as parricides, for which he gave him power accord-"ingly; but if they had only contrived to fly away, he would"have him give them an admonition, and not proceed to extre-"mity with them. He also advised him to get an assembly







OCR Output








ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVI.


"rod of five hundred talents, and a bond, wherein it was writ-"ten, that if the time appointed be elapsed, it should be lawf'jl"to make a seizure out of any part of his country. As for"the pretended army, he said, it was no army, but a party sent"out to require the just payment of the money: that this was"not sent immediately, nor so soon as the bond allowed, but"that Sylleus had frequently come before Saturninus and Vo-"lumnius, the presidents of Syria; and that at last he had sworn"at Berytus, * by thy fortune, that he would certainly pay"the money within thirty days, and deliver up the fugitives that"were under his dominion. And that when Sylleus had per-"formed nothing of this, Herod came again before the presi-"dents; and upon their permission to make a seizure for his"money, he, with difficulty, went out of his country with a party"of soldiers for that purpose. And this is all the war which"these men so tragically describe; and this is the affair of the"expedition into Arabia. And how can this be called a war?"when thy presidents permitted it; the covenants allowed it;"and it was not executed till thy name, O Caesar, as well as that"of the other gods, had been profaned. And now I must speak"in order about the captives. There were robbers that"dwelt in Trachonites; at first their number was no more than"forty, but they became more afterwards, and they escaped the"punishment Herod would have inflicted on them, by making"Arabia their refuge. Sylleus received them, and supported"them with food, that they might be mischievous to all man-"kind, and gave them a country to inhabit, and himself receiv-"ed the gains they made by robbery; yet did he promise that"he would deliver up these men, and that by the same oaths,"and same time that he swore and fixed for payment of his"debt: nor can he by any means show that any other per-"sons have at this time been taken out of Arabia, besides these,"and indeed not all these neither, but only so many as could"not conceal themselves. And thus does the calumny of-' the captives, which hath been so odiously represented, ap-"pear to be no better than a fiction and a lie, made on pur-"pose to provoke thy indignation; for I venture to affirm, that"when the forces of the Arabians came upon us, and one or"two of Herod's party fell, he then only defended himself, and"there fell Nacebus their general, and in all, about twenty-five"others, and no more; when Sylleus, by multiplying every"single soldier to a hundred, he reckons the slain to have"been two thousand five hundred."


* This oath, by the fortune of Crfsar, was put to Polycarp, a bishop of Smyrna,hy the Roman governor, to try \vhethtr ho was a Christian, as they were thenesteemed who refused to swear that oath. Martyr, 1'olyoup, sect. 9,







OCR Output








Chap. VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS, 171


CHAP. VII.
How Judas overthrew the forces of Appollonius and Seron, andkilled the generals of their armies themselves,- and how, whena little while afterward, Lysias and Gorgias were beaten, hewent up to Jerusalem, and purified the temple.
§ 1. VV HEN Appollonius, the general of the Samaritan for­ces heard this, he took his army, and made haste to go againstJudas; who met him, and joined battle with him, and beat him,and slew many of his men, and among them Appolloniushimself, their general, whose sword being that which he hap­pened to wear, he seized upon, and kept for himself; but hewounded more than he slew, and took a great deal of prey fromthe enemies' camp, and went his way. But when Seron, whowas general of the army of Celesyria, heard that many had join­ed themselves to Judas, and that he had about him an army suf­ficient for fighting, and for making war, he determined to makean expedition against him, as thinking it became him to endea­vour to punish those that transgressed the king's injunctions. Hethen got together an army as large as he was able, and joined it tothe runagate and wicked Jews, and came against Judas. Hecame as far as Bethhoron, a village of Judea, and there pitchedhis camp: upon which Judas met him; and when he intended togive him battle, he saw that his soldiers were backward to fight,because their number was small, and because they wanted food,for they were fasting, he encouraged them, and said to them, that"victory and conquest of enemies is not derived from the mul-"titude in armies, but in the exercise of piety towards God;"and that they had the plainest instances in their forefathers,"who by their righteousness, and exerting themselves on behalf"of their own laws, and their own children, had frequently con-'; quered many ten thousands, for innocence is the strongest ar-"my." By this speech he induced his men to contemn the mul­titude of the enemy, and to fall upon Seron. And upon joiningbattle with him, he beat the Syrians; and when their generalfell among the rest, they all run away with speed, as thinkingthat to be their best way of escaping. So he pursued them un­to the plain, and slew about eight hundred of the enemy, butthe rest escaped to the region which lay near to the sea.
2. When king Antiochus heard of these things, he was veryangry at what had happened; so he got together all his own ar-.*ny, with many mercenaries, whom he had hired from the islands,and took them with him, and prepared to break into Judea,about the beginning of the soring. But when, upon his muster-
VOL II. Y 21







OCR Output








Chap. XV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 313


away: * and as the houses were full of armed men, and manyof them ran as far as the tops of the houses, he got them underhis power, and pulled down the roofs of the houses, and saw thelower rooms full of soldiers that were caught, and lay all on aheap: so they threw stones down upon them as they lay piledone upon another, and thereby killed them: nor was there amore frightful spectacle in all the war than this, where beyondthe walls an immense multitude of dead men lay heaped one up­on another. This action it was which chiefly broke the spiritsof the enemy, who expected now what would come, for thereappeared a mighty number of people that came from places fardistant, that were now about the village, but then ran away;and had it not been for the depth of winter, which then re­strained them, the king's army had presently gone to Jerusalem,as being very courageous at this good success, and the wholework had been done immediately, for Antigonus was alreadylooking about how he might fly away, and leave the city.
13. At this time the king gave order that the soldiers shouldgo to supper, for it was late at night, while he went into achamber to use the bath, for he was very weary: and here itwas that he was in the greatest danger, which yet, by God'sprovidence, he escaped; for as he was naked, and had but oneservant that followed him, to be with him while he was bathingin an inner room, certain of the enemy, who were in their ar­mour, and had fled thither out of fear, were then in the place;and as he was bathing, the first of them came out with his na­ked sword drawn, and went out at the doors, and after him asecond and third, armed in like manner, and were under sucha consternation, that they did no hurt to the king, and thoughtthemselves to have come off7 very well in suffering no harmthemselves, in their getting out of the house. However, on thenext day, he cut oft' the head of Pappus, for he was alreadyslain, and sent it to Pheroras, as a punishment of what theirbrother had suffered by his means, for he was the man that slewhim with his own hand.
14. When the rigour of winter was over, Herod removed hisarmy, and came near to Jerusalem, and pitched his camp hardby the city. Now this was the third year since he had beenmade king at Rome; and as he removed his camp, and camenear that part of the wall where it could be most easily assaulted,


* It may be worth our observation here, that these soldiers of Herod's couldnot have gotten upon the tops of these houses, "which were full of enemies, in or­der to pull up the upper floors, and destroy them beneath, but on ladders fromthe outside; which illustrates some texts in the New Testament, by which it ap­pears that men used to ascend thither by ladders on the euuides. See Mai t. xxiv'17. Mark xiii. 15. Luke v. 13. xvii. 31.







OCR Output








232 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIII.


their side. But about these two sects, and that of the Essens,I have treated accurately in the second book of Jewish affairs.
7. But when Hyrcanus had put an end to this sedition, heafter that lived happily, and administered the government inthe best manner for thirty-one years, and then * died; leavingbehind him five sons. He was esteemed by God worthy of thethree greatest privileges, the government of his nation, thedignity of the high priesthood, and prophecy, for God waswith him, and enabled him to know futurities; and to foretellthis in particular, that as to his two eldest sons, he foretold thatthey would not long continue in the government of public af­fairs; whose unhappy catastrophe will be worth our description,that we may thence learn how very much they were inferior totheir father's happiness.
CHAP. XI.
Hem Aristobulus, when he had taken the government, first of allput a diadem on his head, and was most barbarously cruel tohis mother and his brethren; and how after he had slainAntigonus he himself died.
§ 1. .Now when their father Hyrcanus was dead, the eldestson Aristobulus, intending to change the government into akingdom, for so he resolved to do, first of all put a diadem


* Here ends the high priesthood, and the life of this excellent person JohnHyrcanus, and together with him the holy theocracy or divine government of theJewish nation, and its concomitant oracle by Prim. Now follows the profaneand tyrannical Jewish monarchy, first of the Assamonians or Maccabees, and thenof Herod the Great, the Idumean, till the coming of the Messiah. See the noteon Antiq. B. III. chap. viii. sect. 9. Hear Strabo's testimony on this occasion,B. XVI. page 761, 762. "Those, says he, that succeeded Moses, continued for"some time in earnest, both in righteous actions, and in piety; but after a while,"there were others that took upon them the high priesthood; at first superstitious,"and afterwards tyrannical persons. Such a prophet was Moses and those that suc-"ceeded him, beginning in a way not to be blamed, but changing for the worse."And when it openly appeared that the government was become tyrannical, Alex-"ander was the first that set up himself for a king instead of a priest; and his sons"were Hyrcanus and Aristobulus." All in agreement with Josephus, excepting this,that Srabo omits the first king Aristobulus, whose reign being but a single year,seems haidly to have come to his knowledge. Nor indeed does Aristobulus, the sonof Alexander, pretend that the name of long was taken before his father Alexandertook it himself. Antiq. B. XIV. chap. iii. sect. 2. See also chap. xii. sect. 1. whichfavour Strabo also. (And indeed if we may judge from the very different charactersof the Egyptian Jews under high priests, and of the Palestine Jews under kings,in the two next centuries, we may well suppose, that the divine Shechinah wasremoved into Egypt, and that the worshippers at the temple of Onias were bettermen than those at the temple of Jersualem.







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 117


that such honour should be paid to him; but Mordecai was sowise, and so observant of his own country's laws, that he wouldnot * worship the man. When Haman observed this, he in­quired whence he came? and when he understood that he was aJew, he had indignation at him, and said within himself, That"whereas the Persians, who were free men, worshipped him,"this man, who was no better than a slave, does not vouchsafe"to do so." And when he desired to punish Mordecai, he thoughtit too small a thing to request of the king that he alone might bepunished: he rather determined to abolish the whole nation, forhe was naturally an enemy to the Jews, because the nation ofthe Amalekites, of which he was, had been destroyed by them.Accordingly he came to the king, and accused them, saying,"There is a certain wicked nation, and it is dispersed over all"the habitable earth that is under thy dominion; a nation se-"parate from others, unsociable, neither admitting the same"sort of divine worship that others do, nor using laws like to"the laws of others: at enmity with thy people, and with all"men, both in their manners and practices. Now, if thou wilt"be a benefactor to thy subjects, thou wilt give order to destroy"them utterly, and not leave the least remains of them, nor"preserve any of them either for slaves, or for captives." Butthat the king might not be damnified by the loss of the tributeswhich the Jews paid him, Hainan promised to give him out ofhis own estate forty thousand talents whensoever he pleased; andhe said, he would pay this money very willingly, that the king­dom might be freed from such a misfortune.
6. When Haman had made this petition, the king both for­gave him the money, and granted him the men, to do what hewould with them. So Haman having gained what he desired,sent out immediately a decree, as from the king, to all nations,the contents whereof were these: "Artaxerxes, the great king,"to the rulers of the hundred twenty and seven provinces, from"India to Ethiopia, sends this writing: Whereas I have go-"verned many nations, and obtained the dominions of all the"habitable earth, according to my desire, and have not been"obliged to do any thing that is insolent or cruel to my subjects"by such my power, but have showed myself mild and gentle,"by taking care of their peace and good order, and have sought


* Whether this adoration required of Mordecai to Haman were by him deemed,too like the adoration due only to God, as Josehpus seems here to think, as wellas the Septuagint interpreters also, by their translation of Esth. siii. 12, IS, 14.or whether he thought he ought to pay no sort of adoration to an Amalekite,which nation had been such great sinners as to have been universally devoted to de­struction by God himself, Exocl. xvii. 14, 15, 16. 2 Sam. xv. 18. or whether botf;causes concurred, cannot now. I doubt, be certainlv determined.







OCR Output








40 ANTIQUITIES OP THE JEWS. Book IX.


also of the same sort. Now as he was going on in this mad course,Rezin, the king of Syria and Damascus, and Pekah the king otIsrael, who were now at amity one with another, made war withhim; and when they had driven him into Jerusalem, they besieg­ed that city a long while, making but a small progress, on ac­count of the strength of its walls: and when the king of Syriahad taken the city Elath, upon the Red Sea, and had slain theinhabitants, he peopled it with Syrians, and when he had slainthose in the [other] garrisons, and the Jews in their neighbour­hood, and had driven away much prey, he returned with his ar­my back to Damascus. Now when the king of Jerusalem knewthat the Syrians were returned home, he supposing himself amatch for the king of Israel, drew out his army against him, andjoining battle with him was beaten; and this happened becauseGod was angry with him, on account of his many and greatenormities. Accordingly, there was slain by the Israelites onehundred and twenty thousand of his men that day, whose gene­ral, Amaziah by name, slew Zechariah the king's son in his con­flict with Ahaz, as well as the governor of the kingdom, whosename was Azricam. He also carried Elcanah, the general ofthe troops of the tribe of Judah, into captivity. They also car­ried the women and children of the tribe of Benjamin captives;and when they had gotten a great deal of prey, they returned toSamaria.
2. Now there was one Obed, who was a prophet at that timein Samaria, he met the army before the city walls, and with aloud voice told them, " that they had gotten the victory not by"their own strength, but by reason of the anger Godhad against"king Ahaz. And he complained, that they were not satisfied"with the good success they had against him, but were so"bold as to make captives out of their kinsmen the tribe of Ju-"dah and Benjamin. He also gave them counsel to let them go"home without doing them any harm, for that if they did not"obey God herein, they should be punished." So the people ofIsrael came together to their assembly, and considered of thesematters, when a man whose name was Berechiah, and who wasone of chief reputation in the government, stood up, and threeothers with him, and said, " We will not suffer the citizens to"bring these prisoners into the city, lest we all be destroyed by"God: we have sins enough of our own that we have commit-"ted against him, as the prophets assure us; nor ought we"therefore to introduce the practice of new crimes." Whenthe soldiers heard that, they permitted them to do what theythought best. So the forenamed man took the captives and letthem go, and took care of them, and gave them provisions, andsent them to.their own country, without doing them any harm.







OCR Output








Chap. XV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 305


mark of divme providence; so they made a sally, and foughthand to hand with Antigonus' soldiers, with some openly, withsome privately, and destroyed a great number of them. At thesame time, Ventidius, the general of the Romans, was sent outof Syria, to drive the Parthians out of it, and marched after theminto Judea, in pretence indeed to succour Joseph, but in realitythe whole affair was no more than a stratagem, in order to getmoney of Antigonus; so they pitched their camp very near toJerusalem, and wiped off Antigonus a great deal of money, andthen he retired himself with the greater part of the army; but,that the wickedness he had been guilty of might not be found out,he left Silo there, with a certain part of his soldiers, with whomalso Antigonus cultivated an acquaintance, that he might causehim no disturbance, and was still in hopes that the Parthianswould come again and defend him.
CHAP. XV.
Haw Herod sailed out of Italy to Judea, and fought with An­tigonus; and what other things happened in Judea about thattime.
§ 1. BY this time Herod had sailed out of Italy to Pto-lemais, and had gotten together no small army, both of strang­ers and of his own countrymen, and marched through Galileeagainst Antigonus. Silo also, and Ventidius, came and assistedhim, being persuaded by Dellius, who was sent by Antony toassist in bringing back Herod. Now for Ventidius, he was em­ployed in composing the disturbances that had been made hi thecities by the means of the Parthians; and for Silo, he was in Ju­dea indeed, but corrupted by Antigonus. However, as Herodwent along, his army increased every day, and all Galilee, withsome small exception, joined him; but as he was marching tothose that were at Massada, for he was obliged to endeavour tosave those that were in that fortress, now they were besieged,because they were his relations: Joppa was a hinderance to him,for it was necessary for him to take that place first, it being acity at variance with him, that no strong hold might be left in hisenemies' hands behind him when he should go to Jerusalem: andwhen Silo made this a pretence for rising up from Jerusalem,and was thereupon pursued by the Jews, Herod fell upon themwith a small body of men, and both put the Jews to flight andsaved Silo, when he was very poorly able to defend himself; butwhen Herod had taken Joppa, he made haste to set free those ofhis family that were in Massada. Now of the people of the coun­try, some joined him because of the friendship they had had with







OCR Output








164 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JKWS. BOOK XII.


CHAP. V.
How, upon the quarrels of the Jews one against another aboutthe high priesthood, Antiochus made an expedition against Je­rusalem, took the city and pillaged the temple, and distressedthe Jews: As also how many of the Jews forsook the laws oftheir country,- and how the Samaritans followed the customsof the Greeks, and named their temple at mount Gerizzim, thetemple of Jupiter Hellenius.
§ 1. ABOUT this time, upon the death of Onias the highpriest, they gave the high priesthood to Jesus' brother; torthat son which Onias left [or Onias IV.] was yet but an in­fant: and, in its proper place, we will inform the reader of allthe circumstances that befell this child. But this Jesus, whowas the brother of Onias, was deprived of the high priesthoodby the king, who was angry with him, and gave it to hisyounger brother, whose name also was Onias, for Simon hadthese three sons, to each of which the priesthood came as wehave * already informed the reader. This Jesus changed hisname to Jason; but Onias was called Menelaus. Now as theformer high priest, Jesus, raised a sedition against Menelaus,who was ordained after him, the multitude were divided betweenthem both. And the sons of Tobias took the part of Menelaus,but the greater part of the people assisted Jason: and by thatmeans Menelaus, and the sons of Tobias were distressed, andretired to Antiochus, and informed him, that they were desir­ous to leave the laws of their country, and the Jewish way ofliving according to them, and to follow the king's laws, and theGrecian way of living: Wherefore they desired his permissionto build them a f Gymnasium at Jerusalem. And when he had


* We have hitherto had but a few of those many citations where Josephus says,that he had elsewhere formerly treated of many things, of which yet his presenthooks have not a syllable. Our commentators have hitherto been able to give notolerable account of these citations, which are far too numerous, and that usually inall his copies, both Greek and Latin, to be supposed later interpolations, which isalmost all that has been hitherto said upon this occasion. What I have to say far­ther is this, that we have but very few of these references before, and very many inand after the history of Antiochus Epiphanes; and that Josephus' first book, theHebrew or Chaldee, as well as the Greek history of the Jewish War, long since lost,began with that very history, so that the references are most probably made to thatedition of the seven Books of the War. See several other examples, besides thosein the two sections before us, in Antiq. B. XIII. chap. ii. sect . 1, 4. vol. II. andrhap. iv. sect. 6, 8. chap, v* sect. 6, 11. chap. viii. sect. 4. and chap. xiii. sect. 4, 5.and Antiq. B. XVIII- chap. ii. sect. 5. vol. III.
f This word Gymnasium, properly denotes a place where the exercises were per­formed naked, which because it would naturally distinguish circumcised Jews front







OCR Output








Chap. XI. ANTIQUITIES OF THti JEWS. 2SS


on his head, four hundred eighty and one years and threemonths after the people had been delivered from the Babylonishslavery, and were returned to their own country again. ThisAristobulus loved his next brother Antigonus, and treated himas his equal, but the others he held in bonds. He also cast hismother into prison, because she disputed the government withhim, for Hyrcanus had left her to be mistress of all. He alsoproceeded to that degree of barbarity, as to kill her in prisonwith hunger; nay, he was alienated from his brother Antigo­nus by calumnies, and added him to the rest whom he slew, yethe seemed to. have an affection for him, and made him above therest a partner with him in the kingdom. Those calumnies heat first did not give credit to, partly because he loved him, andso did not give heed to what was said against him, and partlybecause he thought the reproaches were derived from the envyof the relaters. But when Antigonus was once returned fromthe army, and that feast was then at hand when they make ta­bernacles to the [honour of] God, it happened that Aristobuluswas fallen sick, and that Antigonus went up most splendidlyadorned, and with his soldiers about him in their armour, tothe temple to celebrate the feast, and to put up many prayersfor the recovery of his brother, when some wicked persons,who had a great mind to raise a difference between the breth­ren, made use of this opportunity of the pompous appearanceof Antigonus, and of the great actions which he had done, andwent to the king, and spitefully aggravated the pompous showof his at the feast, and pretended that all these circumstanceswere not like those of a private person; that these actions wereindications of an affectation of royal authority; and that hiscoming with a strong body of men must be with an intention tokill him; and that his way of reasoning was this, that it was asilly thing in him, while it was in his power to reign himself^to look upon it as a great favour that he was honoured with alower dignity by his brother.
2. 'Aristobulus yielded to these imputations, but took c#reboth that his brother should not suspect him, and that he him­self might not run the hazard of his own safety; so he orderedhis guards to lie in a certain place that was underground, anddark, (he himself then lying sick in the tower which was calledAntonia,) and he commanded them, that in case Antigonuscame in to him unarmed, they should not touch any body, butif armed, they should kill him; yet did he send to Antigonus,and desired that he would come unarmed: But the queen, andthose that joined with her in the plot against Antigonus, per­suaded the messenger to tell him the direct contrary: How hisbrother had heard that he had made himself a fine suit of armour







OCR Output








402 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVI.


cause of her love to her husband, and because Glaphyra seemedto behave herself somewhat insolently towards Salome's daugh­ter, who was the wife of Aristobulus, which equality of hersto herself Glaphyra took very impatiently.
3. Now, besides this second contention that had fallen amongthem, neither did the king's brother Pheroras keep himself outaf trouble, but had a particular foundation for suspicion and ha­tred; for he was overcome with the charms of his wife to sucha degree of madness, that he despised the king's daughter, towhom he had been betrothed, and wholly bent his mind to theother, who had been but a servant. Herod also was grieved bythe dishonour that was done him, because he had bestowed manyfavours upon him, and had advanced him to that height of powerthat he was almost a partner with him in the kingdom, and sawthat he had not made him a due return for his favours, and esteem­ed himself unhappy on that account. So upon Pheroras' un-woithy refusal, he gave the damsel to Phasaelus' son: but aftersome time, when he thought the heat of his brother's affectionswas over, he blamed him for his former conduct, and desiredhim to take his second daughter, whose name was Cypros. Pto­lemy also advised him to leave off affronting his brother, and toforsake her whom he had loved, for that it was a base thing tobe so enamoured of a servant, as to deprive himself of the king'sgood-will to him, and become an occasion of his trouble, and makehimself hated by him. Pheroras knew that this advice wouldbe for his own advantage, particularly because he had been ac­cused before, and forgiven; so he put his wife away, although healready had a son by her, and engaged to the king that he wouldtake his second daughter, and agreed that the thirtieth day aftershould be the day of marriage; and swore he would have nofarther conversation with her whom he had put away; but whenthe thirty days were over, he was such a slave to his affections,that he no longer performed any thing he had promised, but con­tinued still with his former wife. This occasioned Herod togrieve openly, and made him angry, while the king dropped oneword or other against Pheroras perpetually; and many made theking's anger an opportunity for raising calumnies against him.Nor had the king any longer a single quiet day or hour, but oc-easions of one fresh quarrel or another arose among his relations,and those that were dearest to him; for Salome was of a harshtemper, and ill-natured to Mariamne's sons; nor would she sufferher own daughter, who was the wife of Aristobulus, one ofthose young men, to bear a good-will to her husband, but per­suaded her to tell her if he said any thing to her in private,and when any misunderstandings happened, as is common, sheraised a great many suspicions out of it; by which means she







OCR Output








48 ANTIQUITIES OF THB JEWS. Book X.


they might speak with him: but he did not himself come out tothem for fear, but he sent three of his most intimate friends, thename of one was Eliakim, who was over the kingdom, and Sheb-na, and Joah the recorder. So these men came out, and stoodover against the commanders of the Assyrian army; and whenRabshakeh saw them, he bid them go and speak to Hezekiah inthe manner following: That " Sennacherib the * great king, de-"sires to know of him, on whom it is that he relies and depends"in flying from his lord, and will not hear him, nor admit his"army into the city? Is it on account of the Egyptians, and in"hopes that his army would be beaten by them? Whereupon"he lets him know, that if this be what he expects, he is a tbol-"ish man, and like one who leans on a broken reed, while such"a one will not only fall down, but will have his hand pier-"ced and hurt by it. That he ought to know, he makes this"expedition against him by the will of God, who hath granted"this favour to him, that he shall overthrow the kingdom o"Israel, and that in the very same manner he shall destroy*' those that are his subjects also." When Rabshakeh had madethis speech in the Hebrew tongue, for he was skilful in thatlanguage, Eliakim was afraid lest the multitude that heardhim should be disturbed, so he desired him to speak in the Sy­rian tongue; but the general understanding what he meant, andperceiving the fear that he was in, he made his answer with agreater, and a louder voice, but in the Hebrew tongue; andsaid, that " since they all heard what were the king's commands,"they would consult their own advantage in delivering up"themselves to us, for it is plain that both you and your king"dissuade the people from submitting by vain hopes, and so in"duce them to resist: but if you be courageous, and think to"drive our forces away, I am ready to deliver to you two"thousand of these horses that are with me for your use, if"you can set as many horsemen on their backs, and show your"strength, but what you have not, you cannot produce. Why"therefore do you delay to deliver up yourselves to a superior"force, who can take you without your consent? although it will"be safer for you to deliver yourselves up voluntarily, while a"forcible capture, when you are beaten, must appear more dan-"gerous, and will bring farther calamities upon you."
3. When the people, as well as the ambassadors, heard whatthe Assyrian commander said, they related it to Hezekiah, whothereupon put off his royal apparel, and clothed himself with sack­cloth and took the habit of a mourner; and, after the manner of


This title of Great King, both in our Bibles, 2 Kings x\iii. 19. Isa. xxxvi.here in Joscphus, is the very:Spanheim takes notice on this place.
and here in Josephus, is the very same that Herodotus gives tliis Sennacherib *i







OCR Output








560 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XV.


rod, and desirous to have his subjects preserved, he gave leave tothem in the first place to export corn, and assisted them everyway, both in purchasing and exporting the same, so that he wasthe principal, if not the only person, who afforded them whathelp they had. And Herod taking care the people should under­stand that this help came from himself, did thereby not only re­move from him the ill opinion of those that formerly hated him,but gave them the greatest demonstration possible of his good­will to them, and care of them; for, in the first place, as forthose who were able to provide their own food, he distributedto them their proportion of corn in the exactest manner, but forthose many that were not able, either by reason of their old age,or any other infirmity, to providefood for themselves, hemadethisprovision for them, that the bakers should make the bread readyfor them. He also took care that they might not be hurt bythe dangers of winter, since they were in great want of clothingalso, by reason of the utter destruction and consumption of theirsheep and goats, till they had no wool to make use of, nor anything else to cover themselves withal. And when he had pro­cured these things for his own subjects, he went farther, in or­der to provide necessaries for their neighbours, and gave seed tothe Syrians, which thing turned greatly to his own advantagealso, this charitable assistance being afforded most seasonably totheir fruitful soil, so that every one had now a plentiful provi­sion of food. Upon the whole, when the harvest of the land wasapproaching, he sent no fewer than fifty thousand men, whom hehad sustained, into the country; by which means he both repair­ed the afflicted condition of his own kingdom with great genero­sity and diligence, and lightened the afflictions of his neighbours,who were under the same calamities, for there was nobody whohad been in want that was left destitute of a suitable assistance byhim: nay, farther, there were neither any people, nor any cities,nor any private men, who were to make provision for themultitudes, and on that account were in want of support, andhad recourse to him, but received what they stood in need of, in­somuch, that it appeared upon a computation, that the numberof cori of wheat, often attick medimni a-piece, that were givento foreigners, amounted to ten thousand, and the number thatwas given in his own kingdom was about fourscore thousand.Now it happened that this care of his, and this seasonable bene­faction, had such influence on the Jews, and was so cried upamong other nations, as to wipe off that old hatred which his vio­lation of some of then: customs, during his reign, had procuredhim among all the nation; and that this liberality of his assistancein this their greatest necessity was full satisfaction for all thathe had done of that nature, as it also procured him great fame







OCR Output








122 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XI.


ready come, and standing before the court, they should tell him.Now it happened that Raman was found there, for he was comesooner than ordinary to petition the king to have Mordecai putto death; and when the servants said, that Haman was beforethe court, he Lid them call him in; and when he was come in,he said, " Because I know that thou art my only fast friend, I de-"sire thee to give me advice, how I may honour one that I"greatly love, and that after a manner suitable to my magnifi-"cence." Now Haman reasoned with himself, that what opi­nion he should give it would be for himself, since it was healone who was beloved by the king: so he gave that advicewhich he thought of all other the best; for he said, "If thou"wouldest truly honour a man whom thou sayest thou dost love,"give order that he may ride on horseback, with the same gar-"ment on which thou wearest, and with a gold chain about his"neck, and let one of thy intimate friends go before him, and"proclaim through the whole city, that whosoever the king"honoureth, obtaineth this mark of his honour." This was theadvice which Haman gave, out of a supposal that such a rewardwould come to himself. Hereupon the king was pleased withthe advice, and said, "Go thou, therefore, for thou hast the"horse, the garment, and the chain, ask for Mordecai the Jew,"and give him those things, and go before his horse, and pro-"claim accordingly; for thou art, said he, my intimate friend,"and hast given me good advice; be thou then the minister of'*' what thou hast advised me to. This shall be his reward from"us, for preserving my life." When he heard this order, whichwas entirely unexpected, he was confounded in his mind, andknew not what to do. However, he went out and led the horse,and took the purple garment, and the golden chain for the neck,and finding Mordecai before the court, clothed in sackcloth, hebid him put that garment off, and put the purple garment on «*But Mordecai, not knowing the truth of the matter, but think­ing that it was done in mockery, said, "O thou wretch, the"vilest of all mankind, dost thou thus laugh at our calamities?"But when he was satisfied that the king bestowed this honour up­on him, for the deliverance he had procured him, when he con­victed the eunuchs who had conspired against him, he put on thatpurple garment which the king always wore, and put the chainabout his neck, and got on horseback, and went round the city,while Haman went before, and proclaimed, "This shall be the"reward which the king will bestow on every one whom he loves,"and esteems worthy of honour." And when they had goneround the city, Mordecai went in to the king, but Haman wenthome, out of shame, and informed his wife and friends of whathad happened, and this with tears: who said, that "he would







OCR Output








ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. BookXIII.


Now there were some of her friends who persuaded her to seizeAlexander, and to overrun and take possession of the country,and not to sit still and see such a multitude of brave Jews sub­ject to one man. But Ananias' counsel was contrary to theirs,who said, that, "she would do an unjust action, if she deprived"a man that was her ally, of that authority which belonged to"him, and this a man who is related to us; for, said he, I- would"not have thee ignorant of this, that what injustice thou dost"to him, will make all us that are Jews to be thy enemies."This desire of Ananias' Cleopatra complied with, and did noinjury to Alexander, but made a league of mutual assistancewith him, at Scythopolis, a city of Celesyria.
3. So when Alexander was delivered from the fear he was inof Ptolemy, he presently made an expedition against Celesyria.He also took Gadara, after a siege often months. He took alsoAmathus, a very strong fortress belonging to the inhabitantsabove Jordan, where Theodorus, the son of Zeno, had his chieftreasure, and what he esteemed most precious. This Zeno fellunexpectedly upon the Jews, and slew ten thousand of them, andseized upon Alexander's baggage: Yet did not this misfortuneterrify Alexander, but he made an expedition upon the maritimeparts of the country, Raphia and Anthedon, (the name of whichking Herod afterwards changed to Agrippias,) and took even thatby force, but when Alexander saw that Ptolemy was retiredfrom Gaza to Cyprus, and his mother Cleopatra was returned toEgypt, he grew angry at the people of Gaza, because they hadinvited Ptolemy to assist them, and besieged their city and ra­vaged their country. But as Apollodotus, the general of thearmy of Gaza, fell upon the camp of the Jews by night, withtwo thousand foreign, and ten thousand of his own forces, whilethe night lasted, those of Gaza prevailed, because the enemy wasmade to believe that it was Ptolemy who attacked them: butwhen day was come on, and that mistake was corrected, and theJews knew the truth of the matter, they came back again andfell upon those of Gaza, and slew of them about a thousand; butas those of Gaza stoutly'resisted them, and would not yield for ci­ther their want of any thing, nor for the great multitude that wereslain, for they would rather suffer any hardship whatever thancome under the power of their enemies, Aretus, king of theArabians, a person then very illustrious, encouraged them to goon with alacrity, and promised them that he would come to theirassistance; but it happened, that before he came, Apollodotuswas slain, for his brother Lysimachus envying him for the greatreputation he had gained among the citizens, slew him, and gotthe army together, and delivered up the city to Alexander, who,when he came in at first, lay quiet, and afterward set his army







OCR Output








298 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


fortifications there were in that place. Phasaelus came also tohis assistance; yet was Pacorus, the general of the Parthians, atthe desire of Antigonus, admitted into the city, with a few ofhis horsemen, under pretence indeed as if he would still the se­dition, but in reality to assist Antigonus in obtaining the go­vernment. And when Phasaelus met him, and received himkindly, Pacorus persuaded him to go himself as ambassador toBarzapharnes, which was done fraudulently. Accordingly, Pha­saelus, suspecting no harm, complied with his proposal, whileHerod did not give his consent to what was done, because ofthe perfidiousness of these Barbarians, but desired Phasaelusrather to fight those that were come into the city.
5. So both Hyrcanus and Phasaelus went on the embassage;but Pacorus left with Herod two hundred horsemen, and tenmen, who were called, The freemen; and conducted the otherson their journey; and when they were in Galilee, the governorsof the cities there met them in their arms. Barzapharnes alsoreceived them at the first with cheerfulness, and made thempresents though he afterward conspired against them; and Pha­saelus, with his horsemen, were conducted to the seaside: Butwhen they heard that Antigonus had promised to give the Par­thians a thousand talents, and five hundred women, to assist himagainst them, they soon had a suspicion of the Barbarians.Moreover, there was one who informed them that snares werelaid for them by night, while a guard came secretly, and theyhad then been seized upon, had not they waited for the seizureof Herod by the Parthians, that were about Jerusalem, lest,upon the slaughter of Hyrcanus and Phasaelus, he should havean intimation of it, and escape out of their hands. And thesewere the circumstances they were now in, and they saw who theywere that guarded them. Some persons indeed would have per­suaded Phasaelus to fly away immediately on horseback, andnot stay any longer; and there was one Ophellius, who, aboveall the rest, was earnest with him to do so, for he had heard ofthis treachery from Saramalla, the richest of all the Syriansat that time, who also promised to provide him ships tocarry him off; for the sea was just by them: but he had nomind to desert Hyrcanus, nor bring his brother into danger;but he went to Barzapharnes, and told him he did not act justlywhen he made such a contrivance against them, for that if hewanted money, he would give him more than Antigonus; andbesides, that it was a horrible thing, to slay those that came tohim upon the security of their oaths, and that when they haddone them no injury. But the Barbarian swore to him, thatthere was no truth in any of his suspicions, but that he wastroubled with nothing but false proposals, and then went awayto Pacorus.







OCR Output








Chap. IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 221


"occasion was, that the ambassadors sent by the * people of the"Jews, Simon the son of Dositheus, and Apollonius, the son"of Alexander, and Diodorus, the son of Jason, who were"good and virtuous men, had somewhat to propose about that"league of friendship and mutual assistance which subsisted be-"tween them and the Romans, and about other public affairs,"who desired that Joppa, and the havens, and Gazara, and the"springs [of Jordan,] and the several other cities and countries"of theirs, which Antiochus had taken from them in the war,"contrary to the decree of the senate, might be restored to them;"and that it might not be lawful for the king's troops to pass"through their country, and the countries of those that are"subject to them: And that what attempts Antiochus had"made during that war, without the decree of the senate, might"be made void: and that they would send ambassadors, who"should take care that restitution be made them of what An-"tiochus had taken from them, and that they should make an"estimate of the country that had been laid waste in the war,"and that they would grant them letters of protection to the"kings, and free people, in order to their quiet return home."It was therefore decreed, as to those points, to renew their"league of friendship and mutual assistance with these good"men, and who were sent by a good and a friendly people."But that as to the letters desired, their answer was, that thesenate would consult about that matter, when their own affairswould give them leave, and that they would endeavour, for thetime to come, that no like injury should be done them; andthat their pretor Fanius should give them money out of thepublic treasury to bear their expenses home. And thus didFanius dismiss the Jewish ambassadors, and gave them moneyout of the public treasury; and gave the decree of the senateto those that were to conduct them, and take care that theyshould return home in safety.
3. And thus stood the affairs of Hyrcanus the high priest. Butas for king Demetrius, who had a mind to make war againstHyrcanus, there was no opportunity nor room for it, while boththe Syrians and the soldiers bare ill will to him, because he wasan ill man. But when they had sent ambassadors to Ptolemy,who was called Physcon, that he would send them one of the fa­mily at Seleucus, in order to take the kingdom, and he had sentthem Alexander, who was called Zebina, with an army, and therehad been a battle between them, Demetrius was beaten in thefight, and fled to Cleopatra his wife, to Ptolemais, but his wife
* In this decree of the Roman Senate, it seems that these ambassadors weresent from the people of the Jews, as well as from their prince, or high priest, JohnHyrcauus*
vor-. iI. F r 21







OCR Output








Clap. V. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 109


"ply them with the expenses which I commanded you to do for"the offering their sacrifices. My will therefore is this, that"upon tl*e reading of this epistle, you supply them with whatso-"ever they want for their sacrifices, and that out of the royal"treasury, of the tributes of Samaria, as the priest shall desire,"that they may not leave off' offering their daily sacrifices, nor"praying to God for me and the Persians." And these wereIhe contents of that epistle.
- .
CHAP. V.
Haw Xerxes, the son of Darius, leas well disposed to tJie Jews:As also concerning Esdras and Nehemiah.
} 1. LJPON the death of Darius, Xerxes his son took thekingdom, who, as he inherited his father's kingdom, so did heinherit his piety towards God, and honour of him; for he did alltitings suitably to his- father relating to divine worship, and hewas exceeding friendly to the Jews. Now about this time, ason of Jeshua, whose name was Joacim, was the high priest.Moreover, there was now in Babylon a righteous man, and onethat enjoyed a great reputation among the multitude? He was theprincipal priest of the people, and his name was Esdras. Hewas very skilful in the laws of Moses, and was well acquaintedwith king Xerxes. He had determined to go up to Jerusalem,and to take with him .some of those Jews that were in Babylon,and he desired that the king would give him an epistle to thegovernors of Syria, by which they might know who he was. Ac­cordingly, the king wrote the following epistle to those govern­ors: " Xerxes, king of kings, to Ezra the priest, and reader of"the divine law, greeting: I think it agreeable to that love which"I bear to mankind, to permit those of the Jewish nation that"are so disposed, as well as those of the priests and Levites"that are in our kingdom, to go together to Jerusalem. Ac-"cordingly, I have given command for that purpose; and let"every one that hath a mind go, according as it hath seemed"good to me, and to my seven counsellors, and this in order to"their review of the affairs of Judea, to see whether they be"agreeable to the law of God. Let them also take with them'' those presents which I and my friends have vowed, with"all that silver and gold that is found in the country of the"Babylonians, as dedicated to God, and let all this be carried"to Jerusalem, to God for sacrifices. Let it also be lawful for"thee and thy brethren to make as many vessels of silver"and gold as thou pleasest. Thou shalt also dedicate those"holy vessels which have been piven thee, and as many more







OCR Output








Chap. XI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 37


pie, and the bright rays of the sun shone through it, and fell up­on the king's face, insomuch that the leprosy seized upon himimmediately.- And before the city, at a place called Eroge, halfthe mountain broke off'from the rest on the west, and rolled it­self four furlongs, and stood still at the east mountain, till theroads, as well as the king's gardens, were spoiled by the ob­struction. Now, as soon as the priests saw that the king's facewas infected with the leprosy, they told him of the calamity hewas under, and commanded that he should go out of the city asa polluted person. Hereupon he was so confounded at the saddistemper, and sensible that he was not at liberty to contradict,that he did as he was commanded, and underwent this miserableand terrible punishment for an intention beyond what befitted aman to have, and for that impiety against God which was im­plied therein. So he abode out of the city for some time, andlived a private life, while his son Jotham took the government;after which he died with grief and anxiety at what had happenedto him, when he had lived sixty-eight years, and reigned ofthem fifty-two; and was buried by himself in his own gardens.
CHAP. XI .
How Zechariah, Shallum, Menahem, Pekahiah, and Pekah tookthe government over the Israelites; and how Pul and Tiglath-Pileser made an expedition against the Israelites. How Jo­tham, the son of Uzziah, reigned over the tribe of Judah: andwhat things Nahum prophesied against the Assyrians.
§ 1. .N ow when Zechariah, the son of Jeroboam, had reign­ed six months over Israel, he was slain by the treachery of acertain friend of his, whose name was Shallum, the son of Ja-besh, who took the kingdom afterward, but kept it no longerthan thirty days; for Menahem, the general of nis army, whowas at that time in the city Tirzah, and heard of what had be­fallen Zechariah, removed thereupon with all his forces to Sa­maria, and joining battle with Shallum, slew him; and whenhe had made himself king, he went thence, and came to the cityTiphsah, but the citizens that were in it, shut their gates, andbarred them against the king, and would not admit him; butin order to be avenged on them, he burnt the country roundabout it and took the city by force, upon a siege; and being ve­ry much displeased at what the inhabitants of Tiphsah had done,he slew them all, and spared not so much as the infants, without


as they fled from this earthquake in the days of Uzziah king of Judah;" so thatthere seems to have been some considerable resemblance between these historicaland prophetical earthquakes-







OCR Output








Chap. VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 63


advantage; but then his friends perverted him, arid dissuaded himfrom vrhat the prophet advised, and obliged him to do what theypleased. Ezekiel also foretold in Babylon what calamities werecoming upon the people, which when he heard, he sent accountsof them into Jerusalem: But Zedekiah did not believe their pro­phecies, for the reasons following: It happened that the two pro­phets agreed with one another in what they said, as in all otherthings, that the city should be taken, and Zedekiah himself shouldbe taken captive; but Ezekiel disagreed with him, and said that"Zedekiah should not see Babylon," while Jeremiah said, tohim, That " the king of Babylon should carry him away thither"in bonds." And because they did not both say the same thingas to this circumstance, he disbelieved what they both appearedto agree in, and condemned them as not speaking truth therein,although all the things foretold him did come to pass accordingto their prophecies, as we shall show upon a fitter opportunity.3. Now when Zedekiah preserved the league of mutual as­sistance he had made with the Babylonians, for eight years, hebrake it, and revolted to the Egyptians, in hopes, by their as­sistance, of overcoming the Babylonians. When the king ofBabylon knew this, he made war against him; he laid hiscountry waste, and took his fortified towns, and came to the cityJerusalem itself to besiege it: But when the king of Egyptheard what circumstances Zedekiah his ally was in, He took agreat army with him, and came into Judea, as if he would raisethe siege: upon which the king of Babylon departed from Jeru­salem, and met the Egyptians, and joined battle with them, andbeat them, and when he had put them to flight, he pursuedthem, and drove them out of all Syria. Now as soon as theking of Babylon was departed from Jerusalem, the false prophetsdeceived Zedekiah, and said, That " the king of Babylon would"not any more make war against him or his people, nor remove"them out of their own country into Babylon, and that those"then in captivity would return, with all those vessels of the"temple, of which the king of Babylon had despoiled that tem-"pie." But Jeremiah came among them, and prophesied whatcontradicted those predictions, and what proved to be true, That"they did ill, and deluded the king; that the Egyptians would"be of no advantage to them, but that the king of Babylon"would renew the war against Jerusalem, and besiege it again,"and would destroy the people by faminer and carry away those"that remained into captivity, and would take away what they"had as spoils, and would carry off those riches that were in"the temple; nay, that, besides this, he would burn it, and ut-"terly overthrow the city, and that they should serve him and'his posterity seventy years; that then the Persians and the







OCR Output








Chap. IX. ANTIgUITIES OF THE JEWS. 411


all expectation, wiped off. And Archelaus, as soon as he hadmade the reconciliation, went then away to Cappadocia, havingproved at this juncture of time the most acceptable person toHerod in the world; on which account he gave him the richestpresents, as tokens of his respect to him, and being on other oc­casions magnanimous, he esteemed him one of his dearest friends.He also made an agreement with him that he would go to Rome,because he had written to Caesar about these affairs; so theywent together as far as Antioch, and there Herod made a recon­ciliation between Archelaus and Titus, the president of Syria,who had been greatly at variance, and so returned back toJudea.
CHAP. IX.
Concerning the revolt of the Trachonites: How Sylleus accusedHerod before Ctesar: and how Herod, when Ctesar was angryat him, resolved to send Nicolaus to Rome.
§ 1. W HEN Herod had been at Rome, and was come backagain, a war arose between him and the Arabians, on the oc­casion following: The inhabitants of Trachonitis, after Caesarhad taken the country away from Zednodorus, and added itto Herod, had not now power to rob, but were forced toplough the land, and to live quietly, which was a thing theydid not like; and when they did take that pains, the ground didnot produce much fruit for them. However, at the first theking would not permit them to rob, and so they abstained fromthat unjust way of living upon their neighbours, which procuredHerod a great reputation for his care: But when he was sailingto Rome, (it was at that time when he went to accuse his sonAlexander, and to commit Antipater to Caesar's protection,) theTrachonites spread a report as if he were dead, and revoltedfrom his dominion, and betook themselves again to their accus­tomed way of robbing their neighbours: at which time theking's commanders subdued them during his absence, but aboutforty of the principal robbers, being terrified by those that hadbeen taken, left the country, and retired into Arabia, Sylleusentertaining them, after he had missed of marrying Salome, andgave them a place of strength in which they dwelt. So they over­ran not only Judea, butall Coelesyria also, and carried off the prey,while Sylleus afforded them places of protection and quietnessduring their wicked practices. But when Herod came back fromRome, he perceived that his dominions had greatly suffered bythem, and since he could not reach the robbers themselves, be­cause of the secure retreat they had in that country, and whichVOL. n. 3 F 27







OCR Output








29'2 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


up in the tower, and there, on certain conditions, dismissed him.Phasaelus also complained of Hyrcanus, that although he hadreceived a great many benefits from them; yet did he supporttheir enemies; for Malichus' brother made many places to re­volt, and kept garrisons in them, and particularly Masada, thestrongest fortress of them all. In the meantime Herod was re­covered of his disease, and came and took from Felix all theplaces he had gotten; and, upon certain conditions, dismissedhim also.
CHAP. XII.
Herod ejects Antigonus, the son of Aristolndus, out of Judea, andgains the friendship of Antony, who was now come into Syria,by sending him much money; on which account he would notadmit of those that would have accused Herod ,- and what itwas that Antony wrote to the Tyrians in behalf of the Jews.
§ 1. JN ow * Ptolemy the son of Menneus, brought backinto Judea, Antigonus the son of Aristobulus, who had alreadyraised an army, and had, by money, made Fabius to be his friend,and this because he was of kin to him. Marion also gave himassistance. He-had been left by Cassius to tyrannize over Tyre,for this Cassius was a man that seized on Syria, and then kept itunder in the way of a tyrant. Marion also marched into Ga­lilee, which lay in his neighbourhood, and took three of his for­tresses, and put garrisons into them to keep them. But whenHerod came, he took all from him ; but the Tyrian garrison hedismissed in a very civil manner; nay, to some of the soldiers hemade presents out of the good-will he bore to that city. Whenhe had dispatched these affairs, and was gone to meet Antigonus,he joined battle with him, and beat him, and drove him out ofJudea presently, when he was just come into its borders. Butwhen he was come to Jerusalem, Hyrcanus and the people putgarlands about his head; for he had already contracted an af­finity with the family of Hyrcanus by having espoused a descen-dantof his, andfor that reason Herod took the greater care of him,


* In this and the following chapters, the reader will easily remark, how truly Gro-novius observes, in his notes on the Roman decrees in favour of the Jews, that theirrights and privileges were commonly purchased of the Romans with money. Manyexamples of this sort, both as to the Romans, and others in authority, will occur inour Josephus, both now and hereafter, and need not be taken particular notice of onthe several occasions in these notes. Accordingly, the chief captain confesses toSt. Paul, that " with a great sum be had obtained his freedom," Act* xxii. 28. a>had Paul's ancestors, very probably, purchased the like freedom for their family bymoney, as the same author justly concludes also.







OCR Output








190 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. BookXIIL


BOOK XIII.
CONTAINING THE INTERVAL oi? EIGHTY-TWO YEAH*.
[FROM THE DEATH OF JUDAS MACCABEES, TO THEDEATH OF QUEEN ALEXANDRA.]


CHAP. I.
Hem Jonathan took the government after his brother Judas, andhchsi he, together with his brother Simon, imaged \siar againstBaechides.
§ 1. BY what means the nation of the Jews recovered theirfreedom when they had been brought into slavery by the Ma­cedonians, and what struggles, and how great battles Judas thefeneral of their army rail through, till he was slain as he wasghting for them, hath been related in the foregoing book; butafter he was dead, all the wicked, and those that transgressed thelaws of their forefathers, sprang up again in Judea, and grewupon them and distressed them on every side. A famine alsoassisted their wickedness, and afflicted the country, till not a few,who by reason of their want of necessaries, and because theywere not able to bear up the miseries that both the famineand their enemies brought upon them, deserted their country,and went to the Macedonians. And now Bacchides gatheredthose Jews together who had apostatized from the accustomedway of living of their forefathers, and chose to live like theirneighbours, and committed the care of the country to them,who also caught the friends of Judas, and those of his party,and delivered them up to Bacchides, who, when he had, in thefirst place tortured and tormented them at his pleasure, he, bythat means at length killed them. And when this calamity ofthe Jews was become so great, as they had never had expe­rience of the like since their return out of Babylon, those thatremained of the companions of Judas, seeing that the nationwas ready to be destroyed after a miserable manner, came tohis brother Jonathan, and desired him that he would imitate hi»brother, and that care which he took of his countrymen, forwhose liberty in general he died also; and that he would notpermit the nation to be. without a governor, especially in thosedestructive circumstances wherein it now was. And when Jon­







OCR Output








Chap. I. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. S77


BOOK XVI.
CONTAINING THE INTERVAL OF TWELVE YEARS.
[FROM THE FINISHING OF THE TEMPLE BY HEROD TOTHE DEATH OF ALEXANDER AND ARISTOBULUS.J


CHAP. I.
A law of Herod about thieves. Salome and Pheroras, calum­niate Alexander and Aristobulus, upon their return from Rome,for whom yet Herod provides wives.
§ 1. As king Herod was very zealous in the administrationof his entire government, and desirous to put a slop to particularacts of injustice which were clone by criminals about thecity and country, he made a law, no way like our originallaws, and which he enacted of himself, to expose housebreak­ers to be ejected out of his kingdom; which punishment wasnot only grievous to be borne by the offenders, but containedin it a dissolution of the customs of our forefathers; for thisslavery to foreigners, and such as did not live after the mannerof Jews, and this necessity that they were under to do whatsoeversuch men should command, was an offence against our religioussettlement, rather than a punishment to such as were found tohave offended, such a punishment being avoided in our originallaws; for those laws ordain, that the thief shall restore four-fold:and that if he have not so much, he shall be sold indeed, but notto foreigners, nor so that he be under perpetual slavery, for hemust have been released after six years. But this law, thusenacted, in order to introduce a severe and illegal punishment,seemed to be a piece of insolence in Herod, when he did not actas a king but as a tyrant, and thus contemptuously, and with­out any regard to his subjects, did he venture to introduce sucha punishment. Now this penalty, thus brought into practice,was like Herod's other actions, and became a part of his accu­sation, and an occasion of the hatred he lay under.
2. Now at this time it was that he sailed to Italy, as very de­sirous to meet with Caesar, and to see his sons who lived at Rome:and Caesar was not only very obliging to him in other respects,but delivered him his sons again, that he might take them homewith him as having already completed themselves in' the sci­ences; but as soon as tne young men were come from Italy, the







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 15


day, at the very same hour in which the king came to him, theyshould have great plenty of food, and that two seah of barleyshould be sold in the market for a shekel, and a seah of fineflour should be sold for a shekel. This prediction made Jo-ram, and those that were present, very joyful, for they did notscruple believing what the prophet said, on account of the expe­rience they had of the truth of his former predictions ; and theexpectation of plenty made the want they were in that day, withthe uneasiness that accompanied it, appear a light thing to them:but the captain of the third band, who was a friend of the king's,and on whose hand the king leaned, said, "Thou talkest of in-"credible things, O prophet! for as it is impossible for God to"pour down torrents of barley, or fine flour, out of heaven, so"is it impossible that what thou sayest should come to pass."To which the prophet made this reply, "Thou shalt see these"things come to pass, but thou shalt not be in the least a par-"taker of them."
5. Now what Elisha had thus foretold, came to pass in themanner following: There was a * law at Samaria, that thosethat had the leprosy, and whose bodies were not cleansed fromit, should abide without the city; and there were four men thaton this account abode before the gates, while nobody gave themany food, by reason of the extremity of the famine: and as theywere prohibited from entering into the city by the law, and theyconsidered that if they were permitted to enter, they should mi­serably perish by the famine, as also, that if they staid wherethey were, they should suffer in the same manner, they resolvedto deliver themselves up to the enemy, that in case they shouldspare them, they should live, but if they should be killed, thatwould'be an easy death. So when they had confirmed this theirresolution, they came by night to the enemies' camp. Now Godhad begun to affright and disturb the Syrians, and to bring thenoise of chariots and armour to their ears, as though an armywere coming upon them, and had made them suspect that it wascoming nearer and nearer to them. In short, they were in sucha dread of this army, that they left their tents, and ran togetherto Benhadad, and said, That "Joram the king of Israel had hired"for auxiliaries, both the king of Egypt and the king of the"islands, and led them against them, for they heard the noise of"them as they were coming." And Benhadad believed whatthey said (for there came the same noise to his ears as well as itdid to theirs), so they fell into a mighty disorder and tumult,and left their horses and beasts in their camp, with immense


* This law of the Jews, for the exclusion of lepers out of the camp in the"ilderness, and out of the cities in Juik-a, is a well known one, Lev, xiii. 46. andSum. v. 1—4.







OCR Output








12 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book IX.


rians lying in ambush to kill him. So the king did as the pro­phet exhorted him, and avoided his going a hunting. And whenBenhadad missed of the success of his lying in ambush, he waswroth with his own,servants, as if they had betrayed his am-bushment to Joram, and sent for them, and said they werethe betrayers of his secret counsels; and he threatened that hewould put them to death, since such their practice was evident,because he had intrusted this secret to none but them, and yet itwas made known to his enemy. And when one that was pre­sent said, that " he should not mistake himself; nor suspect that"they h.ad discovered to his enemy his sending men to kill him,"but that he ought to know that it was Elisha the prophet"who discovered all to him, and laid open all his counsels," hegave order that they should send some to learn in what city Eli­sha dwelt. Accordingly those thatwere sent brought word, thathe was in Dothan: wherefore Benhadad sent to that city a greatarmy, with horses and chariots, to take Elisha; so they encom­passed the city round about by night, and kept him therein con­fined: but when the prophet's servant in the morning perceivedthis, and that his enemies sought to take Elisha, he came runningand crying out after a disordered manner to him, and told himof it; but he encouraged him, and bid him not be afraid, andto despise the enemy, and trust in the assistance of God, and washimself without fear; and he besought God to make manifestto his servant his power and presence, so far as was possible, inorder to the inspiring him with hope and courage. According­ly God heard the prayer of the prophet, and made the servantsee a multitude of chariots and horses encompassing Elisha, tillhe laid aside his fear, and his courage revived at the sight ofwhat he supposed was come to their assistance. After this Eli­sha did farther entreat God, that he would dim the eyes of theirenemies, and cast a mist before them, whereby they might notdiscern him. When this was done, he went into the midst ofhis enemies, and asked them who it was that they came to seek?and when they replied, the prophet Elisha, he promised he woulddeliver him to them, if they would follow him to the city wherehe was. So these men were so darkened by God in their sightand in their mind, that they followed him very diligently; andwhen Elisha had brought them to Samaria, he ordered Joramthe king to shut the gates, and to place his own army round


forth offer neither burnt-offering nor sacrifice unto other gods, but unto the Lord,ndds, In this thing the Lord pardon thy servant, that when my master goethinto the house of Rimmon to worship there, and he leaneth on my hands, andI bow myself in the house of Rimmon; when I how down myself in the houseof Rimmon, the Lord pardon thy servant in this thing. And Elisha said, Go inpeace." This looks like a prophet's permission for being partaker in idolatry itself,out of compliance with an idolatrous court.







OCR Output








Chap. XVI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 247


"jured. Do thou, therefore, said he, when thou art come to"Jerusalem, send'for the leading men among them, and show"them my body, and with great appearance of sincerity, give"them leave to use it as they themselves please, whether they"will dishonour the dead body, by refusing it burial, as having"severely suffered by my means, or whether in their anger they"will offer any other injury to that body. Promise them also"that thou wilt do nothing without them in the affairs of the"kingdom. If thou dost but say this to them, I shall have the"honour of a more glorious funeral from them than thou couldst"have made for me; and when it is in their power to abuse my"dead body, they will do it no injury at all, and thou wilt rule"in safety."* So when he had given his wife this advice, hedied, after he had reigned twenty-seven years, and lived fiftyyears within one.
CHAP. XVI.
How Alexandra, by gaining the good-will of the Pharisees, re­tained the kingdom nine years, and then having done many glo­rious actions, died.
§ 1. oo Alexandra when she had taken the fortress, acted asher husband had suggested to her, and spake to the Pharisees,and put all things into their power, both as to the dead body,


* It serins, by this dying advice of Alexander Janneus to his wife, that he hadhimself pursued the measures of his father Hyrcanus, and taken part with the Sad-ducees, who kept close to the written law, against the Pharisees, who hud intro­duced their own traditions, <:!.. xvi. § 2. and that he now saw a political necessity ofsubmitting to the Pharisees, and their traditions hereafter, if his widow and familyminded to retain their monarchial government or tyranny over the Jewish nation:Which sect yet, thus supported, were at least in great measure the ruin of the re­ligion, government, and nation of the Jews, and brought them into so wicked a state,that the vengeance of God came upon them to their utter excision. Just thus didCaiaphas politically advise the Jewish sanhedrim, John xi. 50. That it was expedi­ent for them that one man should die for the people, and that the whole nation perishnot, and this in consequence of their own political supposal, ver. 48. that If they letJesus alone, with his miracles, all mm would believe on him, and the Ramans wouldcome and take away both their place and nation* "Which political cruciBxion of Je­sus of Nazareth brought down the vengeance of God upon them, and occasionedthose very Romans, of whom they seemed so much afraid, that to prevent it theyput him to death, actually to come and take away both their place and nation, within38 years afterwards. I heartily wish the politicians of Christendom would considerthese and the like examples, and no longer sacrifice all virtue and religion to theirpernicious schemes of government, to the bringing down the judgment of Godupon themselves, and the several nations entrusted to their care. But this is a di­gression: I wish it were an unseasonable one also. Josephus himself several timesmakes such digressions, and I here venture to follow him. See one of them at theconclusion of the very next chapter.







OCR Output








38* ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVI.


"kind entertainments made both by our nation and our city,"to a man who is the ruler and manager of so much of the pub-"lie affairs, as indications of that friendship which thou hast re-"turned to the Jewish nation, and v.'hich hath been procured"them by the family of Herod. So we put thee in mind of these"things, in the presence of the king, now sitting by thee, and"make our request for no more but this, that what you have''' given us yourselves, you will not see taken away by others"from us."
5. When Nicolaus had made this speech, there was no oppo­sition made to it by the Greeks, for this was not an inquirymade, as in a court of justice, but an intercession to preventviolence to be offered to the Jews any longer; nor did the Greeksmake any defence of themselves, or deny what it was supposedthey had done. Their pretence was no more than this, thatwhile the Jews inhabited in their country, they were entirelyunjust to them [in not joining in their worship,] but they de­monstrated their generosity in this, that though they worship­ped according to their own institutions, they did nothing thatought to grieve them. So when Agrippa perceived that theyhad been oppressed by violence, he made this answer: "That"on account of Herod's good-will and friendship, he was ready"to grant the Jews whatsoever they should ask him, and that"their requests seemed to him in themselves just; and that if"they requested any thing farther, he should not scruple to"grant it them, provided it was no way to the detriment of"the Roman government; but that, while their request was"no more than this, that what privileges they had already gi-"ven them might not be abrogated, he confirmed this to them,"that they might continue in the observation of their own cus-"toms, without any one's offering them the least injury." Andwhen he had said this, he dissolved the assembly; upon whichHerod stood up, and saluted him, and gave him thanks for thekind' disposition he showed to them. Agrippa also took this ina very obliging manner, and saluted him again, and embracedhim in his arms; after which he went away from Lesbos; butthe king determined to sail from Samos to his own country;and when he had taken his leave of Agrippa, he pursued hisvoyage, and landed at Caesarea in a few days time, as having fa­vourable winds, from whence he went to Jerusalem, and theregathered all the people together to an assembly, not a fewbeing there out of the country also. So he came to them, andgave them a particular account of all his journey, and of the af­fairs of all the Jews in Asia, how by his means they would livewithout injurious treatment for the time to come. He also toldthem of the entire good fortune he had met *vith, and how he







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 369


fear of him, yielded to what he required of them, but for suchas were of a more open and generous disposition, and had indig­nation at the force he used to them, he by one means or othermade away with them. He endeavoured also to persuade Polliothe Pharisee, and Sameas, and the greatest part of their scholars,to take the oath; but these would neither submit so to do, norwere they punished together with the rest, out of the reve­rence he bore to Pollio. The Essens also, as we call a sect ofours, were excused from this imposition. These men live thesame kind of life as do those whom the Greeks call Pythagoreans,concerning whom I shall discourse more fully elsewhere. How­ever, it is but fit to set down here the reasons wherefore Herodhad these Essens in such honour, and thought higher of themthan their mortal nature required; nor will this account beunsuitable to the nature of this history, as it will show theopinion men had of these Essens.
Now there was one of these Essens, whose name was Ma-nnhem, who had this testimony, that he not only conducted hislife after an excellent manner, but had the foreknowledge of fu­ture events given him by God also. This man once saw Herodwhen he was a child, and going to school, and saluted him asking of the Jews; but he thinking that either he did not knowhim, or that he was in jest, put him in mind that he wasbut a private man, but Manahem smiled to himself, and clappedhim on his backside with his hand, and said, " However that be"thou wilt be king, and wilt begin thy reign happily, for God"finds thee worthy of it. And do thou remember the blows"that Manahem hath given thee, as being a signal of the change"of thy fortune. And truly this will be the reasoning for thee,"that thou love justice [towards men,] and piety towards God,"and clemency towards thy citizens; yet do I know how thy"whole conduct will be, that thou wilt not be such a one, for"thou wilt excel all men in happiness, and obtain an everlasting"reputation, but wilt forget piety and righteousness; and these"crimes will not be concealed from God, at the conclusion of"thy life, when thou wilt find that he will be mindful of them,"and punish thee for them." Now at that time Herod did notat all attend to what Manahem said, as having no hopes of suchadvancement; but a little afterward, when he was so fortunateas to be advanced to the dignity of king, and was in the heightof his dominion, he sent for Manahem, and asked him, How longhe should reign? Manahem did not tell him the full length ofhis reign, wherefore, upon that silence of his, he asked him,farther, Whether he should reign ten years or not? he replied,"Yes, twenty, nay, thirty years," but did not assign the justdeterminate limit of his reign. Herod was satisfied with these







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTIQUITIES QT THE JEWS. 13


about them; and prayed to God to clear the eyes of these theirenemies, and take the mist from before them. Accordinglywhen they were freed from the obscurity they had been in; theysaw themselves in the midst of their enemies; and as the Syrianswere strangely amazed and distressed, as was but reasonable, atan action so divine and surprising; and as king Joram asked theprophet, if he would give him leave to shoot at them: Elishaforbade him so to do; and said, that "it is just to kill those that"are taken in battle, but that these men had done the country"no harm, but without knowing it, were come thither by the"divine power." So that his counsel was to treat them in ahospitable manner at his table, and then send them away with­out hurting them.* Wherefore Joram obeyed the prophet;and when he had feasted the Syrians in a splendid and magnifi­cent manner, he let them go to Benhadad their king.
4% Now when these men were come back, and had showed Ben-fiaclad how strange an accident had befallen them, and what anappearance and power they had experienced of the God of Israel,he wondered at it, as also at that prophet with whom God wasso evidently present: so he determined to make no more secretattempts upon the king of Israel, out of fear of Elisha, but re­solved to make open war with them, as supposing he could betoo hard for his enemies by the multitude of his army and power.So he made an expedition with a great army, against Joram, who,not thinking himself a match for him, shut himself up in Sama­ria, and depended on the strength of its walls; but Benhadadsupposed he should-take the city, if not by his engines of war, yetthat he should overcome the Samaritans by famine, and the wantof necessaries, and brought his army upon them, and besieged thecity; and the plenty of necessaries was brought so low with Jo-ram, and from the extremity of want an ass's head was sold inSamaria, for fourscore pieces of silver, and the Hebrews boughta sextary of dove's dung, instead of salt, for five pieces of silver.Now Joram was in fear lest somebody should betray the city tothe enemy, by reason of the famine, and went every day roundthe walls and the guards, to see whether any such were concealedamong them; and by being thus seen, and taking such care, hedeprived them of the opportunity of contriving any such thing,and if they had a mind to do it, he, by this means, preventedthem; but upon a certain woman's crying out, "Have pity on


* Upon occasion of this stratagem of ElUha's in Josephus, we may take no­tice that although Josephus was one of the greatest lovers of truth in the world,yet in a just war he seems to have had no manner of scruple upon him l;y ailsuch stratagems possible to deceive public enemies. See also Josephus' accountof Jeremiah's imposition on the great men of the Jews in somewhat a like case.Antiij. 13. X. cb. vii. sect. 6. and 2 Sam. xvi. 16, &c.







OCR Output








190 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


to Anlipater, which when he perceived, he retired beyond Jordan,and got together an army, partly of Arabs, and partly of hisown countrymen. However Mulichus being one of great cun­ning, denied that he had laid any snares for him, and made hisdefence with an oath, both to himself and his sons; and said, thatwhile Phasaelus had a garrison in Jerusalem, and Herod had theweapons of war in his custody, he could never have a thoughtof any such thing. So Antipater, perceiving the distress thatMalichus was in, was reconciled to him, and made an agree­ment with him; this was when Marcus was president of Syria;who yet perceiving that this Malichus was making a disturbancein Judea, proceeded so far that he had almost killed him, butstill at the intercession of Antipater he saved him.
4. However, Antipater little thought that by saving Mali­chus, he had saved his own murderer: for now Cassius andMarcus had got together an army, and intrusted the entire careof it with Herod, and made him general of the Ibrces ot Ccele-syria, and gave him a fleet of ships, and an army of horsemenand footmen; and promised him, that after the war was overthey would make him king of Judea, for a war was already be­gun between Antony and the younger Cassar; But as Malichuswas most afraid of Antipater, he took him out of the way; andby the offer of money, persuaded the butler of Hyrcanus, withwhom they were both to feast, to kill him by poison. Thisbeing done, and he having armed men with him, settled the af­fairs of the city. But when Antipater's sons, Herod and Pha-saalus, were acquainted with this conspiracy against their father,and had indignation at it, Malichus denied all, and utterly re­nounced any knowledge of the murder. And thus died Anti­pater, a man that had distinguished himself for piety and justice,and love to his country. And whereas one of his sons, Herod,resolved immediately to revenge their father's death, and wascoming upon Malichus with an army for that purpose, the el­der of his sons, Phasaelus, thought it best rather to get this maninto their hands by policy, lest they should appear to begin acivil war in the country; so he accepted of Malichus' defencefor himself, and pretended to believe him that he had no handin the violent death of Antipater his father, but erected a finemonument for him. Herod also went to Samaria, and when hefound them in great distress, he revived their spirits, and com­posed their differences.
5. However, a little after this, Herod, upon the approach o[a festival, came with his soldiers unto the city; whereupon Mp-liclms was affrighted, and persuaded Hyrcanus not to permithim to come into the city. Hyrcanus complied; and, for apretence of excluding him, alleged, that a rout of strangers







OCR Output








296 ANTIQUITIES OK THE JEWS. Book XIV.


CHAP. XIII.
Harm Antony made Herod and Phasaelus tetrarchs, after theyhad been accused to no purpose; and how the Parthians, whenthey brought Antigonus into Judea, took Hyrcanus and Pha-saelus captives. Herod's fight,- and what afflictions Hyrcanusand Phasaelus endured.
$ 1. WHEN after this Antony came into Syria, Cleopatramet him in Cilicia, and brought him to fall in love with her.And there came now also a hundred of the most potent of theJews to accuse Herod and those about him, and set the menof the greatest eloquence among them to speak. But Messalacontradicted them, on behalf of the young men, and all thisin the presence of Hyrcanus, who was * Herod's father-in-lawalready. When Antony had heard both sides at Daphne, heasked Hyrcanus who they were that governed the nation best?He replied, Herod and his friends. Hereupon Antony, by rea­son of the old hospitable friendship he had made with his father[Antipater,] at that time when he was with Gubinius, he madeboth Herod and Phasaelus tetrarchs, and committed the publicaffairs of the Jews to them, and wrote letters to that purpose.He also bound fifteen of their adversaries, and was going to killthem, but that Herod obtained their pardon.
2. Yet did not these men continue quiet when they were comeback, but a thousand of the Jews came to Tyre to meet himthere, whither the report was that he would come. But Anto­ny was corrupted by the money which Herod and his brotherhad given him, and so he gave order to the governor of the placeto punish the Jewish ambassadors, who were for making inno-'vations, and to settle the government upon Herod: but Herodwent out hastily to them, and Hyrcanus was with him (for theystood upon the shore before the city,) and he charged them togo their ways, because great mischief would befall them if theywent on with their accusation. But they did not acquiesce:whereupon the Romans ran upon them with their daggers, andslew some, and wounded more of them, and the rest fled awayand went home, and lay still in great consternation: and whenthe people made a clamour against Herod, Antony was so pro­voked at.it that he slew the prisoners.
3. Now, in the second year, Pacorus, the king of Parthia's


* We may here take notice, that espousals alone were of old esteemed a sufficientfoundation for affmity, Hyrcanus being here called father-in-law to Herod, becausehis grand daughter Mariamne was betrothed to him, although the marriage wasnot completed till four years afterward. See Mat. i. 16.







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 215


CHAP. VI.
HffiD Jonathan was slain by treachery; and how thereupon theJews made Simon their general and high priest: what coura­geous actions also he performed, especially against Trypho.
6 1. Now when Trypho knew what had befallen Deme­trius, he was no longer firm to Antiochus, but contrived bysubtilty to kill him, and then take possession of his kingdom;but the fear that he was in of Jonathan was an obstacle to thishis design, for Jonathan was a friend to Antiochus, for whichcause he resolved first to take Jonathan out of the way, and thento set about his design relating to Antiochus; but he judging itbest to take him off by deceit and treachery, came from Antiochto Bethshan, which by the Greeks is called Scythopolis, at whichplace Jonathan met him with forty thousand chosen men, for hethought that he came to fight him; but when he perceived thatJonathan was ready to fight, he attempted to gain him by pre­sents, and kind treatment, and gave order to his captains to obeyhim, and by these means was desirous to give assurance of hisgood-will, and to take away all suspicions out of his mind, thatso he might make him careless and inconsiderate, and might takehim when he was unguarded. He also advised him to dismisshis army, because there was no occasion for bringing it withhim when there was no war, but all was in peace. However,he desired him to retain a few about him, and go with him toPtolemais, for that he would deliver the city up to him, andwould bring all the fortresses that were in the country under hisdominion; and he told him, that he came with those very designs.2. Yet did not Jonathan suspect any thing at all by this hismanagement,' but believed that Trypho gave him this advice outof kindness, and with a sincere design. Accordingly, he dismissedhis army; and retained no more than three thousand of themwith him, and left two thousand in Galilee, and he himself, withone thousand, came with Trypho to Ptolemais: But when thepeople of Ptolemais had shut their gates, as it had been com­manded by Trypho to do, he took Jonathan alive, and slew allthat were with him. He also sent soldiers against those twothousand that were left in Galilee, in order to destroy them: butthose men having heard the report of what had happened to Jo­nathan, they prevented the execution, and before those that weresent by Trypho came, they covered themselves with their ar­mour, and went away out of the country. Now when those thatwere sent against them saw that they were ready to fight fortheir lives, they gave them no disturbance, but returned backto Trypho.







OCR Output








Chap. XI . ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 427


attempt to kill his own sons who were of very comely bodies,and the great darlings of other men, and no way deficient intheir conduct, whether it were in hunting, or in warlike exer­cises, or in speaking upon occasional topics of discourse: for inall these they were skilful, and especially Alexander, who wasthe eldest; for certainly it had been sufficient, even though hehad condemned them, to have kept them alive in bonds, or tolet them live at a distance from his dominions in banishment,while he was surrounded by the Roman forces, which were astrong security to him, whose help would'prevent his sufferingany thing by a sudden onset, or by open force; but for him tokill them on the sudden, in order to gratify a passion that go­verned him, was a demonstration of insufferable impiety; he alsowas guilty of so great a crime in his older age; nor will thedelays that he made, and the length of time in which thething was done, plead at all for his excuse; for when a manis on a sudden amazed, and in commotion of mind, and thencommits a wicked action, although this be a heavy crime, yetis it a thing that frequently happens; but to do it upon deliber­ation, and after frequent attempts, and as frequent puttings off)to undertake it at last, and accomplish it, was the action of amurderous mind, and such as was not easily moved from thatwhich is evil: And this temper he showed in what he did af­terward, when he did not spare those that seemed to be thebest beloved of his friends that were left, wherein though thejustice of the punishment caused those that perished to be theless pitied, yet was the barbarity of the man here equal, in thathe did not abstain from their slaughter also; but of those per­sons we shall have occasion to discourse more hereafter.


END OF VOLUME SECOND.


3 H 29







OCR Output








Chap. V. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 107


month of the same year. Now Esdras presented the sacred mo­ney, of the treasurers, who were of the family of the priests, olsilver six hundred and fifty talents, vessels of silver one hundredtalents, vessels of gold, twenty talents, vessels of brass, that was* more precious than gold, twelve talents by weight, for thesepresents had been made by the king and his counsellors, and byall the Israelites that stayed at Babylon. So when Esdras haddelivered these things to the priests, he gave to God, as the ap­pointed sacrifices of whole burnt-offerings, twelve bulls on ac­count of the common preservation of the people, ninety rams,and seventy-two lambs, twelve kids of the goats, for the remis­sion of sins. He also delivered the king's epistle to the king'sofficers, and to the governors of Celesyria and Phenicia; and asthey were under a necessity of doing what was enjoined by him,they honoured our nation, and were assistant to them in all theirnecessities.
3. Now these things were truly done under the conduct of Es­dras, and he succeeded in them, because God esteemed him wor­thy of the success of his conduct, on account of his goodness andrighteousness. But some time afterward there came some per­sons to him, and brought an accusation against certain of themultitude, and of the priests and Levites, who had transgressedtheir settlement, and dissolved the laws of their country, bymarrying strange wives, and had brought the family of thepriests into contusion. These persons desired him to supportthe laws, lest God should take up a general anger against themall, and reduce them to a calamitous condition again. Here­upon he rent his garment immediately out of grief, and pulledoff the hair off his head and beard, and cast himself upon theground, because this crime had reached the principal men amongthe people, and considering that if he should enjoin them to castout their wives, and the children they had by them, he should notbe hearkened to, he continued lying upon the ground. However,all the better sort came running to him, who also themselves wept,and partook of the grief he was under for what had been done.So Esdras rose up from the ground, and stretched out his handstowards heaven, and said, that " he was ashamed to look towards"it, because of the sins which the people had committed, while"they had cast out of their memories what their fathers had"undergone on account of their wickedness: and he besought"God, who had saved a seed and a remnant out of the calamity"and captivity they had been in, and had restored them again to"Jerusalem and to their own land, and had obliged the kings of
* Dr. Hudson takes notice here, that this kind of brass or copper, or rather mix­ture of gold and brass or copper, was called aurickalcum, and that this was of oldesteemed the most precious of all metals.
VOL. II o 19







OCR Output








214 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIII.


had made them very strong, both in the edifices erected, and inthe garrisons placed in them, he came to Joppa, and when hehad taken it, he brought a great garrison into it, for he heardthat the people of Joppa were disposed to deliver up the city toDemetrius' generals.
11. When Simon and Jonathan had finished these affairs, theyreturned to Jerusalem, where Jonathan gathered all the peopletogether, and took counsel to restore the walls of Jerusalem, andto rebuild the wall that encompassed the temple, which had beenthrown down, and to make the places adjoining stronger by veryhigh towers; and besides that, to build another wall in the midstof the city, in order to exclude the market-place from the gar­rison, which was in the citadel, and by that means to hinder themfrom any plenty of provisions; and moreover, to make the for­tresses that were in the country much stronger, and more defen­sible, than they were before. And when these things were ap­proved of by the multitude, as rightly proposed, Jonathan him­self took care of the building that belonged to the city, and sentSimon away to make the fortresses in the country more securethan formerly. But Demetrius passed over [Euphrates,] andcame into Mesopotamia, as desirous to retain that country still,as well as Babylon; and when he should have obtained the do­minion of his upper provinces, to lay a foundation for recover­ing his entire kingdom; for those Greeks and Macedonians whodwelt there, frequently sent ambassadors to him, and promised,that if he would come to them, they would deliver themselvesup to him, and assist him in fighting against * Arsaces, the kingof the Parthians. So he was elevated with these hopes, andcame hastily to them, as having resolved that, if he had onceoverthrown the Parthians, and gotten an army of his own, hewould make war against Trypho, and eject him out of Syria;and the people of that country received him with great alacrity.So he raised forces, with which he fought against Arsaces, andlost all his army, and was himself taken alive, as we have else­where related.


* This king, who was of the famous race of Arsaces, is both here, and 1 Mac.Jtiv. 2. called by the family name Arsaces, but Appion says, his proper name wasPhrates. He is here also called by Joscplius the king of the Far/hums, as theGreeks used to call them, but by the elder author of the first Maccabees the kingaf the Persians and Males, according to the language of the eastern nations. Seeftuthent. Rec. part. II. p. 1108.







OCR Output








Chap. II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 195


made Jonathan, and withal knew his courage, and what greatthings he had done when he fought the Macedonians, and be­sides what hardships he had undergone by the means of Deme­trius, and of Bacchides, the general of Demetrius' army, hetold his friends, That " he could not at present find any one else"that might afford him better assistance than Jonathan, who"was both courageous against his enemies, and had a particular"hatred against Demetrius, as having both suffered many hard"things from him, and acted many hard things against him-."If therefore they were of opinion that they should make him"their friend against Demetrius, it was more for their advan-"tage to invite him to assist them now than at another time."It being therefore determined by him and his friends to send toJonathan, he wrote to him this epistle; "King Alexander to"his brother Jonathan, sendeth greeting: We have long ago"heard of thy courage, and thy fidelity, and for that reason"have sent to thee, to make with thee a league of friendship"and mutual assistance. We therefore do ordain thee this day-' the high priest of the Jews, and that thou beest called my"friend. I have also sent thee, as presents, a purple robe and"a golden crown, and desire, that now thou art by us honoured,"thou wilt in like manner respect us also."
3. When Jonathan had received this letter, he * put on thepontifical robe at the time of the feast of tabernacles, four yearsafter the death of his brother Judas, for at that time no highpriest had been made. So he raised great forces, and had abun­dance of armour got ready. This greatly grieved Demetrius,when he heard of it, and made him blame himself for his slow­ness, that he had not prevented Alexander, and got the good­will of Jonathan, but had given him time so to do. However,he also himself wrote a letter to Jonathan, and to the people;the contents whereof are these: "King Demetrius to Jonathan,"and to the nation of the Jews, sendeth greeting: Since you"have preserved your friendship for us; and when you have"been tempted by our enemies, you have not joined yourselves"to them, I both commend you for this your fidelity, and ex-"hort you to continue in the same disposition, for which you*' shall be repaid, and receive rewards from us: for I will free


* Since Jonathan plainly did not put on the pontifical robes till seven or eightyears after the death of his brother Judas, or not till the feast of tabernacles in theI60th of the Seleucidae, 1 Maccab. x. 21. Fetitus' emendation seems here to de­serve consideration, who, instead of after four years since the death of his brotherJudas, would have us read, and therefore after eight years since the death of his bro­ther Judas. This would tolerably well agree with the death of the Maccabees, andwith Josephus' own exact chronology at the end of the twentieth book of these An­tiquities, which the present text cannot be made to do.
VOL. II B 21







OCR Output








66 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book X.


"try that had fallen away to the Babylonians, lest he should be"accused by them to the king of Babylon, and be punished."But the prophet encouraged him, and said, " He had no cause to"fear such punishment, for that he should not have the expe-"rience of any misfortune, if he would deliver all up to the"Babylonians, neither himself, nor his children, nor his wives,"and that the temple should then continue unhurt." So whenJeremiah had said this, the king let him go, and charged him,"To betray what they had resolved on to none of the citizens,"nor to tell any of these matters to any of the rulers, if they"should have learned that he had been sent for, and should in-"quire of him what it was that he was sent for, and what he had"said to him? but to pretend to them, that he besought him that"he might not be kept in bonds and in prison." And indeed hesaid so to them; for they came to the prophet, and asked him,what advice it was that he came to give the king relating tothem? and thus I have finished what concerns this matter
CHAP. VIII.
How the king of Babylon took Jerusalem and burnt the temple,and removed the people of Jerusalem, and Zedekiah to Baby­lon. As also, who they were that had succeeded in the highpriesthood under the kings.
§ 1. Now the king of Babylon was very intent and earnestupon the siege of Jerusalem: and he erected towers upon great. banks of earth, and from them repelled those that stood upon thewalls: he also made a great number of such banks round aboutthe whole city, whose height was equal to those walls. However,those that were within, bore the siege with courage and alacrity,for they were not discouraged, either by the famine, or bythe pestilential distemper, but were of cheerful minds in the pro­secution of the war, although those miseries within oppressedthem also, and they did not suffer themselves to be te-rrified,either by the contrivances of the enemy, or by their enginesof war, but contrived still different engines to oppose all theother withal, till indeed there seemed to be an entire strugglebetween the Babylonians, and the people of Jerusalem, whichhad the greater sagacity and skill; the former party supposingthey should be thereby too hard for the other, for the destruc­tion of the city; the latter placing their hopes of deliver­ance in nothing else but in persevering in such inventionsin opposition to the other, as might demonstrate the enemies'engines were useless to them. And this siege they enduredfor eighteen months, until they were destroyed by the famine,







OCR Output








106 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XI.


"as thou bast a mind to make, and shall take the expenses out"of the king's treasury. I have moreover written to the trea-"surers of Syria and Phenicia, that they take care of those af-"fairs that Esdras the priest, and reader of the laws of God,"is sent about. And that God may not be at all angry with"me, or with my children, I grant all that is necessary for sa-"crifices to God, according to the 'law, as far as a hundred"cori of wheat. And I enjoin you not to lay any treacherous"imposition, or any tributes, upon their priests or Levites, or"sacred singers, or porters, or sacred servants, or scribes of the"temple. And do thou, O Esdras, appoint Judges according to"the wisdom [given thee] of God, and those such as understand"the law, that they may judge in all Syria and Phenicia; and"do thou instruct those also who are ignorant of it, that if any"one of thy countrymen transgress the law of God, or that of"the king, he may be punished, as not transgressing it out of"ignorance, but as one that knows it indeed, but boldly de-"spises and contemns it; and such may be punished by death,"or by paying fines. Farewell."
2. When Esdras had received this epistle, he was very joyful,and began to worship God, and confessed that he had been thecause of the king's great favour to him, and that for the samereason he gave all the thanks to God. So he read the epistle atBabylon to those Jew.s that were there, but he kept the epistle it­self, and sent a copy of it to all those of his own nation that were inMedia. And when these Jews had understood what piety theking had towards God, and what kindness he had for Esdras,they were all greatly pleased; nay, many of them took their ef­fects with them, and came to Babylon, as very desirous of goingdown to Jerusalem; but then the entire body of the people of Is­rael remained in that country, wherefore there are but two tribesin Asin and Europe subject to the Romans, while the ten tribesare beyond Euphrates till now, and are an immense multitude,ami not to be estimated by numbers. Now there came agreat num­ber of priests, and Levites, and porters, and sacred singers, andsacred servants, to Esdras. So he gathered those that were in thecaptivity together beyond Euphrates, and stayed there three days,and ordained a fast for them, that they might make their prayersto God for their preservation, that they might suffer no misfor­tunes by the way, either from their enemies, or from any other illaccident; for Esdras had said beforehand, that he had told theking how God would preserve them, and so he had not thought fitto request that he would send horsemen to conduct them. Sowhen they had finished their prayers, they removed from Eu­phrates on the twelfth day of the first month of the seventh yearof the reign of Xerxes3 and they came to Jerusalem on the fifth







OCR Output













OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTIO.UH IES OF THE JEWS. 331


he gave her the cities that were within the river Eleutherus, asfar as Egypt, excepting Tyre and Sidon, which he knew tohave been free cities from their ancestors, although she pressedhim very often to bestow those on her also.
2. When Cleopatra had obtained thus much, and had accom­panied Antony in his expedition to Armenia, as far as Eu­phrates she returned back, and came to Apamia and Damascus,and passed on to Judea, where Herod met her, and farmed ofher parts of Arabia, and those revenues that came to herfrom the region about Jericho. This country bears that bal­sam, which is the most precious drug that is there, and grows-there alone. The place bears also palm-trees, both many innumber, and those excellent in their kind. When she was there,and was very often with Herod, she endeavoured to have crim­inal conversation with the king: Nor did she affect secrecy inthe indulgence of such sort of pleasures; and perhaps she had insome measure .a passion of love to him, or rather, what is mostprobable, she laid a treacherous snare for him, by aiming toobtain such adulterous conversation from him: However, uponthe whole, she seemed overcome with love to him. Now Herodhad a great while borne no good-will to Cleopatra, as knowingthat she was a woman irksome to all; and at that time he thoughther particularly worthy of his hatred, if this attempt proceededout of lust: he had also thought of preventing her intrigues, byputting her to death, if such were her endeavours. However,he refused to comply with her proposals, and called a council ofhis friends to consult with them, "Whether he should not kill"her, now he had her in his power? for that he should thereby"deliver all those from a multitude of evils to whom she was"already become irksome, and was expected to be still so for"the time to come; and that this very thing would be much"for the advantage of Antony himself, since she would certain-"ly not be faithful to him, in case any such reason or necessity"should come upon him as that he should stand in need of her"fidelity." But when he thought to follow this advice, hisfriends would not let him; and told him, That "in the first"place it was not right to attempt so great a thing, and run"himself thereby into the utmost danger: and they laid hard"at him, and begged of him, to undertake nothing rashly, for"that Antony would never bear it, no not though any one"should evidently lay before his eyes that it was for his own"advantage; and that the appearance of depriving him of her"conversation, by this violent and treacherous method, would"probably set his affections more in a flame than before. Nor"did it appear that he could offer any thing of tolerable weight"in his defence, this defence being against such a woman as
VOL. II. T T 2S







OCR Output








S62 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JKWS. Book XV.


that place where he had conquered the Jews when he was drivenout of his government, and Antigonus enjoyed it. This citadelis distant from Jerusalem about threescore furlongs. It wasstrong by nature, and fit for such a building. It is a sort of amoderate hill, raised to a farther height by the hand of man, tillit was of the shape of a woman's breast. It is encompassed withcircular towers, and hath a strait ascent up to it, which ascentis composed of steps of polished stones, in number two hundred.Within it are royal and very rich apartments, of a stucturethat provided both for security and for beauty. About thebottom thei'e are habitations of such a structure as are well worthseeing, both on other accounts, and also on account of the waterwhich is brought thitherfrom a great way off, and at vastexpenses,for the place itself is destitute of water. The plain that is aboutthis citadel is full of edifices; not inferior to any city in large­ness, and having the hill above it in the nature of a castle.
5. And now, when all Herod's designs had succeeded accord*ing to his hopes, he had not the least suspicion that any troublescould arise in his kingdom, because he kept his people obedient,as well by the fear they stood in of him, for he was implacablein the infliction of his punishments, as by the provident care hehad showed towards them, after the most magnanimous manner,when they were under their distresses: But still he took care tohave external security for his government as a fortress against hissubjects; for the orations he made to the cities were very fine,and full of kindness, and he cultivated a seasonable good under­standing with their governors, and bestowed presents on everyone of them, inducing them thereby to be more friendly to him,and using his magnificent disposition, so as his kingdom might bethe better secured to him, and this till all his affairs were everyway more and more augmented. But then, this magnificenttemper of his, and that submissive behaviour and liberality whichhe exercised towards Caesar, and the most powerful men of Rome,obliged him to transgress the customs of his nation, and to setaside many of their laws, and by building cities after an extrava­gant manner, and erecting temples; * not in Judea indeed, for that


* One may here take notice, that how tyrannical and extravagant soever Herodwas in himself, and in his Grecian cities, as to those plays, and shows, and templestor idolatry, mentioned above, ch. viii. sect. 1. and here also, yet durst even he intro­duce very few of them into the cities of ihe Jews, who, as Josephus here notes, wouldnot even then have borne them, so zealous were they still for many of the la\vs of Moses,even under so tyrannical a government as this wasof Herod the Great; which tyrannicalgovernment puts me naturally in mind of Dean Prideaux's honest reflection upon thelike ambition, after such tyrannical- power in Pompey and Casar; " One of these, [says"he, at the year GO,] could notEear an equal, nor the other a superior; and through« this ambitious humour and thirxt after more power in these two men, the







OCR Output








202 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIII-


brought him, and sailed to Cilicia. This thing cast Alexanderinto great concern and disorder when he heard it; so he madehaste immediately out of Phenicia and came to Antioch, that hemight put matters in a safe posture there before Demetriusshould come. He also left * Apollonius Daus governor of Ce-lesyria, who coming to Jamnia with a great army, sent to Jona­than the high priest, and told him, That "it was not right that"he alone should live at rest, and with authority, and not be"subject to the king; and this thing had made him a reproach"among all men, that he had not yet made him subject to the"king. Do not thou therefore deceive thyself, and sit still"among the mountains, and pretend to have forces with thee:"but if thou hast any dependance on thy strength, come down"into the plain, and let our armies be compared together, and"the event of the battle will demonstrate which of us is the"most courageous. However, take notice, that the most va-." liant 'men of every city are in my army, and that these are"the very men vrho have always beaten thy progenitors; but let"us have the battle in such a place of the country where we may"fight with weapons, and not with stones, and where there may"be no place whither those that are beaten may fly."
4. With this Jonathan was irritated; and choosing himselfout ten thousand of his soldiers, he went out of Jerusalem inhaste with his brother Simon, and came to Joppa, and pitchedhis camp on the outside of the city, because the people of Joppahad shut their gates against him, for they had a garrison inthe city put there by Apollonius; but when Jonathan was pre­paring to besiege them, they were afraid he would take themby force, and so they opened the gates to him. But Apollonius,when he heard that Joppa was taken by Jonathan, took threethousand horsemen, and eight thousand footmen, and came toAshdod, and removing thence, he made his journey silently andslowly, and going up to Joppa, he made as if he was retiringfrom the place, and so drew Jonathan into the plain, as valuinghimself highly upon his horsemen, and having his hopes of vic­tory principally in them. However, Jonathan sallied out, andpursued Apollonius to Ashdod; but as soon as Apollonius per­ceived that his enemy was in the plain, he came back and gavehim battle: but Apollonius had laid a thousand horsemen in am­bush in a valley, that they might not be seen by their enemies as


* Of tlic several Ajiollonu about these ages, see Dean Prideaux at tlic year 148.This Apollonius Daus was, by his account, the son of that Apollonius who had beenmade governor of Celesyria and Phenicia by Scleucus Philopator, and was himself aconfident of his son Demetrius the father, and restored to his father's government byhim, but afterwards revolted from him to Alexander, but not to Demetrius the son,as he supposes.







OCR Output








160 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XII.


to the king also. The son was irritated at this, and threw Arioninto prison. But when Arion's wife had informed Cleopatraof this, with her entreaty, that she would rebuke the child forwhat he had done, (for Arion was in great esteem with her)Cleopatra informed the king of it. And Ptolemy sent for Hyr-canus, and told him, that " he wondered when he was sent to"him by his father, that he had not yet come into his presence,"but had laid the steward in prison." And he gave order,therefore, that he should come to him, and give an account ofthe reason of what he had done. And they report, that the an­swer he made to the king's messenger was this: that " there was"a law of his that forbade a child that was born, to taste of the"sacrifice, before he had been at the temple and sacrificed to God."According to which way of reasoning he did not himself come"to him in expectation of the present he was to make to him,"as to one who had been his father's benefactor: and that he"had punished the slave for disobeying his commands, for that"it mattered not whether a master was little or great; so that"unless we punish such as these, thou thyself mayest also ex-"pect to be despised by thy subjects." Upon hearing this hisanswer he fell a laughing, and wondered at the great soul of thechild.
9. When Arion was apprized that this was the king's dispo­sition, and that he had no way to help himself, he gave the childa thousand talents, and was let out of prison. So after threedays were over, Hyrcanus came and saluted the king and queen.They saw him with pleasure, and feasted him in an obligingmanner, out of the respect they bare to his father. So he cameto the merchants privately, and bought a hundred boys, thathad learning, and were in the flower of their ages, each at a talentapiece; as also he bought a hundred maidens, each at thesame price as the other. And when he was invited to feast withthe king among the principal men in the country, he sat downthe lowest of them all, because he was little regarded, as a childin age still; and this by those who placed every one according totheir dignity. Now when all those that sat with him had laidthe bones of the several parts on a heap- before Hyrcanus, (forthey had themselves taken away the flesh belonging to them,)till the table where he sat was filled full with them; Trypho,who was the king's jester, and wasappointed for jokes and laughterat festivals, who was now asked by the guests that sat at the table[to expose him to laughter]. So he stood by the king, and said,"Dost thou not see, my Lord, the bones that lie by Hyrcanus?"by this similitude thou mayest conjecture that his father made"all Syria as bare as he hath made these bones." - And the kinglaughing at what Trypho said, and asking of Hyrcanus, "How







OCR Output








140 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIL


him of the release of the Jews that had been in slavery amongthem. He also sent fifty talents of gold for the making of largebasons, and vials, and cups, and an immense quantity of preciousstones. He also gave orders to those who had the custody of thechest that contained these stones, to give the artificers leave tochoose out what sorts of them they pleased. He withal appointed,that a hundred talents in money should be sent to the temple,for sacrifices, and for other uses. Now I will give a descriptionof these vessels, and the manner of their construction, but nottill after I have set down a copy of the epistle which was writtento Eleazar the high priest, who had obtained that dignity on theoccasion following: when Onias the high priest was dead, hisson Simon became his successor. He was called * Simon the Just,because of both his piety towards God, and his kind dispositionto those of his own nation. When he was dead, and had left ayoung son, who was called Onias, Simon's brother Eleazar, ofwhom we are speaking, took the high priesthood; and he it wasto whom Ptolemy wrote, and that in the manner following:"King Ptolemy to Eleazar the high priest, sendeth greeting:"There are many Jews who now dwell in my kingdom, whom"the Persians, when they were in power, carried captives."These were honoured by my father; some of them he placed"in the army, and gave them greater pay than ordinary: to"others of them, when they came with him into Egypt, he com-"mitted his garrisons, and the guarding of them, that they"might be a terror to the Egyptians. And when I had taken"the government, I treated all men with humanity, and espe-"cially those that are thy fellow citizens, of whom I have set"free above a hundred thousand that were slaves, and paid the"price of their redemption to their masters out of my own re-"venues; and those that are of a fit age, I have admitted into"the number of my soldiers. And for such as are capable of"being faithful to me, and proper for my court, I have put"them in such a post, as thinking this [kindness done to them]"to be a very great and an acceptable gift, which I devote to"God for his providence over me. And as I am desirous to do"what will be grateful to these, and to all the other Jews in"the habitable earth, I have determined to procure an interpre-"tation of your law, and to have it translated out of Hebrew"into Greek, and to be reposited in my library. Thou wilt"therefore do well to choose out and send to me men of a good"character, who are now elders in age, and six in number out


* We have a very great encomium of this Simon the Just, the son of Onias I. inthe fiftieth chapter of the Ecclesiasticus, through the whole chapter. Nor is it im­proper to consult that chapter itself upon this occasion.







OCR Output








2C2 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


est of the towers was shaken by it, and fell down, and brakedown a part of the fortifications, so the enemy poured in apace,and Cornelius Faustus, the son of Sylla, with his soldiers, firstof all ascended the wall, and next to him Furius the centurion,with those that followed on the other part, while Fabius, whowas also a centurion, ascended it in the middle, with a greatbody of men after him. But now all was full of slaughter; someof the Jews being slain by the Romans, and some by one ano­ther; nay, some there were who threw themselves down the pre­cipices, or put fire to their houses, and burnt them, as not ableto bear the miseries they were under. Of the Jews there felltwelve thousand, but of the Romans very few. Absalom, whowas at once both uncle and father-in-law to Aristobulus, wustaken captive. And no small enormities were committed aboutthe temple itself, which, in former ages, had been inaccessibleand seen by none; for Pompey went into it, and not a few ofthose that were with him also, and saw all that which it wasunlawful for any other men to see but only for the high priests.There were in that temple the golden table, the holy candlestick,and the pouring vessels, and a great quantity of spices; and be­sides these there were among the treasures two thousand ta­lents of sacred money; Yet * did Pompey touch nothing of allthis, on account of his regard to religion; and in this point alsohe acted in a manner that was worthy of his virtue. The nextday he gave order to those that had the charge of the temple tocleanse it, and to bring what offerings the law required to God:and restored the high priesthood to Hyrcanus, both because hehad been useful to him in other respects, and because he hin­dered the Jews in the country from giving Aristobulus any as­sistance in his war against him. He also cut off' those that hadbeen the authors of that war; and bestowed proper rewards onFaustus, and those others that mounted the wall with such alac­rity: and he made Jerusalem tributary to the Romans; andtook away those cities of Coelesyria which the inhabitants of Ju-dea had subdued, and put them under the government of the Ro­man president, and confined the whole nation, which had elevat­ed itself so high before, within its own bounds. Moreover, hef rebuilt Gadara, which had been demolished a little before, togratify Demetrius of Gadara, who was his freed man, and re­stored the rest of the cities, Hippos, and Scy thopolis, and Pellaand Dios, and Samaria, as also Marissa, and Ashdod, and Jam­


* This is fully confirmed by the testimony of Cicero, who says in his oration forFlaccus, That " Cneius Pompeius, when he was conqueror, and had taken Jeru-"salem, did not touch any thing belonging to that temple."
f Of this destruction of Gadara litre presupposed, and its restoration by Pompey,see the note on the War, B. I. ch. vii. sect. 7. vol. 111.







OCR Output








316 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


he not treat him as if he were a woman, by letting him go atliberty, but put him into bonds and kept him in close custody.
3. And now Herod having overcome his enemies, his care wasto govern those foreigners who had been his assistants, for thecrowd of strangers rushed to see the temple, and the sacred thingsin the temple, but the king thinking a victory to be a more se­vere affliction than a defeat, if any of those things which it wasnot lawful to see should be seen by them, used entreaties andthreatenings, and even sometimes, force itself, to restrain them.He also prohibited the ravage that was made in the city, andmany times asked Sosius, whether the Romans would empty thecity both of money and men, and leave him king of a desert? andtold him, that he esteemed the dominion over the whole habit­able earth as by no means an equivalent satisfaction for such amurder of his citizens; and when he said, that this plunder wasiustly to be permitted the soldiers, for the siege they had under­gone, he replied, that he would give every one their reward outof his own money, and by this means he redeemed what remain­ed of the city from destruction; and he performed what he hadpromised him, for he gave a noble present to every soldier, and aproportionable present to their commanders, but a most royalpresent to Sosius himself, till they all went away full of money.
4. This * destruction befell the city of Jerusalem when MarcusAgrippa, and Caninius Gallus were consuls of Rome, on thehundred eighty and fifth Olympiad, on the third month, on the


* Note here, that Josephus fully and frequently assures us that there passed abovethree years between Herod's first obtaining the kingdom at Rome, and his secondobtaining it upon the taking of Jerusalem, and death of Antigonus. The presenthistory of this interval twice mentions the army's going into winter quarters, whichperhaps belonged to two several winters, ch. xv. sect. 3, 4. and though Josephus saysnothing how long they lay in those quarters, yet does he give such an account of thelong and studied delays of Ventidius Silo, and Macherus, who were to see Herodsettled in his new kingdom, but seem not to have had sufficient forces for that pur­pose, and were for certain all corrupted by Antigonus to make the longest delayspossible, and give us such particular accounts of the many great actions of Herod'sduring the same interval, as fairly imply that interval before Herod went to Samo­sata, to have been very considerable. However, what is wanting in Josephus, is ful­ly supplied by Moses Chorenensis, the Armenian historian, in his history of thatinterval, B. II. ch. xviii. where he directly assures us, that Tigranes, then king ofArmenia, and the principal manager of this Parthian war, reigned two years afterHerod was made king at Rome, and yet Antony did not hear of his death, in thatvery neighbourhood, at Samosata, till he was come thither to besiege it; after whichHerod brought him an army, which was 340 miles march, and through a difficultcountry, full of enemies also, and joined with him in the siege of Samosata till thatcity was taken: then Herod and Sosius march back with their large armies the semenumber of 540 miles, and when in a little time, they sat down to besiege Jerusalem,they were not able to take it but by a siege of five months. All which put together-fulty supplies what is wanting in Josephus, and secures the entire chronology olthese times beyond contradiction.







OCR Output








HO ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XI.


people, he died an old man, and was buried in a magnificentmanner at Jerusalem. About the same time it happened also,that Joachim the high priest died; and his son Eliasib succeed­ed in the high priesthood.
6. Now there was one of those Jews that had been carried cap­tive, who was cup-bearer to king Xerxes ; his name was Nehe-miah. As this man was walking before Susa, the metropolis ofthe Persians, he heard some strangers that were entering the cityafter a long journey, speaking to another in the Hebrew tongue,so he went to them and asked them whence they came? Andwhen their answer was, that they came from Judea, he began toinquire of them again in what state the multitude was? and inwhat condition Jerusalem was; nnd when they replied, that theywere in a * bad state, for that their walls were thrown down tothe ground, and that the neighbouring nations did a great deal o.mischief to the Jews, while in the day time they overran thecountry, and pillaged it, and in the night did them mischief, in­somuch that not a few were led away captive out of the country,and out of Jerusalem itself, and that the roads were in the daytime found full of dead men. Hereupon Nehemiah shed tears,out of commiseration for the calamities of his countrymen: andlooking up to heaven he said, " How long, O Lord, wilt thou"overlook our nation, while it suffers so great miseries, and while"we are made the prey and spoil of all men." And while he stayedat the gate and lamented thus, one told him that the king was go­ing to sit down to supper; so he made haste, and went as he was,without washing himself, to minister to the king in his office o.jcup-bearer: But as the king was very pleasant after supper, andmore cheerful than usual, he cast his eyes on Nehemiah, andseeing him look sad, he asked him, why he was sad? Where­upon he prayed to God to give him favour, and afford him thepower of persuading by his words, and said, "How can I, O"king, appear otherwise than thus, and not be in trouble, while"I hear that the walls of Jerusalem, the city where are the"sepulchres of my fathers, are thrown down to the ground, and"that its gates are consumed by fire; but do thou grant me the"favour to go and build its wall, and to finish the building of"the temple." Accordingly the king gave him a signal, thathe freely granted him what he asked; and told him that heshould carry an epistle to the governors, that they might payhim due honour, and afford him whatsoever assistance he


* This miserable condition of the Jews, and their capital, must have been afterthe death of Ezra, their former governor, and before Nehemiah came with his com­mission to build the walls of Jerusalem. Nor is that at all disagreeable to these his­tories in Josephus, since Ezra came on the 7th, and Nehemiah not till the 25tb otXerxes, at the interval of 18 years.







OCR Output








Chap. XVI. ANTigmTiES OF THE JEWS. 249


"like brute beasts, without any help whatsoever. They said"also, that if their adversaries would be satisfied with those"that had been slain already, they would take what had been"done patiently, on account of their natural love to their go-"vernors; but if they must expect the same for the future"also, they implored of her a dismission from her service, for"they could not bear to think of attempting any method for"their deliverance without her, but would rather die willingly"before the palace-gate, in case she would not forgive them."And that it was a great shame both for themselves, and for"the queen, that when they were neglected by her, they should"come under the lash of her husband's enemies; for that Are-"tas, the Arabian king, and the monarchs, would give any"reward, if they could get such men as foreign auxiliaries, to"whom their very names, before their voices be heard, may"perhaps be terrible: But if they could not obtain this their"second request, and if she had determined to prefer the Pha-"risees before them, they still insisted that she would place"them every one in her fortresses; for if some fatal demon had"a constant spite against Alexander's house, they would be will-"ing to bear their part, and to live in a private station there."
3. As these men said thus, and called upon Alexander's ghostfor commiseration of those already slain, and those in danger ofit, all the bystanders broke out into tears: But Aristobuluschiefly made manifest what were his sentiments, and used manyreproachful expressions to his mother [saying,] "Nay, indeed,"the case is this, that they have been themselves the authors,"of their own calamities, who have permitted a woman who,"against reason, was mad with ambition, to reign over them,"when there were sons in the flower of their age fitter for it."So Alexandra not knowing what to do with any decency, com­mitted the fortresses to them, all but Hyrcania and Alexan-drium, and Macherus, where her principal treasures were.After a little while also, she sent her son Aristobulus with anarmy to Damascus against Ptolemy, who was called Menneuswho was such a bad neighbour to the city; but he did nothingconsiderable there and so returned home.
4. About this time news was brought that Tigranes, the kingof Armenia, had made an irruption into Syria with * five hun­dred thousand soldiers, and was coming against Judea. This news,


* The number of 500,000 or even 300,000, as one Greek copy, with the Latincopies have it, Tigranes' army, that came out of Armenia into Syria and Judeaseems much too large. We have had already several such extravagant numbers inJosephus' present copies, which are not to be at all ascribed to him. Accordingly,I incline to Dr. Hudson's emendation here, which supposes them but 40,000.







OCR Output








Chap. III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS, 257


Strabo of Cappadocia mentions this present in these words:"There came also an embassage out of Eygpt, and a crown of"the value of four thousand pieces of gold, and out of Judea"there came another, whether you call it a vine or a garden:"They called the thing TERPULE, The delight. However, we"ourselves saw that present reposited at Rome, in the temple"of Jupiter Capitolinus, with this inscription, The gift of Alex-"ander the king of the Jews. It was valued at five hundred"talents; and the report is, that Aristobulus, the governor of"the Jews, sent it."
2. In a little time afterward came ambassadors again to him,Antipater from Hyrcanus, and Nicodemus from Aristobulus;which last also accused such as had taken bribes, first Gabinius,and then Scaurus, the one three hundred talents, and the otherfour hundred; by which procedure he made these two his ene­mies, besides those he had before. And when Pompey had or­dered those that had controversies one with another to come tohim in the beginning of the spring, he brought his army out oftheir winter quarters, and marched into the country of Damas­cus; and as he went along he demolished the citadel that wasat Apamia, which Antiochus Cyzicenus had built, and tookcognizance of the country of Ptolemy Menneus, a wicked man,and not less so than Dionysius of Tripoli, who had been be­headed, who was also his relation by marriage; yet did he buyoff the punishment of his crimes for a thousand talents, witliwhich money Pompey paid the soldiers their wages. He alsoconquered the place called Lysias, of which Silas a Jew, wastyrant. And when he had passed over the cities of Helio-polis and Chalcis, and got over the mountain which is onthe .limit of Celesyria, he came from Pella to Damascus; andthere it was that he heard the causes of the Jews, and of theirgovernors Hyrcanus and Aristobulus, who were at differenceone with another, as also of the nation against them both,which did not .desire to be under kingly government, becausethe form of government they received from their forefatherswas that of subjection to the priests of that God whom theyworshipped, and [they complained,] that though these twowere the posterity of priests, yet did they seek to change thegovernment of their nation to another form, in order to enslavethem. Hyrcanus complained, that although he were the elderbrother, he was deprived of the prerogative of his birth by
Pompey, they are both very improbable, and no way agreeable to Josephus, whowould hardly have avoided the recording both ihese uncommon points of history,had he known any of them; nor would either the Jewish naiion, or even PompeJhimself, then hare relished such a flagrant instance of sacrilege.







OCR Output








70 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book X.


poor, and those that had deserted, in the country, and madeone, whose name was Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, a person ofa noble family, their governor; which Gedaliah was of a gentleand righteous disposition. He also commanded them that theyshould cultivate the ground, and pay an appointed tribute to theking. He also took Jeremiah the prophet out of prison, andWould have persuaded him to go along with him to Babylon, forthat he had been enjoined by the king to supply him with what­soever he wanted : and if he did not like to do so, he desired himto inform him where he resolved to dwell, that he might sig­nify the same to the king: but the prophet had no mind tofollow him, nor to dwell any where else, but would gladly liveIn the ruins of his country, and in the miserable remains of it.When the general understood what his purpose was, he en­joined Gedaliah, whom he left behind, to take all possible careof him, and to supply him with whatsoever he wanted: Sowhen he had given him rich presents, he dismissed him. Ac­cordingly, Jeremiah abode in a city of that country, which wascalled Mispah; and desired of Nebuzaradan, that he would setat liberty his disciple * Baruch, the son of Neraiah, one of aVery eminent family, and exceeding skilful in the language ofhis country.
2. When Nabuzaradan had done thus, he made haste to Ba­bylon: But as to those that fled away during the siege of Jeru­salem, and had been scattered over the country, when they heardthat the Babylonians were gone away, and had left a remnantin the land of Jerusalem, and those such as were to cultivate thesame, they came together from all parts to Gedaliah to Mispah.Now the rulers that were over them were Johanan, the son ofKareah, and Jazeniah, andSeraiah, and others beside them. Nowthere was of the royal family one Ishmael, a wicked man, andvery crafty, who during the siege of Jerusalem, fled to Baalis,the king of the Ammonites, and abode with him during thattime: And Gedaliah persuaded them now they were there, tostay with him, and to have no fear of the Babylonians, for thatif they would cultivate the country, they should suffer no harm,This he assured them of by oath; and said, that they shouldhave him for their patron, and that if any disturbance shouldarise, they should find him ready to defend them. He also advis­ed them to dwell in any city, as everyone of them pleased; andthat they would send men along with his own servants, and re­build their houses upon the old foundations, and dwell there,and he admonished them beforehand, that they should make


* Of Ihis character of Baruch the son of Neraiah, and the genuineness of his bookthai stands now in our Apocrypha, and thai it is ivally a canonical book, and an ap­pendix to Jeremiah, see Authcut. Rec. part 1. page 1—11.







OCR Output








138 ANTIQUITIES Of THE JEWS. Book XII.


every one of the slaves. And he promised to publish a magni­ficent decree, about what they requested, which should confirmwhat Aristeus had proposed, and especially what God willedshould be done; whereby he said, he would not only set thosefree who had been led away captive by his father, and his army,but those who were in this kingdom before, and those also, ifany such there were, who had been brought away since. Andwhen they said that their redemption money would amount toabove four hundred talents, he granted it. A copy of whichdecree I have determined to preserve, that the magnanimity ofthis king may be made known. Its contents were as follows:"Let all those who were soldiers under our father, and who,"when they overran Syria and Phenicia, and laid waste Judea,"took the Jews captives, and made them slaves, and brought*' them into our cities, and into this country, and then sold"them; as also all those that were in my kingdom before"them, and if there be any that have been lately brought"thither, be made free by those that possess them; and let them"accept of [an hundred and] twenty drachmae for every slave."And let the soldiers receive this redemption money with their"pay, but the rest out of the king's treasury: for I suppose"that they were made captives without our father's consent,"and against equity; and that their country was harassed by"the insolence of the soldiers, and that, by removing them into"Egypt, the soldiers have made a great profit by them. Out of*' regard therefore to justice, and out of pity to those that have been"tyrannized over, contrary to equity, I enjoin those that have"such Jews in their service to set them at liberty, upon the"receipt of the beforementioned sum; and that no one use any"deceit about them, but obey what is here commanded. And"I will, that they give in their names within three days, after"the publication of this edict, to such as are appointed to exe-"cute the same, and to produce the slaves before them also, for"I think it will be for the advantage of my affairs: And let"every one that will, inform against those that do not obey this"decree: and I will that their estates be confiscated into the"king's treasury." When this decree was read to the king,it at first contained the rest that is here inserted, and omittedonly those Jews that had formerly been brought, and thosebrought afterwards, which had not been distinctly mentioned,so he added these clauses out of his humanity, and with greatgenerosity. He also gave order, that the payment, which waslikely to be done in a hurry, should be divided among the king'sministers, and among the officers of his treasury. When thiswas over, what the king had decreed was -quickly brought to aconclusion; and this in no more than seven days' time, the num­







OCR Output








278 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV


would ratify that league of friendship and mutual alliance whichwas between them. And it seems to me to be necessary here togive an account of all the honours that the Romans and theiremperors paid to our nation, and of the leagues of mutual as­sistance they have made with it, that all the rest of mankindmay know what regard the kings of Asia and Europe have hadto us, and that they have been abundantly satisfied of our courageand fidelity; for, whereas many will not believe what hath beenwritten about us by the Persians and Macedonians, becausethose writings are not every where to be met with, nor do liein public places, but among us ourselves, and certain otherbarbarous nations, while there is no contradiction to be madeagainst the decrees of the Romans, for they are laid up in thepublic places of the cities, and are extant still in the capitol,and engraven upon pillars of brass; nay, besides this, Julius Ca>sar made a pillar of brass for the Jews at Alexandria, and declar­ed publicly that they were citizens of Alexandria. Out ofthese evidences will I demonstrate what I say; and will nowset down the decrees made both by the senate, and by JuliusCaesar, which relate to Hyrcanus, and to our nation.
2. "Caius Julius Caesar, imperator and high priest, and dicta-"tor the second time, to the magistrates, senate, and people of"Sidon, sendeth greeting: if you be in health, it is well. I also"and the army are well. I have sent you a copy of that de-"cree, registered on the tables, which concerns Hyrcanus, the"son of Alexander, the high priest and ethnarch of the Jews,"that it may be laid up among the public records; and I will"that it be openly proposed in a table of brass, both in Greek,"and in Latin: It is as follows: I Julius Caesar, imperator the"second time, and high priest, have made this decree, with the"approbation of the senate: Whereas Hyrcanus, the son of"Alexander the Jew, hath demonstrated his fidelity and dili-"gence about our affairs, and this both now and in former times,"both in peace and in war, as many of our generals have borne"witness, and came to our assistance in the last * Alexandrian'war with fifteen hundred soldiers; and when he was sent by me"to Mithridates, showed himself superior in valour to all the"rest of that army: for these reasons I will, that Hyrcanus the'son of Alexander, and his children, be ethnarchs of the Jews,'and have the high priesthood of the Jews for ever, according"to the customs of their forefathers, and that he and his sons"be our confederates, and that besides this, every one of them"be reckoned among our particular friends. I also ordain,


* That Hyrcanus was himself in Egypt, along with Antipater, at this time, towhom accordingly the bold and prudent actions of his deputy Antipater are hereascribed, as this decree of Julius Czesar supposes, we are farther assured by the testi­mony of Strabo, already produced by Joseptms, chap. viii. sect. 2,







OCR Output








Univcr? '-


.-..3


General Library SystemUniversity of Wisconsin - Madison728 State StreetMadison, Wl 53706-1494U.S.A.


 







OCR Output








8 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book IX.


was like his father Ahab in wickedness, and reigned twelveyears, indulging himself in all sorts of wickedness, and impietytowards God, for leaving off his worship, he worshipped foreigngods: but in other respects he was an active man. Now at thistime it was that Elijah disappeared from among men, and no oneknows of his death to this very day; but he left behind him-his disciple Elisha as we have formeriy declared. And indeed,as to Elijah, and as to Enoch, who was before the deluge, it iswritten in the sacred books that they disappeared, but so thatnobody knew that they died.
CHAP. III.
How Joram 'and Jehoshaphat made an expedition against theMoabites: As also concerning the wonders of Elisha; and thedeath of Jehoshaphat.
§ 1. W HEN Joram had taken upon him the kingdom, hedetermined to make an expedition against the king of Moab,whose name was Mesha, - for, as we told you before, he wasdeparted from his obedience to his brother [Ahaziah], whilehe paid to his father Ahab two hundred thousand sheep, withtheir fleeces of wool. When therefore he had gathered hisown army together, he sent also to Jehoshaphat, and entreatedhim, that since he had from the beginning been a friend to hisfather; he would assist him in the war that he was entering intoagainst the Moabites, who had departed from their obedience,who not only himself promised to assist him, but would alsooblige the king of Edom, who was under his authority, to make thesame expedition also. When Joram had received these assurancesof assistance from Jehoshaphat, he took his army with him, andcame to Jerusalem; and when he had been sumptuously entertainedby the king of Jerusalem, it was resolved upon by them to taketheir march against their enemies through the wilderness of Edom;And when they had taken a compass of seven days journey, theywere in distress for want of water for the cattle, and for the army,from the mistake of their roads by the guides that conductedthem, insomuch that they were all in an agony, especiallyJoram; and cried to God, by reason of their sorrow, and[desired to know] what wickedness had been committed bythem that induced him to deliver three kings together, with­out fighting, unto the king of Moab. But Jehoshaphat, whowas a righteous man, encouraged him, and bid him send to thecamp, and know whether any prophet of God was come alongwith them, that we might by him learn from God what weshould do. And when one of the servants of Joram said, thathe had seen there Elisha, the son of Shaphat, the disciple of







OCR Output








Chap. IX. ANTIQUITIES. OF THE JEWS. 363


would not have been borne, it being forbidden for us to pay anyhonour to images, or representations of animals, after the man­ner of the Greeks, but still he did thus in the country [properly]out of our bounds, and in the cities thereof. The apologywhich he made to the Jews for these things was this, that all wasdone, not out of his own inclinations, but by the commands andinjunctions of the others, in order to please Caesar, and the Ro­mans, as though he had not the Jewish customs so much in hiseye as he had the honour of those Romans, while yet he had him­self entirely in view all the while, and indeed was very ambi­tious to leave great monuments of his government to posterity;whence it was that he was so zealous in building such fine cities,and spent such vast sums of money upon them.
6. Now upon his observation of a place near the sea, whichwas very proper for containing a city, and was before calledStrato's Tower, he set about getting a plan for a magnificentcity there, and erected many edifices with great diligence all overit, and this of white stone. He also adorned it with most sump­tuous palaces, and large edifices for containing the people; andwhat was the greatest and most laborious work of all, he adornedit with a haven; that was always free from the waves of thesea. Its largeness was not less than the Pyraeum [at Athens,]and had towards the city a double station for the ships. Itwas of excellent workmanship; and this was the more remarkablefor its being built in a place that of itself was not suitable tosuch noble structures, but was to be brought to perfection bymaterials from other places, and at very great expenses. Thiscity is situate in Phenicia, in the passage by sea to Egypt, be­tween Joppa and Dora, which are lesser maritime cities, and notfit for havens, on account of the impetuous south winds that beatupon them, which rolling the sands that come from the seaagainst the shores, do not admit of ships lying in their station, butthe merchants are generally there forced to ride at their anchorsin the sea itself. So Herod endeavoured to rectify this incon­venience, and laid out such a compass towards the land as might
'whole Roman empire being divided into two opposite factions, there was pro-'duced hereby the most destructive war that ever afflicted it; and the like folly'too much reigns in all other places. Could about thirty men be persuaded to'Kve at home in peace, without enterprising upon the right of each other, for'the vain glory of conquest, and the enlargement of power, the whole world'might be at quiet; but their ambition, their follies, and their humour, leading- them constantly to encroach upon and quarrel with each other, they involve all'that are under them in the mischiefs thereof; and many thousands are they which'yearly perish by it; so that it may almost raise a doubt, whether the benefit"which the world receives from government be sufficient to make amends for the"calamities which it suiters from the follies, mistakes, and mal-administrations of"those that manage it«"
VOL. II, z z 27







OCR Output








Chap. III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JKWS. -&8


"once inhabited, and be entirely encompassed with walls, thoa"wilt be excluded from thy passage to Celesyriaand Phenicia."2. When Cambyses had read the epistle, being naturallywicked, he was irritated at what they told him; and wrote backto them as follows: "Cambyses the king, to Rathumus thea historiographer, to Beeltethmus, to Semellius the scribe,"and the rest that are in commission, and dwelling in Samaria"and Phenicia, after this manner; I have read the epistle that"was sent from you; and I gave order that the books of my"forefathers should be searched into, and it is there found,"that this city hath always been an enemy to Icings, and its in*"habitants have raised seditions and wars. We also are sensi-"ble that their kings have been powerful, and tyrannical, and"have exacted tribute of Celesyria and PheHicia: Wherefore I"give order that the Jews shall not be permitted to build that"city, lest such mischief as they used to bring upon kings be"greatly augmented." When this epistle was read, Rathumus,and Semellius the scribe, and the;r-associates, got suddenly onhorseback, and made haste to Jerusalem; they also brought agreat company -with them,'and forbade the Jews to build thecity, and the temple. Accordingly, these works were 'hinderedfrom going on till the second year of the reign of Darius, fornine years more; for Cambyses reigned six years, and withinthat time overthrew Egypt, and when he was come back, hedied at Damascus.
CHAP. III.
How, offer the death of Cambyses, and the slaughter of the Magi,but under the reign of Darius, Zorobabel was superior to therest in the solution of problems, and thereby obtained this fa­vour of the king, that the temple should be built.
$ 1. AFTER the slaughter of the Magi, -who, upon thedeath of Cambyses, attained the government of the Persian'sfor a year, those families which were called the seven familiesof the Persians, appointed Darius, the son of Hystaspes, to betheir king. Now he, while he was a private man, had made avow to God, that if he came to .be king, he would send allthe vessels of God that were in Babylon to the temple at Jeru­salem. Now it so fell out, that about this time Zorobabel, whohad been made governor cf the Jews that iiad- been in captivity,came to Darius, from Jerusalem: for there had been an oldfriendship between him and the king. 'He was also, with twoothers, thought worthy to be guards of the king's body; and ob­tained that honour which he hoped for.. 2. -Now in the first year of the king's reign, Darius feasted







OCR Output








Chap. V.' ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 335


and the men were utterly destroyed, and thought there now re­mained nothing that could oppose them. Accordingly, they tookthe Jewish ambassadors, who came to them after all this had hap­pened, to make peace with them, and slew them, and came withgreat alacrity against their army: but the Jews durst not with­stand them, and were so cast down by the calamities they wereunder, that they took no care of their affairs, but gave up them­selves to despair, for they had no hope that they should be upona level again with them in battles, nor obtain any assistance else­where while their affairs at home were in such great distressalso. When matters were in this condition, the king persuadedthe commanders by his words, and tried to raise their spirits,which were quite sunk; and first he endeavoured to encourageand embolden some of the better sort beforehand, and then ven­tured to make a speech to the multitude, which he had beforeavoided to do, lest he should find them uneasy thereat, because ofthe misfortunes which had happened, so he made a consolatoryspeech to the multitude, in the manner following:
3. " You are not unacquainted, my fellow-soldiers, that we"have had not long since, many accidents that have put a stop"to what we are about; and it is probable, that even those that"arembstdistinguishedaboveothers fortheircourage, can hardly"keep up their spirits in such circumstances; but since we can-"not avoid fighting, and nothing that hath happened is of such a"nature but it may by ourselves be recovered into a good state,"and this by one brave action only well performed, I have pro-"posed to myself both to give you some encouragement, and, at"the same time, some information, both which parts of my de-"sign will tend to this point, that you may still continue in your"own proper fortitude. I will then in the first place, demon-"strate to you, that this war is a just one on our side, and that"on this account it is a war of necessity, and occasioned by the"injustice of our adversaries, for if you be once satisfied of this,"it will be a real cause of alacrity to you, after which I will"farther demonstrate, that the misfortunes we are under are"of no great consequence, and that we have the greatest rea-ff son to hope for victory. I shall begin with the first, and** appeal to yourselves as witnesses to what I shall say. You"are not ignorant certainly of the wickedness of the Arabians,"which is to that degree as to appear incredible to all other"men, and to include somewhat that shows the grossest bar-"barity and ignorance of God. Their chief things wherein"they have affronted us, have arisen from covetousness and"envy; and they have attacked us in an insidious manner,"and on the sudden. And what occasion is there for me to"mention many instances of such their procedure' When they







OCR Output








256 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


3. In the meantime Pompey sent Scaurus into Syria, whilehe was himself in Armenia, and making war with Tigranes:But when Scaurus was come to Damascus, and found that Lol-lius and Metellus had newly taken the city, he came himselfhastily into Judea. And when he was come thither, ambassa­dors came to him, both from Aristobulus and Hyrcanus, andboth desired he would assist them. And when both of thempromised to give him money, Aristobulus four hundred talents,and Hyrcanus no less, he accepted of Aristobulus' promise, forhe was rich and had a great soul, and desired to obtain nothingbut what was moderate; whereas the other was poor, and te­nacious, and made incredible promises in hopes of greater ad­vantages; for it was not the same thing to take a city, that wasexceeding strong and powerful, as it was to eject out of thecountry some fugitives, with a greater number of Nabateans,who were no very warlike people. He therefore made an agree­ment with Aristobulus, for the reasons before mentioned, andtook his money, and raised the siege, and ordered Aretas todepart, or else he should be declared an enemy to the Romans.So Scaurus returned to Damascus again; and Aristobulus, witha great army, made war with Aretas and Hyrcanus, and foughtthem at a place called Pajnjron, and beat them in the battle, andslew about six thousand of the enemy; with whom fell Phalionalso, the brother of Antipater.
CHAP. III.
How Aristobulus and Hyrcanus came to Pompey, in order to ar­gue isoho ought to have the kingdom: and how upon the flightof Aristobulus to the fortress Alexandrium, Pompey led hisarmy against him, and ordered him to deliver up the fortresses'whereof he was possessed.
4 1. A LITTLE afterward Pompey came to Damascus, andmarched over Celesyria, at which time their came ambassa­dors to him from all Syria, and Egypt, and out of Judeaalso, for Aristobulus had sent him a great present, which wasa * golden vine, of the value of five hundred talents. Now


* Tliis golden vine or garden, seen by Strabo at Rome, lias its inscription here asif it were the gift of Alexander, tlie father of Aristobulus, and not of Aristobulushimself, to whom yet Josephus ascribes it; and in order to prove the truth of thatpart of his history, introduces this testimony of Strabo's; so that the ordinary copiesseem to be here either erroneous or defective, and the original reading seems to havebeen either jtrislobulvs, instead of Aiexander, with one Greek copy, or else jlristnbu-Itis the son of Alexander, with the Latin copies, which last seems to me the most pro­bable—For as to Archbishop Usher's conjectures, that Alexander made it, and de-diratud it to Cod in the temple, and that thence Aristolmlus took it, and sent it to







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 261


venth day, this bank could never have been perfected, by rea­son of the opposition the Jews would have made; for thoughour laws give us leave then to defend ourselves against thosethat began to fight with us, and assault us, yet it does notpermit us to meddle with our enemies while they do any thing -else.
3. Which thing when the Romans understood, on those dayswhich we call Sabbaths, they threw nothing at the Jews, norcame to any pitched battle with them, but raised up theirearthen banks, and brought their engines into such forwardnessthat they might do execution the following days. And any onemay hence learn how very great piety we exercise towards God,and the observance of his laws, since the priests were not at allhindered from their sacred ministrations, by their fear during thissiege, but did still twice a-day, in the morning, and about theninth hour, offer their sacrifices, on the altar; nor did theyomit those sacrifices, if any melancholy accident happened, bythe stones that were thrown among them; for although the citywas taken on * the third month, on the day of the fast, uponthe hundred seventy-ninth olympiad, when Caius Antonius andMarcus Tullius Cicero, were consuls, and the enemy then fellupon them, and cut the throats of those that were in the tem­ple, yet could not those that offered the sacrifice be compelledto run away, neither by the fear they were in of their own lives,nor by the number that were already slain, as thinking it bet­ter to suffer whatever came upon them, at their very altars,than to omit any thing that their laws required of them. Andthat this is not a mere brag, or an encomium to manifest a de­gree of our piety that was false, but is the real truth; I appealto those that have written of the acts of Pompey: and amongthem, to Strabo and Nicolaus [of Damascus ;3 and besides thesetwo, Titus Livius, the writer of the Roman history, who willbear witness to this thing.f
4. But when the battering engine was brought near, the great-


* That is on the 23d of Sivan, the annual fast for the defection and idolatry ofJeroboam, who made Israel to sin; or possibly some other fast might fall into thatmonth, before and in the days of Josephus.
')- It deserves htre to be noted, that this Pharisaical superstitious notion, that of­fensive Bghting was unlawful to Jews, even under the utmost necessity, on the Sab-batl) day; of which we hear nothing before the times of the Maccabees, was thdproper occasion of Jerusalem's being taken by Pompey, Sosius, and by Titus, asappears from the places already quoted in the note on Antiq. B. XIII. ch. viii sect . 1.winch scrupulous superstition, as to the observation of such a rigorous rest upon theSabbatr* day, our Saviour always opposed, when the Pharisaical Jews insisted on it,as is evident in many places of the New Testament, though he still intimated howpernicious that superstition might prove to them in their flight from the Romans,Alatt. xxv. 20.







OCR Output








426 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS, Book XVI,


already made haste to bring his purpose to a conclusion. He al­so brought out three hundred of the officers that were under anaccusation, as also Tero and his son, and the barber that accusedthem, before an assembly, and brought an accusation against themall; whom the multitude stoned with whatsoever came to hand,and thereby slew them. Alexander and also Aristobulus werebrought to Sebaste by their father's command, and there strang­led; but their dead bodies were in the night time carried toAlexandrium, where their uncle by the mother's side, and thegreatest part of their ancestors, had been deposited.
8. * And now perhaps it may not seem unreasonable to some,that such an inveterate hatred might increase so much [on bothsides,] as to proceed farther, and overcome nature: but it mayjustly deserve consideration, whether it be to be laid to the chargeof the young men, that they gave such an occasion to their fa­ther's anger, and led him to do what he did, and by going on longin the same way, put things past remedy, and brought him touse them so unmercifully; or whether it be to be laid to the fa­ther's charge, that he was so hardhearted, and so very tender inthe desire of government, and of other things that would tend tohis glory, that he would take no one into a partnership with him,that so whatsoever he would have done himself might continueimmoveable; or indeed, whether fortune have not greater powerthan all prudent reasonings: Whence we are persuaded that hu­man actions are thereby determined beforehand by an inevit­able necessity, and we call her Fate, because there is nothingwhich is not done by her: wherefore I suppose it will be suffi­cient to compare this notion with that other, which attributessomewhat to ourselves, and renders men not unaccountable forthe different conducts of their lives, which notion is no otherthan the philosophical determination of our ancient law. Ac­cordingly of the two other causes of this sad event, any bodymay lay the blame on the young men, who acted by youthfulvanity, and pride of their royal birth, that they should bear tohear the calumnies that were raised against their father, whilecertainly they were not equitable judges of the actions of hislife, but ill-natured in suspecting, and intemperate in speakingof it, and on both accounts easily caught by those that observedthem, and revealed them to gain favour; yet cannot their fatherbe thought worthy excuse, as to that horrid impiety which hewas guilty of about them, while he ventured, without any cer­tain evidence of their treacherous designs against him, andwithout any proofs that they had made preparation for such


* The reader is here to note, that this eighth section is entirely wanting in theuld Lntin version, as Spanheim truly observes; nor is there any other reason for it,I suppose, than the great difficulty of an exact translation.







OCR Output








Chap. V. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 19


to David. However, Jehoram did not leave off the introduc­tion of new sorts of customs, to the propagation of impiety,and to the ruin-of the customs of his own country. And whenthe Edomites about that time had revolted from him, and slaintheir former king, who was in subjection to his father, and hadset up one of their own choosing, Jehoram fell upon the landof Edom, with the horsemen that were about him, anil the cha­riots, by night, and destroyed those that lay near to his ownkingdom, but did not proceed farther. However, this expedi­tion did him no service, for they all revolted from him, withthose that dwelt in the country of Libnah. He was indeed somad, as to compel the people to go up to the high places of themountains, and worship foreign gods.
2. And as he was doing this, and had entirely cast his own coun­try laws out of his mind, there was brought him an * epistlefrom Elijah the prophet, which declared that " God would ex-"ecute great judgments upon him, because he had not imitated"his own fathers, but had followed the wicked courses of the"kings of Israel; and had compelled the tribe of Judah, and"the citizens of Jerusalem, to leave the holy worship of their"own God, and to worship idols, as Ahab had compelled the"Israelites to do, and because he had slain his brethren, and the"men that were good and righteous." And the prophet gavehim notice in this epistle, what punishment he should under­go for these crimes, namely, "the destruction of his people,<* with the corruption of the king's own wives and children,"and that he should himself die of a dis'temper in his bowels,"with long torments, those his bowels falling out by the vio-"lence of the inward rottenness of the parts, insomuch, that"though he see his own misery, he shall not be able at all to"help himself, but shall; 'die in that manner." Thus it waswhich Elijah denounced to him in that epistle.
3. It was not long after this that an army of those Arabiansthat lived near to Ethiopia, and of the Philistines, fell upon thekingdom of Jehoram, and spoiled the country and the king'shouse: Moreover, they slew his sons and his wives: one onlyof his sons was left him, who escaped the enemy; his namewas Ahaziah .- After which calamity, he himself fell into thatdisease which was foretold by the prophet, and lasted a greatwhile (for God inflicted this punishment upon him in his belly,


* This epistle, in some copies of Josepbus, is said to come to Joram fromElijah, with this addition, far he was yet upon earth, which could not be trueof Elijah, who, as all agree, was gone from the earth about four years before,and could only be true of Elisha: nor. perhaps, is there any more mystery here,than that the name of Elijah has very anciently crept into the text instead ofElisha, by the copiers, there being nothing in any copy of that epistle peculiar toElijah.
VOL. II. C 15







OCR Output








206 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIII.


diers very hardly, neither remembering the league of mutual as­sistance that was between them, nor that he was his son-in-lawand kinsman, by Cleopatra's marriage to him; so the soldiersfled from his wicked treatment to Alexandria, but Demetriuskept his elephants. But Jonathan the high priest, levied anarmy out of all Judea, and attacked the citadel at Jerusalem,and besieged it; it was held by a garrison of Macedonians, andby some of those wicked men who had deserted the customs oftheir forefathers. These men at first despised the attempts ofJonathan for taking the place, as depending on its strength; butsome of those wicked men went out by night and came to De­metrius, and informed him, that the citadel was besieged; whowas irritated with what he heard, and took his army, and camefrom Antioch, against Jonathan. And when he was at An-tioch, he wrote to him, and commanded him to come tohim quickly to Ptolemais: upon which Jonathan did not in­termit the siege of the citadel, but took with him the elders ofthe people, and the priests, and carried with him gold, and silver,and garments, and a great number of presents of friendship, andcame to Demetrius, and presented him with them, and therebypacified the king's anger. So he was honoured by him, and re­ceived from him the confirmation of his high priesthood, as hehad possessed it by the grants of the kings his predecessors. Andwhen the Jewish deserters accused him, Demetrius was so farfrom giving credit to them, that when he petitioned him that hewould demand no more than three hundred talents for the tributeof all Judea, and the three toparchies of Samaria and Perea, andGalilee, he complied, with the proposal, and gave him a letterconfirming all those grants, whose contents were as follows:"King Demetrius to Jonathan his brother, and to the nation of"the Jews, sendeth greeting: We have sent you a copy of that"epistle which we have written to Lasthenes our kinsman, that"you may know its contents. King Demetrius to Lasthenes our"lather, sendeth greeting: I have determined to return thanks,"and to show favour to the nation of the Jews, which hath ob-"served the rules ofjusticeinourconcerns. Accordingly, I remit"to them the three prefectures, Apherimo, and Lydda, and Ra-"matha, which have been added to Judea out of Samaria, with"their appurtenances: As also what the kings my predecessors"received from those that offered sacrifices in Jerusalem, and"what are due from the fruits of the earth, and of the trees,"and what else belongs to us; with the salt pits and the crowns"that used to be presented to us! Nor shall they be compelled


his coins still extant; as Hudson and Spanheim inform us; the latter of whom givesus here the entire inscription, Xing Demetrius the God, Philatklphus Nicator.







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 281


"before me have borne witness to Hyrcanus, the high priest"of the Jews, and to the Jews themselves, and this before the"senate and people of Rome, when the people and senate re-"turned their thanks to them, it is good that we now also re-"member the same, and provide that a requital be made to"Hyrcanus, to the nation of the Jews, and to the sons of Hyr-"canus, by the senate and people of Rome, and that suitably"to what good-will they have shown us, and to the benefits"they have bestowed upon us."
8. "Julius Caius, pretor [consul] of Rome, to the magistrates,"senate, and people of the Parians, sendeth greeting. The Jews"of Delos, and some other Jews that sojourn there, in the pre-"sence of your ambassadors, signified to us, that by a decree of"yours, you forbid them to make use of the customs of their"forefathers, and their way of sacred worship. Now it does"not please me, that such decrees should be made against our"friends and confederates, whereby they are forbidden to live"according to their own customs, or to bring in contributions,"for common suppers, and holy festivals, while they are not"forbidden so to do even at Rome itself; for even Caius Caesar,"our imperator, and consul, in thatdecree wherein he forbade the"Bacchanal rioters to meet in the city, did yet permit these"Jews, and these only, both to bring in their contributions,"and to make their common suppers. Accordingly, when I"forbid other Bacchanal rioters, I permit these Jews to gather"themselves together, according to the customs and laws of"their forefathers, and to persist therein. It will be therefore"good for you, that if you have made any decree against"these our friends and confederates, to abrogate the same, by"reason of their virtue, and kind disposition towards us."
9. Now after Caius was slain, when Marcus Antonius, andPublius Dolabella, were consuls, they both assembled the senateand introduced Hyrcanus' ambassadors into it, and discoursedof what they desired, and made a league of friendship withthem. The senate also decreed, to grant them all they desired.I add the decree itself, that those who read the present work,may have ready by them a demonstration of the truth of whatwe say: the decree was this:
10. "The decree of the senate, copied out of the treasury,"from the public tables belonging to the questors, when Quin-"tus Rutilius and Caius Cornelius were questors, and taken"out of the second table of the first class, on the third day"before the ides of April, in the temple of Concord. There
"ere principally, Pompey Scaurus, and Gabinius; of all whom Joseplius had alreadygiven us the history so far as the Jews were concerned with them.







OCR Output








416 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVI.


thinking him to be his friend by this advice, gave him presents,upon all occasions, and at length persuaded him to informHerod of what he had heard. So when he related to the kingAlexander's ill temper, as discovered by the words he had hearrlhim speak, he was easily believed by him, and he thereby broughtthe king to that pass, turning him about by his words, and ir­ritating him, till he increased his hatred to him, and made himimplacable, which he showed at that very time, for he imme­diately gave Eurycles a present of fifty talents; who, when hehad gotten them, went to Archelaus, king of Cappadocia, andcommended Alexander before him, and told him that he hadbeen many ways of advantage to him in making a reconciliationbetween him and his father. So he got money from him also,and went away, before his pernicious practices were found out;but when Eurycles was returned to Lacedemon, he did notleave off doing mischief, and so, for his many acts of injustice,he was banished from his own country.
2. But as for the king of the Jews, he was not now in thetempeV he was in formerly towards Alexander and Aristobulus,when he had been content with the hearing their calumnieswhen others told him of them, but he was now come to that passas to hate them himself, and to urge men to speak against them,though they did not do it of themselves. He also observed allthat was said, and put questions, and gave ear to every onethat would but speak, if they could but say any thing againstthem, till at length he heard that Euaratus of Cos was a con­spirator with Alexander, which thing to Herod was the mostagreeable and sweetest news imaginable.
3. But still a greater misfortune came upon the young men;while the calumnies against them- were continually increased,and, as a man may say, one would think it was every one'sendeavour to lay some grievous thing to their charge;, whichmight appear to be for the king's preservation. There weretwo guards of Herod's body, who were in great esteem for theirstrength and tallness, Jucundus and Tyrannus; these men hadbeen cast off by Herod, who was displeased at them; thesenow used to ride along with Alexander, and for their skill intheir exercises were in great esteem with him, and had somegold and other gifts bestowed upon them. Now the king havingan immediate suspicion of those men, had them tortured, whoendured the torture courageously for a long time, but at lastconfessed that Alexander would have persuaded them to killHerod, when he was in pursuit of the wild beasts. That itmight be said he fell from his horse, and was run through withhis own spear, for that he had once such a misfortune formerly.They also showed where there was. money hidden in the stable







OCR Output








194 iNTiyuiTiEs OF THE JEWS. Book XIII.


Syria, and took Ptolemais, the soldiers within having betray­ed it to him, for they were at enmity with Demetrius, on ac­count of his insolence and difficulty of access; for he shut him­self up in a palace of his that had four towers, which he hadbuilt himself, not far from Antioch, and admitted nobody. Hewas withal slothful and negligent about the public affairs, where­by the hatred of his subjects was the more kindled against him,as we have elsewhere already related. When therefore Deme­trius heard tkat Alexander was in Jftolemais, he took his wholearmy, and led it against him: he also sent ambassadors to Jona­than, about a league of mutual assistance and friendship, for heresolved to be beforehand witii Alexander, lest the other shouldtreat with him first, and gain assistance from him: And this hedid out of the fear he had, lest Jonathan should remember howill Demetrius had formerly treated him, and should join withhim in this war against him. He therefore gave orders thatJonathan should be allowed to raise an army, and should get ar­mour made, and should receive back those hostages of the Jewishnation whom Bacchides had shut up in the citadel of Jerusalem.When this good fortune had befallen Jonathan, by the concessionof Demetrius, he came to Jerusalem, and read tne kmg's letter,in the audience of the people, and of those that kept the citadel.When these were read, these wicked men and deserters, whowere in the citadel, were greatly afraid, upon the king's per­mission to Jonathan to raise an army, and to receive back thehostages: So he delivered every one of them to his own pa­rents. And thus did Jonathan make his abode at Jerusalem,renewing the city to a better state, and reforming the buildingsas he pleased; for he gave orders that the walls of the cityshould be rebuilt with square stones, that it might be more se­cure from their enemies. And when those that kept the garri­sons that were in Judea saw this, they all left them, and fled toAntioch, excepting those that were in the city of Bethsura, andthose that were in the citadel of Jerusalem, for the greater partof these was of the wicked Jews and deserters, and on that ac­count these did not deliver up their garrisons.
2. When Alexander knew what promises Demetrius had


yet is by several historians deemed to be a counterfeit, and of no family at all, is,however, by Josephus believed to have been the real son of that Antiochus, and byhim always spoken of accordingly. And truly, since the original cotemporary andauthentic author of the first book of Maccab. ch. x. 1. calls him by his father's nameEpiphanes, and says he was the son of Antiochus, I suppose the other writers, whoare all much later, are not to be followed against such evidence, though perhapsEpiphanes might have him by a woman of no family. The king of Egypt also,Philometer, soon gave him his daughter in marriage, which he would hardly havedone, had he believed him to be a counterfeit, and of so very mean a birth as thelater historians pretend.







OCR Output








126 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XI.


"you assist them, that at the same season whereto their miser-"able estate did belong, they may defend themselves the Tery« same day from unjust violence, the thirteenth day of the"twelfth month, which is Adar, for God hath made that day a'** day of salvation instead of a day of destruction to them; and"may it be a good day to those that wish us well, and a memo-^ rial of the punishment of the conspirators against us! and I"will that you take notice, that every city, and every nation,f* that shall disobey any thing that is contained in this epistle,"shall be destroyed by fire and sword. However, let thisf* epistle be published through all the country that is under ourf* obedience, and let all the Jews, by all means be ready against** the day before mentioned, that they may avenge themselves* upon their enemies."
13. Accordingly, the horsemen who carried the epistles, pro­ceeded on the ways which they were to go with speed: but asfor Mordecai, as soon as he had assumed the royal garment, andthe crown of gold, and had put the chain about his neck, he wentforth in a public procession; and when the Jews, who are atShushan, saw him in so great honour with the king, they thoughthis good fortune was common to themselves also; and joy, and abeam of salvation encompassed the Jews, both those that were inthe cities, and those that were in the countries, upon the publi­cation of the king's letters, insomuch, that many even of othernations circumcised their foreskin for fear of the Jews, that theymight procure safety to themselves thereby; for on the thir­teenth day of the twelfth month, which according to the Hebrewsis called Adar, but according to the Macedonians, Dystrus, thosethat carried the king's epistle gave them notice, that the sameday wherein their danger was to have been, on that very dayshould they destroy their enemies. But now the rulers of theprovinces, and the tyrants, and the kings, and the scribes, hadthe Jews in esteem; for the fear they were in of Mordecaiforced them to act with discretion. Now when the royal decreewas come to all the country that was subject to the king, it fellout that the Jews at Shushan slew five hundred of their enemies:and when the king had told Esther the number of those that wereslain in that city, but did not well know what had been done inthe provinces, he asked her, whether she would have any thingfarther done against them ? for that it should be done according­ly: Upon which she desired that the Jews might be permittedto treat their remaining enemies in the same manner the nextday; as also that they might hang ten sons of Haman upon thegallows. So the king permitted the Jews so to do, as desirous notto contradict Esther. So they gathered themselves together again'on the fourteenth day of the month Dystrus, and slew aboutthree hundred of their enemies, but touched nothing of what







OCR Output








41'2 ANTIQUITIES «»F Hit S>l"tfS, Book XVI.


the Arabian government afforded them, and jet being very un­easy at the injuries they had done him, he went all over Tra-chonitis, and slew their relations; whereupon these robbers weremore angry than before, it being a law among them to be aven­ged on the murderers of their relations by all possible means, sothey continued to tear and rend every thing under Herod's do-miniou with impunity: Then did he discourse about these rob­beries to Saturninus and VoLumuius, and required that theyifaould be punished; upon which occasion they still tbe moreconfirmed themselves in their robberies, and became mjre nu­merous; and made very great disturbances, laying waste thecountries and villages that belonged to Herod's kingdom, andkilling those men whom they caught, till these unjust pro­ceedings came to be like a real war, for the robbers were nowbecome about a thousand. At which Herod was sore displeas­ed, and required the robbers, as weli as the money which hehad lent Dbodas, by Sylleus, which was sixty talents, and sincethe time of payment was now past, he desired to have it paid him;but Sylleus, who had laid Obodas aside, and managed all by him­self, denied that the robbers were in Arabia, and put off the pay­ment of the money; about which there was a hearing before* Saturninus and Volumnius, who were then the presidents ofSyria. At last, he, by their means, agreed, that within thirtydays time Herod should be paid his money, and that each otthem should deliver up the other's subjects reciprocally. Now,as to Herod, there was not one of the other's subjects found inhis kingdom, either as doing any injustice, or on any otheraccount, but it was proved that the Arabians had the robbersamongst them.
2. When this day appointed for payment of the money waspast, without Sylleus' performing any part of his agreement,and he was gone to Rome, Herod demanded the payment of themoney, and that the robbers that were in Arabia should be de­livered up; and, by the permission of Saturninus and Volum­nius executed the judgment himself upon those that were re->fractory. He took an army that he had, and led it into Arabia,and in three days time, by forced marches, arrived at thegarrison wherein the robbers were, he made an assault uponthem, and took them all, and demolished the place, which wascalled Raepta, but did no harm to any others; but as the Ara­bians came to their assistance, under Nacebus their captain, thereensued a battle, wherein a few of Herod's soldiers, and Nacebus,


* These joint presidents of Syria, Saturninus and Volumnius, were not perhapsof equal authority, but the latter like a procurator under the former, as the verylearned Noris and Pagi, and wiih them Dr. Hudson, determine.







OCR Output








Chap. IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Sh9


were destitute both of methods of cure and of food, made thepestilential distemper, which began after a violent manner, themore lasting. The destruction of men also after such a mannerdeprived those that survived of all their courage, because they hadno way to provide remedies sufficient for the distresses they werein. \Vhen therefore the fruits of that year were spoiled, andwhatsoever they had laid up beforehand was spent, there wasno foundation of hope for relief remaining, but the misery, con­trary to what they expected, still increased upon them; and thisnot only at that year, while they had nothing for themselves left[at the end of it,] but what seed they had sown perished also,by reason of the ground not yieldingits fruitson the * second year.This distress they were in made them also, out of necessity, to eatmany things that did not use to be eaten; nor, was the king him­self free from this distress any more than other men, as beingdeprived of that tribute he used to have from the fruits of theground, and having already expended what money he had, in hisliberality to those whose cities he had built; nor had he anypeople that were worthy of his assistance, since this miserablestate of things had procured him the hatred of his subjects, forit is a constant rule, that misfortunes are still laid to the accountof those that govern.
2. In these circumstances he considered with himself how toprocure some seasonable help; but this was a hard thing to bedone, while their neighbours had no food to sell them, and theirmoney also was gone, had it been possible to purchase a littlefood at a great price. However, he thought it his best way, byall means, not to leave off his endeavours to assist his people; sohe cut off the rich furniture that was in his palace, both of silverand gold, insomuch that he did not spare the finest vessels he had,or those that were made with the most elaborate skill of the ai -tificers, but sent the money to Petronius, who had been madeprefect of Egypt by Caesar; and as not a few had already fled to himunder their necessities, and as he was particularly a friend to He­


* This famine that for two years affected Judea and Syria, the 13th and 14th yearsof Herod, which ave the 23d and 24th years before the Christian era, seems to havebeen more terrible during this time than was that in the days of Jacob, Gen. xli, xlii.And what makes the comparison the more remarkable is this, that now as well asthen, the relief they had was from Egypt also; then from Joseph the governoi otEgypt, under Pharaoh king of Egypt, and now from Petronius the prefect ofEgypt, under Augustus the Roman emperor. See almost the like case, Antiq. B.XX. chap. ii. sect. 6. vol. III. It is also well worth our observation here, that these twoyears were a sabbatic year, and a y«ar of jubilee, for which Providence, during thetheocracy, used to provide a treple crop beforehand, but became now, when theJews had forfeited that blessing, the greatest years of famine to them ever since thedays of Ahab, 1 Kings xvii, xviii.







OCR Output








414 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVI.


the Arabians, who had pillaged their country, and were morerigid in their unjust proceedings, not only in order to get by it,but by way of revenge also.
4. Now Herod was forced to bear all this, that confidence ofhis being quite gone with which Caesar's favour used to inspirehim; for Caesar would not admit so much as an embassage fromhim to make an apology for him: and when they came again,he sent them away without success: so he was cast into sadnessand fear; and Sylleus' circumstances grieved him exceedingly,who was now believed by Caesar, and was present at Rome, nay,sometimes aspiring higher. Now it came to pass that Obodaswas dead: and Eneas, whose name was afterwards changed to* Aretas, took the government, for Sylleus endeavoured by ca­lumnies to get him turned out of his principality, that he mighthimself take it; with which design he gave much money to thecourtiers, and promised much money to Caesar, who indeed wasangry that Aretas had not sent to him first before he took thekingdom, yet did Eneas send an epistle and presents to Caesar,and a golden crown, of the weight of many talents. Now thatepistle accused Sylleus as having been a wicked servant, and hav­ing killed Obodas by poison; and that while he was alive, hehad governed him as he pleased; and had also debauched thewives of the Arabians; and had borrowed money, in order toobtain the dominion for himself: yet did not Caesar give heedto these accusations, but sent his ambassadors back, without re­ceiving any of his presents: but in the meantime the affairs ofJudea and Arabia became worse and worse, partly because of theanarchy they were under, and partly because, as bad as theywere, nobody had power to govern them, for of the two kings,the one was not yet confirmed in his kingdom, and so had notauthority sufficient to restrain the evil doers; and as for Herod,Caesar was immediately angry at him, for having avenged him­self, and so he was compelled to bear all the injuries that wereoffered him. At length, when he saw no end of the mischiefwhich surrounded him, he resolved to send ambassadors to Romeagain, to see whether his friends had prevailed to mitigate Cae­sar, and to address themselves to Caesar himself: and the am­bassador he sent thither was Nicolaus of Damascus.


* This Aretas was now become so established a name for the kings of Arabia,[ at Petra, and Damascus,] that when the crown came to this Eneas, he changed hisname to Gretas, as Harercamp here justly observes. See Antiq. B. XIII. ch, xv.Met, 2. vol. II.







OCR Output








34 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book X.


the king, and to the multitude, by whom he threatened thevery same calamities to them, which their brethren the Israel­ites, upon the like affronts offered to God, were now under.But these men would not believe their words, by which belietthey might have reaped the advantage of escaping all those mi­series, yet did they in earnest learn that what the prophets hadtold them was true.
2. And when they persevered in the same course of life, Godraised up war against them, from the king of Babylon and Chaldea, who sent an army against Judea, and laid waste the country; and caught king Manasseh by treachery, and ordered hinto be brought to him, and had him under his power to inflic"what punishment he pleased upon him. But then it was thatManasseh perceived what a miserable condition he was in, andesteeming himself the cause of all, he besought God to renderhis enemy humane and merciful to him. Accordingly, Godheard his prayer, and granted him what he prayed for. So Ma­nasseh was released by the king of Babylon, and escaped the dan­ger he was in: And when he was come to Jerusalem, he en­deavoured, if it were possible, to cast out of his memory thosehis former sins against God, of which he now repented, and toapply himself to a very religious life. He sanctified the temple,and purged the city, and for the remainder of his days he was'intent on nothing but to return his thanks to God for his de­liverance, and to preserve him propitious to him all his lifelong.He also instructed the multitude to do the same, as having verynearly experienced what a calamity he was fallen into by a con­trary conduct. He also rebuilt the altar, and offered the legalsacrifices, as Moses commanded. And when he had re-establish­ed what concerned the divine worship, as it ought to be, he tookcare of the security of Jerusalem: he did not only repair theold walls with great diligence, but added another wall to theformer. He also built very lofty towers, and the garrisonedplaces before the city he strengthened, not only in other respectsbut with provisions of all sorts that they wanted. And indeedwhen he had changed his former course, he so led his life fo»the time to come, that from the time of his return to piety to­wards God, he was deemed a happy man, and a pattern foi.mitation: when therefore he had lived sixty-seven years, hedeparted this life, having reigned fifty-five years, and was buriedin his own garden; and the kingdom came to his son Amon,whose mother's name was Meshumeleth, of the city of Jobath.







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTtgumfcS OF THk JEWS.


"God, the Jews and their rulers, to build the tempfej He also"ordained that they should assist them in the work: and that"they should pay to the Jews, out of the tribute of the coun-"try where they were governors, on account of the sacrifices,"bulls and rams, and lambs and kids of the goats, ahd fine flout"and oil, and wine, and all other things that the priests should"suggest to them; and that they should pray for the preserva-"tion of the king, and of the Persians, and that for such as"transgressed any of these orders thus sent to th«m, he com-"manded that they should be caught, and hung upon a cross^"and their substance confiscated to the king's use. He also"prayed to God against them*, that if any one attempted to"hinder the building of the temple, God would strike him"dead, and thereby restrain his wickedness."
7. When Darius had found this book among the records ofCyrus, he wrote an answer to Sisinnes and his associates, whosecontents were these: " King Darius to Sisinnes the governor,"and to Sathrabuzanes, sendeth greeting: Having found a copy"of this epistle among the records of Cyrus, I have sent it you;"and I will that all things be done as is therein written. Fare"ye well." So when Sisinnes, and those that were with him,understood the intention of the king, they resolveS to follow hisdirections entirely for the time to come. So they forwardedthe sacred works, and assisted the elders of the Jews, and 'theprinces of the sanhedrim, ami the structure of the temple waswith great diligence brought to a conclusion, by the propheciesof Haggai and Zechariah, according to God's commands, andby the injunctions of Cyrus nml Darius the kings. Now thetemple was built in seven years' time: And in the ninth year ofthe reign of Darius, on the twenty-third day of the twelfth month,which is by us called Adar, but by the Macedonians Dystnts,the priests and Levites, and the other multitude of the Israelitesoffered sacrifices, as the renovation of their former prosperityafter their captivity, find because they had now the temple re­built, a hundred bulls, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs,and twelve kids of the goats, according to the number of theirtribes, (for so many are the tribes of the Israelites,) and this lastfor the sins of every tribe. The priests also and the Levites setthe porters at every gate, according to the laws of Moses. TheJews also built the cloisters of the inner temple, that were roundabout the temple itself.
8. And as the feast of unleavened bread was at hand, in thefirst month, which, according to the Macedonians, is called Xan-thicus, but according to us Nisan, all the people ran together outof the villages to the city, and celebrated the festival, havingpurified themselves, with" their wires and children, according







OCR Output








Chap. III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 55


*' all lie tiad, that by the sight of his riches and forces they might"thereby guess at [the plenty he was in], and be able to in-*' form the king of it." But the prophet rejoined, and said,"Know thou, that, after a little while, these riches of thine"shall be carried away to Babylon, and thy posterity shall be"made eunuchs there, and lose their manhood, and be servants"to the king of Babylon, for that God foretold such things"would come to pass." Upon which words Hezckiah .wastroubled, and said, That "he was himself unwilling that his*' nation should fall into such calamities, yet since it is not pos-"sible to alter what God had determined, he prayed that there*' might be peace while he lived." Berosus also makes men-don of this Baladon king of Babylon. Now sis to this prophet,[Isaiah], he was by the confession of all a divine and wonderfulman in speaking truth; and out of the assurance that he hadnever written what was false, he wrote down all his pro­phecies, and left them behind him in books that their accom­plishment might be judged of from the events, -by posterity: nor.did this prophet do so alone, but the others, which were twelvein number, did the same. And whatsoever is done among us,whether it be good, or whether it be bad, comes to pass accord­ing to their prophecies; but of every one of those we shall speakhereafter.
.. ! CHAP. III.
How Manasseh reigned after Hezekiah; and how, when he wasin captivity, he returned to God, and was restored to his king­dom, and left it to [his son} Amon.
$ 1. WHEN king Hezekiah had survived the interval ottune already mentioned, and had dwelt all that time inpeace, he died, having completed fifty-four years of his life,and reigned twenty-nine: but when his son Manasseh, whosemother's name was Hephzibah, of Jerusalem, had taken thekingdom, he departed from the conduct of his father, and fellinto a course of life quite contrary thereto, and showed himselfin his manners most wickeVl in all respects, and omitted no sortof impiety, but imitated those transgressions of the Israelites, bythe commission of which against God, they had been destroyed;for he was so hardy as to defile the temple of God and the city,and the whole country; for, by setting out from a contempt ofGod, he barbarously slew all the righteous men who were amongthe Hebrews, nor would he spare the prophets, for he everyday slew some of them, till Jerusalem was overthrown with blood.So God was angry at these proceedings, and sent prophets to







OCR Output








230 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIII.


4. Now it happened at this time, that not only those Jews whowere at Jerusalem and in Judea were in prosperity, but alsothose of them that were at Alexandria, and in Egypt and Cyprus,for Cleopatra the queen was at variance with her son Ptolemy,who was called Lathyrus, and appointed for her generals Chel-cias, and Ananias, the sons of that Onias who built the templein the prefecture of Heliopolis, like to that at Jerusalem, as wehave elsewhere related. Cleopatra intrusted these men withher army; and did nothing without their advice, as Strabo ofCapadocia attests, when he saith thus, " Now the greater part,"both those that came to Cyprus with us, and those that were"sent afterward thither, revolted to Ptolemy immediately; only"those that were called Onias' party, being Jews, continued"faithful, because their countrymen Chelcias and Ananias were"in chief favour with the queen." These are the words ofStrabo.
5. However, this prosperous state of affairs moved the Jews toenvy Hyrcanus, but they that were the worst disposed to himwere the * Pharisees, who were one of the sects of the Jews, aswe have informed you already. These have so great a powerover the multitude, that when they say any thing against theking, or against the high priest, they are presently believed.Now Hyrcanus was a disciple of theirs, and greatly beloved bythem. And when he once invited them to a feast, and entertainedthem very kindly, when he saw them in a good humour, he be­gan to say to them, that "they knew he was desirous to be a"righteous man, and to do all things whereby he might please"God, which was the profession of the Pharisees also. How-"ever, he desired, if they observed him offending in any point,"and going out of the right way, they would call him back and"correct him." On which occasion they attested to his beingentirely virtuous, with which commendation he was well pleas­ed. But still there was one of his guests there, whose name was


* The original of the Sadducees, as a considerable party among the Jews, beingcontained in this, and the two following sections, take Oean Frideaux's note uponthis their first public appearance, which I suppose to be true: Hyrcanus, says he,"went over to the party of the Sadducees, that is, by embracing the doctrine against"the tradition of the elders, added to the written law, and made of equal authority"with it, but not their doctrine against the resurrection and a future state, for this"cannot be supposed of so good and righteous a man as John Hyrcanus is said to'be. It is most probable, that at this time the Sadducees had gone no farther in'the doctrines of that sect than to deny all the unwritten traditions, which the'Pharisees were so fond of; for Josephus mentions no other difference at this* time between them; neither doth he say that Hyrcanus went over to the Saddu-'cees in any other particular than in the abolishing of all the traditionary con-'stitutions of the Pharisees, which our Saviour condemned as well as they."—[At the year 108,]







OCR Output








112 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XI.


ritans, and all that inhabited Celesyria, heard that the buildingwent on apace, they took it heinously, and proceeded to laysnares for them, and to hinder their intentions. They alsoslew many of the Jews, and sought how they might destroy Nehe-miah himself, by hiring some of the foreigners to kill him. Theyalso put the Jews in fear, and disturbed them, and spread abroadrumours, as if many nations were ready to make an expeditionagainst them, by which means they were harassed, and had almostleft off the building: But none of these things could deter Nehe-miah from being diligent about the work, he only set a numberof men about him as a guard to his body, and so unweariedlypersevered therein, and was insensible of any trouble out of hisdesire to perfect this work. And thus did he attentively, andwith great forecast take care of his own safety, not that he fear­ed death, but of this persuasion, that if he were dead, the wallsfor his citizens would never be raised. He also gave orders,that the builders should keep their ranks, and have their armouron while they were building. Accordingly, the mason had hissword on, as well as he that brought the materials for building.He also appointed that their shields should lie very near them;and he placed trumpeters at every five hundred feet, and chargedthem that if their enemies appeared, they should give notice ofit to the people, that they might fight in their armour, and theirenemies might*not fall upon them naked. He also went aboutthe compass of the city by night, being never discouraged, nei-, ther about the work itself, nor about his own diet and sleep, forhe made no use of those things for his pleasure, but out of ne­cessity. And this trouble he underwent for * two years andfour months: for in so long time was the wall built, in thetwenty-eigth year of the reign of Xerxes, in the ninth month.Now when the walls were finished, Nehemiah and the multitudeoffered sacrifices to God for the building of them, and they con­tinued in feasting eight days. However, when the nations whichdwelt in Syria heard that the building of the wall was finished,


* It may not be very improper to remark here, with what an unusual accuracyJosephus determines these years of Xerxes, in which the walls of Jerusalem werebuilt, viz. that Nehemiah came with his commission on the 25th of Xerxes; that thewalls were two years four months in building, and that thuy were finished on the28th of Xerxes, sect. 7, 8. It may be also remarked farther, that Josephus hardlyever mentions more than one infallible astronomical character, I mean an eclipse ofthe moon, and this a little before the death of Herod the Great, Antiq. B. XVII. ch.vi. sect. 4. vol. III. Now on these two chronological characters in a great measuredepend some of the most important points belonging to Christianity, viz. the expli­cation of Daniel's 70 weeks, and the duration of our Saviour's ministry, and thetime of his death, in correspondence to those 70 weeks. See the supplement to theLit. Accump. of Proph. page 7*'







OCR Output








Chap. III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 151


tained leave to make us of their own customs, and this underthe patronage of Nicolaus of Damascus; for Agrippa gave sen­tence, that he could not innovate. And if any one hath a mindto know this matter accurately, let him peruse the hundred andtwenty-third, and hundred and twenty-fourth book of the his­tory of this Nicolaus. Now, as to this determination of Agrip­pa, it is not so much to be admired, for at this time our nationhad not made war against the Romans. But one may well beastonished at the generosity of Vespasian and Titus, that after sogreat wars and conquests which they had from us, they shoulduse such moderation. But I will now return to that part of myhistory whence I made the present digression.
3. Now it happened that in the reign of Antiochus the Great,who ruled over all Asia, that the Jews, as well as the inhabi­tants of Celossyria, suffered greatly, and their land was sorely har-rassed: For while he was at war with Ptolemy Philopater, andwith his son who was called Epiphanes, it fell out, that thesenations were equally sufferers, both when he was beaten, andwhen he beat the others: So that they were very like to a shipin a storm, which is tossed by the waves on both sides; and justthus were they in their situation in the middle between Antio­chus' prosperity and its change to adversity. But at length,when Antiochus had beaten Ptolemy, he seized upon Judea:And when Philopater was dead, his son sent out a great armyunder Scopas, the general of his forces, against the inhabitantsof Celcesyria, who took many of their cities, and in particularour nation; which, when he fell upon them, went over to him.Yet was it not long afterward when Antiochus overcame Sco­pas, in a battle fought at the fountains of Jordan, and destroyeda great part of his army. But afterward, when Antiochus sub­dued those cities of Celcesyria which Scopas had gotten into hispossession, and Samaria, with them the Jews of their own ac­cord, went over to him, and received him into the city [Jeru­salem], and gave plentiful provision to all his army, and to hiselephants, and readily assisted him when he besieged the garrisonwhich was in the citadel of Jerusalem. Wherefore Antiochusthought it but just to requit the Jews' diligence and zeal in hisservice: So he wrote to the generals of his armies, and to hisfriends, and gave testimony to the good behaviour of the Jewstowards him, and informed them what rewards he had resolvedto bestow on them for that their behaviour. I will set downpresently the epistles themselves, which he wrote to the generalsconcerning them, but will first produce the testimonies of Poly-bius of Megalopolis, for thus does he speak, in the sixteenthbook of his history: "Now Scopas, the general of Ptolemy's"army, went in haste to the superior parts of the country, and







OCR Output








172 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XII.


ing his soldiers, he perceived that his treasures were deficient,and there was a want of money in them, for all the taxes werenot paid, by reason of the seditions there had been among thenations, he having been so magnanimous and so liberal, that whathe had was not sufficient for him, he therefore resolved first togo into Persia, and collect the taxes of that country. Hereuponhe left one whose name was Lysias, who was in great reputewith him, governor of the kingdom, as far as the bounds ofEgypt, and of the lower Asia, and reaching from the river Eu­phrates, and committed to him a certain part of his forces, andof his elephants, and charged him to bring up his son Antiochuswith all possible care, until he came back; and that he shouldconquer Judea, and take its inhabitants for slaves, and utterlydestroy Jerusalem, and abolish the whole nation. And whenking Antiochus had given these things in charge to Lysias, hewent into Persia: and in the hundred and forty-seventh yearhe passed over Euphrates, and went to the superior provinces.3. Upon this Lysias chose Ptolemy, the son of Dorymenes,and Nicanor, and Gorgias, very potent men among the king'sfriends, and delivered to them forty thousand foot soldiers, andseven thousand horsemen, and sent them against Judea, who cameas far as the city Emmaus, and pitched their camp in the plaincountry. There came also to them auxiliaries out of Syria, andthe country round about; as also many of the runagate Jews.And besides these came some merchants to buy those that shouldbe carried captives, (having bonds with them to bind those thatshould be made prisoners), with that silver and gold which theywere to pay for their price. And when Judas saw their camp,and how numerous their enemies were, he persuaded his ownsbldiers to be of good courage; and exhorted them to place theirhopes of victory in God, and to make supplication to him, accord­ing to the custom of their country, clothed in sackcloth; and toshow what was their usual habit of supplication in the greatestdangers, and thereby to prevail with God to grant you the vic­tory over your enemies. So he set them in their ancient orderof battle used by their forefathers, under their captains of thou­sands, and other officers; and dismissed such as were newly mar­ried, as well as those that had newly gained possessions; that theymight not fight in a cowardly manner, out of an inordinate loveof life, in order to enjoy those blessings. When he had thus dis­posed his soldiers, he encouraged them to fight by the followingspeech, which he made to them: "O my fellow-soldiers, no"other tune remains more opportune than the present for cou-"rage, and contempt of dangers; for if you now fight manfully"you may recover your liberty, which, as it is a tiiing of"itself agreeable to all men, so it proves to be to us, much more







OCR Output








Chap. III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 9


Elijah, the three kings went to him at the entreaty of Jehosha-phat; and when they were come at the prophet's tent, whichtent was pitched out of the camp, they asked him, "What"would become of the army?" and Joram was particularlyvery pressing with him about it. And when he replied to him,That " he should not trouble him, but go to his father's and"mother's prophets, for they [to be sure] were true prophets,"he still desired him to prophesy, and to save them. So he sworeby God, that he would not answer him unless it were on ac­count of Jehoshaphat, who was an holy and righteous man, andwhen, at his desire, they brought him a man that could play on ".the psaltery, the Divine Spirit came upon him as the musicplayed, and he commanded them to dig many trenches in the val­ley; for, said he, "Though there appear neither cloud, nor"wind, nor storm of rain, ye shall see this valley full of water,"till the army and the cattle be saved for you by drinking of"it: Nor will this be all the favour that you shall receive"from God, but you shall also overcome your enemies, and"take the best and strongest cities of the Moabites, and you"shall * cut down their fruit trees, and lay waste their coun-"try, and stop up their fountains and rivers."
2. When the prophet had said this, the next day, before thesun rising, a great torrent ran strongly; for God had causedit to rain very plentifully at the distance of three days' journeymto Edom; so that the army and the cattle found water to drinkin abundance. But when the Moabites heard that the threekings were coming upon them, and made their approachthrough the wilderness, the king of Moab gathered his armytogether presently, and commanded them to pitch their campupon the mountains, that when the enemies should attempt toenter their country, they might not be concealed from them.But when at the rising of the sun they saw the water in thetorrent, for it was not far from the land of Moab, and that itwas of the colour of blood, for at such a time the water especiallylooks red, by the shining of the sun upon it, they formed a falsenotion of the state of their enemies, as if they had slain one ano­ther for thirst; and that the river ran with their blood. How­ever, supposing that this was the case, they desired their kingwould send them out to spoil their enemies; whereupon they


* This practice of cutting down, or plucking up by the roots, the fruit trees,was forbidden, even in ordinary wars, by the law of Moses, ])cut. xx. 19, 20.and only allowed by God in this particular case, when the Moabites were to bepunished and cut oh" in an extraordinary manner for their wickedness. See Jer.xlviii. 11, 1'.?, 13. and many the like prophecies against them. Nothing couldtherefore justify this practice but a particular commission from God by his pro­phet, as in the present case, which was ever a sufficient warrant for breaking anytucb ritual or ceremonial law whatsoever.







OCR Output








Chap. III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 325


in probability be better concealed in doing it, if he did it notpresently, nor immediately after what had lately happened.
3. And now, upon the approach of the feast of tabernacles,which is a festival very much observed among us, he let thosedays pass over, and both he and the rest of the people weretherein very merry; yet did the envy which at this time arosein him, cause him to make haste to do what he was about, andprovoke him to do it: for when this youth Aristobulus, who wasnow in the seventeenth year of his age; went up to the altar, ac­cording to the law to offer the sacrifices, and this with the orna­ments of his high priesthood, and when he * performed the sa­cred offices, he seemed to be exceeding comely, and taller thanmen usually were at that age, and to exhibit in his countenancea great deal of that high family he was sprung from, and a warmzeal and affection towards him appeared among the people, andthe memory of the actions of his grandfather Aristobulus, wasfresh in their minds; and their affections got so far the masteryof them that they could not forbear to show their inclinationsto him., They at once rejoiced, and were confounded, andmingled with good wishes their joyful acclamations which theymade to him, till the good-will of the multitude was made tooevident, and they more rashly proclaimed the happiness they hadreceived from his family than was fit under a monarchy to havedone. Upon all this, Herod resolved to complete what he hadintended against the young man. When therefore the festivalwas over, and he was feasting at f Jericho with Alexandra, whoentertained them there, he was then very pleasant with theyoung man, and drew him into a lonely place; and at the sametime played with him in a juvenile and ludicrous manner.Now the nature of that place was hotter than ordinary; so theywent out in a body and of a sudden, and in a vein of madness;and as they stood by the fish ponds, of which there were largeones about the house, they went to cool themselves [by bathing]because it was in the midst of a hot day. At first they wereonly spectators of Herod's servants and acquaintance as theywere swimming, but after a while, the young man, at the in­stigation of Herod, went into the water among them, while suchof Herod's acquaintance, as he had appointed to do it, dippedhim, as he was swimming, and plunged him under water, in thedark of the evening, as if it had been done in sport only, nor


* This entirely confutes the Talmudists, who pretend that no one under tirmttyyears of age could officiate as high priest among the Jews.
t A. Hebrew chronicle, cited by Reland, says, this drowning was at Jordan, notat Ji'ric/ni, and tin's even when he quotes Josephus. 1 suspect the transcriber of theHebrew chronicle mistook the nanTc, and wrote Jordan for Jcru'tia*







OCR Output








326 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XV.


did they desist till he was entirely suffocated; and thus was Aris-tobulus murdered, having lived no more in all than * eighteenyears, and kept the high priesthood one year only: which highpriesthood Ananelus now recovered again.
4. When this sad accident was told the women, their joy wassoon changed to lamentation, at the sight of the dead body thatlay before them; and their sorrow was immoderate. The cityalso of [Jerusalem,] upon the spreading of this news, were invery great grief, every family looking on this calamity, as ifit had not belonged to another, but that one of themselves wasslain; but Alexandra was more deeply affected, upon her know­ledge that he had been destroyed [on purpose.] Her sorrowwas greater than that of others, by her knowing how the mur­der was committed, but she was under a necessity of bearing upunder it, out of her prospect of a greater mischief that mightotherwise follow: and she oftentimes came to an inclination tokill herself with her own hand, but still she restrained herself,in hopes she might live long enough to revenge the unjust mur­der thus privately committed; nay, she farther resolved to en­deavour to live longer, and to give no occasion to think she sus­pected that her son was slain on purpose, and supposed that shemight thereby be in a capacity of revenging it at a proper op­portunity. Thus did she restrain herself, that she might notbe noted for entertaining any such suspicion. However, Herodendeavoured that none abroad should believe that the child'sdeath was caused by any design of his ; and for this purpose hedid not only use the ordinary signs of sorrow, but fell into tearsso, and exhibited a real confusion of soul: and perhaps his af­fections were overcome on this occasion, when he saw the child'scountenance so young, and so beautiful, although his deathwas supposed to tend to his own security; so far at least thisgrief served as to make some apology for him: and as for hisfuneral, that he took care should be very magnificent, by mak­ing great preparation for a sepulchre to lay his body in, andproviding a great quantity of spices, and burying many orna­ments together with him, till the very women, who were insuch deep sorrow, were astonished at it, and received in thisway some consolation,
5. However, no such things could overcome Alexandra's grief,but the remembrance of this miserable case made her sorrowboth deep and obstinate. Accordingly, she wrote an account ofthis treacherous scene to Cleopatra, and how her son was mur­


* The reading of one of Josephus' Greek MSS. seems here to be right, that Ar-istobulus was not eighteen years old when he was drowned, for he was not sevmtcfnwhen he was made high priest, ch. ii. sect. 6. ch. iii. sect. 3. and he continued inthat office but one year, as in the place before us.







OCR Output








 







OCR Output








422 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVI.


c*


together, and to appoint some place near * Berytus, whichis a city belonging to the Romans, and to take the presi-"dents of Syria, and Archelaus king of Cappadocia, and as"many more as he thought to be illustrious, tor their friend-"ship to him, and the dignities they were in, and determine"what should be done by their approbation." These werethe directions that Caesar gave him. Accordingly Herod,when the letter was brought to him, was immediately very
flad of Caesar's reconciliation to him, and very glad also thate had a complete authority given him over his sons. Andit strangely came about, that whereas before, in his adversity,though he had indeed showed himself severe, yet had he notbeen very rash, nor hasty in procuring the destruction of hissons, he now, in his prosperity, took advantage of this changefor the better, and the freedom he now had, to exercise hishatred against them, after an unheard of manner; he thereforesent and called as many as he thought fit to this assembly, ex­cepting Archelaus, for as for him, he either hated him, so thathe would not invite him, or he thought he would be an obsta­cle to his designs.
2. When the presidents, and the rest that belonged to theci nes, were come to Berytus, he kept his sons in a certain vil­lage belonging to Sidon, called Platana, but near to this city,that if they were called he might produce them, for he did notthink fit to bring them before the assembly: and when there wereone hundred and fifty assessors present, Herod came by himselfalone, and accused his sons, and that in such a way as if it werenot a melancholy accusation, and not made but out of necessity,and upon the misfortunes he was under: indeed in such a way,as was very indecent for a father to accuse his sons, for he wasvery vehement and disordered, when he came to the demonstra­tion of the crime they were accused of, and gave the greatestsigns of passion and barbarity: nor would he suffer the assessorsto consider of the weight of the evidence, but asserted them tobe true by his own authority, after a manner most indecent in afather against his sons, and read himself what they themselveshad written, wherein there was no confession of any plots or con­trivances against him. But only how they had contrived to flyaway, and containing withal certain reproaches against him, onaccount of the ill-will he bore them; and when he came to those


* What Josephus relates Augustus to have here said, that Berytus was a citybelonging to the Romans, is confirmed by Spanheim's notes here: *' It was," sayshe, "a colony placed there by Augustus. Whence Ulpian. De tens. teL L- T."X\r. The colony of Berytus was rendered famous /», the benefits of Caesar' And"thence it is that, among the coins of Augustus, we meet with some having this!' inscription: The hafjty colony if Augustus at Berytus."







OCR Output








Chap. II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 7


"phet, I will pray that * fire may fall from heaven, and destroy"both the soldiers and yourself." So he prayed, and a whirl­wind of fire [fell from heaven] and destroyed the captain, andthose that were with him. And when the king was informedof the destruction of these men, he was very angry and sent an­other captain with the like number of armed men that weresent before. And when this captain also threatened the prophet,that unless he came down of his own accord, he would take himand carry him away; upon his prayer against him, the fire[from heaven] slew this captain as well as the other. And whenupon inquiry, the king was informed of what happened to him,he sent out a third captain. But when this captain, who was awise man, and of a mild disposition, came to the place where Eli­jah happened to be, and spake civilly to him; and said, That" he"knew that it was without his own consent, and only in submis-"sion to the king's command that he came unto him; and that"those that came before did not come willingly, but on the same"account: He therefore desired him to have pity on those armed"men that were with him; and that he would come down and"follow him to the king." So Elijah accepted of his discreetwords and courteous behaviour, and came down and followedhim. And when he came to the king, he prophesied to him, andtold him, that " God said, Since thou hast despised him as not"being God, and so unable to fortell the truth about thy distem-"per, but has sent to the god of Ekron to inquire of him what"will be the end of this thy distemper, know this, that thou"shalt die."
2. Accordingly the king in a very little time died, as Elijahhad foretold; but Jehoram his brother succeeded him in thekingdom, for he died without children: but for this Jehoram, he


* It is commonly esteemed a very cruel action of Elijah's, when ho called for »fire from heaven, and consumed no fewer than two cnptains and a hundred soldiers,and this for no other crime than obeying the orders of their king, in attempting toseize him; and it is owned by our Saviour, that it was an instance of greater severitythan the spirit of the New Testament allows, Luke ix. 54. But then we mustconsider that it is not unlikely that these captains and soldiers believed that theywere eent to fetch the prophet, that he aright be put to death for foretelling thedeath of the king, and this while they knew him to be the prophet of the true God,the supreme King of Israel (for they were still under the theocracy), which was noless than impiety, rebellion, Aid treason, in the highest degree: Nor would thecommand of a subaltern, or inferior captain, contradicting the commands of thegeneral, when the captain and the soldiers both knew it to be so, as I suppose,justify or excuse such gross rebellion and disobedience in soldiers at this day. Ac­cordingly, when Saul commanded his guards to slay Ahimclech, and the priests atNob, they knew it to be an unlawful command, and would not obey it, 1 Sam. xxii-17. From which cases both officers and soldiers may learn, that the commands oftheir leaders or kings cannot justify or excuse them in doing what is wicked i»the sight of God, or in fighting in an unjust cause, when they know it so to he.







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 277


he fled from the king: and when he had been with SextusCaesar, and had put his own affairs in a sure posture, he resolv­ed to do thus, that in case he were again summoned before thesanhedrim to take his trial, he would not obey that summons.Hereupon the members of the sanhedrim had great indignationat this posture of affairs, and endeavoured to persuade Hyrcanusthat all these things were against him. Which state of mattershe was not ignorant of, but his temper was so unmanly, andso foolish, that he was able to do nothing at all. But when Sextushad made Herod general of the army of Coelesyria, for he soldhim that post for money, Hyrcanus was in fear lest Herodshould make war upon him: nor was the effect of what hefeared long in coming upon him, for Herod came and broughtan army along with him, to fight with Hyrcanus, as being an­gry at the trial he had been summoned to undergo before thesanhedrim, but his father Antipater, and his brother [Phasae-lus,] met him and hindered him from assaulting Jerusalem.They also pacified his vehement temper, and persuaded him todo no overt action, but only to affright them with threatenings,and to proceed no farther against one who had given him thedignity he had: they also desired him not only to be angry thathe was summoned, and obliged to come to his trial, but to re­member withal, how he was dismissed without condemnation,and how he ought to give Hyrcanus thanks for the same, andthat he was not to regard only what was disagreeable to him,and be unthankful for his deliverance. So they desired himto consider, that since it is God that turns the scales of war,there is great uncertainty in the issues of battles, and that there­fore he ought not to expect the victory, when he should fightwith his king, and him that had supported him, and bestowedmany benefits upon him, and had done nothing itself very se­vere to him; for that his accusation, which was derived fromevil counsellors, and not from himself, had rather the suspicionof some severity, than any thing really severe in it. Herodwas persuaded by these arguments, and believed that it wassufficient for his future hopes to have made a show of hisstrength before the nation; and done no more to it: And inthis state were the affairs of Judea at this time.
OHAP. X.
The honours that were paid the Jews; and the leagues that weremade by the Romans, and other nations, with them.
§ 1. .N ow when Caesar was come to Rome, he was ready tosail into Africa to fight against Scipio and Cato, when Hyrcau-us sent ambassadors to him, and by them desired that he







OCR Output








162 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XII.


two of his brethren themselves, but the rest of them escapedto Jerusalem to their father. But when Hyrcanus came to thecity, where nobody would receive him, he was afraid for him­self, and retired beyond the river Jordan, and there abode, butobliging the Barbarians to pay their taxes.
10. At this time Seleucus, who was called Soter, reigned overAsia, being the son of Antiochus the Great. And [now] Hyr­canus' father Joseph died. He was a good man and of greatmagnanimity; and brought the Jews out of a state of povertyand meanness, to one that was more splendid. He retained thefarm of the taxes of Syria, and Phenicia, and Samaria, twenty-two years. His uncle also, Onias, died [about this time] andleft the high priesthood to his son Simeon. And when he wasdead, Onias his son succeeded him in that dignity. To him itwas that Areus, king of the Lacedemonians, sent an embassage,with an epistle; the copy whereof here follows:
"AREUS king of the Lacedemonians, to ONIAS, sendethgreeting:"
"We have met with a certain writing, whereby we have"discovered that both the Jews and the Lacedemonians are of"one stock, and are derived from the * kindred of Abraham: It"is-but just therefore, that you, who are our brethren, should"send to us about any of your concerns as you please. We"will also do the same thing, and esteem your concerns as our"own; and will look upon our concerns as in common with"yours. Demoteles, who brings you this letter, will bring"your answer back to us. This letter is foursquare; and the"seal is an eagle, with a dragon in its claws."
11. And these were the contents of the epistle which was sentfrom the king of the Lacedemonians. But upon the death of


* Whence it comes that these Lacedemonians declare themselves here to be ofkin to the Jews, as derived from the same ancestor Abraham, I cannot tell, unless,us Grotius supposes, they were derived from the Dores, that came of the Pelftsgi.These are by Herodotus, called Barbarians, and perhaps were derived from theSyrians and Arabians, the posterity of Abraham by Keturah. See Antiq. B.XVI. ch. x. sect. 22. Vol. II. and Of the War, B. I. ch. xxvi. sect. 1. Vol. III. andGrot, on 1 Maccab. xii. 7. We may farther observe from the recognitions of Cle­ment, that Eliezer of Damascus, the servant of Abraham, Gen xv. 2. and xxiv. wa»of old by some taken for his son. So that if the Lacedemonians were sprung fromhim, they might think themselves to be of the posterity of Abraham: as well as theJews who were sprung from Isaac. And perhaps this Eliczur of Damascus is thatvery Damascus whom Trogus Pompeius, as abridged by Justin, makes the founderof the Jewish nation itself, though he afterwards blunders, and makes Azelus, Ado­res, Abraham, and Israel, kings of Judea, and successors to this Damascus. It maynot be'itnproper to observe farther, that Moses Chorenensis, in his history of the Ar­menians, informs us, that the nation of the Partliians was also derived from Abra­ham, by Keturah, and her children.







OCR Output








 


B89096178488A







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 269


Phasael, and Herod, who was afterwards made king, and Jo­seph, and Pheroras; and a daughter named Salome. This An-tipater cultivated also a friendship and mutual kindness withother potentates but especially with the king of Arabia, to'whom he committed his children, while he fought against Aris-tobulus. So Cassius removed his camp, and marched to Eu­phrates, to meet those that were coming to attack him, as hathbeen related by others.
4. But some time afterward, Caesar, when he had takenRome, and after Pompey and the senate were fled beyond theIonian sea, freed Aristobulus from his bonds, and resolved tosend him into Syria, and delivered two legions to him, that hemight see matters right, as being a potent man in that country:But Aristobulus had no enjoyment of what he hoped for fromthe power that was given him by Caesar, for those of Pompey'sparty prevented it, and destroyed him by poison, and those of Ce­sar's party buried him. His dead body also lay, for a good while,embalmed in honey, till Antony afterward sent it to Judea, andcaused him to be buried in the royal sepulchre. But Scipio,upon Pompey's sending to him to slay Alexander, the son ofAristobulus, because the young man was accused of what offen­ces he had been guilty of at first against the Romans, cut off hishead; and thus did he die at Antioch. But Ptolemy, the sonof Menneus, who was the ruler of Chalcis, under mount Liba-nus, took his brethren to him, and sent his son Philippion toAskelon to Aristobulus' wife, and desired her to send backwith him her son Antigonus, and her daughters: The one ofwhich, whose name was Alexandra, Philippion fell in love withand married her, though afterward his father Ptolemy slewhim, and married Alexandra, and continued to take care of herbrethren.
CHAP. VIII.
The Jems become confederates with Caesar when he fought againstEgypt. The glorious actions of Antipater, and his friendshipwith Ccesar. The honours which the Jews received from theRomans and Athenians.
5 1. Now after Pompey was dead, and after that victoryCaesar had gained over him, Antipater, who managed the Jew­ish affairs, became very useful to Caesar when he made waragainst Egypt, and that by the order of Hyrcanus: For. whenMithridates of Pergamus was bringing his auxiliaries, and wasnot able to continue his march through Pelusium, but obliged tostay at Askelon, Antipater came to him, conducting three thou­







OCR Output








284 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


16. The declaration of Lucius Lentullus the consul: "I have
* dismissed those Jews who are Roman citizens, and who ap-
* pear to me to have their religious rites, and to observe the"laws of the Jews at Ephesus, on account of the superstition"they are under. This act was done before the thirteenth of"the calends of October."
17. "Lucius Antonius, the son of Marcus, vice-questor, and"vice-pretor, to the magistrates, senate, and people of the"Sardians, sendeth greeting: those Jews that are our fellow-"citizens of Rome, came to me, and demonstrated that they"had an assembly of their own, according to the laws of their"forefathers, and this from the beginning, as also a place of"their own, wherein they determined their suits and controver-"sies with one another: Upon their petition therefore to me,"that these might be lawful for them, I gave order that these"their privileges be preserved, and they be permitted to do"accordingly."
18. The declaration of Marcus Publius, the son of Spurius,and of Marcus the son of Marcus, and of Lucius the son of Pub­lius: "We went to the proconsul, and informed him of what"Dositheus, the son of Cleopatrida of Alexandria desired, that,"if he thought good, he would dismiss those Jews who were"Roman citizens, and were wont to observe the rites of the"Jewish religion, on account of the superstition they were un-"der. Accordingly, he did dismiss them. This was done be-"fore the thirteenth of the calends of October."
19. "In the month Quintilis, when Lucius Lentullus and"Caius Marcellus were consuls; and there were present Titus"Appius Bulbus, the son of Titus, lieutenant of the Horatian"tribe. Titus Tongius of the Crustamine tribe, Quintus"Resius the son of Quintus, Titus Pompeius the son of Titus"Cornelius Longinus, Caius Servilius Bracchus, the son of"Caius, a military tribune, of the Terentine tribe, Publius"Clusius Gallus, the son of Publius, of the Veturian tribe,"Caius Teutius the son of Caius, a military tribune, of the"Emilian tribe, Sextus Atilius Serranus, the son of Sextus, of"the Esquiline tribe, Caius Pompeius, the son of Caius, of the"Sabbatine tribe, Titus Appius Menander, the son-of Titus"Publius Servilius Strabo, the son of Publius, Lucius Paccius"Capito, the son of Lucius, of the Colline tribe. Aulus Fu-"rius Tertius, the son of Aulus, and Appius Menas. In the"presence of these it was that Lentullus pronounced this decree:"I have before the tribunal dismissed those Jews that are Ro-"man citizens, and are accustomed to observe the sacred rites"of the Jews at Ephesus, on account of the superstition they"are under."







OCR Output








Chap. I. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 5


faces, and gave thanks to God, and worshipped him; and the Le-vites continued singing hymns to God with their instruments ofmusic.
3. As soon as it was day, and the king was come mto thatwilderness which is under the city of Tekoa, he said to the mul­titude, That " they ought to give credit to what the prophet had"said, and not to set themselves in array for fighting, but to set"the priests with their trumpets, and the Levites, with the sing-"ers of hymns, to give thanks to God, as having already deliver-"ed our country from our enemies." This opinion of the kingpleased [the people], and they did what he advised them to do.So God caused a terror and a commotion to arise among the Am­monites, who thought one another to be enemies, and slew oneanother, insomuch that not one man out of so great an armyescaped: and when Jehoshaphat looked upon that valley whereintheir enemies had been encamped, and saw it full of dead men; herejoiced at so surprising an event, as was this assistance of God,while he himself by his own power, and without their labour,had given them the victory. He also gave his army leaveto take the prey of the enemies' camp, and to spoil their deadbodies; and indeed so they did for three days together, till theywere weary, so great was the number of the slain; and on thefourth day, all the people were gathered together, unto a certainnollow place or valley, and blessed God for his power and assist­ance, from which the place had this name given it, the valleyof[_Berachah, 01] blessing.
4. And when the king had brought his army back to Jerusa­lem, he betook himself to celebrate festivals, and offer sacrifices,and this for many days. And, indeed, after this destruction oftheir enemies, and when it came to the ears of the foreign na­tions they were all greatly affrighted, as supposing that Godwould openly fight for him hereafter. So Jehoshaphat from thattime lived in great glory and splendour, on account of his right­eousness and his piety towards God. He was also in friendshipwith Ahab's son, who was king of Israel: and he joined withhim in the building of ships that were to sail to * Pontus, and the


* What are here Pontus and Thrace, as the places whither Jehoshaphat's fleetsailed, are in our other copies Opkir and Tttrshish, and the place whence it sailedis in them Eziongeber, which lay on the Red Sea, whence it was impossible for anyships to sail to Pontus or Thrace; so that Josephus' copy differed from cur othercopies, as is farther plain from his own words, which render what we read, that theships were broken at Eriongeber, from their unwieldy greutnes*. But so far wemay conclude, that Josephus thought one Ophir to be somewhere in the Medi­terranean, and not in the South Sea, though perhaps there might be another Ophirin that South Sea also, and that fleets might then sail both from Phoenicia, andfrom tii. Red Se» to fetch the gold of Of/iir.







OCR Output








286 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


"they had desired of them, that Antiochus the king, the son"of Antiochus, should do no injury to the Jews, the confede-"rates of the Romans; and that the fortresses, and the havens,"and the country, and whatsoever else he had taken from them"should be restored to them; and that it may be lawful for"them to export their goods out of their own havens; and that"no king nor people may have leave to export any goods,"either out of the country of Judea, or out of their havens, with-"out paying customs, but only Ptolemy the king of Alexan-"dria, because he is our confederate and friend; and that ac-"cording to their desire, the garrison that is in Joppa may be"ejected. Now Lucius Petius, one of our senators, a worthy"and good man, gave order that we should take care that these"things should be done according to the senate's decree; and"that we should take care also that their ambassadors might"return home in safety. Accordingly, we admitted Theodorus"into our senate and assembly, and took the epistle out of his"hands, as well as the decree of the senate; And as he dis-"coursed with great zeal about the Jews, and described Hyr-"canus' virtue and generosity, and how he was a benefactor"to all men in common, and particularly to every body that"comes to him, we laid up the epistle in our public records;"and made a decree ourselves, that since we also are in confe-"deracy with the Romans, we would do every thing we could"for the Jews, according to the senate's decree. Theodorus"also, who brought the epistle, desired of our pretors, that they"would send Hyrcanus a copy of that decree, as also ambassa-"dors to signify to him the affection of our people to him, and"to exhort them to preserve and augment their friendship for"us, and be ready to bestow other benefits upon us, as justly"expecting to receive proper requitals from us: and desiring"them to remember that our * ancestors were friendly to the"Jews even in the days of Abraham, who was the father of ali


* We have here a most remarkable and authentic attestation of the citizens ofPergamus, that Abraham was the father of all the Hebrews; that their own an­cestors were, in the oldest time, the friends of those Hebrews; and that thepublic acts of their city, then extant, confirmed the same; which evidence is toostrong to be evaded by our present ignorance of the particular occasion of suchancient friendship and alliance between those people. See the like full evidence ofthe kindred of the Lacedemonians and the .lews; and that because they were boththe posterity of Abraham, by a public epistle of those people to the Jews, preservedin the first book of Maccabees, xii. 19—23. and thence by Josephus, Antiq. B. XII.chap. iv. sect 1O. both which authentic records are highly valuable. It is also Wellworthy of observation, what Moses Choronensis, the principal Armenian historian,informs us of, p. 83. that Arsaces, who raUed the Parthian Empire, was of trie seedvf Abraham by Chetura, and that thereby was accomplished that prediction which•aid, « Kings of nations shall proceed from thee," Gen. xvii, 6.







OCR Output








Chap. VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEVVS. 267


CHAP. VII.
How Crassus came into Judea, and pillaged- the temple; and. thenmarched against the Parthians, and perished, with his army.Also hffw Cassius obtained. Syria ,' and put a stop to the Par­thians, and then went up to Judea.
§ 1. IS ow Crassus, as he was going upon his expeditionagainst the Parthians, came into Judea, and carried off themoney that was in the temple, which Pompey had left: beingtwo thousand talents, and was disposed to spoil it of all the goldbelonging to it, which was eight thousand talents. He alsotook a beam, which was made of solid beaten gold, of the weightof three hundred minae; each of which weighed two pounds andan half. It was the priest who was guardian of the sacred trea­sures, and whose name was Elcazar, that gave him this beam,not out of a wicked design, for he was a good and a righteousman, but being intrusted with the custody of the veils belongingto the temple, which were of admirable beauty, and of verycostly workmanship, and hung down from this beam, when hesaw that Crassus was busy in gathering money, and was in fearfor the entire ornaments of the temple, he gave him this beamof gold as a ransom for the whole, but this not till he had givenhis oath that he would remove nothing else out of the temple,but be satisfied with this only, which he should give him, beingworth many ten thousand [shekels.] Now, this beam was con­tained in a wooden beam that was hollow; but was known to noothers, but Eleazar alone knew it; yet did Crassus take awaythis beam, upon the condition of touching nothing else that be­longed to the temple, and then brake his oath, and carried awayall the gold that was in the temple.
2. And let no one wonder that there was so much wealth inour temple, since all the Jews throughout the habitable earth,and those that worshipped God, nay, even those of Asia and Eu­rope, sent their contributions to it, and this from very ancienttimes. Nor is the largeness of these sums without its attesta­tion; nor is that greatness owing to our vanity, as raising itwithout ground to so great a height: But there are many wit­nesses to it, and particularly Strabo of Cappadocia, who says thus;"Mithridates sent to Cos, and took the money which queen"Cleopatra had deposited there, as also eight hundred talents"belonging to the Jews." Now, we have no public money'but only what appertains to God; and it is evident that theAsian Jews removed this money out of fear of Mithridates, forit is not probable that those of Judea, who had a strong city and
VOL. JI. it 23







OCR Output








104 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVL


"mean, when thou really hatest both him and his brother, to"pretend kindness to them, only in order to raise a reproach"against me, and talk of such things as no one but such an im-"pious wretch as thou art could either devise in their mind, or"declare in their words. Begone, thou that art such a plague"to thy benefactor, and thy brother, and may that evil con-"science of thine go along with thee; while I still overcome my"relations by kindness, and am so far from avenging myself of"them, as they deserve, that I bestow greater benefits upon"them than they are worthy of."
5. Thus did the king speak. Whereupon Pheroras, who wascaught in the very act of his villany, said, That " it was Salome"who was the framer of this plot, and that the words came"from her." But as soon as she heard that, for she was at hand,she cried out, like one that would be believed, that no such thingever came out of her mouth ; that they all earnestly endeavouredto make the king hate her, and to make her away, because ofthe good-will she bore to Herod, and because she was always fore­seeing the dangers that were coming upon him, and that at pre­sent there were more plots against him than usual; for whileshe was the only person who persuaded her brother to put awaythe wife he now had, and to take the king's daughter, it wasno wonder if she were hated by him. As she said this, and of­ten tore her hair, and often heather breast, her countenance madeher denial to be believed; but the perverseness of her manners de­clared at the same time her dissimulation in these proceedings: butPheroras was caught between them, and had nothing plausible tooffer in his own defence, while he confessed that he had said whatwas charged upon him, but was not believed when he said he hadheard it from Salome: so the confusion among them was increas­ed, and their quarrelsome words one to another. At last theking, out of his hatred to his brother and sister, sent them bothaway; and when he had commended the moderation of his son,and that he had himself told him of the report, he went in theevening to refresh himself. After such a contest as this hadfallen out among them, Salome's reputation suffered greatly,since she was supposed to have first raised the calumny ; and theking's wives were grieved at her, as knowing she was a very illnatured woman, and would sometimes be a friend, and sometimesan enemy at different seasons: so they perpetually said onething or another against her, and somewhat that now fell outmade them the bolder in speaking against her.
6. There was one Obodas, king of Arabia, an inactive andslothful man in his nature; but Sylleus managed most of his af­fairs to him. He was a shrewd man, although he was butyoung, and was handsome withal. This Sylleus, upon some







OCR Output








Chap. II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 141


"of every tribe. These, by their age, must be skilful in the"laws, and of abilities to make Tm accurate interpretation of"them: and when this shall be finished, I shall think that I"have done a work glorious to myself. And I have sent to"thee Andreas, the captain of my guard, and Aristeus, men"whom I have in very great esteem; by whom I have sent"those first fruits which I have dedicated to the temple, and to"the sacrifices, and to other uses, to the value of a hundred"talents. And if thou wilt send to us, to let us know what"thou wouldest have farther, thou wilt do a thing acceptable to« me."
6. When this epistle of the king's was brought to Eleazar, hewrote an answer to it with all the respect possible: "Eleazar"the high priest, to king Ptolemy, sendeth greeting: If thou"and thy * queen Arsinoe, and thy children, be well, we are"entirely satisfied. When we received thy epistle, we greatly"rejoiced at thy intentions: And when the multitude were ga-"thered together, we read it to them, and thereby made them"sensible of the piety thou hast towards God. We also showed"them the twenty vials of gold, and thirty of silver, and the"five large basons, and the table for the show-bread; as also"the hundred talents for the sacrifices, and for the making what"shall be needful at the temple. Which things Andreas and"Aristeus, those most honoured friends of thine, have brought"us: and truly they are persons of an excellent character, and"of great learning, and worthy of thy virtue. Know then, that"we will gratify thee in what is for thy advantage, though we"do what we used not to do before, for we ought to make a re-"turn for the numerous acts of kindness which thou hast done"to our countrymen. We immediately, therefore, offered sa-"crifices for thee and thy sister, with thy children, and friends;"and the multitude made prayers, that thy affairs may be to"thy mind, and that thy kingdom may be preserved in peace,"and that the translation of our law may come to the conclusion"thou desirest, and be for thy advantage. We have also chosen"six elders out of every tribe, whom we have sent, and the law"with them. It will be thy part, out of thy piety and justice,"to send back the law, when it hath been translated; and to"return those to us that bring it in safety. Farewell."
7. This was the reply which the high priest made. But it


* When we have here and presently mention made of Philadelphia' queen, andsister Arsinoe, we are to remember, with Spanheim, that Arsinoe was both bis sis­ter and his wife, according to the old custom of Persia, and of Egypt at this verytime; nay, of the Assyrians long afterward. See Antiq. B. XX. ch. ii. sect. I. vol.III. Whence we have, upon the coins of Philadelphus, this known inscription,tAe divine brother and sister.







OCR Output








Chap. XVI. ANTiyurriES OF THE JEWS. 315


works, neither from the air, nor from the workmen: so theybrought their engines to bear, and shook the walls of the citv,and tried all manner of ways to get in; yet did not these with­in discover any fear, but they also contrived not a few engines tooppose their engines withal. They also sallied out, and burntnot only those engines that were not yet perfected, but those thatwere; and when they came hand to hand, their attempts werenot less bold than those of the Romans, though they were behindthem in skill. They also erected new works when the formerwere ruined, and making mines underground, they met eachother, and fought there: and making useof brutish con rage ratherthan of prudent valour, they persisted in this war to the very last;and this they did while a mighty army lay round about them,and while they were distressed by famine, and the want of neces­saries, for this happened to be a sabbatic year. The first thatscaled the walls were twenty chosen men, the next were Sosius'centurions, for the first wall was taken in forty days, and the se­cond in fifteen more, when some of the cloisters that were aboutthe temple were burnt, which Herod gave out to have been burntby Antigonus, in order to expose him to the hatred of the Jews.And when the outer court of the temple, and the lower city weretaken, the Jews fled into the inner court of the temple, and intothe upper city; but now fearing lest the Romans should hinderthem from offering their daily sacrifices to God, they sent an cm-bassage, and desired that they would only permit them to bringin beasts for sacrifices, which Herod granted, hoping they weregoing to yield, but when he saw that they did nothing of whathe supposed, but bitterly opposed him, in order to preserve thekingdom to Antigonus, he made an assault upon the city, andtook it by storm; and now all parts were full of those that wereslain by the rage of the Romans at the long duration of the siege,and by the zeal of the Jews that were on Herod's side, who werenot willing to leave one of their adversaries alive, so they weremurdered continually in the narrow streets and in the houses bycrowds, and as they were flying to the temple for shelter, andthere was no pity taken of either infants or the aged, nor didthey spare so much as the weaker sex; nay, although the kingsent about, and besought them to spare the people, yet nobodyrestrained their hand from slaughter, but, as if they were a com­pany of madmen, they fell upon persons of all ages, without dis­tinction; and then Antigonus, without regard to either his pastor present circumstances, came down from the citadel, and felldown at the feet of Sosius, who took no pity of him, in thechange of his fortune, but insulted him beyond measure, andcalled him Antigone [_i. c. a woman, and not a man;] yet didVOL. u. R K 25







OCR Output













OCR Output








Chap. V. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 395


oeived [from Herod,] he entertained them all in the public inns,and at public tables, nnd with perpetual feasts, this solemnityhaving in the day-time the diversions of the fights, and in thenight-time such merry meetings as cost vast sums of money,and publicly demonstrated the generosity of his soul, fof in ailhis undertakings he was ambitious to exhibit what exceededwhatsoever had been done before of the same kind. And it isrelated that Caesar and Agrippa often said, That " the dominions"of Herod were too little for the greatness of his soul, for thai"he deserved to have both all the kingdom of Syria, and that"of Egypt also."
2. After this solemnity and these festivals were over, Heroderected another city in the plain called Capharsaba, where hechose out a fit place, both for plenty of water, and goodness ofsoil, and proper for the production of what was there planted,where a river encompassed the city itself, and a grove of thebest trees for magnitude was round nbflut it: this he named An-tipatris, from his father Antipater. He also built upon anotherspot of ground above Jericho, of the same name with his mo­ther, a place of great security, and very pleasant for habitation,and called it Cyprus. He also dedicated the finest monumentsto his brother Phasaelus, on account of the great natural affec­tion there had been between them, by erecting a tower in thecity itself, not less than the tower of Pharos, which he namedPhasaelus, which was at once a part of the strong defences of thecity and a memorial for him that was deceased, because it borehis name. He also built a city of the same name in the valleyof Jericho, as you go from it northward, whereby he renderedthe neighbouring country more fruitful, by the cultivation itsinhabitants introduced; and this also he called Phasaelus.
3. But as for his other benefits, it is impossible to reckon themup, those which he bestowed on cities, both in Syria and inGreece, and in all the places he came to in his voyages; for heseems to have conferred, and that after a most plentiful manner,what would minister to many necessities, and the building ofpublic works, and gave them the money that was necessary tosuch works as wanted it, to support them upon the failure oftheir other revenues: but, what was the greatest and most il­lustrious of all his works, he erected Apollo's temple at Rhodes,at his own expenses, and gave them a great number of talents ofsilver for the repair of their fleet. He also built the greatestpart of the public edifices for the inhabitants of * Nicopolis,
* Dr. Hudson here gives us the words of Suetonius concerning this Nieopolis,when Agustus rebuilt it: "And that the memory of the victory at Actium might"be celebrated the more afterward, he built NicopolUat Actium, and appointed pub-"lie shows to be ilmrc exhibited every tifth year, in August." Sect. 18.
VOL. iI. 3D 27







OCR Output








Chap. V. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 109


regard to the observation of the law than to their natural af­fection, and immediately cast out their wives, and the childrenwhich were born of them. And in order to appease God, theyoffered sacrifices, and slew rams, as oblations to him; but it doesnot seem to me to be necessary to set down the names of thesemen. So when Esdras had reformed this sin about the mar­riages of the forementioned persons, he reduced that practice topurity, so that it continued in that state for the time to come.
5. Now when they kept the * feast of tabernacles in the se­venth month, and almost all the people were come together to it,they went up to the open part of the temple, to the gate whichlooked eastward, and desired of Esdras that the laws of Mosesmight be read to them. Accordingly he stood in the midst ofthe multitude and read them; and this he did from morning tonoon. Now, by hearing the laws read to them, they were in­structed to be righteous men for the present and for the future;but as for their past offences, they were displeased at themselves,and proceeded to shed tears on their account, as considering withthemselves, that if they had kept the law, they had endured noneof these miseries which they had experienced. But when Esdrassaw them in that disposition, he bade them go home and not weep,for that it was a festival, and that they ought not to weep there­on, for that it was f not lawful so to do. He exhorted them ra­ther to proceed immediately to feasting, and to do what was suit­able to a feast, and what was agreeable to a day of joy, butto let their repentance and sorrow for their former sins be a se­curity and a guard to them, that they fall no more into the likeoffences. So upon Esdras' exhortation they began to feast;-and when they had so done for eight days, in their tabernacles,they departed to their own homes, singing hymns to God, andreturning thanks to Esdras, for his reformation of what cor­ruptions had been introduced into their settlement. So it camew pass, that after he had obtained this reputation among the


to the strictness of the law of Moses, without any regard to the greatness of thosewho had broken it, and without regard to that natural affection or compassion fortheir heathen wives, and their children hy them, which made it so hard for Ezra tocorrect it, deserves greatly to be observed and imitated in all attempts for reforma­tion among Christians, the contrary conduct having ever been the bane of true reli­gion, both among Jews and Christians, while political views, or human passions, orprudential motives, are suffered to take place instead of the divine laws, and so theblessing of God is forfeited, and the church still suffered to continue corrupt fromone generation to another. See chap. viii. sect. 2."
* This Jewish feast of tabernacles was imitated in several hentben solemnities, asSpanheim here observes and proves. He also farther observes presently, what greatregard many heathens had to the monuments of their forefathers, as Nehemiah hadhere, sect. 6.
t This rule of Ezra's not to fast on a festival day, is quoted in the ApostolicalConstitutions, B. V. as obtaining among Christians also.







OCR Output








Chap. III. ANTIQUITIES OP THE JEWS. 397


duced Antipater as their antagonist, and imagined that he madea good provision for discouraging their pride, and that after thiswas done to the young men, there might be a proper season forexpecting these to be of a better disposition: But the event provedotherwise than he intended, for the young men thought he didthem a very great injury; and as Antipater was a shrewd man,when he had once obtained this degree of freedom, and began toexpect greater things than he had before hoped for, he had butone single design in his head, and that Was, to distress his bre­thren, and not at all to yield to them the pre-eminence, but tokeep close to his father, who was already alienated from themby the calumnies he had heard about them, and ready to bewrought upon in any way his zeal against them should advisehim to pursue, that he might be continually more and morese-'vere against them. Accordingly, all the reports that were spreadabroad came from him, while he avoided himself the suspicionof those discoveries proceeding from him, for he rather chose tomake use of those persons for his assistants that were unsuspected,and such as might be believed to speak truth by reason of thegood-will they bore to the king; and indeed there were alreadynot a few who cultivated a friendship with Antipater, in hopesof gaining somewhat by him, and these were the men who mostof all persuaded Herod, because they appeared to speak thus out'of their good-will to him: and while these joint accusations,'which from various foundations supported one another's veracity,the young men themselves afforded farther occasions to An­tipater also: for they were observed to shed tears often, on ac­count of the injury that was offered them, and had their motherin their mouths, and among their friends they ventured to re­proach their father, as not acting justly by them; all whichthings were with an evil intention reserved in memory by An­tipater against a proper opportunity; and when they were toldto Herod, with aggravations, increased the disorder so much, that *it brought a great tumult into the family; for while the king wasvery angry at imputations that were laid upon the sons of Mariam-ne, and was desirous to humble them, he still increased the honourthat he had bestowed on Antipater; and was at last so overcome-by his persuasions, that he brought his mother to court also.He also wrote frequently to Caesar in favour of him, and moreearnestly recommended him to his particular care. And whenAgrippa was returning to Rome, after he had finished his ten* years'government in Asia, Herod sailed fromJudea; amiwhen he met with him, he had none with him but Antipater,


* This interval of ten years for die duration of Marcus Agrippa's government inAsia, seems to be true, and agreeable to the Roman liiitory. See Usher's AnnalsIt A. M. .1392.
vpL. iI. 3 C 2?







OCR Output













OCR Output








44 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book IX,


sorts of their fruits to the priests and the Levites. The kingalso made garners and receptacles for these fruits, and distribut­ed them to every one of their priests and Levites, and to theirchildren and wives. And thus did they return to their old formof divine worship. Now when the king had settled these mat­ters after the manner already described, he made war upon thePhilistines, and beat them, and possessed himself of ah1 the ene­mies' cities from Gaza to Gath; but the king of Assyria sentto him, and threatened to overturn all his dominions, unless hewould pay him the tribute which his father paid him formerly;but king Hezekiah was not concerned at his threatenings, butdepended on his piety towards God, and upon Isaiah the pro­phet, by whom he inquired, and accurately knew all futureevents. And thus much shall suffice for the present concerningthis king Hezekiah.
CHAP. XIV.
flow Shalmaneser took Samaria by force, and how Tie transplantedthe ten tribes into Media, and brought the nation of the Cutheansinto their country [in their room'].
$ 1. WHEN Shalmaneser, the king of Assyria, had it toldhim, that [Hoshea], the king of Israel had sent privately toSo, the king of Egypt, desiring his assistance against him,he was very angry, and made an expedition against Sama­ria, in the seventh year of the reign of Hoshea; but whenhe was not admitted [into the city] by the king, * he besiegedSamaria three years, and took it by force in the ninth year ofthe reign of Hoshea, and in the seventh year of Hezekiah kingof Jerusalem, and quite demolished the government of theIsraelites, and transplanted all the people into Media, andPersia, among whom he took king Hoshea alive; and when hehad removed these people out of this their land, he transplantedother nations out of Cuthath, a place so called, (for there is [still]a river of that name in Persia) into Samaria, and into the coun­try of the Israelites. So the ten tribes of the Israelites were re-mQved out of Judea, nine hundred and forty-seven years aftertheir forefathers were come out of the land of Egypt, and pos­


* The siege of Samaria, though nor given a particular account of, either in ourHebrew or Greek Bibles, or in Josephus, was so very long, no less than three years,that it was no way improbable but that parents, and particularly mothers, mighttherein be reduced to e»t their own children, as the law of Moses had threatenedupon their disobedience, Lev-it- xxvi. 29. Deut, xxviii. 53—57. and as was accom­ptished in the other shorter sieges of both the capital cities, Jerusalem and Samaria;the former mentioned, Jer. xix. 9. Antiq. B. IX. ch. 4. § 4. and the latter. 2 King*»i. 2U—29.







OCR Output








Chap. 11. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 9\


"treasurer M'ithridates, and Zorobabel, the governor of the"Jews, that they may lay the foundations of the temple, and". may build it sixty cubits high, and of the same latitude, making"three edifices of polished stones, and one of the wood of the"country, and the same order extends to the altar, whereon"they offer sacrifices to God. I require also, that the sacri-"fices for these things may be given out of my revenues. More."over, I have also sent the Vessels which king Nebuchadnezzai"pillaged out of the temple, and have given them to Mithri-"dates, the treasurer, and to Zorobabel the governor of the"Jews, that they may have them carried to Jerusalem, and"may restore them to the temple of God. Now their * num-"ber is as follows: fifty chargers of gold, and five hundred of"silver; forty Thericleon cups of gold, and five hundred of"silver; fifty basons of gold, and five hundred of silver, thirty"vessels for pouring, [the drink offerings], and three hundred"of silver; thirty vials of gold, and two thousand four hundred"of silver; with a thousand other large vessels. I permit them"to have the same honour which they were used to have from"their forefathers, as also for their small cattle, and for wine"and oil, two hundred and five thousand and five hundred"drachmae; and for wheat flour, twenty thousand and five"hundred artabae; and I give order, that these expenses shall"be given them out of the tributes due from Samaria. The"priests shall also offer these sacrifices according to the laws of"Moses in Jerusalem: and when they offer them, they shall pray"to God for the preservation of the king and of his family^"that the kingdom of Persia may continue. But my will is^"that those who disobey these injunctions, and make them void,"shall be hung upon a cross, and their substance brought in-"to the king's treasury." And such was the import of thisepistle. Now the number of those that came out of captivityto Jerusalem, were forty-two thousand four hundred and sixty-two.
CHAR II.
Hffw upon itie death of Cyrus, the Jews were hindered in buildingof the temple by the Cutheans, and the neighbouring governors:and how Cambyses entirely forbade the Jews to do any such ,thing.
§ I. WHEN the foundations of the temple were laying, and -when the Jews were very zealous about building it, the neigh-


* Of the true number of golden and silver vessels here gnd elsewhere belongingto the temple of Solomon, see my Description of Temples, chap. xiii.
VOL. II. M 17







OCR Output








812 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


11. At this time messengers came to Herod, and informed himof what had been done; and wh«n he was come to Daphne byAntioch, they told him of the ill fortune that had befallen hisbrother; which yet he expected, from certain visions that ap­peared to him in his dreams, which clearly foreshowed his bro­ther's death. So he hastened his march; and when he came tomount Libanus, he received about eight hundred of the men ofthat place, having already with him also one Roman legion, andwith these he came to Ptolemais. He also marched thence bynight with his army, and proceeded along Galilee. Here it wasthat the enemy met him, and fought him, and were beaten, andshut up in the same place of strength whence they had sallied outthe day before. So he attacked the place in the morning, but byreason of a great storm that was then very violent, he was ableto do nothing, but drew off his army into the neighbouring vil­lages; yet as soon as the other legion that Antony sent him wascome to his assistance, those that were in garrison in the placewere afraid, and deserted it in the night time. Then did theking march hastily to Jericho, intending to avenge himself onthe enemy for the slaughter of his brother; and when he hadpitched his tents, he made a feast for the principal commanders,and after this collation was over, and he had dismissed his guests,he retired to his own chamber; and here may one see what kind­ness God had for the king, for the upper part of the house felldown when nobody was in it, and so killed none, insomuch thatall the people believed that Herod was beloved of God, since hehad escaped such a great and surprising danger.
12. But the next day six thousand ot the enemy came downfrom the tops of the mountains to fight the Romans, which great­ly terrified them; and the soldiers that were in light armourcame near, and pelted the king's guards that were come out withdarts and stones, and one of them hit him on the side with adart. Antigonus also sent a commander against Samaria, whosename was Pappus, with some forces, being desirous to show theenemy how potent he was, and that he had men to spare in hiswar with them: He sat down to oppose Macherus; but He­rod, when he had taken five cities, took such as were left inthem, being about two thousand, and slew them, and burnt thecities themselves, and then returned to go against Pappus, whowas encamped at a village called Isanas; and there ran in to himmany out of Jericho and Judea, near to which places he was,and the enemy fell upon his men, so stout were they at thistime, and joined battle with them, but he beat them in the fight;and in order to be revenged on them for the slaughter of hisbrother, he pursued them sharply, and killed them as they ra»







OCR Output








p. \y. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 59


siah did not admit of this advice of Neco's, but put himself intott posture to hinder him from this intended march. 1 suppose itwas fate that pushed him on to this conduct, that it might takean occasion against him ; for as he was setting his * army in array, and rode about in his chariot, from one wing of his armyto another, one of the Egyptians shot an arrow at him, and putan end to his eagerness of fighting: for being sorely wounded, hecommanded a retreat to be sounded for his army, and returnedto Jerusalem, and died of that wound; and was magnificentlyburied in the sepulchre of his fathers, when he had lived thirty-nine years, and of them had reigned thirty-one. But all thepeople mourned greatly for him, lamenting and grieving on hisaccount many days: and Jeremiah the prophet f composedan elegy to lament him, which is extant till this time also. More­over, this prophet denounced beforehand the sad calamities thatwere coming upon the city. He also left behind him in writinga description of that destruction of our nation which has latelyhappened in our days, and the taking of Babylon; nor was hethe only prophet who delivered such predictions beforehand tothe multitude, but so did Ezekiel tdso, who was the first personthat wrote, and left behind him in writing two books concern­ing these events. Now these two prophets were priests by birth;but of them Jeremiah dwelt in Jerusalem, from the thirteenthyear of the reign of Josiah, until the city and temple were utter­ly destroyed. However as to what befell this prophet, we willrelate it in its proper place.
2. Upon the death of Josiah, which we have already mention­ed, his son, Jehoahaz by name, took the kingdom : being abouttwenty-three years old: He reigned in Jerusalem; and his mo­ther was Hamutal, of the city Libnah. He was an impious man,and impure in his course of life; but as the king of Egypt re­turned from the battle, he sent for Jehoahaz to come to him, tothe city called J Hamath, which belongs to Syriaj and when hawas come, he put him in bonds, and delivered the kingdom to abrother of his, by the father's side whose name was Eliakim, and


* This battle is justly esteemed the very same that Herodotus, B. II. § 156. men­tions, when hi- says, that "Neco joined battle with the Syrians [or Jews] at Mag-dolum (Megiddo,) nnd beat them,".as Dr. Hudson here observes.
f Whether Josephus, from 2 Chrou. XXXT. 25. here means the book of the La­mentations of Jeremiah, still extant, which chiefly belongs to the destruction of Je­rusalem under Nebuchadnezzar, or to any other like melancholy poem now lost, butextant in the days of Josephus, belonging peculiarly to Josiah, cannot now be deter­mined.
} This ancient city Hamath, which is joined with Arpad, or Aradus, and with Oa-matcus, 2 Kings xviii. 18. Isa. xxxvi. 19. Jer. xlix. 23. cities of Syria and Fhenicianear the borders of Judea, was also itself evidently near the same borders though longage* utterly destroyed.
VOL. II. Ii 17







OCR Output








Chap. XII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


"their oaths, I will that you be at peace with those that are our"confederates; as also, that what you have taken by the means of"our adversaries shall not be reckoned your own, but be return-"ed to those from whom you took them; for none of them"took their provinces or their armies by the gift of the senate,"but they seized them by force, and bestowed them by violence"upon such as became useful to them in their unjust proceed-"ings. Since, therefore, those men have received the punish-'-' ment due to them, we desire that our confederates may retain"whatsoever it was that they formerly possessed without dis-"turbance, and that you restore all the places which belong to"Hyrcanus the ethnarch of the Jews, which you have had,"though it were but one day before Caius Cassius began an un-"justifiable war against us, and entered into our province; nor"do you use any force against him, in order to weaken him, that"he may not be able to dispose of that which is his own, but"if you have any contest with him about your respective rights,"it shall be lawful for you to plead your cause when we come"upon the places concerned, for we shall alike preserve the"rights, and hear all the causes of our confederates."
5. " Marcus Antonius, imperator, to the magistrates, senate,"and people of Tyre, sendeth greeting: I have sent you my"decree, of which I will that ye take care that it be engraven"on the public tables, in Roman and Greek letters, and that it"stand engraven in the most illustrious places, that it may be"read by all." Marcus Antonius, imperator, one of the tri­umvirate over the public affairs, made this declaration: "Since"Caius Cassius, in this revolt he hath made, hath pillaged that"province which belonged not to him, and was held by gar-"risons there encamped, while they were our confederates, and"hath spoiled that nation of the Jews that was in friendship"with the Roman people, as in war; and since we have over-"come his madness by arms, we now correct by our decrees"and judicial determinations what he hath laid waste, that those"things may be restored to our confederates. And as for what"hath been sold of the Jewish possessions, whether they be"bodies or possessions, let them be released, the bodies into"that state of freedom they were originally in, and the posses-"sions to their former owners. I also will, that he who shall"not comply with this decree of mine, shall be punished for"his disobedience: and if such a one be caught, I will take"care that the offenders suffer condign punishment."
6. The same thing did Antony write to the Sidonians, and theAntiochians, and the Arabians. We have produced these de­crees, therefore, as marks for futurity of the truth of what wehave said, that the Romans had a great concern about our nation.







OCR Output








Chap. II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 879


he had built, and at the fortresses which he had erected at greatexpense, Alexandrium, and Herodium, and Hyrcania. He alsoconducted him to the city Jerusalem, where all the people methim in their festival garments, and received him with acclama­tions. Agrippa also offered a hecatomb of sacrifices to God;and feasted the people, without omitting any of the greatestdainties that could be gotten. He also took so much pleasurethere, that he abode many days with them, and would willinglyhave staid longer, but that the season of the year made himmake haste away; for, as winter was coming on, he thought itnot safe to go to sea later, and yet he was of necessity to return-again to Ionia.
2. So Agrippa went away, when Herod had bestowed on him,and on the principal of those that were with him, many presents-,but king Herod, when he had passed the winter in his own do­minions, made haste to get to him again in the spring, when heknew he designed to go to a campaign at the Bosphorus. Sowhen he had sailed by Rhodes, and by Cos, he touched at Les­bos, as thinking he should have overtaken Agrippa there, buthe was taken short here by a northwind, which hindered hisship from going to the shore; so he continued many days atChios, and there he kindly treated a great many that came tohim, and obliged them by giving them royal gifts. And whenhe saw that the portico of the city was fallen down, which, asit was overthrown in the Mithridatic war, and was a very largeand fine building, so was it not so easy to rebuild that, as it wasthe rest, yet did he furnish a sum not only large enough for thatpurpose, but what was more than sufficient to finish the build­ing, and ordered them not to overlook that portico, but to re­build it quickly, that so the city might recover its proper orna­ments. And when the high winds were laid, he sailed to Mity-lene, and thence to Byzantium; and when he heard that Agrippawas sailed beyond the Cyanean rocks, he made all the haste pos­sible to overtake him, and came up with him about Sinope, inPontus. He was seen sailing by the shipmen most unexpectedly,but appeared to their great joy; and many friendly salutationsthere were between them, insomuch that Agrippa thoughthe had received the greatest marks of the king's kindness andhumanity towards him possible, since the king had come so longa voyage, and at a very proper season for his assistance, and hadleft the government of his own dominions, and thought it moreworth his while to come to him. Accordingly, Herod was allin all to Agrippa, in the management of the war, and a greatassistant in civil affairs, and in giving him counsel as to parti­cular matters. He was also a pleasant companion for him whenhe relaxed himself- and a joint partaker with him in all things:
VOL. u. SB 27







OCR Output








406 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVI.


CHAP. VIII.
Herod took vp Alexander, and bound him: tehom yet Ar-chelaus, king of Cappadocia, reconciled to his father, Herod,again.
§ 1. I>UT still the affairs of Herod's family were no better,but perpetually more troublesome. Now this accident happened,which arose from no decent occasion, but proceeded so faras to bring great difficulties upon him. There were certain eu­nuchs which the king had, and on account of their beauty wasvery fond of them; and the care of bringing him drink was en­trusted to one of them, of bringing him his supper to another,and of putting him to bed to the third, who almost managed theprincipal affairs of the government; and there was one told theking that these eunuchs were corrupted by Alexander the king'sson, with great sums of money: And when they were asked,whether Alexander had had criminal conversation with them?they confessed it, but said they knew of no farther mischief ofhis against his father, but when they were more severely tor­tured, and were in the utmost extremity, and the tormentors,out of compliance with Antipater, stretched the rack to the veryutmost, they said, that Alexander bare great ill-will and in­nate hatred to his father : and that he told them, that Herod de­spaired to live much longer; and that in order to cover his greatage, he coloured his hair black, and endeavoured to conceal whatwould discover how old he was; but that if he would applyhimself to him, when he should attain the kingdom, which, inspite of his father, could come to no one else, he should quicklyhave the first place in that kingdom under him, for that he wasnow ready to take the kingdom, not only as his birthright, butby the preparations he had made for obtaining it, because a greatmany of the rulers, and a great many of his friends, were of hisside, and those no ill men neither, ready both to do and to sufferwhatsoever should come on that account.
2. When Herod heard this confession, he was all over angerand fear, some parts seeming to him reproachful, and some madehim suspicious of dangers that attended him, insomuch that onboth accounts he was provoked, and bitterly afraid lest somemore heavy plot was laid against him than he should be thenable to escape from; whereupon he did not now make an opensearch, but sent about spies to watch such as he suspected, for hewas now overrun with suspicion and hatred against all abouthim; and indulging abundance of those suspicions, in order to hispreservation, he continued to suspect those that were guiltless;







OCR Output








170' ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. BookXJI.


3. But when he had ruled one year, and was fallen into a dis­temper, he called for his sons, and set them round about him, andsaid, " O my sons, I am going the way of all the earth, and I"recommend to you my resolution, and beseech you not to be"negligent in keeping it, but to be mindful of the desires of him"who begat you, and brought you up, and to preserve the cus-"toms of your country, and to recover your ancient form of gov-"ernment, which is in danger of being overturned, and not to"be carried away with those that, either by their own inclina-"tion, or out of necessity, betray it, but to become such sons as"are worthy of me; to be above all force and necessity, and so"to dispose your souls, as to be ready, when itshall be necessary,"to die for your laws, as sensible of this by just reasoning, that"if God see that you are so disposed he will not overlook you,"but will have a great value for your virtue, and will restore"to you again what you have lost, and will return to you that"freedom in which you shall live quietly, and enjoy your own"customs. Your bodies are mortal, and subject to fate, but"they receive a sort of immortality, by the remembrance of"what actions they have done. And I would have you so in"love with this immortality, that you may pursue after glory;"and that, when you have undergone the greatest difficulties,"you may not scruple, for such things, to lose your lives. 1"exhort you, especially, to agree one with another; and in what"excellency any one of you exceeds another, to yield to him so"far, and by that means to reap the advantage of every one's own"virtues. Do you then esteem Simon as your father, because"he is a man of extraordinary prudence, and to be governed"by him in what counsels he gives you. Take Maccabeus"for the general of your army, because of his courage and"strength, for he will avenge your nation, and will bring ven-"geance on your enemies. Admit among you the righteous"and religious, and augment their power."
4. When Mattathias had thus discoursed to his sons, and hadprayed to God to be their assistant, and to recover to the peopletheir former constitution, he died a little afterward, and wasburied at Modin; all the people making great lamentation forhim. Whereupon his son Judas took upon him the administra­tion of public affairs, in the hundred forty and sixth year: andthus by the ready assistance of his brethren, and of others, Judascast their enemies out of the country, and put those of their owncountry to death who had transgressed its laws, and purified theland of all the pollutions that were in it.







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 187


and had been built by the holy prophets, * he was smitten sud*denly by God, and fell dqwn. This stroke made him fall downspeechless upon the ground: and undergoing torments for manydays, he at length died, when he had been high priest four years.And when he was dead, the people bestowed the high priesthoodon Judas; who hearing of the power f of the Romans, and thatthey had conquered in war Galatia, and Iberia, and Carthage,and Lybia; and that, besides these, they had subdued Greece,and their kings, Perseus, and Philip, and Antiochus the Greatalso, he resolved to eater into a league of friendship with them.He therefore sent to Rome some of his friends, Eupolemus theson of John, and Jason the son of Eleazar, and by them desiredthe Romans that they would assist them, and be their friends,and would write to Demetrius that he would not fight againstthe Jews. So the senate received the ambassadors that came fromJudas to Rome, and discoursed with them about the errand onwhich they came, and then granted them a league of assistance.They also made a decree concerning it, and sent a copy of it intoJudea. It was also laid up in the capitol, and engraven inbrass. The decree itself was this: "The decree of the senate"concerning a league of assistance and friendship with the na>-"tion of the Jews. It shall not be lawful for any that are sub'"ject to the Romans to make war with the nation of the Jews,"nor to assist those that do so, either by sending them corn, or"ships, or money; and if any attack be made upon the Jews,"the Romans shall assist them, as far as they are able: and"again, if any attack be made upon the Romans, the Jews shall"assist them. And if the Jews had o mind to add to, or to"take away any thing from this league of assistance, that shall"be done with the common consent of the Romans. And what-"soever addition shall thus be made, it shall be of force." Thisdecree was written by Eupolemus the son of John, and by Ja­son the son of Eleazar, $ when Judas was high priest of the na­


» This account of the miserable death of Alcimus or Jaclmus, the wicked highpriest, (the first that was not of the family of the high priests, and made by a vileheathen, Lysias,) before the death of Judas, and of Judas' succession to him as ahigh priest, both here, and at the conclusion of this book, directly contradicts,1 Maccab. ix. 34—57. which places his death after the death of Judas, and says nota syllable of the high priesthood of Judas.
')- How well the Koman histories agree to this Bccouot of me conquests anpowerful condition of the Romans at this time, see the notes in Havercamp's edi­tion; only that the number of the senators of Rome was then just 32P, is, I think,only known from 1 Maccab. viii. 15.
J This subscription is wanting, 1 Maccab. viii. 17, 19. and must be the wordsof Josephus, who by mistake, thought, as we have just now seen, that Judas wasat this time high priest, and accordingly then reckoned his brother Jonathan to bethe general of the army, which yet he seems not to have been till after the death ofJudas.
VOL II. A. j, 2t







OCR Output








Chajl. Vf. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 12S


** be able to be revenged of Mordecai, for that God was with"him."
II. Now while these men were thus talking one to another,Esther's eunuchs hastened Haman away to come to supper; butone of the eunuchs named Sabuchadas, saw the gallows that wasfixed in Haman's house, and inquired of one of his servants, forwhat purpose they had prepared it? So he knew that it was forthe queen's uncle, because Haman was about to petition the kingthat he might be punished, but at present he held his peace.Now when the king, with Haman, were at the banquet, he de­sired the queen to tell him what gift she desired to obtain, andassured her that she should have whatsoever she had a mind to.She then lamented the danger her people were in; and said,that "she and her nation were given up to be destroyed, and"that she, on that account, made this her petition: that she"would not have troubled him if he had only given order that"they should be sold into bitter servitude, for such a misfortune"would not have been intolerable; but she desired that they"might be delivered from such a destruction." And when theking inquired of her who was the author of this misery to them?she then openly accused Haman, and convicted him, that hehad been the wicked instrument of this, and had formed hisplot against them.- When the king was hereupon in disorder,and was gone hastily out of the banquet into the gardens, Ha­man began to intercede with Esther, and to beseech her to for­give him, as to what he had offended, for he perceived that hewas in a very bad case. And as he had fallen upon the queen'sbed, and was making supplication to her, the king came in, andbeing still more provoked at what he saw, "O thou wretch,"said he, thou vilest of all mankind, dost thou aim to force"my wife?" And when Haman was astonished at this, andnot able to speak one word more, Sabuchadas the eunuch camein, and accused Haman and said, " He found a gallows at his"house prepared for Mordecai, for that the servant told him"so much upon his inquiry, when he was sent to him to call"him to supper." He said farther, "that the gallows was fifty"cubits high." Which when the king heard, he determined thatHaman should be punished after no other manner than thatwhich had been devised by him against Mordecai: so he gaveorder immediately that he should be hung upon this gallows,and be put to death after that manner. And from hence I can­not forbear to admire God, and to learn hence his wisdom andhis justice, not only in punishing the wickedness of Haman,but in so disposing it, that Ire should undergo the very samepunishment which he had contrived for another; as also, be­cause he thereby teaches others this lesson, that what mischiefs
VOL. II g 19







OCR Output








Chap. XIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 41


However, these four went along with them, and conducted themas far as Jericho, which is not far from Jerusalem, and return­ed to Samaria.
3. Hereupon king Ahaz having been so thoroughly beaten bythe Israelites, sent to Tiglath-Pileser, king of the Assyrians,and sued for assistance from him in his war against the Israel­ites, and Syrians, and Damascenes, with a promise to send himmuch money; he sent him also great presents at the same time.Now this king, upon the reception of those ambassadors, cameto «ssist Ahaz, and made war upon the Syrians, and laid theircountry waste, and took Damascus by force, and slew Rezintheir king, and transplanted the people of Damascus into theupper Media, and brought a colony of Assyrians, and plantedthem in Damascus. He also afflicted the land of Israel, andtook many captives out of it. While he was doing thus withthe Syrians, king Ahaz took all the gold that was in the king'streasures, and the silver, and what was in the temple of God,and what precious gifts were there, and he carried them withhim, and came to Damascus, and gave it to the king of Assy­ria, according to his agreement. So he confessed that he owedhim thanks for all they had done for him, and returned to Jeru­salem. Now this king was so sottish, and thoughtless of whatwas for his own good, that he would not leave off worshippingthe Syrian gods when he was beaten by them, but he went onin worshipping them, as though they would procure him thevictory: and when he was beaten again he began to honourthe gods of the Assyrians; and he seemed more desirous tohonour any other gods than his own paternal and true God,whose anger was the cause of his defeat; nay, he proceeded tosuch a degree of despite and contempt [of God's worship],that he shut up the temple entirely, and forbade them to bringin their appointed sacrifices, and took away the gifts that hadbeen given to it. And when he -had offered these indignitiesto God, he died, having lived thirty-six years, and of themreigned sixteen; and he left his son Hezekiah for his successor.
CHAP. XIII.
HowPeJcah died by the treachery of Hoshea, who was a little af-ter subdued by Shalmaneser: And how Hezekiah reigned in­stead of Ahaz ; and what actions of piety and justice he did.
J 1. ABOUT the same tune, Pekah, the king of Israel, died,by the treachery of a friend of his, whose name was Hoshea,who retained the kingdom nine years time, but was a wicked







OCR Output








302 ANTIO,UJTIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


CHAP. XIV.
How Herod got away from the king of Arabia, and made hasteto go into Egypt, and thence -went away in haste also to Rome:and how, by promising a great deal of money to Antony, lieobtained of'the senate and of'Caesar, to be made king of theJews.
§ 1. A s for Herod, the great miseries he was in did not dis­courage him, but made him sharp in discovering surprisingundertakings; for he went to Malchus, king of Arabia, whom hehad formerly been very kind to, in order to receive somewhatby way of requital, now he was in more than ordinary want ofit, and desired he would let him have some money, either by wayof loan, or as his free gift, on account of the many benefits hehad received from him; for not knowing what was become of hisbrother, he was in haste to redeem him out of the hands of hisenemies, as willing to give three hundred talents for the priceof his redemption. He also took with him the son of Phasaelus,who was a child of but seven years of age, for this very reasonthat he might be a hostage for the repayment of the money;but there came messengers from Malchus to meet him, bywhom he was desired to be gone, for that the Parthians hadlaid a charge upon him not to entertain Herod. This was onlya pretence which he made use of that he might not be obliged torepay him what he owed him: and this he was farther inducedto, by the principal men among the Arabians, that they mighttheat him of what sums they had received from [his father] An-tipater, and which he had committed to their fidelity. He madeanswer that he did not intend to be troublesome to them by hiscoming thither, but that he desired only to discourse with themabout certain affairs that were to him cf the greatest import­ance.
2. Hereupon he resolved to go away, and did go very prudent­ly the road to Egypt; and then it was that he lodged in a cer­tain temple, for he had left a great many of his followers there.On the next day he came to Rhinocolura, and there it was that heheard what was befallen his brother. Though Malchus soon re­pented of what he had done, and came running after Herod, butwith no manner of success, for he was gotten a very great wayoff, and made haste into the road to Pelusium; and when the sta­tionary ships that lay there hindered him from sailing to Alex­andria, he wentto their captains, by whose assistance, and that outof much reverence of, and great regard to him, he was conductedinto the city [Alexandria,] and was retained there by Cleopatra,







OCR Output








272 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


follows: "Lucius Valerius, the son of Lucius the pretor refer-"red this to the senate, upon the ides of December, in the tem-"pie of Concord. There were present at the writing of this de-"cree Lucius Coponius, the son of Lucius of the Colline tribe,"and Pepirius of the Quirine tribe, concerning the affairs"which Alexander the son of Jason, and Numenius the son"of Antiochus, and Alexander the son of Dositheus, ambas-"sadors of the Jews, good and worthy men, proposed, who"came to renew that league of good-will and friendship with"the Romans which was in being before. They also brought"a shield of gold, as a mark of confederacy, valued at fifty"thousand pieces of gold; and desired that letters might be"given them, directed both to the free cities and to the kings,"that their country and their havens might be at peace, and"that no one among them might receive any injury. It there-"fore pleased [the senate] to make a league of friendship and"good-will with them, and to bestow on them whatsoever they"stood in need of, and to accept of the shield which was brought"by them. This was done in the ninth year of Hyrcanus the"high priest and ethnarch, in the month Panemus." Hyrcan­us also received honours from the people of Athens, as havingbeen useful to them on many occasions. And when they wroteto him they sent him this decree, as it here follows; "Under"the Prutaneia and priesthood of Dionysius, the son of Escu-"lapius, on the fifth day of the latter part of the month Pane-"mus, this decree of the Athenians was given to their com-"manders, when Agathocles was archon, and Eucles, the son"of Menander of Alimusia, was the scribe. In the month Mu-"nychion, on the eleventh day of the Prutaneia, a council of"the presidents was held in the theatre. Dorotheus the high"priest, and the fellow presidents with him, put it to the vote"of the people. Dionysius the son of Dionysius, gave the"sentence: Since Hyrcanus, the son of Alexander, the high"priest and ethnarch of the Jews, continues to bear good-will"to our people in general, and to every one of our citizens in"particular, and treats them with all sorts of kindness; and"when any of the Athenians come to him, either as ambassa-"dors, or on any occasion of their own, he receives them in an
"' gave order for one thing, and his amanuensis performed another, by transposing"decrees that concerned the Hyrcani, and as deluded by the sameness of their"names, for that belongs to the Jirst high priest of this name, (John Hyrcanus,)"which Josephus here ascribes to one that lived later, (Hrycanus the son of Alex-"ander Janneus.) However, the decrees which he proposes to set down follows a"little lower, in the collection of Roman decrees, that concerned the Jews, and ii-' that dated when Caesar was consul the fifth time." See chap. 10. sect. 5.







OCR Output








20 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book IX.


out of his wrath against him), and so he died miserably, andsaw his own bowels fall out The people also abused his deadbody: I suppose it was because they thought that such his deathcame upon him by the wrath of God, and that therefore he wasnot worthy to partake of such a funeral as became kings. Ac­cordingly, they neither buried him in the sepulchres of his fa­thers, nor vouchsafed him any honours, but buried him like aprivate man, and this when he had lived forty years, and reignedeight: And the people of Jerusalem delivered the government tohis son Ahaziah.
CHAP. VI.
How Jehu was anointed king and slew both Joram and Ahaziah ',as also what he did for the punishment of the wicked.
$ 1. Now Joram the king of Israel, after the death ofBenhadad, hoped that he might now take Ramoth, a city ofGilead from the Syrians. Accordingly he made an expedi­tion against it, with a great army: but as he was besieging it,an arrow was shot at him by one of the Syrians, but the woundwas not mortal: So he returned to have his wound healed inJezrcel, but left his whole army in Ramoth, and Jehu the son ofNimshi for their general, for he had already taken the city byforce; and he proposed, after he was healed, to make war withthe Syrians; but Elisha the prophet sent one of hie disciples toRamoth, and gave him holy oil to anoint Jehu, and to tell him,that God had chosen him to be their king. He also sent him tosay other things to him, and bid him to take his journey as if hefled, that when he came away he might escape the knowledge ofall men. So when he was come to the city, he found Jehu sitting inthe midst of the captains of the army, as Elisha had foretold heshould find him. So he came up to him, and said, that he desiredto speak with him about certain matters; and when he was arisen,and had followed him into an inward chamber, the young mantook the oil, and poured it on his head, and said, that " God or-"dained him to be king, in order to his destroying the house of"Ahab, and that he might revenge the blood of the prophets,"that were unjustly slain by Jezebel, that so their house"might utterly perish, as those of Jeroboam the son of Nebat,"and of Baasha, had perished for their wickedness, and no seed"might remain of Ahab's family." So when he had said this,he went away hastily out of the chamber, and endeavoured notto be seen by any of the army.
2. But Jehu came out, and went to the place where he beforesat with the captains : and when they asked him, and desired himto tell them, wherefore it was that this young man came to him?







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 339


bians fled; and so great a slaughter was made upon their beingrouted, that they were not only killed by their enemies, butbecame the authors of their own deaths also, and were troddendown by the multitude, and the great current of people in dis­order, and were destroyed by their own armour; so five thou­sand men lay dead upon the spot, while the rest of the multi­tude soon ran within the bulwark [for safety,] but had no firmhope of safety, by reason of their want of necessaries, and es­pecially of water. The Jews pursued them; but could not getin with them, but sat round about the bulwark, and watchedany assistance that would get in to them, and prevented any there,that had a mind to it, from running away.
5. When the Arabians were in these circumstances, they sentambassadors to Herod, in the first place to propose terms of ac­commodation, and after that to offer him, so pressing was theirthirst upon them, to undergo whatsoever he pleased, if he wouldfree them from their present distress; but he would admit of noambassadors, of no price of redemption, nor of any other mode­rate terms whatever, being very desirous to revenge those unjustactions which they had been guilty of towards his nation. Sothey were necessitated by other motives, and particularly by theirthirst, to come out, and deliver themselves up to him, to be car­ried away captives; and in five days' time, the number of fourthousand were taken prisoners, while all the rest resolved to makea sally upon their enemies, and to fight it out with them, choos­ing rather, if so it must be, to die therein, than to perish gradu­ally and ingloriously. When they had taken this resolution,they came out of their trenches, but could no way sustain thefight, being too much disabled, both in mind and body, and hav­ing not room to exert themselves, and thought it an advantageto bekilled, and a misery to survive; so at the first onset there fellabout seven thousand of them, after which stroke, they let all thecourage they had put on before fall, and stood amazed at Herod's'warlike spirit under his own calamities; so for the future, theyyielded, and made him ruler of their nation; whereupon he wasgreatly elevated at so seasonable a success, and returned hometaking great authority upon him, on account of so bold and glo­rious an expedition as he had made.
CHAP. VI.
Haw Herod slew Hyrcanus, and then hasted away to Ctesar, andobtained the kingdom from him also; and how a little time af­terward, he entertained Ctxsar in a most honourable manner.
$ 1. .HEROD'S other affairs were now very prosperous; andhe was not to be easily assaulted on any side. Yet did thereVOL. iI. u u' 25







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 131


ander; and finding him beginning the siege of Tyre, he said tohim, that he delivered up to him these men, who came out ofplaces under his dominion, and did gladly accept of him for hislord, instead of Darius. So when Alexander had received himkindly, Sanballat thereupon took courage, and spake to himabout his present affair. He told him, That "he had a son-in-"law, Manasseh, who was brother to the high priest Jaddua s"and that there were many others of his own nation, now with"him, that were desirous to have a temple in the same places"subject to him: that it would be for the king's advantage to"have the strength of the Jews divided into two parts, lest when"the nation is of one mind, and united, upon any attempt for"innovation, it prove troublesome to kings, as it had formerly"proved to the kings of Assyria." Whereupon Alexander gaveSanballat leave so to do, who used the utmost diligence, andbuilt the temple, and made Manasseh the priest, and deemed ita great reward, that his daughter's children should have thatdignity: but when the seven months of the siege of Tyre wereover, and the two months of the siege of Gaza, Sanballat died.Now Alexander, when he had taken Gaza, made haste to go upto Jerusalem : and Jaddua the high priest, when he heard that,was in an agony, and under terror, as not knowing how heshould meet the Macedonians, since the king was displeased athis foregoing disobedience. He therefore ordained that thepeople should make supplications, and should join with him inoffering sacrifice to God, whom he besought to protect that na­tion, and to deliver them from the perils that were coming up­on them j Whereupon God warned him in a dream, which cameupon him after he had offered sacrifice, That " he should take"courage, and adorn the city, and open the gates ; that the rest"should appear in white garments, but that he and the priests"should meet the king in the habits proper to their order,"without the dread of any ill consequences, which the provi-"dence of God would prevent." Upon which, when he rose fromhis sleep, he greatly rejoiced; and declared to all the warninghe had received from God. According to which dream hei act­ed entirely, and so waited for the coming of the king.
5. And when he understood that he was not far from the cityyhe went out in procession, with the priests and the multitude ofthe citizens. The procession was venerable, and the manner ofit different from that of other nations. It reached to a placecalled Sapha, which name translated into Greek, signifies a pros­pect, for you have thence a prospect both of Jerusalem and ofthe temple; and when the Phenicians and the Chaldeans ; thatfollowed him, thought they should have liberty to plunder thecity, and torment the high priest to death, which the king's dis­pleasure fairly promised them, the very reverse of it happened;
VOL. n. K 19







OCR Output








260 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIIL


Gabinius came back being both excluded out of the city, andreceiving none of the money promised, because Aristobulus'soldiers would not permit the agreements to be executed. Atthis Pompey was very angry, and put Aristobulus into prisonand came himself to the city, which was strong on every side,excepting the north, which was not so well fortified, for therewas * a broad and deep ditch that encompassed the city, and in­cluded within the temple, which was itself encompassed aboutwith a very strong stone wall.
2. Now there was a sedition of the men that were within thecity, who did not agree what was to be done in their presentcircumstances, while some thought it best to deliver up the cityto Pompey: but Aristobulus' party exhorted them to shut thegates, because he was kept in prison. Now these prevented theothers and seized upon the temple, and cut oft' the bridge whichreached from it to the city, and prepared themselves to abide asiege; but the others admitted Pompey's army in, and deliveredup both the city and the king's palace to him. So Pompey senthis lieutenant Piso with an army, and placed garrisons both inthe city and in the palace, to secure them, and fortified thehouses that joined to the temple: and all those which were moredistant, and without it. And in the first place, he offered termsof accommodation to those within, but when they would notcomply with what was desired, he encompassed all the placesthereabout with a wall, wherein Hyrcanus did gladly assist himon all occasions, but Pompey pitched his camp within [the wall,]on the north part of the temple, where it was most practicable;but even, on that side there were great towers, and a ditch hadbeen dug, and a deep valley begirt it round about, for on theparts towards the city were precipices, and the bridge on whichPompey had gotten in, was broken down; however, a bank wasraised day by day, with a great deal of labour, while the Ro­mans cut down materials for it from the places round about:And when this bank was sufficiently raised and the ditch filledup, though but poorly, by reason of its immense depth, hebrought his mechanical engines and battering rams from Tyre,and placing them on the bank he battered the temple with thestones that were thrown against it. And had it not been ourpractice, from the days of our forefathers, to rest on the se­


* The particular depth and breadth of this ditch whence the stones for the wallabout the temple were probably taken, are omitted in our copies of Josephus, but setdown by Strabo, B. XVI. p. 763. from whom we learn, that this ditch was CO feetdeep, and 250 feet broad. However, its depth is, in the first section, said by Jose-phus to be immense, which exactly agrees to Strabo's description, and which numberin Strabo are a strong confirmation of the truth of Josephus' description also.







OCR Output








Chap. V. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 218


they say that some actions, but not all, are the work of fate, andsome of them are in our own power, and that they are liable tofate, but are not caused by fate. But the sect of the Essensaffirm, that fate governs all things, and that nothing befalls menbut what is according to its determination. And for the Saddu-cees they take away fate and say there is no such thing, andthat the events of human affairs are not at its disposal, but theysuppose that all our actions are in our own power, so that we areourselves the causes of what is good, and receive what is evilfrom our own folly. However, I have given a more exact ac­count of these opinions in the second book of the Jewish war.
10. But now the generals of Demetrius being willing to re­cover the defeat they had had, gathered a greater army togetherthan they had before, and came against Jonathan; but as soon ashe was informed of their coming, he went suddenly to meetthem, to the country of Hamoth, for he resolved to give themno opportunity of coming into Judea, so he pitched his camp atfifty furlongs distant from the enemy, and sent out spies to takea view of their camp, and after what manner they were encamp­ed. When his spies had given him full information, and hadseized upon some of them by night, who told him the enemywould soon attack him, he, thus apprized beforehand, providedfor his security, and placed watchmen beyond his camp, andkept all his forces armed all night; and he gave them a chargeto be of good courage, and to have their minds prepared to fightin the night time, if they should be obliged to do so, lest theirenemies' designs should seem concealed from them. But whenDemetrius' commanders were informed, that Jonathan knewwhat they mtended, their counsels were disordered, and it alarm­ed them to find, that the enemy had discovered those their in­tentions, nor did they expect to overcome them any other way,now they had failed in the snares they had laid for them; forshould they hazard an open battle, they did not think theyshould be a match for Jonathan's army, so they resolved tofly: and having lighted many fires, that when the enemy sawthem they might suppose they were there still, they retired.But when Jonathan came to give them battle in the morning intheir camp, and found it deserted, and understood they were fled,he pursued them, yet he could not overtake them, for they hadalready passed over the river Eleutherus, and were out of danger.So when Jonathan was returned thence, he went into Arabia,and fought against the Nabateans, and drove away a great dealof their prey, and took [many] captives, and came to Damascus,and there sold of that he had taken. About the same time itwas, that Simon his brother went over all Judea and Palestine,as far as Askelon, and fortified the strong holds; and when he







OCR Output








372 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XV.


3. So Herod took away the old foundations, and laid others,and erected the temple upon them, being in length a hundredcubits, and in height twenty additional cubits, which [twenty,]upon the * sinking of their foundations, fell down: and this partit was that we resolved to raise again in the days of Nero. Nowthe temple was built of stones that were white and strong, andeach of their length was twenty-five cubits, their height waseight, and their breadth about twelve; and the whole structure,as was also the structure of the royal cloister, was on each sidemuch lower, but the middle was much higher, till they werevisible to those that dwelt in the country for a great many fur­longs, but chiefly to such as lived over against them, and thosethat approached to them. The temple had doors also at the en­trance, and lintels over them, of the same height with the tem­ple itself. They were adorned with embroidered vails, withtheir flowers of pm-pie, and pillars interwoven: and over these,but under the crown-work, was spread out a golden vine, withits branches hanging down from a great height, the largeness andfine workmanship of which was a surprising sight to the specta­tors, to see what vast materials there were, and with what greatskill the workmanship was done. He also encompassed the en­tire temple with very large cloisters, contriving them to be in adue proportion thereto; and he laid out larger sums of moneyupon them than had been done before him, till it seemed that noone else had so greatly adorned the temple as he had done. Therewas a large wall to both the cloisters, which wall was itself themost prodigious work that was ever heard of by man. The hillwas a rocky ascent, that declined by degrees towards the eastparts of the city, till it came to an elevated level. This hill itwas which Solomon, who was the first of our kings, by divinerevelation, encompassed with a wall; it was of excellent work­manship upwards, and round the top of it. He also built a wallbelow, beginning at the bottom, which was encompassed by a


* Some of our modern students in architecture have made a strange blunderhere, when they imagine that Joseph us affirms the entire foundation of the tempi*or holy house sunk down into the rocky mountain on which it stood, no less than20 cubits; whereas he is clear, that they were the foundations of the (ulduiimal 20cubits only above the hundred, (made perhaps weak on purpose, and only for showand grandeur.) that sunk or fell do\vn, as Dr. Hudson rightly understands him: noris the thing itself possible in the other sense. Agrippa's preparation for building theinner pans of the temple 20 cubits higher, (H istory of the War, B. V. ch. i. stct. 5.)must in all probability refer to this matter, since Josephus says here, that this whichhad fallen down was designed to 1 craised up again under NeTO, under whom Agrippamade that preparation. But what Josejihus says presently, that Solomon was thefirst king of the Jews, appears by the paraltel place, .Amu;. B. XX. ch. ix. sect. 7.vol. III. and other places, to be meant only the first of David's posterity, ami the firstbuilder of the temple.







OCR Output








16 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book IX


riches also, and betook themselves to flight. And those leperswho had departed from Samaria, and were gone to the campof the Syrians, of whom we made mention a little before, whenthey were in the camp, saw nothing but great quietness and si­lence : accordingly they entered into it, and went hastily into oneof their tents, and when they saw nobody there they eat anddrank, and carried garments and a great quantity of gold, andhid it out of the camp ; after which they went into another tent,and carried off what was in it, as they did at the former, andthis did they for several times, without the least interruptionfrom any body. So they gathered thereby that the enemieswere departed; whereupon they reproached themselves thatthey did not inform Joram and the citizens of it. So they cameto the walls of Samaria, and called aloud to the watchmen, andtold them in what state the enemies were, as did these tell theking's guards, by whose means Joram came to know of it; whothen sent for his friends, and the captains of his host, and said tothem, That "he suspected that this departure of the king of Sy-"ria was by way of ambush and treachery, and that out of de-"spair of ruining you by famine, when you imagine them to"be fled away, you may come out of the city to spoil their"camp, and he may then fall upon you on a sudden, and may"both kill you, and take the city without fighting; whence it"is that I exhort you to guard the city carefully, and by no -"means to go out of it, or proudly to despise your enemies, as"though they were really gone away." And when a certainperson said, That "he did very well and wisely to admit such a"suspicion, but that he still advised him to send a couple of"horsemen to search all the country, as far as Jordan, that if"they were seized by an ambush of the enemy, they might be"a security to your army, that they may not go out as if they"suspected nothing, nor undergo the like misfortune; and,"(said he), those horsemen may be numbered among those"that have died by the famine, supposing they be caught and"destroyed by the enemy." So the king was pleased with thisopinion and sent such as might search out the truth, who per­formed their journey over a road that was without any enemies,but found it full of provisions, and of weapons, that they hadtherefore thrown away, and left behind them, in order to theirbeing light and expeditious in their flight. When the king heardthis, he sent out the multitude to take the spoils of the camp;which gains of theirs was not of things of small value, but theytook a great quantity of gold, and a great quantity of silver,and flocks of all kinds of cattle. They also possessed themselvesof [so many] ten thousand measures of wheat and barley, as theynever in the least dreamed of; and were not only freed from







OCR Output








234 . ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIII.


for war, and desired him to come to him in that armour, that hemight see how fine it was. So Antigonus suspecting no treach­ery, but depending on the good-will of his brother, came toAristobulus armed, as he used to be, with his entire armour,in order to show it to him; but when he was come at a placewhich was called Strato's Tower, where the passage happenedto be exceeding dark, the guards slew him; which death of hisdemonstrates that nothing is stronger than envy and calumny,and that nothing does more certainly divide the good-will andnatural affections of men than those passions. But here onemay take occasion to wonder at one Judas, who was of the sectof tlie Essens, and who never missed the truth in his predictions;for this man when he saw Antigonus passing by the temple,cried out to his companions and friends, who abode with himas his * scholars, in order to learn the art of foretelling things tocome, "That it was good for him to die now, since he had"spoken falsely about Antigonus, who is still alive, and I see"him passing by, although he had foretold he should die at"the place called Strato's Tower, that very day, while yet the"place is six hundred furlongs off, where he had foretold he"should be slain; and still this day is a great part of it already"past, so that he was in danger of proving a false prophet."As he was saying this, and that in a melancholy mood, thenews came that Antigonus was slain in a place under ground,which itself was called also Strato's Tower, or of the same namewith that Cesarea which is seated at the sea. This event putthe prophet into a great disorder.
3. But Aristobulus repented immediately of this slaughter ofhis brother, on which account his disease increased upon him,and he was disturbed in his mind, upon the guilt of such wick­edness, insomuch that his entrails were corrupted by his intol­erable pain, and he vomited blood: at which time one of theservants that attended upon him, and was carrying his bloodaway, did, by divine providence, as I cannot but suppose, slipdown and shed part of his blood at the very place where therewere spots of Antigonus' blood there slain, still remaining;and when there was a cry made by the spectators, as if the ser­vant had on purpose shed the blood on that place, Aristobulusheard it and inquired what the matter was? And as theydid not answer him, he was the more earnest to know what it


* Hence we learn that the Essens pretended to have rules whereby men mightforeteli things to come, and that this Judas the Essen, taught those rules to hisscholars; but whether their pretences were of an astrological or magical nature,which yet in such religious Jews, who were utterly forbidden such ans, is no wayprobable, or to any Bath Col, spoken of by the latter Rabbins, or otherwise, I can­not tell. See of the War, B. II. chap. viii. sect. 12. vol. III.







OCR Output








Chap. V. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


given them leave, they also hid the circumcision of their geni­tals, that even when they were naked, they might appear to beGreeks. Accordingly they left off all the customs that belongedto their own country, and imitated the practices of the othernations.
2. Now Antiochus, upon the agreeable situation of the affairsof his kingdom, resolved to make an expedition against Egypt,both because he had a desire to gain it, and because he contemnedthe son of Ptolemy, as now weak, and not yet of abilities to man­age affairs of such consequence; so he came with great forcesto Pelusium, and circumvented Ptolemy Philometer by treach­ery, and seized upon Egypt. He then came to the places aboutMemphis; and when he had taken them, he made haste toAlexandria, in hopes of taking it by siege, and of subduing Pto­lemy, who reigned there. But he was driven not only fromAlexandria, but out of all Egypt, by the declarations of the Ro­mans, who charged him to let that country alone; accordingas I have elsewhere formerly declared. I will now give a par­ticular account of what concerns this king, how he subdued Ju-dea and the temple; for in my former work I mentioned thosethings very briefly, and have therefore now thought it necessaryto go over that history again, and that with greater accuracy.
3. * King Antiochus returning out of Egypt, for fear of theRomans, made an expedition against the city Jerusalem; andwhen he was there, in the hundred forty and third year of thekingdom of the Seleucidae, he took the city without fighting,those of his own party opening the gates to him. And whenhe had gotten possession of Jerusalem he slew many of theopposite party; and when he had plundered it of a great deal ofmoney, he returned to Antioch.
4. Now it came to pass, after two years, in the hundred fortyand fifth year, on the twenty-fifth day of that month, which isby us called Chasleu, and by the Macedonians Apelleus, in thehundred and fifty-third olympiad, that the king came up to Je­rusalem, and pretending peace, he got possession of the city bytreachery: at which time he spared not so much as those that


uncircumcised Gentiles, these Jewish apostates endeavoured to appear uncircumcised,by means of a ehirurgical operation, hinted at by St. Paul, 1 Cor. vii. 18. and de­scribed by Celsus, B. VII. chap. xxv. as Dr. Hudson here informs us.
* Hereabouts Josephus begins to follow the first book of the Maccabees, a mostexcellent and most authentic history; and accordingly it is here, with great fidelityand exactness, abridged by him; between whose present copies there seem to be fewervariations than in any other sacred Hebrew book of the Old Testament whatsoever,(for this book also was originally written in Hebrew), which it very natural, becauseit was written so much nearer to the times of Josephus than the rest were.







OCR Output








Chap. I. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 4J


BOOKX.
CONTIIKING THE INTERVAL OF ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-TWO YEARS AND A HALF.
[FKOM THE CAPTIVITY OF THE TEN TRIBES TO THE FIRSTOF CYRUS.]


CHAP. I.
Hem Sennacherib made an expedition against Hezekiah,- ivhatthreatenings Rabshakeh made to Hezekiah when Sennacheribleas gone against the Egyptians; how Isaiah the prophet en­couraged him; how Sennacherib, having failed of success inEgypt* returned thence to Jerusalem; and how, upon hisflndinghis army destroyed, he returned home ,- and what befell him alittle afterward.
4 1. IT was now the fourteenth year of the governmentof Hezekiah, king of the two tribes, when the king of Assy­ria, whose name was Sennacherib, made an expedition againsthim with a great army, and took all the cities of the tribe ofJudah and Benjamin by force; and when he was ready to bringhis army against Jerusalem, Hezekiah sent ambassadors to himbeforehand, and promised to submit, and pay what tribute heshould appoint. Hereupon Sennacherib, when he heard of whatoffers the ambassadors made, resolved not to proceed in the war,but to accept of the proposals that were made him; and if hemight receive three hundred talents of silver, andj thirty talentsof gold, he promised that he would depart in a Friendly manner;and he gave security upon oath to the ambassadors that he wouldthen do him no harm, but go away as he came. So Hezekiahsubmitted, and emptied his treasures, and sent the money, as sup­posing he should be freed from his enemy, and from any fartherdistress about his kingdom. Accordingly, the Assyrian king tookit; and yet had no regard to what he had promised; but while hehimself went to the war against the Egyptians and Ethio­pians, he left his general Rabshakeh, and two other command­ers, with great forces, to destroy Jerusalem. The names ofthe two other commanders were Tartan and Rabsaris.
2. Now as soon as they were come before the walls, they pitch­ed their camp, and sent messengers to Hezekiah, and desired that







OCR Output








42 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book IX.


man, and a despiser of the divine worship. And Shalmaneser,the king of Assyria, made an expedition against him, and over­came him, (which must have been because he had not God fa­vourable or assistant to him), and brought him to submission,and ordered him to pay an appointed tribute. Now in thefourth year of the reign of Hoshea, Hezekiah, the son of Ahaz,began to reign in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Abi-jah, a citizen of Jerusalem. His nature was good, and right­eous, and religious; for when he came to the kingdom, hethought that nothing was prior, or more necessary, or moreadvantageous to himself, and to his subjects, than to worshipGod. Accordingly, he called the people together, and thepriests and the Levites, and made a speech to them, and said,"you are not ignorant, how by the sins of my father, who"transgressed that sacred honour which was due to God, you"have had experience of many and great miseries, while you"were corrupted in your mind by him, and were induced to"worship those which he supposed to be gods: I exhort you"therefore, who have learned by sad experience how danger-"ous a thing impiety is, to put that immediately out of your"memory, and to purify yourselves from your former pollu-"tions, and to open the temple to these priests and Levites"who are here convened, and to cleanse it with the accustom-"ed sacrifices, and to recover all to the ancient honour which. " our fathers paid to it; for by this means we may render God"favourable, and he will remit the anger he hath had to us."
2. When the king had said this, the priests opened the temple;and when they had set in order the vessels of God, and cast outwhat was impure, they laid the accustomed sacrifices upon the al­tar. The king also sent to the country that was under him, andcalled the people to Jerusalem to celebrate the feast of unleaven­ed bread, for it had been intermitted a long time, on account of thewickedness of the forementioned kings. He also sent to theIsraelites, and exhorted them to leave off their present way ofliving, and return to their ancient practices, and to worshipGod, for that he gave them leave to come to Jerusalem, and tocelebrate, all in one body, the feast of unleavened bread; andthis, he said, was by way of invitation only, and to be doneof their own good-will, and for their own advantage, and notout of obedience to him, because it would make them happy.But the Israelites, upon the coming of the ambassadors, and up­on their laying before them what they had in charge from theirown king, were so far from complying therewith, that theylaughed the ambassadors to scorn, and mocked them as fools:as also they affronted the prophets which gave them the sameexhortations, and foretold what they would suffer if they did notreturn to the worship of God, insomuch that at length they







OCR Output








328 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book.XV.


put him to death. This report, as is natural, disturbed thosethat were about the palace, but chiefly the women: Uponwhich Alexandra endeavoured to persuade Josephtogoout of thepalace, and fly to the ensigns of the Roman legion, which thenlay encamped about the city as a guard to the kingdom, underthe command of Julius; for that, by this means, if any disturb­ance should happen about the palace, they should be in greatersecurity, as having the Romans favourable to them; and thatbesides, they hoped to obtain the highest authority, if Antonydid but once see Mariamne, by whose means they should re­cover the kingdom, and want nothing which was reasonablefor them to hope for, because of their royal extraction.
8. But as they were in the midst of these deliberations, letterswere brought from Herod about all his affairs, and proved con­trary to the report, and of what they before expected; for whenhe was come to Antony, he soon recovered his interest withhim, by the presents he made him, which he had brought withhim from Jerusalem, and he soon induced him, upon discoursingwith him, to leave off' his indignation at him, so that Cleopatra'spersuasions had less force than the arguments and presents hebrought, to regain his friendship, for Antony said, That, "it"was not good to require an account of a king, as to the affairs"of his government, for at this rate he could be no king at all,"but that those who had given him that authority ought to per- ."mit him to make use of it." He also said" the same things toCleopatra, that it would be best for her not busily to meddlewith the acts of the king's government. Herod wrote an ac­count of these things, and "enlarged upon the other honours"which he had received from Antony: how he sat by him at"his hearing causes, and took his diet with him every day,"and that he enjoyed those favours from him, notwithstanding"the reproaches that Cleopatra so severely laid against him,"who having a great desire of his country, and earnestly en-"treating Antony that the kingdom might be given to her, la-"boured with her utmost diligence to have him out of the way,"but that he still found Antony just to him, and had no longer"any apprehensions of hard treatment from him; and that he"was soon upon his return, with a firmer additional assurance"of his favour to him, in his reigning and managing public"affairs; and that there was no longer any hope for Cleopatra's"covetous temper, since Antony had given her Ccelesyria in-"stead of what she desired, by which means he had at once"pacified her, and got clear, of the entreaties which she made"him to have Judea bestowed upon her."
9. When these letters were brought, the women left off theirattempt for flying to the Romans, which they thought of while







OCR Output








152 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XII.


"in the winter time overthrew the nation of the Jews. He al-"so saith, in the same book, that when Scopas was conquered"by Antiochus, Antiochus received Batanea and Samaria, and"Abila and Gadara: and that, a while afterwards, there came"in to him those Jews that inhabited near that temple which"was called Jerusalem, concerning which, although I have"more to say, and particularly concerning the presence of God"about the temple, yet do I put off that history till another"opportunity." This it is which Polybius relates. But wewill return to the series of the history, when we have first pro­duced the epistle of king Antiochus:
"King ANTIOCHUS to PTOLEMY, sendeth greeting:
"Since the Jews, upon our first entrance on their country, de-"monstrated their friendship towards us; and when we came"to their city [Jerusalem,] received us in a splendid manner,"and came to meet us with their senate, and gave abundance of"provisions to our soldiers, and to the elephants, and joined"with us in ejecting the garrison of the Egyptians that were in"the citadel, we have thought fit to reward them, and to re-"trieve the condition of their city, which had been greatly de-"populated by such accidents as have befallen its inhabitants,"and to bring those that have been scattered abroad back to the'; city. And, in the first place, we have determined, on ac-"count of their piety towards God, to bestow on them, as a"pension, for their sacrifices of animals that are fit for sacrifice,"for wine and oil, and frankincense, the value of twenty thou-"sand pieces of silver, and [six] sacred artabrae of fine flour,"with one thousand four hundred and sixty medimni of wheat,"and three hundred and seventy-five medimni of salt. And"these payments I would have fully paid them, as I have sent"orders to you. I would also have the work about the temple"finished, and the cloisters, and if there be any thing else that"ought to be rebuilt.. And for the materials of wood, let it"be brought them out of Judea itself, and out of the other"countries, and out of Libanus, tax free: and the same I would"have observed as to those other materials which will be ne-"cessary, in order to render the temple more glorious. And let"all of that nation live according to the laws of their own coun-"try; and let the senate and the priests, and the scribes of the"temple, and the sacred singers, be discharged from poll-mo-"ney and the crown tax, and other taxes also. And that the"city may the sooner recover its inhabitants, I grant a dis-"charge from taxes for three years to its present inhabitants;"and to such as shall come to it, until the month Hyperbere-







OCR Output








W AWFJO^rFMKS OP THE JEWS, Book X,


that he had raised over against the walls were of a great height,and when he was ready to make an immediate assault upon them,but heard that Tirhaka, king of the Ethiopians, was coming andbringing great forces to aid the Egyptians, and was resolved tomarch through tfie desart, and so to fall directly upon the Assy­rians, this king Sennacherib was disturbed at the news, and, as Isaid before, left Pelusium, and returned back without- success.Now concerning this Sennacherib, Herodotus also says, in thesecond book of his histories, "How this King came against thea Egyptian king, who was the priest of Vulcan, and that as he"was besieging Pelusium, he broke up the siege on the follow-"ing occasion; this Egyptian priest prayed to God, and Godrt heard his prayer, and sent a judgment upon the Arabian king,"But in this Herodotus was mistaken when he called this kingHot king of the Assyrians, but of the Arabians; for he saith,that " a multitude of mice gnawed to pieces in one night both'* the bows and the rest of the armour of the Assyrians, and that44 it was on that account that the king, when he had no bows"left, drew off his army from Pelusium." And'Herodotus doesindeed give us this history; nay, and Berosus, who wrote of theaffairs of Chaldea, makes mention of this king Sennacherib, andthat he ruled over the Assyrians, and that he made an expedi­tion against all Asia and Egypt; and * says thus:
3. "Now when Sennacherib was returning from his Egyp-"tian war to Jerusalem, he found his army under Rabshakeh"his general, in danger [by a plague], for God had sent a pes-"tilential distemper upon his qrmy; and on the very first nightK of the siege, a hundred fourscore and five thousand, with theirw captains and general's, were destroyed: So the king was in a"great dread, and in a terrible agony at this calamity; and being"in great fear for his whole army, he fled with the rest of his"forces to his own kingdom, and to his city Nineveh: And"when he had abode there a little while, he was treacherously"assaulted, and died by the hands of his elder sons f Adram-** melech and Seraser; and was slam in his own temple, which was"called Araske. Now these sons of his were driven away on"account of the murder of their father by the citizens, and** went into Armenia, while Assarachoddas took the kingdom of


- * That this terrible calamity of the slaughter of the 185,000 Assyrians is here de­livered in the words of Berosus the Chaldean; and that it was certainly and fre­quently foretold by the Jewish prophets, and that it was certainly and undeniablyaccomplished, see Authentic. Kec. part II. page 858.
f We are here to take notice, that these two sons of Sennacherib, that ran awayinto Armenia, became the heads of two famous families there, the Arzcrunii andGenunii; of which see the particular histories iu Moses Choreuensis, p. 60.







OCR Output








14 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book IX.


"me, my lord," while he thought that she was about to ask forsomewhat to eat, he imprecated God's curse upon her, andsaid, "he had neither threshing-floor, nor wine-press, whence he"might give her any thing at her petition." Upon which shesaid, " She did not desire his aid in any such thing, nor trouble"him about food, but desired that he would do her justice as to"another woman." And when he bade her say on, and let himknow what she desired, she said, "She had made an agreement"with the other woman, who was her neighbour and her friend,"that because the famine and want was intolerable, they should"kill their children, each of them having a son of their own,"and we will live upon them ourselves for two days, the one day"upon one son, and the other day upon the other: and, said she,"I have killed my son the first day, and we lived upon my son"yesterday, but this other woman will not do the same thing,"but hath broken her agreement, and hath hid her son." Thisstory mightily grieved Joram when he heard it; so he renthis garment, and cried out with a loud voice, and conceived greatwrath against Elisha the prophet, and set himself eagerly to havehim slain, because he did not pray to God to provide them someexit and way of escape out of the miseries with which theywere surrounded, and sent one away immediately to cut off hishead, who made haste to kill the prophet; but Elisha was not un­acquainted with the wrath of the king against him; for as hesat in his house by himself, with none but his disciples about him,he told them, that Joram, * who was the son of a murderer, hadsent one to take away his head; but, said he, "when he that is"commanded to do this comes, take care that ye do not let him"come in, but press the door against him, and hold him fast"there, for the king himself will follow him, and come"to me having altered his mind." Accordingly, they did asthey were bidden, when he that was sent by the king to killElisha came; but Joram repented of his wrath against theprophet, and for fear he that was commanded to kill himshould have done it before he came, he made haste to hinder hisslaughter, and to save the prophet: and when he came to him,he accused him that he did not pray to God for their deliverancefrom the miseries they lay now under, but saw them so sadly de­stroyed by them. Hereupon Elisha promised, that the very next


* This son of a murderer was Joram, the son of Ahab, which Ahab slew, orpermitted his wife Jezebel to slay the Lord's prophets, and Naboth, I Kingsxviii. 4. xxi. 19. and he is here called by this name, I suppose, because he hadnow also himself sent an officer to murder him; yet is Josephus' account ofJoram's coming himself at tast, as repenting of his intended cruelty, muchmore probable than that in our copies, 2 Kings vi. 33. which rather implies thecontrary.







OCR Output








320 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XV.


These Jews honoured Hyrcanus as their high priest, and king;as did all the Jewish nation that dwelt as far as Euphrates;which respect was very much to his satisfaction. But when hewas informed that Herod had received the kingdom, new hopescame upon him, as having been himself still of a kind dispositiontowards him, and expecting that Herod would bear in mindwhat favour he had received from him, and when he was uponhis trial, and when he was in danger that a capital sentence wouldbe pronounced against him, he delivered him from that danger,and from all punishment. Accordingly, he talked of that matterwith the Jews that came often to him with great affection; butthey endeavoured to retain him among them, and desired thathe would stay with them, putting him in mind of the kind officesand honours they did him, and that those honours they paid himwere not at all inferior to what they could pay to either their highpriests or their kings: and what was a greater motive to deter­mine him, they said, was this, that he could not have those dig­nities [in Judea] because of that maim in his body, which hadbeen inflicted on him by Antigonus; and that kings do not useto requite men for those kindnesses which they received whenthey were private persons, the height of their fortune makingusually no small changes in them.
3. Now although they suggested these arguments to him forhis own advantage, yet did Hyrcanus still desire to depart. He­rod also wrote to him, and persuaded him to desire of Phraates,and the Jews that were there, that they should not grudge himthe royal authority, which he should have jointly with himself,for that now was the proper time for himself to make him amendsfor the favours he had received from him, as having been broughtup by him, and saved by him also, as well as for Hyrcanus toreceive it. And as he wrote thus to Hyrcanus, so did he sendalso Saramallas, his ambassador, to Phraates, and many presentswith him, and desired him in the most obliging way, that hewould be no hinderance to his gratitude towards his benefactor.But this zeal of Herod's did not flow from that principle, butbecause he had been made governor of that country without hav­ing any just claim to it, he was afraid, and that upon reasons goodenough, of a change in his condition, and so made what hastehe could to get Hyrcanus into his power, or indeed to put himquite out of the way: which last thing he compassed afterward.
4. Accordingly, when Hyrcanus came, full of assurance, bythe permission of the king of Parthia, and at the expense of theJews, who supplied him with money, Herod received him withall possible respect, and gave him the upper place at public meet­ings, and set him above all the rest at feasts, and thereby deceivedhim. He called him his father; and endeavoured by all the







OCR Output








98 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XL"


should be made at his own charges; and that the musical instf u-ments which the Levites used in singing hymns to God shouldbe given them. Moreover he charged them, that portions ofland should be given to those that guarded the city and the tem­ple, as also a determinate sum of money every year for theirmaintenance: and withal he sent the vessels. And all that Cy­rus intended to do before him relating to the restoration of Je­rusalem, Darius also ordained should be done accordingly.
9. Now when Zorobabel had obtained these grants from theking, he went out of the palace, and looking up to heaven, hebegan to return thanks to God for the wisdom he had given him,and the victory he had gained thereby, even- in the presence ofDarius himself; for, said he, "I had not been thought worthy"of these advantages, O Lord, unless thou hadst been favour-"able to me." When therefore he had returned these thanks toGod for the present circumstances he was in, and had prayed tohim to afford him the like favour for the time to come, he cameto Babylon, and brought the good news to his countrymen ofwhat grants he had procured for them from the king; who, when-they heard the same, gave thanks also to God that he restoredthe land of their forefathers to them again: So they betook them­selves to drinking, and eating, and for seven days they continuedfeasting, and kept a festival, for the rebuilding and restorationof their country: after this they <-V-se themselves rulers, whoshould go up to Jerusalem, out of i' '.ribes of their forefathers,with their wives and children, and cattle, who travelled to Je­rusalem with joy and pleasure, under the conduct of those whomDarius sent along with them, and making a noise with songs,and pipes, and cymbals. The rest of the Jewish multitude alsobesides accompanied them with rejoicing,
10. And thus did these men go, a certain and determinate num-»ber out of every family, though I do not think it proper to re-­cite particularly the name of those families, that I may not takeoff the mind of my readers from the connexion of the historicalfects, and make it hard for them to follow the coherence of mynarrations; but the sum of those that went up, above the age oftwelve years, of the tribes of Judah and Benjamin, was * fourhundred sixty-two myriads and eight thousand; the Levites wereseventy-four : the number of the women and children mixed to­gether was forty thousand seven hundred and forty-two; and be­sides these, there were singers of the Levites one hundred and


* This strange reading in Josophns' present copies of 4,OOO,COO instead of40,000, is one of the grossest errors that is in them, and ought to be correctedfrom Ezra ii. 64. 1 Esd. v. 40. and Neb. vii. 66. who all agree the general sumwas but about 42,360. It is also very plain, that Josephus thought, that whenEsdras afterwards brought up another company out of Babylon and Persia, in tlie







OCR Output








76 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book X.


given a command, that all the wise men should be put to death,and that among them himself and his three kinsmen were in dan­ger, he went to Arioch, who was captain of the king's guards,and desired to know of him what was the reason why the kinghad given command that all the wise men, and Chaldeans, andmagicians, should be slain; So when he had learned that theking had had a dream, and had forgotten it, and that when theywere enjoined to inferm the king of it, they had said they couldnot do it, and had thereby provoked him to anger; he desired ofArioch that he would go in to the king, and desire respite for themagicians for one night, and to put off their slaughter so long,for that he hoped within that time to obtain, by prayer to God,the knowledge of the dream. Accordingly, Arioeh informedthe king of what Daniel desired: So the kmg bid them delay theslaughter of the magicians till he knew what Daniel's promise-would come to-; but the young man retired to his own house,with his kinsmen,- and besought God that whole night to dis­cover the dream, and thereby deliver the magicians and Chal­deans, with whom they were themselves- to perish, from theking's anger, by enabling him to declare his vision, and to makemanifest what the king had seen the night before in his sleep,-but had forgotten it. Accordingly, God out of pity to those thatwere in danger, and out of regard to the wisdom of Daniel, madeknown to him the dream and its_ interpretation, that so the kingmight understand by him its signification also. When Daniel hadobtamed this knowledge from God, he arose very joyful, and toldit his brethren, and made them glad, and to hope well, thatthey should now preserve their Eves, of which they despairedbefore; and had their minds full of nothing but the thoughtsof dying. So when he had with them returned thanks to Godwho had commiserated their youth, when it was day he cameto Arioch, and desired him to bring him to the king, becausehe would discover to him that dream which he had seen thenight before.
4. When Daniel was come in to the king, he excused himselfirst, that "he did not pretend to be wiser than the other Chal"deans and magicians, when, upon their entire inability to dis-"cover his dream, he was undertaking to inform him of it, for"this was not by his own skill, or on account of his having befr-"ter cultivated his understanding than the rest, but he said, God"hath had pity upon us, when we were in danger of death, and"when I prayed for the life of myself, and of those of my own"nation, hath made manifest to me both the dream, and the in-"terpretation thereof, for I was not less concerned for thy glory"than for the sorrow that we were by thee condemned to die,"wlu'le thou didst so unjustly command mens both good and







OCR Output








226 ANTIQUITIES X>F THE JEWS. Book XIII.


tress of his army. After this he took Samega, and the neigh­bouring places; and besides these, Shechem and Gerizzim, andthe nation of the Cutheans, who dwelt at the temple which A-.lexander permitted Sanballat, the general of his army, to buildfor the sake of Manasseh, who was son-in-law to Jaddua thehigh priest, as we have formerly related; which temple wasnow deserted two hundred years after it was built. Hyrcanustook also Dora and Marissa, cities of Idume.a, and subdued allthe Idumeans; and permitted them to stay in that country, ifthey would circumcise their genitals, and make use of the lawsof the Jews; and they were so desirous of living in the countryof their forefathers, that they * submitted to the use of circum­cision, and of the rest of the Jewish ways of living; at whichtime therefore this befell them, that they were hereaiter no otherthan Jews.
2. But Hyrcanus the high priest was desirous to renew thatleague of friendship they had with the Romans. Accordingly hesent an embassage to them: and when the senate had receivedtheir epistle, they made a league of friendship with them, afterthe manner following: " Fanius, the son of Marcus the pretor,"gathered the senate together on the eighth day before the ides"of February, in the senate house, when Lucius Manlius, the"son of Lucius, of the Mentine tribe, and Caius Sempronius,"the son of Caius, of the Falernian tribe, were present. The


* This account of the Idumeans. addmitting circumcision, and the entire Jew­ish law, from this time, or from the days of Hyrcanus, is confirmed by their entirehistory afterward. See Antiq. B. XIV. ch. viii. sec. I. B. XV. ch. vii. sec. 9. vol.II. Of the War, B. II. ch. iii. sec. 1. vol. III. B. IV. ch. iv. sec. 5. vol. IV. This,in the opinion of Josephus, made them proselytes of justice, or entire Jews, as hereand elsewhere, Antiq. B. XIV. ch. viii. sec. 1. However, Antigonus, the enemyof Herod, though Herod were derived from such a proselyte of justice for severalgenerations, will allow him to be no more than a half Jew, B. XIV. ch. xv. § 2. Butstill take out of Dean Prideaux, at the year 129, the words of Ammonias a gram,rnarian, which fully confirms this account of the Idumeans in Josephus. " The Jews,"says he, are such by nature, and from the beginning, whilst the Idumeans were"not Jews from the beginning, but Phenicians and Syrians; but being afterward"subdued by the Jews, and compelled to be circumcised, and to unite into one na-"tion, and be subject to the same laws, they were called Jews." Dio also says, as theDean there quotes him, from book XXXVI. p. 37. "That country is called"Judea, and the people Jews; and this name is given also to as many others"as embrace their religion, though of other nations." But then upon whatfoundation so good a governor as Hyrcanus took- upon him to compel those Idu­means either to become Jews or to leave the country, deserves great considera­tion. I suppose it was because they had long ago been driven out of the landof Edom, and seized on and possessed the tribe of Simeon, and all the southernparts of the tribe of Judah, which was the peculiar inheritance of the worship­pers of the true God without idolatry, as the reader may learn from Reland,Palestine, part I. p. 154, 305. and from Prideaux, at thejears 140, and 165.







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 223


Ptolemy being * for this cause released from the war, he slewthe brethren of Hyrcanus, and his mother: and when he hadso done he fled to Zeno, who was called Cotylas, who was thenthe tyrant of the city of Philadelphia.
2. But Antiochus being very uneasy at the miseries thatSimon had brought upon him, he invaded Judea in the fourthyear of his reign, and the first year of the principality of Hyr­canus, in f the hundred and sixty second Olympiad. And whenhe had burnt the country, he shut up Hyrcanus in the city,which he encompassed round with seveii encampments, but didnothing at the first, because of the strength of the walls, andbecause of the valour of the besieged; although they were oncein want of water, which yet they were delivered from by a largeshower of rain, which fell at the \ setting of the Pleiades. How­ever, about the north part of the wall, where it happened thecity was upon a level with the outward ground, the king raiseda hundred towers of three stories high, and placed bodies ofsoldiers upon them, and as he made his attacks every day, hecut a double ditch, deep and broad, and confined the inhabitantswithin it as within a wall; but the besieged contrived to makefrequent sallies out, and if the enemy were not any where upontheir guard, they fell upon them, and did them a great deal ofmischief, and if they perceived them, they then retired into the citywith ease. But because Hyrcanus discerned the inconvenienceof so great a number of men in the city, while the provisionswere the sooner spent by them, and yet, as is natural to suppose


* Hence we learn, that in the days of this excellent high priest, John Hyrcanus,the observation of the Sabbatic year, as Josephus supposed, required a rest from waras did that of the weekly Sabbath from work: I mean this, unless in the case of ne­cessity, when the Jews were attacked by their enemies, in which case indeed, and inwhich alone, they then allowed defensive fighting to be lawful even on the Sabbathday, as we see in several places of Josephus, Antiq. B. XII. chap. vi. § 2. B. XIII.chap. I. § 2. vol. II. Of the War, B. I. chap. vii. § 2. vol. III. But then it mustbe noted, that this rest from war no way appears in the first book of Maccabees,chap. xvi. but the direct contrary; though indeed the Jews, in the days of AntiochusEpiphanes, did not venture upon fighting on the Sabbath day, even in the defenceof their own lives, till the Asainonians or Maccabees decreed so to do, 1 Mac. ii-32—41. Antiq. B XII. chap. vii. sec. 2. .
f Josephus' copies, both Greek and Latin, have here a gross mistake, when theysay, that this first year of John Hyrcanus, which we have just now seen to have beena Sabbatic year, was in the 162d Olympiad, whereas it was for certain the second yearof the 161st. See the like before, B. XII. chap. vi. sect. 6.
J This heliacal setting of the Pleiades, or seven stars, was, in the days of Hyrcanusand Josephus, early in the spring, about February, the time of the latter rain inJudea, and this so far as I remember, is the only astronomical character of time, be­sides one eclipse of the moon in the reign of Herod, that we meet with in all Jose­phus, the Jews being little accustomed to astronomical observations, any farther thanfar the uses of their kalendar, and utterly forbidden those astrological uses which theheathens commonly made of them.







OCR Output








78 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book X.


and saluted Daniel in the manner that men worship God, andgave command that he should be sacrificed to as a god. And thiswas not all, for he also imposed the name of his own god upon him,[Baltasar], and made him and his kinsmen rulers of his wholekingdom; which kinsmen of his happened to fall into great dan­ger by the envy and malice of [their enemies]; for they offend­ed the king upon the occasion following: he made an image ofgold, whose height was sixty cubits, and its breadth six cubits,and set it in the great plain of Babylon; and when he was goingto dedicate the image, he invited the principal men out of all theearth that was under his dominions, and commanded them in thefirst place, that when they should hear the sound of the trumpet,they should then fall down and worship the image; and he threat­ened, that those who did not so, should be cast into a fiery fur­nace. When therefore all the rest, upon the hearing of the soundof the trumpet, worshipped the image, they related that Daniel'skinsmen did not do it, because they would not transgress the lawsof their country: So these men were convicted and cast immedi­ately into the fire, but were saved by divine providence, and af­ter a surprising manner escaped death, for the fire did not touch.them: and I suppose that it touched them not, as if it reasonedwith itself, that they were cast into it without any fault of theirs,fmd that therefore it was too weak to burn the young men whenthey were in it. This was done by the power of God, who madetheir bodies so far superior to the fire, that it could not consumethem. This it was which recommended them to the king asrighteous men, and men beloved of God, on which account theycontinued in great esteem with him.
6. A little after this the king saw in his sleep again another-vision; how he should fall from his dominion, and feed amongdie wild beasts, and that when he had lived in this manner in thedesert for * seven years, he should recover his dominion again.


* Since Joscpbus here explains the seven prophetic times which were to pass overNebuchadnezzar, Dan. iv. 16. to be seven years, we thence learn how he most pro­bably must have understood those other parallel phrases, of a time, times and an half,Antiq. B. VII. chap. xxv. of so many prophetic years also, though he withal lets usknow, by this hint at the interpretation of the seventy ivtieks, as belonging to thefourth monarchy, and the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans in the days ofJosephus, chap. ii. sect. 7. that he did not think those years to be bare years, but ga­ther days Jar years; by which reckoning, and by which alone, could 70 weeks, or'4 9O days reach to the age of Josephus. But as to the truth of those seven years'banishment of Nebuchadnezzar from men, and his living so long among the beasts,the very small remains we have any where else of this Nebuchadnezzar, prevent ourexpectation of any other full account of it. So far we know by Ptolemy's canon, acontemporary record, as well as by Josephus presently, that he reigned in all 43years, that is, eight years after we meet with any account of his actions; one of thelast, of which was the 13 years siege of Tyre, Antiq. B. X. chap. xi. where yet theOld Latin has but three years and ten months, yet were his actions before so remark­







OCR Output








250 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIII.


as may well be supposed, terrified the queen and the nation. Ac­cordingly they sent him many and very valuable presents; asalso ambassadors, and that as he was besieging Ptolemais; forSelene the queen, the same that was also called Cleopatra, ruledthen over Syria, who had persuaded the inhabitants to excludeTigranes. So the Jewish ambassadors interceded with him, andentreated him that he would determine nothing that was severeabout their queen or nation. He commended them for the re­spects they paid him at so great a distance: and gave them goodhopes of his favour. But as soon as Ptolemais was taken, newscame to Tigranes that Lucullus, in his pursuit of Mithridates,could not light upon him, who was fled into Tberia, but waslaying waste Armenia and besieging its cities. Now, whenTigranes knew this he returned home.
5. After this, when the queen was fallen into a dangerousdistemper, Aristobulus resolved to attempt the seizing of thegovernment; so he stole away secretly by night, with only one ofhis servants, and went to the fortresses wherein his friends thatwere such from the days of his father, were settled: for as hehad been a great while displeased at his mother's conduct, so hewas now much more afraid, lest upon her death, their wholefamily should be under the power of the Pharisees, for he sawthe inability of his brother, who was to succeed in the govern­ment : nor was any one conscious of what he was doing but onlyhis wife, whom he left at Jerusalem with their children. Hefirst of all came to Agaba, where was Galestes, one of the potentmen before mentioned, and was received by him. When it wasday the queen perceived that Aristobulus was fled; and forsome time she supposed that his departure was not in order tomake any innovation, but when messengers came one afteranother with the news that he had secured the first place, thesecond place, and all the places, for as soon as one had begunthey all submitted to his disposal, then it was that the queen andthe nation were in the greatest disorder, for they were awarethat it would not be long ere Aristobulus would be able to settlehimself firmly in the government. What they were principallyafraid of was this, that he would inflict punishment upon themfor the mad treatment his house had had from them: So theyresolved to take his wife and children into custody, and keepthem in the * fortress that was over the temple. Now therewas a mighty conflux of people that came to Aristobulus from


* This fortress, castle, citadel, or tower, whither the wife and children of Aristo­bulus were now sent, and which overlooked the temple, could be no other than whatHyrcanus I. built, Antiq. B. XVIII. ch. iv. sect. 3. vol. III. and Herod the Greatrebuilt, and called the Tower ofAntonia, Antiq. B. XV. ch. xi. sect. 5. vol. II.







OCR Output








86 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book X.


it was not their hunger, which had been a little before satisfiedwith abundance of flesh, but the wickedness of these men thatprovoked them [to destroy the princes]; for if it so please God,that wickedness might, by even those irrational creatures, beesteemed a plain foundation for their punishment.
7. When therefore those that had intended thus to destroy Da­niel by treachery, were themselves destroyed, king Darius sent[letters] over all the country, and praised that God whom Da­niel worshipped; and said, That "he was the only true God,"and had all power." He had also Daniel in very great esteem,and made him the principal of his friends. Now when Daniel'was become so illustrious and famous, on account of the opinionmen had that he was beloved of God, he built a tower at Ecba-tana in Media: it was a most elegant building, and wonderfullymade, and it is still remaining, and preserved to this day; andto such as see it, it appears to have been lately built, and tohave been no older than that very day when any one looks uponit, it is * so fresh, flourishing, and beautiful, and no way grownold in so long time, for buildings suffer the same as men do, theygrow old as well as they, and by numbers of years their strengthis dissolved, and their beauty withered. Now they bury thekings of Media, of Persia, and Parthia, in this tower to this day;and he who was entrusted with the care of it, was a Jewish priest;which thing is also observed to this day: But it is fit to give anaccount of what this man did, which is most admirable to hear,for he was so happy as to have strange revelations made to him,and those as to one of the greatest of the prophets, insomuch,that while he was alive he had the esteem and applause both ofthe kings and of the multitude, and now he is dead, he retainsa remembrance that will never fail, for the several books thathe wrote and left behind him are still read by us till this time,and from them we believe that Daniel conversed with God;for he did not only prophesy of future events, as did the otherprophets, but he also determined the time of their accomplish­ment: And while prophets used to foretel misfortunes, and onthat account were disagreeable both to the kings and to the mul­titude, Daniel was to them a prophet of good things, and thisto such a degree, that by the agreeable nature of his predictions,he procured the good-will pf all men, and by the accomplish-


* What Josephus here sayn, that the stones of the sepulchres of the kings of Per­sia at this tower, or those perhaps of the same sort that are now commonly calledthe ruins of Persepolis, continued so entire and unaltered in his days, as if they werelately put there, " I, says Reland, here can show to he .true, as to those stones of"the Persian kings' mausoleum which Corn. Brunius brake off and gave me." Heascrjbed this to the hardness of the stone, which scarcely yields to iron tools, an)proves frequently too hard fur cutting by the chissel, but oftentimes breaks inttpieces.







OCR Output








Chop. VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 21


and added withal that he was mad: he replied, you guess right,for the words he spake were the words of a madman: and whenthey were e^ger about the matter, and desired he would tell them,he answered, that God had said, he had chosen him to be king"over the multitude." When he had said this, every one ofthem * put off his garment, and strewed it under him, and blewwith trumpets, and gave notice, that Jehu was king. So whenhe had gotten the army together, he was preparing to set out im­mediately against Joram, at the city Jezreel, in which city, as wesaid before, he was healing of the wound which he had receivedin the siege of Ramoth. It happened also that Ahaziah, king ofJerusalem, was now come to Joram, for he was his sister's son,as we have said already, to see how he did after his wound, andthis upon account of their kindred; but as Jehu was desirous tofall upon Joram and those with him on the sudden, he desired thatnone of the soldiers might run away and tell to Joram what hadhappened, for that this would be an evident demonstration oftheir kindness to him, and would show that their real inclinationswere to make him king.
3. So they were pleased with what he did, and guarded theroads, lest somebody should privately tell the thing to those thatwere at Jezreel. Now Jehu took his choice horsemen, and satupon his chariot, and went on for Jezreel, and when he was comenear, the watchman whom Joram had sent there to spy out suchas came to the city, saw Jehu marching on, and told Joram thathe saw a troop of horsemen marching on. Upon which heimmediately gave orders, that one of his horsemen should besent out to meet them, and to know who it was that was com­ing. So when the horseman came up to Jehu, he asked him,m what condition the army was? for that the king wanted toknow it; but Jehu bid him not at all to meddle with such mat­ters, but to follow him. When the watchman saw this, he toldJoram that the horseman had mingled himself among the com­pany, and came along with them. And when the king had senta second messenger, Jehu commanded him to do as the formerdid; as soon as the watchman told this also to Joram, he at lastgot upon his chariot himself, together with Ahaziah, the kingof Jerusalem; for, as we said before, he was there to see howJoram did, after he had been wounded, as being his relation.So he went out to meet Jehu, who marched j- slowly, and in


* Spanheim bere notes that this putting off men's garments and strewing themunder a king, was an eastern custom, which he elsewhere explained.
t Our copies say, that this "driving of the chariots was like the driving of'' Jehu the son of Nimshi, for he driveth furiously," 2 Kings ix. SO. whereasJosephus' copy, as he understood it, was this, trtat, on the contrary, Jehumarched slowly and in good order. Nor can it be denied, that since there wasmterval enough for king Jor,im, to send out two horsemen, one after another,







OCR Output








26 ANTIQUITIES OF .THE JEWS. Book IX.


also opened that armoury which David had made in the temple,and distributed to the captains of hundreds, as also to the priestsand Levites, all the spears and quivers, and what kind ofweapons soever it contained, and set them armed in a circle roundabout the temple; so as to touch one another's hands, and by thatmeans excluding those from entering that ought not to enter.So they brought the child into the midst of them, and, put onhim the royal crown, and Jehoiada anointed him with the oil,and made him king; and the multitude rejoiced; and made anoise, and cried, "God save the king."
3. When Athaliah unexpectedly heard the tumult and theacclamations; she was greatly disturbed in her mind, and sud­denly issued out of the royal palace with her own army; andwhen she was come to the temple, the priests received her, butas for those that stood round about the temple, as they wereordered by the high priest to do, they hindered the armed menthat followed her from going in. But when Athaliah saw thechild standing upon a pillar, with the royal crown upon his head,she rent her clothes, and cried out vehemently, and commanded[her guards] to kill him that had laid snares for her, and endea­voured to deprive her of the government: But Jehoiada calledfor the captains of hundreds, and commanded them to bringAthaliah to the valley of Cedron, and slay her there, for hewould not have the temple defiled with the punishment of thispernicious woman ; and he gave order, that if any one came nearto help her, he should be slain also: wherefore those that had thecharge of her slaughter, took hold of her, and led her to thegate of the kings' mules, and slew her there.
4. Now as soon as what concerned Athaliah was by thisstratagem, after this manner despatched, Jehoiada called togetherthe people and the armed men into the temple, and made themtake an oath that they would be obedient to the king, and takecare of his safety, and of the safety of his government; afterwhich he obliged the king to give security [upon oath] that hewould worship God, and not transgress the laws of Moses. Theythen ran to the house of Baal, which Athaliah and her husbandJehoram had built, to the dishonour of the God of their fathers,and to the honour of Ahab, and demolished it, and slew Matan,that had his priesthood. But Jehoiada entrusted the care andCustody of the temple to the priests and Levites, according tothe appointment of king David, and enjoined them to bringtheir regular burnt-offerings twice a-day, and to offer incenseaccording to the law. He also ordained some of the Levites,with the porters, to be a guard to the temple, that no one ths:was defiled might come there.
5. And when Jehoiada had set these things in order, he, with







OCR Output








204 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIII.


golden button, which it is the custom to give the king's kins­men; and allowed him Ekron, and its toparchy, for his owninheritance.
5. About this time it was that king Ptolemy, who was call­ed Philometer, led an army, part by the sea, and part by land,and came to Syria, to the assistance of Alexander, who was hisson-in-law; and accordingly all the cities received him willingly,as Alexander had commanded them to do, and conductedhim as far as Ashdod; where they all made loud complaintsabout the temple of Dagon, which was burnt, and accused Jona­than of having laid it waste, and destroyed the country adjoin­ing with fire, and slain a great number of them. Ptolemy heardthese accusations, but said nothing. Jonathan also went to meetPtolemy as far as Joppa, and obtained from him hospitable pre­sents, and those glorious in their kinds, with all the marks ofhonour. And when he had conducted him as far as the rivercalled Eleutherus, he returned again to Jerusalem.
6. But as Ptolemy was at Ptolemais, he was very near to amost unexpected destruction, for a treacherous design was laidfor his life by Alexander, by the means of Ammonius, who washis friend; and as the treachery was very plain, Ptolemy wroteto Alexander, and required of him that he should bring Ammo­nius to condign punishment, informing him what snares had beenlaid for him by Ammonius, and desiring thathe might be accord­ingly punished for it. But when Alexander did not complywith his demands, he perceived that it was he himself who laidthe design, and was very angry at him. Alexander had alsoformerly been in very ill terms with the people of Antioch, forthey had suffered very much by his means; yet did Ammoniusat length undergo the punishment his insolent crimes had deserv­ed, for he was killed in an opprobrious manner, like a woman,while he endeavoured to conceal himself in a feminine habit, aswe have elsewhere related.
7. Hereupon Ptolemy blamed himself for having given hisdaughter in marriage to Alexander, and for the league he hadmade with him to assist him against Demetrius; so he dissolvedhis relation to him, and took his daughter away from him, andimmediately sent to Demetrius, and offered to make a league ofmutual assistance and friendship with him, and agreed with himto give him his daughter in marriage, and to restore him to theprincipality of his fathers. Demetrius was well pleased with thisembassage, and accepted of his assistance, and of the marriageof his daughter. But Ptolemy had still one more hard task todo, and that was to persuade the people of Antioch to receive
''Dervetrihsj' because they'were greatly displeased at him, on







OCR Output








Chap. XV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 311


the forces that were about him, and immediately drove back theenemy; by which means he made the minds of his own mencourageous, and emboldened Intern to go on, insomuch that thosewho ran away before, now returned back, and the Barbarianswere slain on all sides. The king also went on killing them, andrecovered all the baggage, among which were a great numberof beasts for burden, and of slaves, and proceeded on in hismarch; and whereas there were a very great number of those inthe woods that attacked them, and were near the passage thatletl into the plain, he made a sally upon these also with a strongbody of men; and put them to flight, and slew many of them,and thereby rendered the way safe for those that came after;and these called Herod their saviour and protector.
9. And when he was near to Samosata, Antony sent out hisarmy in all their proper habiliments to meet him, in order topay Herod this respect, and because of the assistance he had givenhim, for he had heard what attacks the Barbarians had madeupon him [in Judea.] He also was very glad to see him there,as having been made acquainted with the great actions he hadperformed upon the road: so he entertained him very kindly,and could not but admire his courage. Antony also embracedhim as soon as he saw him, and saluted him after a most affection­ate manner, and gave him the upper hand, as having himself late­ly made him a king; and in a little time Antiochus delivered upthe fortress, and on that account this war was at an end; thenAntony committed the rest to Sosius, and gave him orders toassist Herod, and went himself to Egypt. Accordingly Sosiussent two legions before into Judea to the assistance of Herod,and he followed himself with the body of the army.
10. Now Joseph was already slain in Judea, in the mannerfollowing: He forgot what charge. his brother Herod had givenhim when he went to Antony; and when he had pitched hiscamp among the mountains; for Macherus had lent him fiveregiments, with these he went hastily to Jericho, in order toreap the corn thereto belonging: and as the Roman regimentswere but newly raised, and were unskilful in war, for they werein great part collected out of Syria, he was attacked by the ene­my, and caught in those places of difficulty, and was himselfslain, as he was fighting bravely, and the whole army was lost,for there were six regiments slain. So when Antigonus had gotpossession of the dead bodies, he cut off Joseph's head, althoughPheroras his brother would have redeemed it at the price offifty talents. After which defeat the Galileans revolted fromtheir commanders, and took those of Herod's party, and drownedthem in the lake, and a great part of Judea was become sedi­tious; but Macherus fortified the place Gitta [in Samaria.]







OCR Output








74 ANTIQUITIES OF THiI JEWS. Book X.


the entire mterval of time which passed from the captivity of theIsraelites, to the carrying away of the two tribes, proved to bean hundred and thirty years six months and ten days.
CHAR X.
Concerning Daniel, and what befell him at Babylon.
§ 1. DUT new Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took someof the most noble of the Jews that were children and the kins­men of Zedekiah their king, such as were rem arkable for the beau­ty of their bodies, and the comeliness of their countenances, anddelivered them into the hands of tutors, and to the improvementto be made by them. He also made some of them to be eunuchs -which course he took also with those of other nations, whom hehad taken in the flower of their age, and afforded them theirdiet from his own table, and had them instructed in the insti­tutes of the country, and taught the learning of the Chaldeans;and they had now exercised themselves sufficiently in that wis­dom which he had ordered they should apply themselves to.Now among these there were four of the family of Zedekiah, 01most excellent dispositions, one of whom was called Daniel,another was called Ananias, another Mesael, and the fourthAzarias: And the king of Babylon changed their names, and com­manded that they should make use of other names; Daniel hecalled Baltasar, Ananias, Shadrach, Mesael, Meshach, and Aza­rias, Abednego. These the king had in esteem, and continuedto love, because of the very excellent temper they were of, andbecause of their application to learning, and the progress theyhad made in wisdom.
2. Now Daniel and his kinsmen, had resolved to use a severediet, and to abstain from those kinds of food which came fromthe king's table, and entirely to forbear to eat of all living crea­tures: So he came to Ashpenaz, who was that * eunuch towhom the care of them was committed, and desired him to takeand spend what was brought for them from the king, but togive them pulse and dates for their food, and any thing else,besides the flesh of living creatures, that he pleased; for that theirinclinations were to that sort of food, and that they despised the


* That Daniel was made one of these eunuchs of which Isaiah prophesied Isa.xxxix. 7. and the three children his companions also, seems to me plain, both herein Josephus, and in our copies of Daniel, Dan. i. 3, 6, 7—11, 18. although it mustbe granted that some married persons, that had children were sometimes calledeunuchs, in a general acceptation for courtiers, on account that so many of the an­cient courtiers were real-.cunuchs. See Gen, zxxix. 1. . -'-•-.







OCR Output








Chap. VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 219


was called Nicator, got the dominion over Syria. Now the af­fection of the multitude towards Simon was so great, that intheir contracts one with another, and in the public records, theywrote, "In the first year of Simon the benefactor and ethnarch"of the Jews:" for under him they were very happy, and over­came the enemies that were round about them, for Simon over­threw the city Gazara, and Joppa, and Jamnia. Pie also tookthe citadel of Jerusalem by siege, and cast it down to the ground,that it might not be any more a place of refuge to their enemieswhen they took it, to do them a mischief, as it had been till now.And when he had done this, he thought it their best way, andmost for their advantage, to level the very mountain itself uponwhich the citadel happened to stand, that so the temple mightbe higher than it. And indeed, when he had called the mul­titude to an assembly, he persuaded them to have it so demolish­ed, and this by putting them in mind what miseries they hadsuffered by its garrison, and the Jewish deserters, and whatmiseries they might hereafter suffer in case any foreigner shouldobtain the kingdom, and put a garrison into that citadel. Thisspeech induced the multitude to a compliance, because he ex­horted them to do nothing but what was for their own good:so they all set themselves to the work, and levelled the moun­tain, and in that work spent both day and night without anyintermission, which cost him three whole years before it was re­moved, and brought to an entire level with the plain of the restof the city. After which the temple was the highest of all thebuildings, now the citadel, as well as the mountain whereon itstood, were demolished. And these actions were thus perform­ed under Simon.
CHAP. VII.
Hoi® Simon confederated himself with Antioclms Pius, and madewar against Trypho: and a little afterward against Cendebem,the general of Anttochus' army: As also hoiio Simon was mur­dered by his son-in-laiio Ptolemy, and that by treachery.
§ 1. * .N ow a little while after Demetrius Tiad been carried


* It must here be diligently noted, that Josephus' copy of the first book of Mac­cabeus, which he had so carefully followed, and faithfully abridged, as far as the50th verse of the twelfth chapter, seems there to have ended. What few thingsthere are afterward common to both, might probably be learned by him from someother more imperfect records. However, we must exactly observe here, what the re­maining part of that book of the Maccabeus informs us of, and what Josephus wouldnever have omitted, had his copy contained so much, that this Simon the Great, theMaccabee, made a league with Amiochus Soter, the son of Demetrius Soter, and bro­ther of the other Demetrius, who was now a captive in Parthia, that upon his corr.i 115VOL. II E £ 21







OCR Output








Chap. XIII. ATmyvmES OF THE JEWS. 4S


caught them, and slew them: nor did this degree of transgress­ing suffice them, but they had more wicked contrivances thanwhat have been described: Nor did they leave off, before God,as a punishment for their impiety, brought them under theirenemies; but of that more hereafter. However, many there wer»of the tribe of Manasseh, and of Zebulon, and of Issachar, wh<twere obedient to what the prophets exhorted .them to do, andreturned to the worship of God. Now all these came runningto Jerusalem^ to Hezekiah, that they might worship God[there].
3. Where these men were come, king Hezekiah went up intothe temple, with the rulers' and all the people, and offered forhimself seven bulls, and as many rams, with seven lambs, and asmany kids of the goats. The king also himself, and the rulers,laid their hands on the heads of the sacrifices, and'perrnitted thapriests to complete the sacred offices about them. So they bothslew the sacrifices, and burnt the burnt-offerings, while the Le-vites stood round about them, with their musical instruments,and sang hymns to God, and played on their psalteries, as theywere instructed by David to do, and this while the rest of the;priests returned the music, and sounded the trumpets whichthey had in their hands : and when this was done, the king.andthe multitude threw themselves down upon their face and wor­shipped God; He also sacrificed seventy bulls, one hundredrams, and two hundred lambs. He also granted the multitudesacrifices to feast upon, six hundred oxen, and three thousandother cattle; and the priests performed all things according tothe law. Now'the king was so pleased herewith, that he feastedwith the people, and returned thanks to God: But as the feastof unleavened bread was now come, when they had offered thatsacrifice which is called the Passover, they after that offeredother sacrifices for seven days : When the king had bestowed onthe multitude, besides what they sanctified of themselves, twothousand bulls, and seven thousand other cattle, the same thingwas done by the rulers; for they gave them a thousand bulls,and a thousand and forty other cattle. Nor had this festivalbeen so well observed from the days of king Solomon, as it wasnow first" observed with great splendour and magnificence: andwhen the festival was ended, they went out into the country, andpurged it; and cleansed the city of all the pollution of the idols.The king also gave order that the daily sacrifice should be offer­ed, at his own charges, and according to the law ; and appoint­ed that the tythes, and the first fruits should be given by themultitude to the priests and Levites, that they might constantlyattend tipon divine service, and never be taken off from the wor­ship of God. Accordingly, the multitude brought together all
VOL. II. I 17







OCR Output








254 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


This temper of his, not disposing him to meddle with publicaffairs, and want of spirit, occasioned him to appear to specta­tors to be degenerous and unmanly; while Aristobulus was of acontrary temper, an active man, and one of a great and gener­ous soul.
4. Since therefore Antipater saw that Hyrcanus did not attendto what he said, he never ceased, day by day, to charge feignedcrimes upon Aristobulus, and to calumniate him before him, asif he had a mind to kill him, and so, by urging him perpetually,he advised him, and persuaded him to fly to Aretas, the kingof Arabia, and promised, that if he would comply with his ad­vice, he would also himself assist him, [and go with him.] WhenHyrcanus heard this, he said that it was for his advantageto fly away to Aretas. Now Arabia is a country that bordersupon Judea. However, Hyrcanus sent Antipater first to theking of Arabia, in order to receive assurances from him, thatwhen he should come in the manner of a supplicant to him, hewould not deliver him up to his enemies. So Antipater havingreceived such assurances, returned to Hyrcanus to Jerusalem.A while afterward he took Hyrcanus, and stole out of the cityby night, and went a great journey, and came and brought himto the city called Petra, where the palace of Aretas was; andas he was a very familiar friend of that king's he persuadedhim to bring buck Hyrcanus into Judea, and his persuasionhe continued every day without any intermission. He also pro­posed to make him presents on that account. At length he pre­vailed with Aretas in his suit. Moreover, Hyrcanus promisedhim, that when he had been brought thither, and had receivedhis kingdom, he would restore that country, and those twelvecities which his father Alexander had taken from the Arabians,which were these, Medaba, Naballo, Libias, Tharabasa, Agala,Athene, Zoar, Orone, Marissa, Rudda, Lussa, and Oruba.
CHAP. II.
How Aretas and Hyrcanus made an expedition against Aristobu­lus, and besieged Jerusalem-; and houi Scaitrus, the Roman ge­neral, raised the siege. Concerning the death of Onias.
§ 1. A FTER these promises had been given to Aretas, hemade an expedition against Aristobulus, with an army of fiftythousand horse and foot, and beat him in the battle. Andwhen after that victory many went over to Hyrcanus as desert­ers, Aristobulus was left desolate, and fled to Jerusalem; uponwhich the king of Arabia took all his army and made an assaultupon the temple, and besieged Aristobulus therein, the peo­







OCR Output








116 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XL


he sent one to be with the king every day. So when he had ac­companied with her, he sent her back to the eunuch: and whenEsther had come to him, he was pleased with her, and fell inlove with the damsel, and married her, and made her his lawfulwife, and kept a wedding feast for her on the twelfth monthof the seventh year of his reign, which was called Adar. Healso sent angari, as they are called, or messengers, unto everynation, and gave orders that they should keep a feast for hismarriage, while he himself treated the Persians and the Medes,and the principal men of the nations, for a whole month, onaccount of this his marriage. Accordingly, Esther came to hisroyal palace, and he set a diadem on her head: And thus wasEsther married, without making known to the king what na­tion she was derived from. Her uncle also removed from Ba­bylon to Shushan, and dwelt there, being every day about thepalace, and inquiring how the damsel did, for he loved her as-thougjh she had been his own daughter.
3. Now the king had made * a law, that none of his ownpeople should approach him unless he were called, when he satupon his throne; men, with axes in their hands, stood roundabout his throne, in order to punish such as approached to himwithout being called. However, the king sat with a goldensceptre in his hand, which he held out when he had a mind tosave any one of those that approached to him without being call­ed: and he who touched it was free from danger. But of this-matter we have discoursed sufficiently.
4. Some time after this [two eunuchs] Bigthan and Teresh-plotted against the king; and Barnabazus, the servant of one ofthe ennuchs, being by birth a Jew, was acquainted with theirconspiracy, and discovered it to the queen's uncle; and Mor-decai, by the means of Esther, made the conspirators known tothe king. This troubled the king, but he discovered the truth,and hanged the eunuchs upon a cross, while at that time he gaveno reward to Mordecai, who had been the occasion of his preser­vation. He only bid the scribes to set down his name in therecords, and bid him stay in the palace, as an intimate friend ofthe king's.
5. Now there was one Haman, the son of Amedatha, by birthan Amalekite, that used to go. in to the king; and the foreignersand Persians worshipped him, as Artaxerxes had commanded


* Herodotus says, that this law [against any one's coming uncalled to the kingsof Persia when they were sitting on their thrones] was first enacted by Deioces, i. e.(by him who first withdrew tliu Medes from the dominion of the Assyrians, andhimself first reigned over them.) Thus also, says Spanheim, stood guards, withtheir axes, about the throne of Tenus, Tenudus, that the offender might by them bepunished immediately.







OCR Output








Chap. XII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 235


was, it being natural to men to suspect that what is thus con­cealed, is very bad: so upon his threatening, and forcing themby terrors to speak, they at length told him the truth; where­upon he shed many tears, in that disorder of mind which arosefrom his consciousness of what he had done, and gave a deepgroan, and said, "I am not therefore, I perceive, to be con-"cealed from God, in the impious and horrid crimes I have"been guilty of, but a sudden punishment is coming upon me"for the shedding the blood of my relations. And now, O"thou most impudent body of mine, how long wilt thou re-"tain a soul that ought to die, in order to appease the ghosts"of my brother, and my mother? Why dost thou not give it"all up at once? And why do I deliver up my blood drop by"drop, to those whom I have so wickedly murdered?" In say­ing which last words, he died, having reigned a year. He wascalled a lover of the Grecians, and had conferred many benefitson his own country, and made war against Iturea, and added agreat part of it to Judea, and compelled the inhabitants, if theywould continue in that country, to be circumcised, and to liveaccording to the Jewish laws. He was naturally a man of can­dour, and of great modesty, as Strabo bears witness, in thename of Timagenes; who says thus; "This man was a person"of candour, and very serviceable to the Jews, for he added a"country to them, and obtained a part of the nation of the Itu-"reans for them, and bound them to them by the bond of the"circumcision of their genitals."
CHAP. XII.
Hew Alexander, when he had taken the government, made anexpedition against Ptolemais, and then raised the siege out offear of Ptolemy Lathyrus: and how Ptolemy made war againsthim, because he had sent to Cleopatra to persuade her to makewar against Ptolemy, and yet pretended to be in friendshipwith him, when he beat the Jews in the battle.
1. VV HEN Aristobulus was dead, his wife Salome, who,by the Greeks, was called Alexandra, let his brethren out ofprison, for Aristobulus had kept them in bonds, as we have saidalready, and made Alexander Janneus king, who was the supe­rior in age and in moderation. This child happened to behated by his father as soon as he was born, and could never bepermitted to come into his father's sight till he died. The oc­casion of which hatred is thus reported: When Hyrcanus chieflyloved the two eldest of his sons, Anjigonus and Aristobulus,God appeared to him in his sleep, of whom he inquired, whichVOL. n. oc 23







OCR Output








2+2 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIII.


making war against the Parthians, and as he was fighting cour­ageously, he tell, while Demetrius and Philip governed Syria,as hath been elsewhere related.
5. As to Alexander, his own people were seditious againsthim; for at a festival which was then celebrated, when he stoodupon the altar, and was going to sacrifice, the nation rose uponhim, and pelted him with citrons, [which they then had in theirhands,] because the law of the Jews required, that at the feastof tabernacles every one should have branches of the palm-treeand citron-tree: which thing we have elsewhere related. Theyalso reviled him, as * derived from a captive, and so unworthyof his dignity, and of sacrificing. At this he was in a rage,and slew of them about six thousand. He also built a parti­tion wall of wood round the altar and the temple, as far asthat partition within which it was only lawful for the prieststo enter, and by this means he obstructed the multitude fromcoming at him. He also maintained foreigners of Pisidiae andCilicia, for as to the Syrians, he was at war with them, and somade no use of them. He also overcame the Arabians, such asthe Moabites, and Gileadites, and made them bring tribute.Moreover, he demolished Amathus, while f Theodorus durstnot fight with him; but as he had joined battle with Obedas, kingof the Arabians, and fell into an ambush in the places thatwere rugged and difficult to be travelled over, he was throwndown into a deep valley, by the multitude of the camels at Ga-dara, a village of Gilead, and hardly escaped with his life.From thence he fled to Jerusalem, where, besides his other illsuccess, the nation insulted him, and he fought against themfor six years, and slew no fewer than fifty thousand of them.And when he desired that they would desist from their ill-willto him, they hated him so much the more, on account of whathad already happened; and when he had asked them what heought to do; they all cried out, that "he ought to kill himself."They also sent to Demetrius Eucerus, and desired him to makea league of mutual defence with them.


says, that this Antiochus Pius did rot die in this battle, but running away, wasdrowned in the river Orontes. Appian says that he was deprived of the kingdom ofSyria by Tigraties; but Porphyry makes this Loadice, Queen of the Calamans—Allwhich is noted by Spanheim. In such confusion of the latter historians, we have noreason to prefer any of them before Josephus, who had more original ones beforehim. »
* This reproach upon Alexander, that he was sprung from a captive, seemsonly the repetition of the old Pharisaical calumny upon his father, chap. x.sect. v.
f This Theodorus was the son of Zeno, and was in possession of Amathus, as welearn from sect 3. foregoing.







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 1 S3


into it, and saw how strong the place was, he broke his oaths,and ordered his army that was there to pluck down the wallsto the ground, and when he had so done, he returned to An-tioch: he also carried with him Onias the high priest, who wasalso called Menelaus; for Lysias advised the king to slay Mene-laus, if he would have the Jews be quiet, and cause him nofarther disturbance, for that this man was the origin of all themischief the Jews had done them, by persuading his father tocompel the Jews to leave the religion of their fathers: So theking sent Menelaus to Berea, a city of Syria, and there had him>put to death, when he had been high priest ten years. He hadbeen a wicked and an impious man: and, in order to get the go­vernment to himself, had compelled his nation to transgress theirown laws. After the death of Menelaus, Alcimus, who wasalso called Jacimus, was made high priest. But when king An-tiochus found that Philip had already possessed himself of thegovernment, he made war against him, and subdued him, andtook him and slew him. Now, as to Onias the son of the highpriest, who, as we before informed you, was left a child whenhis father died, when he saw that the king had slain his uncleMenelaus, and given the high priesthood to Alcimus, who wasnot of the high priest stock, but as induced by Lysias to translatethat dignity from this family to another house, he fled to Ptole­my, king of Egypt, and when he found he was in great esteemwith him, and with his wife Cleopatra, he desired and obtaineda place in the Nomus of Heliopolis, wherein he built a templelike to that at Jerusalem: of which therefore we shall hereaftergive an account in a place more proper for it.
CHAP. X.
How Bacchides, the general of Demetrius' army, made an expe­dition against Judea, and returned without success; and hawNicanor was sent a little afterward against Judas, andperish-ed, together with his army : as also concerning the death of Al­cimus, and the succession of Judas.
§ 1. ABOUT the same time Demetrius, the son of Seleucus,fled away from Rome, and took Tripoli, a city of Syria, andset the diadem on his own head. He also gathered certainmercenary soldiers together, and entered into his kingdom, andwas joyfully received by all, who delivered themselves up to him.And when they had taken Antiochus the king, and Lysias, theybrought them to him alive; both which were immediately putto death by the command of Demetrius, when Antiochus hadreigned two years, as we have already elsewhere related. Butthere were now many of the wicked Jewish runagates that came







OCR Output








361 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XV.


by the introduction of foreign practices, which constitution yetought to have been preserved inviolable; by which means vrebecame guilty of great wickedness afterward, while those re­ligious observances which used to lead the multitude to piety,were now neglected: for, in the first place, he appointed so­lemn games to be celebrated every fifth year, in honour of Caesar, and built a theatre at Jerusalem, as also a very great am­phitheatre in the plain. Both of them were indeed costly works,but opposite to the Jewish customs; for we have had no suchshows delivered down to us as fit to be used or exhibited by us;yet did he celebrate these games every five years, in the mostsolemn and splendid manner. He also made proclamation to theneighbouring countries, and called men together out of everynation. The wrestlers also, and the rest of those that strove forthe prizes in such games, were invited out of every land, bothby the hopes of the rewards there to be bestowed, and by theglory of victory to be there gained. So the principal personsthat were the most eminent in these sorts of exercises, weregotten together, for there were very great rewards for victoryproposed, not only to those that performed their exercises naked,but to those that played the musicians also, and were called Thy-melici; but he spared no pains to induce all persons, the mostfamous for such exercises, to come to this contest for victory.He also promised no small rewards for those who ran for theprizes in chariot races, when they were drawn by two, or three,or four pair of horses. He also imitated every thing, thoughnever so costly or magnificent, in other nations, out of an am­bition that he might give most public demonstration of his gran­deur. Inscriptions also of the great actions of Caesar, and tro­phies of those nations which he had conquered in his wars, andtdl made of the purest gold and silver, encompassed the theatreitself: Nor was there any thing that could be subservient to hisdesign, whether it were precious garments, or precious stonesset in order, which was not also exposed to sight in these games.He had also made a great preparation of wild beasts, and oflions themselves in great abundance, and of such other beasts aswere either of uncommon strength, or of such a sort as wererarely seen. These were prepared either to fight with one ano­ther, or that men who were condemned to death, were to fightwith them. And truly foreigners were greatly surprised anddelighted at the vastness of the expenses here exhibited, and atthe great dangers that were here seen; * but to natural Jews;


* These grand plays and shows, and thymelici, or music meetings, and chariotraces, when the chariots were drawn by two, three, or four pair of horses, &c. insti­tuted hy Herod in his theatres, were still, as we see here, looked on by the soberJews as heathenish sports, and tending to corrupt the manners of the Jewish nation,







OCR Output








36 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book IX.


by length of time, or by the carelessness of the kings, his prede­cessors, as well as all that part which had been thrown down bythe king of Israel, when he took his father Amaziah prisoner,and entered with him into the city. Moreover, he built a greatmany towers, of one hundred and fifty cubits high, and builtwalled towns in desert places, and put garrisons into them, anddug many channels for conveyance of water. He had also manybeasts for labour, and an immense number of cattle; for hiscountry was fit for pasturage. He was also given to husbandry,and took care to cultivate the ground, and planted it with allsorts of plants, and sowed it with all sorts of seeds. He had alsoabout him an army composed of chosen men, in number threehundred and seventy thousand, who were governed by generalofficers and captains of thousands, who were men of valour, andof unconquerable strength, in number two thousand. He alsodivided his whole army into bands, and armed them, givingevery one a sword, with brazen bucklers and breast-plates, withbows and slings; and besides these, he made for them many en­gines of war, for besieging of cities, such as cast stones and darts,with grapplers, and other instruments of that sort.
4. While Uzziah was in this state, and making preparation[for futurity], he was corrupted in his mind by pride, and be­came insolent, and this on account of that abundance which hehad of things that will soon perish, and despised that powerwhich is of eternal duration (which consisted in piety towardsGod, and in the observation of his laws), so he fell by occasionof the good success of his affairs, and was carried headlong intothose sins of his fathers which the splendour of that prosperityhe enjoyed, and the glorious actions he had done, led him into,while he was not able to govern himself well about them. Ac­cordingly, when a remarkable day was come, and a general festi­val was to be celebrated, he put on the holy garment, and wentinto the temple to offer incense to God upon the golden altar,which he was prohibited to do by Azariah the high priest, whohad fourscore priests with him, and who told him that it wasnot lawful for him to offer sacrifice, and that " none besides the"posterity of Aaron were permitted so to do." And when they |cried out, that he must go out of the temple, and not transgress -against God, he was wroth at them, and threatened to kill them,'unless they would hold their peace. In the mean time a great* earthquake shook the ground, and a rent was made in the tem-


* This account of an earthquake at Jerusalem at the very same time whenUzziab usurped the priest's office, and went into the sanctuary to burn incense,and of ihc consequences of that earthquake, is entirely wanting in our othercopies, though it be exceeding like to a prophecy of Jeremiah's now in Zech.xiv. 5. in which prophecy, mention is made of " fleeing from that earthquake,







OCR Output








392 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVI.


"holy temple which was built by thee. iW suppose we had." made light of other dangers, can any murderer go off' un-"punished, while Caesar is alive? We are thy sons, and not"so impious, or so thoughtless, as that comes to, though per­haps more unfortunate than is convenient for thee. But incase thou neither findest any causes of complaint, nor anytreacherous designs, what sufficient evidences hast thou to makesuch a wickedness of ours credible? Our mother is dead in­deed, but then what befell her might be an instruction to us"to caution, and not. an incitement to wickedness. We are." willing to make a larger apology for ourselves, but actions"never done do not admit of discourse: Nay, we will make"this agreement with thee, and that before Caesar, the lord of"all, who is now a mediator between us, If thou, O father, canst"bring thyself by the evidence of truth, to have a mind free from"suspicion concerning us, let us live, though even then we shall"live in an unhappy way, for to beaccusedof greatactsof wicked-"ness, though falsely, is a terrible thing; but if thou hast any"fear remaining, continue thou on in thy pious life, we will"give this reason for our own conduct, our life is not so de-"sirable to us as to desire to have it, if it tend to the harm of"our father who gave it us."
4. When Alexander had thus spoken, Caesar, who did not be­fore believe so gross a calumny, was still more moved by it, andlooked intently upon Herod, and perceived he was a little con­founded; the persons there present were under an anxiety aboutthe young men, and the fame that was spread abroad made theking hated, for the very incredibility of the calumny, and theGommiseration which the flower of youth, the beauty ofbody, which were in the young men, pleaded for assistance; andthe more so on this account, that Alexander had made their de­fence with dexterity and prudence; nay, they did not themselvesany longer continue in their former countenances, which hadbeen bedewed with tears and cast downwards to the ground, butnow there arose in them a hope of the best: and the king himselfappeared not to have had foundation enough to build such anaccusation upon, he having no real evidence wherewith to con­vict them. Indeed he wanted some apology for making the ac­cusation; but Caesar, after some delay, said, That "although the"young men were thoroughly innocent of that for which they"were calumniated, yet had they been so far to blame, that"they had not demeaned themselves towards their father, so as"to prevent that suspicion which was spread abroad concerning
"him a vast sum; and that the Asamoneans, in those 125 years they held the"government, were not able to perform so great a work, to the honour of God,"at this was." Antiq. B. XVII. ch% vi. sect. 3. vol. HI-







OCR Output








Chap. XI . ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 289


lowing: Cecilius Bassus, one of Pompey's party, laid a treach­erous design against Sextus Caesar, and slew him, and thentook his army, and got the management of public affairs into hisown hand; so there arose a great war about Apamia, while Cae­sar's generals came against him with an army of horsemen andfootmen: To these Antipater also sent succours, and his sonswith them, as calling to mind the kindnesses they had receivedfrom Caesar, and on that account he thought it but just to requirepunishment for him, and to take vengeance on the man that hadmurdered him. And as the war was drawn out into a greatlength, Marcus came from Rome to take Sextus' governmentupon him: But Caesar was slain by Cassius and Brutus in thesenate house, after he had retained the government three yearsand six months. This fact, however, is related elsewhere.
2. As the war that arose upon the death of Caesar was nowbegun, and the principal men were all gone, some one way, andsome another, to raise armies, Cassius came from Rome intoSyria, in order to receive the [army that lay in the] camp atApamia; and having raised the siege, he brought over both Bas­sus and Marcus to his party. He then went over the cities, andgot together weapons and soldiers, and laid great taxes uponthose cities; and he chiefly oppressed Judea, and exacted of itseven hundred talents: But Antipater, when he saw the state tobe in so great consternation and disorder, he divided the collec­tion of that sum, and appointed his two sons to gather it, andso that part of it was to be exacted by Malichus, who wasill-disposed to him, and part by others. And because Heroddid exact what is required of him from Galilee before others,he was in the greatest favour with Cassius; for he thought it apart of prudence to cultivate a friendship with the Romans, andto gain their good-will at the expense of others; whereas thecurators of the other cities, with their citizens, were sold forslaves; and Cassius reduced four cities into slavery, the twomost potent of which were Gophna and Emmaus; and, besidesthese, Lydia, and Thamna. Nay, Cassius was so very angry atMalichus, that he had killed him, (for he assaulted him,) hadnot Hyrcanus, by the means of Antipater, sent him a hun­dred talents of his own, and thereby pacified his anger againsthim.
3. But after Cassius was gone out of Judea, Malichus laid snaresfor Antipater, as thinking that his death would be the preserva­tion of Hyrcanus' government; But his design was not unknown
Roman historians require us to read Marcus in Josephus, and tliis perpetually,l>oth in these Antiquities, and in the history of the Wars, as the learned generally•gree.







OCR Output








Chap. III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 385


had administered the government, and had not neglected anything which was for their advantage; and as he was very joyful,he now remitted to them the fourth part of their taxes for thelast year. Accordingly, they were so pleased with his favourand speech to them, that they went their ways with great glad­ness, and wished the king all manner of happiness.
CHAP. III.
How great disturbances arose in Herod's family on his preferringAntipater, his eldest son, before the rest, till Alexander tookthat injury very heinously.
§ 1. JJUT now the affairs in Herod's family were m moredisorder, and became more severe upon him, by the hatredof Salome to the young men [Alexander and Aristobulus,]which descended as it were by inheritance [from their motherMariamne:] And as she had fully succeeded against theirmother, so she proceeded to that degree of madness and inso­lence as to endeavour that none of her posterity might be leftalive, who might have it in their power to revenge her death.The young men had also somewhat of a bold and uneasy disposi­tion towards their father, occasioned by the remembrance ofwhat their mother had unjustly suffered, and by their own affec­tation of dominion. The old grudge was also renewed; and theycast reproaches on Salome and Pheroras, who requited theyoung men with malicious designs, and actually laid treacheroussnares for them. Now, as for this hatred it was equal on bothsides, but the manner of exerting that hatred was different: foras for the young men they were rash, reproaching and affront­ing the others openly, and were unexperienced enough to thinkit the most generous to declare their minds in that undauntedmanner: but the others did not take that method, but made useof calumnies after a subtle and a spiteful manner, still provok­ing the young men, and imagining that their boldness might intime turn to the offering violence to their father; for inasmuchas they were not ashamed of the pretended crimes of their mother,nor thought she suffered justly, these supposed that it might allength exceed all bounds, and induce them to think they oughtto be -ivenged on their father, though it were by despatchinghim with their own hands. At length it came to this, that thewhole city was full of their discourses, and, as is usual in suchcontests, the unskilfulness of the young men was pitied, but thecontrivance of Salome was too hard for them, and what impu­tations she laid upon them came to be believed, by means oftheir own conduct: for they who were so deeply affected with







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 279


"that he and his children retain whatsoever privileges belong to"the office of high priest, or whatsoever favours have been"hitherto granted them. And if at any time hereafter there"arise any questions about the Jewish customs, I will that he"determine the same. And I think it not proper that they"should be obliged to fmd us winter quarters, or that any"money should be required of them."
3. "The decrees of Caius Caesar, consul, containing what hath"been granted and determined, are as follows: That Hyrcanus"and his children bear rule over the nation of the Jews, and"have the profits of the places to them bequeathed: and that he"as himself the high priest and ethnarch of the Jews, defend"those that are injured. And that ambassadors, be sent to Hyr-"canus the son of Alexander, the high priest of the Jews, that"may discourse with him about a league of friendship and"mutual assistance, and that a table of brass, containing the"premises, be openly proposed in the capitol, and at Sidon and"Tyre, and Askelon, and in the temple, engraven in Roman"and Greek letters: that this decree may also be communicated"to the questors and pretors of the several cities, and to the"friends of the Jews: and that the ambassadors may have pre-"sents made them, that these decrees be sent every where."
4>. "Caius Caesar, imperator, dictator, consul, hath granted,"That out of regard to the honour and virtue, and kindness of"the man; and for the advantage of the senate, and of the people"of Rome, Hyrcanus, the son of Alexander, both he and his"children, be high priests and priests of Jerusalem, and of the"Jewish nation, by the same right, and according to the same"laws, by which their progenitors have held the priesthood."
5. " Caius Caesar, consul the fifth time, hath decreed, That"the Jews shall possess Jerusalem, and may encompass that"city with walls; and that Hyrcanus, the son of Alexander,"the high priest and ethnarch of the Jews, retain in the man-"ner he himself pleases; and that the Jews be allowed to de-"duct out of their tribute every second year the land in let [in"the sabbatic period] a corous of that tribute, and that the tri-"bute they pay be not let to farm, nor that they pay always"the same tribute."
6. " Caius Caesar, imperator the second time, hath ordained,"That all the country of the Jews, excepting Joppa, do pay a tri-"bute yearly for the city Jerusalem, excepting the seventh;"which they call the Sabbatical year, because thereon they"neither receive the fruits of their trees, nor do they sow their"land; and that they pay their tribute in Sidon on the second"year [of that Sabbatical period,] the fourth part of what was"sown: and besides this, they are to pay the same tithes to







OCR Output








80 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book X.


"it a branch of his own kingdom; but about that time it happen-"ed, that his father Nebuchodonosor [Nabopollassar] fell ill, and"ended his life in the city Babylon, when he had reigned"* twenty-one years; and when he was made sensible, as he was"in a little time, Jthat his father Nebuchodonosor [Nabopollas-"sar] was dead, and having settled the affairs of Egypt, and the"other countries, as also those that concerned the captive Jews"and Phoenicians, .and Syrians, and those of the Egyptian"nations, and having committed the conveyance of them to". Babylon to certain of his friends, together with the gross of"his army, and the rest of their ammunition and provisions,"he went himself hastily, accompanied with a few others,"over the desert, and came to Babylon. So he took upon him"the management of public affairs, and of the kingdom which"had been kept for him by one that was the principal of the"Chaldeans, and he received the entire dominions of his father,<{ and appointed, that when the captives came, they should be"placed as colonies, in the most proper places of Babylonia:"but then he adorned the temple of Belus, and the rest of the"temples, in a magnificent manner, with the spoils he had taken41 in war. He also added another city to that which was there"of old, and rebuilt it, that such as would besiege it hereafter"might no more turn the course of the river, and thereby attack"the city itself: He therefore built three walls round about the"inner city, apd three others about that which was the outer,"and this he did with burnt brick. And after he had, after a"becoming manner, walled the city, and adorned its gates glo-"riously, he built another palace before his father's palace, but"so that they joined to it; to describe whose vast height, and"immense riches, it would perhaps be too much for me to at-"tempt; yet as large and lofty as they were, they .were com-"pleted in j- fifteen days. He also erected elevated places for


* These 21 years here ascribed to one named Kaboulasser in the first book againstApion, or to Nabopollassar, the father of the great Nebuchadnezzar, are also thevery same with those given him in Ptolemy's canon. And note here, that what Dr.Prideaux says, at the year 612, that Nebuchadnezzar must have been a commonname of the other kings of Babylon, besides the great Nebuchadnezzar himself, isa groundless mistake of some modern chronologers only, and destitute of all properoriginal authority.
f These fifteen days for finishing such vast buildings at Babylon, in Josephus'copy of Berosus, would seem too absurd to be supposed to be the true number, wereit not for the same testimony extant also in the first book against Apion, §. 19. withthe same number. It thence indeed appears, that Josephus' copy of Berosus had thissmall number, but that it is the- true number I still doubt . Josephus assuresus, that the walls of so much a smaller city as Jerusalem were two years and fourmonths in building by Nchcmiah, who yet hastened the work all he could, Antiq.B. XI. chap. v. sect. 8. I should think 115 days, or a year and 15 days, much mor«proportionable to so great a work.







OCR Output








252 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEVTS. Book XIV.


BOOK XIV.
CONTAINING THE INTERVAL OF THIRTY-TWO YEARS.
FROM THE DEATH OF QUEEN ALEXANDRA TO THE DEATHOF ANTIGONUS.


CHAP. I.
The war between Aristobulus and Hyrcanus about the kingdom;and how they made an agreement, that Aristobulus should beking, and Hyrcanus live a private life: as also how Hyrcan­us, a little afterward, was persuaded by Antipater to Jly toAretas.
'i O J
§ 1. WE have related the affairs of Queen Alexandra, andher death in the foregoing book, and will now speak of whatfollowed, and was connected with those histories; declaring,before we proceed, that we have nothing so much at heart asthis, they we may * omit no facts, either through ignorance orlaziness, for we are upon the history and explication of suchthings as the greatest part are unacquainted withal, because oftheir distance from our times; and we aim to do it with aproper beauty of style, so far as that is derived from properwords harmonically disposed, and from such ornaments ofspeech also as may contribute to the pleasure of our readers,that we may entertain the knowledge of what we write withsome agreeable satisfaction and pleasure. But the principalscope that authors ought to aim at above all the rest, is to speakaccurately, and to speak truly, for the satisfaction of those thatare otherwise unacquainted with such transactions, and obligedto believe what these writers inform them of.
2. Hyrcanus then began his high priesthood on the third yearof the hundred seventy-seventh olympiad, when Quintius Horten-sius and Quintus Metellus, who was called Metellus of Crete,were consuls at Rome; when presently Aristobulus began tomake war against him, and as it came to a battle with Hyrcan-tis at Jericho, many of the soldiers deserted him, and went overto his brother; upon which Hyrcanus fled into the citadel, whereAristobulus' wife and children were imprisoned by their mo­ther, as we have said already, and attacked and overcame those


* Reland takes notice here, very justly, how Joseplms' declaration, that it washis great concern not only to write an agreeable, an accurate, and a true history, butalso distinctly not to omit any thing [of consequence,] either through ignorance orlaziness, implies that he could not, consistently with that resolution, omit the mentionof [so famous a person as] Jesvs Christ,







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THJ. JEWS. Jb}


and by the darts which the enemy threw at them from thetowers. ,.
2. Now the city was taken in the ninth day of the fourthmonth, in the eleventh year of the reign of Zedekiah. Theywere indeed only generals of the king of Babylon, to whom Ne­buchadnezzar committed the care of the siege, for he abode him -self in the city of Riblah. The names of these generals who rav -aged andsubdued Jerusalem, if any one desire to know them, werethese, Nergal Sharezer, Samgar Nebo, Rabsaris, Sa«rsechim, andRabmag. And when the city was taken about midnight, andthe enemies' generals were entered into the temple, and when Ze­dekiah was sensible of it, he took his wives and his children, andhis captains and his friends, and with them fled out of the city,through the fortified ditch, and through the desert: and whencertain of the deserters had informed the Babylonians of this, atbreak of day, they made haste to pursue after Zedekiah, and over­took him not far from Jericho, and encompassed him about; butfor those friends.and captains of Zedekiah who had fled out ofthe city with him, when they saw their enemies near them, theyleft him and dispersed themselves, some one way and some ano­ther, and every one resolved to save himself; so the enemy tookZedekiah alive, when he was deserted by all but a few, with hischildren and his wives, and brought him to the king. When hewas come, Nebuchadnezzar began to "call him a wicked wretch,"and a covenant breaker, and one that had forgotten his former"words, when he promised to keep the country for him. He"also reproached him for his ingratitude, that when he had re-"ceived the kingdom from him, who had taken it from Jehoia-"chin, and given it him, he had made use of the power he gave"him :against him that gave it, but, said he, God is great, who"hated that conduct of thine, and hath brought thee under us."And when he had used these words to Zedekiah, he commandedhis sons and his friends to be slain, while Zedekiah and the restof the captains looked on, after which he put out the eyes oZedekiah : and bound him, and carried him to Babylon. Andthese things happened to him*, as Jeremiah and Ezekiel hadforetold to him, that he should be caught, and brought before theking of Babylon, and should speak to him face to face; and shouldsee his eyes with his own eyes; and thus far did Jeremiah pro-


* This observation of Josephus* about the seeming disagreement of Jeremiah,chap. wii. 4. and xxxiv. 3. and Ezek. xii. 13. but real agreement at last, concerningthe fate of Zedekiah, is very true, and very remarkable. See chap. vii. sect. 2. Noris it at all unlikely that the courtiers and false prophets might make use of this*ecming contradiction to dissuade Zedekiah from believing either of those prophet*,as Josephus here intimates lie was dissuaded thereby.
VOL. II. I If







OCR Output








B2" JtNTIjJUITIBtf OF THB JEWS. BOOK X»


he was under, which was very sore, and by reason -of the sur­prising nature of what was told him, so he desired that Isaiahwould give him some sign; of wonder, that he might believe himin what he had said, andbe sensible that he came from God: forthings that are beyond expectation, and greater than our hopes,are made credible by the actions of like nature. And whenIsaiah bad asked him, WThat sign he desired to be exhibited? hedesired that he would make the shadow of the sun, which he hadalready made to go down ten steps [or degrees] in his house, to* return again to the same place, and to make it as it was be­fore. And when the prophet prayed to God to exhibit thissign to the king, he saw what he desired to see, and was freed-from- his distemper, and went up to the temple, where he wor­shipped God and made vows to him.
'2. At this time it was that the dominion of the Assyrians f waaoverthrown by the Medes, but of these things I shall treat else­where. But the king of Babylon, whose name was Baladon, sentambassadors to Hezekiah, with presents, and desired he wouldbe his ally and his friend. So he received the ambassadors gladly,and made them a feast, and showed them his treasures, and his-armoury, and the other wealth he was possessed of, in preciousstones, and in gold, and gave them presents to be carried to Ba-ladon, and sent them back to him. Upon which the prophetIsaiah came to him, and inquired of him, "Whence those am-'** bassadors came?" To which he replied, That " they came** from Babylon, from the king; and that he had showed them


-'<'* As to this regress of the shadow, either upon tt sun-dial-, or the steps of the-royal palace built by Ahaz, whether it were physically done by the real miracu­lous revolution of the earth in its diurnal motion backward from east to west, fora while, and its return again to its old natural revolution from west to east, or whe­ther it were not apparent only; and performed by an zerkil phosphorus, which imi­tated the sun's motion backward, while a cloud hid the real sun, cannot now be de­termined. Philosophers and astronomers will naturally incline to the latter hypothe­sis. However, it must be noted, that Josephus seemi to have understood it otherwisethan we generally do; that the shadow was accelerated at much at first forward as itwas made to go backward afterward, and so the day was neither longer nor shorterthan usual, which it must be confessed, agrees best of all to astronomy, whose eclip­ses older than that time were observed at the times of the day as if this miracle badnever happened. After all, this wonderful signal was not, it seems, peculiar to Ju-dea, but either seen, or at last heard of, at Babylon also, as appears by 2 Chron.xxxii. 31. where we learn, that the Babylonian ambassadors were sent to Hezekiah,among other things, to im/uira of the wonder that was done in the land.
f This expression of Josephus' that the Medes, upon this destruction of the As­syrian army, ova-threw the Assyrian empire, seems to be too strong, for althoughthey immediately cast off the Assyrian yoke, and set up Deioces a king of their own,jet it was sometime before the Medes and Babylonians overthrew Nineveh, andsome generations ere the Msdes and Persians under Cyaxares and Cyrus overthrewIhe Assyrian or Babylonian unpin;.







OCR Output








72 ANTIgUlTIES OF THE JEWS. Book X..


country with presents to Gedaliah, none of them knowing whathad befallen him; when Ishmael saw them, he invited them into Gedaliah, and when they were come in, he shut up the court,and slew them, and cast their dead bodies down into a certain deeppit, that they might not be seen; but of these fourscore men'Ishmael spared those that entreated him not to kill them; till theyhad delivered up to him what riches they had concealed in thefields, consisting of their furniture, and garments, and corn: buthe took captive the people that were in Mispah, with theirwives and children; among whom were the daughters of kingZedekiah, whom Nebuzaradan, the general of the army of Ba­bylon, had left with Gedaliah: And when he had done this, hecame to the king of the Ammonites.
5. But when Johanan and the rulers with him heard of what'was done at Mispah by Ishmael, and of the death of Gedaliah,they had indignation at it, and every one of them took his ownarmed men and came suddenly to fight with Ishmael, and over­took him at the fountain in Hebron: And when those that werecarried away captives by Ishmael, saw Johanan and the rulers,they were very glad; and looked upon them as coming to theirassistance; so they left him that had carried them captives, andcame over to Johanan: then Ishmael, with eight men, fled tothe king of the Ammonites; but Johanan took those whom hehad rescued out of the hands of Ishmael, and the eunuchs, andtheir wives and children, and came to a certain place called Man-dra, and there they abode that day, for they had determined toremove from thence, and go into Egypt, out of fear lest theBabylonians should slay them in case they continued in thecountry, and that out of anger at the slaughter of Gedaliah,who had been by them set over it for governor.
6. Now while they were under this deliberation, Johanan, theson of Kareah, and the riders that were with him, came to Je­remiah the prophet, and desired that he would pray to God thatbecause they were at an utter loss about what they ought to do,he would discover it to them, and they sware that they would dowhatsoever Jeremiah should say to them. And when the pro­phet said he would be their intercessor with God, it'came to pass,that after ten days God appeared to him, and said, "That he"would inform Johanan and the other rulers, and all the people,"that he would be with them while they continued in that coun-"try, and take care of them, and keep them from being hurt"by the Babylonians, of whom they were afraid, but that he"would desert them, if they went into Egypt, and out of his"wrath against them, would inflict the same punishments upon"them which they knew their brethren had already endured."kso when the prophet had infnrmwl Johanan and the people that







OCR Output








55 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book X.


set up in his royal palace, which his predecessors had framed;and what thing soever there was besides, which they worshippedas a god. And when he had thus purged all the country, he call­ed the people to Jerusalem, and there celebrated the feast ofunleavened bread, and that called the Passover. He also gavethe people for Paschal sacrifices, young kids of the goats andlambs, thirty thousand, and three hundred oxen for burnt of­ferings. The principal of the priests also gave to the priestsagainst the passover, two thousand and six hundred lambs; theprincipal of the Levites also gave to the Levites five thousandJambs and five hundred oxen, by which means there was greatplenty of sacrifices; and they offered those sacrifices according tothe laws of Moses, while every priest explained the matter, andministered to the multitude. And indeed there had been noother festival thus celebrated by the Hebrews from the times ofSamuel the prophet; and the plenty of sacrifices now was theoccasion that all things were performed according to the laws,and according to the custom of their forefathers. So when Jo-siah had after this lived in peace; nay, in riches and reputationalso among all men, he ended his life in the manner following.
CHAP. V.
How Josiah fought with Neco [king of Egypf], and was twund-ed and died in a little afterward: As also how Neco carriedJehoahaz, who had been made king, into Egypt, and deliveredthe kingdom to Jehoiakim: And [lastly] concerning Jeremiahand Ezekiel.
§ 1. JXow Neco, king of Egypt, raised an army, amimarched to the river Euphrates, in order to fight with theMedes and Babylonians, who had * overthrown the dominionof the Assyrians, for he had a desire to reign over Asia. Nowwhen he was come to the city Mendes, which belonged to thekingdom of Josiah, he brought an army to hinder him from pass­ing through his own country, in his expedition against theMedes. Now Neco sent a herald to Josiah, and told him,That "he did not make this expedition against him, but was"making haste to Euphrates; and desired that he would not"provoke him to fight against "him, because he obstructed his"march to the place whither he had resolved to go." But Jo­


* This is a remarkable passage of chronology in Josephus, that about the latterend of the reign of Josiah, the Medes and Babylonians overthrew the empire of theAssyrians; or in the words of Tobit's continuator, that "before Tobias died, lie"heard of the destruction of Nineveh, which was taken by Nebuchodonosor the"Babylonian, and Assuerus die Mede," Tob. ziv. 15.—See Dean Prideaux Con-nection at tht year 612.







OCR Output








368 ANTIgUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XV.


trarchy * for his brother Pheroras, while he did himself bestowupon him a revenue of a hundred talents out of his own king­dom, that in case he came to any harm himself, his brother mightbe in safety, and that his sons might not have dominion over him.So when he had conducted Caesar to the sea, and was returnedhome, he built him a most beautiful temple of the whitest stone,in Zenodorus' country, near the place called Panium. This isa very fine cave in a mountain, under which there is a great ca­vity in the earth, and the cavern is abrupt, and prodigiously deep,and full of a still water; over it hangs a vast mountain; and un­der the caverns arise the springs of the river Jordan. Herodadorned this place, which was already a very remarkable one,still farther, by the erection of this temple, which he dedicatedto Caesar.
4. At which time Herod released to his subjects the third partof their taxes, under pretence indeed of relieving them, after thedearth they had had; but the main reason was, to recover theirgood-will, which he now wanted, for they were uneasy at him,because of the innovations he had introduced in their practices, ofthe dissolution of their religion, and of the disuse of their own cus­toms; and the people every where talked against him, like thosethat were still more provoked and disturbed at his procedure:against which discontents he greatly guarded himself, and tookaway the opportunities they might have to disturb him, and en­joined them to be always at work, nor did he permit the citi­zens either to meet together, or to walk, or to eat together, butwatched every thing they did, and when any were caught theywere severely punished, and many there were who were broughtto the citadel Hyrcania,both openly and secretly, and were thereput to death; and there were spies set every where, both in thecity, and in the roads, who watched those that met together; nay,it is reported, that he did not himself neglect this part of caution,but that he would oftentimes himself take the habit of a privateman, and mix among the multitude, in the night time, and maketrial what opinion they had of his government; and as for thosethat could no way be reduced to acquiesce under his scheme ofgovernment, he prosecuted them all manner of ways, but for therest of the multitude, he required that they should be obliged totake an oath of fidelity to him, and at the same time compelledthem to swear that they would bear him good-will, and con­tinue certainly so to do, in his management of the government;and indeed a great part of them, either to please him, or out of


* A tetrarcky properly and originally denoted the fourth part of an entire kingdomor country, and a tetrarch one that was a ruler of such a fourth part; which always implies somewhat less extent of dominion and power than belong to a kingdom and to aking.







OCR Output








Chap. II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 193


him, and besides took his Jewish auxiliaries, and came againstJonathan, and made an assault upon his fortifications, and be­sieged him many days; but Jonathan did not abate of his cour­age at the zeal Bacchides used in the siege, but courageouslyopposed him: And while he left his brother Simon in the city,to fight with Bacchides, he went privately out himself into thecountry, and got a great body of men together of his own party,and fell upon Bacchides' camp in the night time, and destroyeda great many of them. His brother Simon knew also of thishis falling upon them, because he perceived that the enemieswere slain by him, so he sallied out upon them, and burnt theengines which the Macedonians used, and made a great slaugh­ter of them. And when Bacchides saw himself encompassedwith enemies, and some of them before, and some behind him,he fell into despair and trouble of mind, as confounded at theunexpected ill success of this siege. However, he vented hisdispleasure at these misfortunes upon those deserters who sentfor him from the king, as having deluded him. So he had amind to finish this siege after a decent manner, if it were possi­ble for him so to do, and then to return home.
6. When Jonathan understood these his intentions, he sent am­bassadors to him, about a league of friendship and mutual assist­ance, and that they might restore those they had taken captiveon both sides. So Bacchides thought this a pretty decent wayof retiring home, and made a league of friendship with Jona­than, when they sware that they would not any more make warone against another. Accordingly, he restored the captives, andtook his own men with him, and returned to the king of An-tioch: and after this his departure, he never came into Judeaagain. Then did Jonathan take the opportunity of this quietstate of things, and went and lived in the city Michmash; andthere governed the multitude, and punished the wicked andungodly, and by that means pu rged the nation of them.


CHAP. II.
How Alexander [Bala] in his war 'with Demetrius, granted Jo­nathan many advantages, and appointed him to be high priest,and persuaded him to assist him, although Demetrius promisedhim greater advantages on the other side. Concerning thedeath of Demetrius.
§ 1. Now in the hundred and sixtieth year, it fell out thatAlexander, the * son of Antiochus Epiphanes, came up into


* This Alexander Bala. who certainly pretended to be the son of AntiochusEpiphanes, and was owned for such by the Jews and Romans, and many others*







OCR Output








156 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIJ.


coming to him, to excuse the multitude, as not having done himany harm, for that he was their patron. In short, he was so verylarge in his encomiums upon the young man, that he disposedboth the king and his wife Cleopatra to have a kindness for himbefore he came, So Joseph sent to his friends at Samaria, andborrowed money of them; and got ready what was necessary forhis journey, garments and cups, and beasts for burthen, whichamounted to about twenty thousand drachmae, and went to Alex­andria. Now it happened that at this time all the principalmen and rulers went up out of the cities of Syria and Phenicia,to bid for their taxes; for every year the king sold them to themen of the greatest power in every city. So these men saw Jo­seph journeying on the way, and laughed at him for his povertyand meanness. But when he came to Alexandria^ and heardthat king Ptolemy was at Memphis, he went up thither to meetwith him; which happened as the king was sitting in his cha­riot, with his wife and with his friend Athenion, who was thevery person who had been ambassador at Jerusalem, and been en­tertained by Joseph. As soon therefore as Athenion saw him,he presently made him known to the king, how good and gene­rous a young man he was. So Ptolemy saluted him first, anddesired him to come up into his chariot; and as Joseph sat there,he began to complain of the management of Onias. To whichhe answered, Forgive him, on account of his age for thou canstnot certainly be unacquainted with this, that old men and in­fants have their minds exactly alike; but thou shalt have fromus, who are young men, every thing thou desirest, and shalt haveno cause to complain. With this good humour and pleasantryof the young man, the king was so delighted, that he began al­ready, as though he had long experience of him, to have a stillgreater affection for him, insomuch, that he bade him take hisdiet in the king's palace, and be a guest at his own table everyday. But when the king was come to Alexandria, the principalmen of Syria saw him sitting with the king, and were much of­fended at it.
4. And when the day came on which the king was to let thetaxes of the cities to farm, and those that were the principalmen of dignity in their several countries were to bid for them,the sum of the taxes together, of Celesyria and Phenicia, andJudea, with Samaria [as they were bidden for,] came to eightthousand talents. Hereupon Joseph accused the bidders, as hav­ing agreed together to estimate the value of the taxes at too lowa rate; and he promised, that he would himself give twice asmuch for them: but for those who did not pay, he would sendthe king home their whole substance; for this privilege wassold together with the taxes themselves. The king was pleased







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 283


"necessary for sacrifices: and my will is, that you writ? this to"the several cities under your jurisdiction."
13. And these were the concessions that Dolabella made to ournation when Hyrcanus sent an embassage to him. But Luciusthe consul's decree ran thus: "I have at my tribunal set these"Jews, who are citizens of Rome, and follow the Jewish reli-"gious rites, and yet live at Ephesus, free from going into the"army, on account of the superstition they are under. This"was done before the twelfth of the calends of October, when"Lucius Lentullus, and Cains Marcellus, were consuls, of the"presence of Titus Appius Balgus, the son of Titus, and lieuten-"ant of the Horatian tribe, of Titus Tongius, the son of Titus"of the Crustamine tribe, of Quintus Resius, the son of Quin-"tus, of Titus Pompius Longinus, the son of Titus, of Caius"Servillius, the son of Caius of the Terentine tribe, of Bracchus"the military tribune, of Publius Lucius Gallus, the son of Pub-"lius of the Veturian tribe of Caius Sentius, the son of Caius"of the Sabbatine tribe, of Titus Attilius Bulbus, the son of"Titus, lieutenant and vice-praetor, to the magistrates, senate,"and people of the Ephesians, sendeth greeting: Lucius Lentul-"lus the consul freed the Jews that are in Asia from going into"the armies at my intercession for them. And when 1 had"made the same petition sometime afterward to Phanius the"imperator, and to Lucius Antonius the vice-questor, I obtain-"ed that privilege of them also; and my will is, that you take"care that no one give them any disturbance."
14. The decree of the Delians. "The answer of the pretors,"when Beotus was archon, on the twentieth day of the month"Thargeleon, while Marcus Piso the lieutenant lived in our"city, who was also appointed over the choice of the soldiers,"he called us, and many other of the citizens, and gave order,"that if there be here any Jews, who are Roman citizens, no"one is to give them any disturbance about going into the ar-"my, because Cornelius Lentullus, the consul, freed the Jews"from going into the army, on account of the superstition"they are under; you are therefore obliged to submit to the"pretor." And the like decree was made by the Sardiansabout us also.
15. "Caius Phanius, the son of Caius, imperator and consul,''' to the magistrates of Cos, sendeth greeting: I would have you"know that the ambassadors of the Jews have been with me,"and desired they might have those decrees which the senate"had made about them; which decrees are here subjoined. My"will is, that you have a regard to, and take care of these men,"according to the .senate's decree, that they may be safely con-"veyed home through your country."
VOL. II. N N S8







OCR Output








380 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XVI.


in troubles because of his kindness, and in prosperity because ofthe respect Agrippa had for him. Now as soon as those affairs ofPontus were finished, for whose sake Agrippa was sent thither,they did not think fit to return by sea, but passed throughPaphlagonia and Cappadocia; they then travelled thence overgreat Phrygia, and came to Ephesus, and then they sailed fromEphesus to Samos. And indeed the king bestowed a great manybenefits on every city that he came to, according as theystood in need of them; for as for those that wanted eithermoney or kind treatment, he was not wanting to them; but hesupplied the former himself out of his own expenses:' he alsobecame an intercessor with Agrippa for all such as sought afterhis favour, and he brought things so about, that the petitionersfailed in none of their suits to him, Agrippa being himself of agood disposition, and of great generosity, and ready to grant allsuch requests as might be advantageous to the petitioners, pro­vided they were not to the detriment of others. The inclinationof the king was of great weight also, and still excited Agrippa,who was himself ready to do good; for he made a reconciliationbetween the people of Ilium, at whom he was angry, and paidwhat money the people of Chios owed Caesar's procurators, anddischarged them of their tributes; and helped all others accord­ing as their several necessities required.
3. But now when Agrippa and Herod were in Ionia, a greatmultitude of Jews, who dwelt in their cities, came to them, andlaying liold of the opportunity and the liberty now given them,laid before them the injuries which they suffered, while theywere not permitted to use their own laws, but were compelledto prosecute theif lawsuits by the ill usage of the judges, upontheir holy-days, and were deprived of the money they used tolay up at Jerusalem, and were forced into the army, and uponsuch other offices as obliged them to spend their sacred money:from which burdens they always used to be freed by the Ro­mans, who had still permitted them to live according to theirown laws. When this clamour was made, the king desired ofAgrippa that he would hear their cause, and assigned Nicolaus,one of his friends, to plead for those, their privileges. Accord­ingly, when Agrippa had called the principal of the Romans,and such of the kings and rulers as we-re there, to be his asses­sors, Nicolaus stood up, and pleaded for the Jews, as follows:"It is of necessity incumbent on such as are in distress to have"recourse to those that have it in their power to free them"from those injuries they lie under; and for those that now are"complainants, they approach you with great assurance; for as"they have formerly often obtained your favour, so far as they"have even wished to have it, they now only entreat that you,







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTlgUITiEE OF THE JEWS. 11


came to him; and said, That " he was not ignorant how her"husband had preserved the prophets that were to be slain by"Jezebel, the wife of Ahab: for she said that he hid a hundred"of them, and had borrowed money for their maintenance;« that after her husband's death, she and her children were car-"ried away to be made slaves by the creditors; and she desired"of him to have mercy upon her on account of what her hus-"band did, and afford her some assistance." And when he ask­ed her what she had in the house, she said, Nothing but a verysmall quantity of oil in a cruse. . So the prophet bid her goaway, and borrow a great many empty vessels of her neighbours,and when she had shut her chamber door, to pour the oil intothem all; for God would fill them full. And when the womanhad done what she was commanded to do, and bade her childrenbring every one of the vessels, and all were filled, and not oneleft empty, she came to the prophet, and told him that they wereall full: Upon which he advised her to go away, and sell the oil,and pay the creditors what was owing to them, for that therewould be some surplus of the price of the oil, which she mightmake use of for the maintenance of her children. And thus didElisha discharge the woman's debts, and free her from the vexa­tion of her creditors.
3. * Elisha also sent an hasty message to Joram and exhortedhim to take care of that place, for that therein were some Sy-


widow of Obadiah, the good steward of Aliah, is confirmed by the Chaldeeparaphrast, and by the Rabbins and others. Nor is that unlikely which Jose-plms here adds, that these debts were contracted by her husband for the sup­port of those hundred of the Lord's jrrophets, whom he maintained by Jifty in acave, in the days of Ahab and Jezebel, 1 Kings xviii. 4. which circumstancerendered it highly fit that the prophet Elisha should provide her a remedy, andenable her to redeem herself and her sons from the fear of that slavery whichinsolvent debtors were liable to by the law of Moses, Lev. xxv. 59. Matt, xviii.25. which he did accordingly, with God's help, at the expense of a miracle.
* Dr. Hudson with very good reason, suspects that there is no small defect inour present copies of Josephus; just before the beginning of this section, and thatchiefly, as to that distinct account which he had given us reason to expect in thefirst section, and to which he seems to refer, chap. viii. § 6. concerning the glo­rious miracles which Elisha wrought, which indeed in our Bibles are not i. few,2 Kings iv—ix. but of which we have several omitted in Josephus' present co­pies. One of these histories, omitted at present, was evidently in his Bible, Imean that of the curing of Naaman's leprosy, 2 Kings v. for he plainly alludesto it, B. III. chap. xi. § 4. "here he observes, That "there were lepers in many"nations who yet have been in honour, and not only free from reproach and"avoidance, but who have been great captains of armies, and been intrusted with"high offices in the commonwealth, and have had the privilege of entering into"holy places and ti-mples." But what makes me most regret the want of thathistory in our present copies of Josephus, is this, that we have here, as it is com.monly understood, one of the greatest difficulties in all the Bible, that in 2 Kingtv. 18, ] 9. where Naaman, after he had been miraculously cured by a prophetof the true God, and had thereupon promised, ver. 17. that "he would hence-VOL. II. B 15







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 119


and not to think it a dishonourable thing in her to put on ahumble habit, for the safety of her nation, wherein she mightdeprecate the ruin of the Jews, who were in danger of it; for thatHaman, whose dignity was only inferior to that of the king's,had accused the Jews, and had irritated the king against them.When she was informed of this, she sent to Mordecai again,and told him that she was not called by the king, and that hewho goes in to him without being called, is to be slain, unlesswhen he is willing to save any one, he holds out his golden scep­tre to him; but that to whomsoever he does so, although he goin without being called, that person is so far from being slain,that he obtains pardon, and is entirely preserved. Now whenthe eunuch carried this message from Esther to Mordecai, hebade him also tell her that she must not only provide for her ownpreservation, but for the common preservation of her nation, forthat if she now neglected this opportunity, there would certainlyarise help to them from God some other way, but she and herfather's house would be destroyed by those whom she now de­spised. But Esther sent the very same eunuch back to Mor­decai [to desire him] to go to Shushan, and to gather the Jewsthat were there together to a congregation, and to fast and ab­stain from all sorts of food, on her account, and [to let him knowthat] she with her maidens would do the same; and then shepromised that she would go to the king, though it were againstthe law, and that if she must die for it, she would not refuse it.8. Accordingly, Mordecai did as Esther had enjoined him,and made the people fast; and he besought God, together withthem, " Not to overlook his nation, particularly at this time,."when it was going to be destroyed; but that, as he had often"before provided for them, and forgiven, when they had sinned,"so he would now deliver them from that destruction which was"denounced against them; for although it was not all the nation"that had offended, yet must they so ingloriously be slain, and"that he was himself the occasion of the wrath of Haman, be-"cause said he, I did not worship him, nor could I endure to"pay that honour to him which I used to pay to thee, O Lord,"for upon that his anger hath he contrived this present mis-"chief against those that have not transgressed thy laws." Thesame supplications did the multitude put up; and entreated thatGod would provide for their deliverance, and free the Israelitesthat were in all the eaith from this calamity which was nowcoming upon them, for they had it before their eyes, and ex­pected its coming. Accordingly Esther made supplication toGod after the manner of her country, by casting herself downupon the earth, and putting on her mourning garments, and bid­ding farewell to meat and drink; and all delicacies, for three days,







OCR Output








Chap. V. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 211


battle as well as he was able; but those that were laid in am­bush by Demetrius' generals being behind them, the Jews wereafraid lest they should be caught in the midst between two bo­dies, and perish, so they ran away in haste, and indeed all therest left Jonathan; but a few there were, in number about fifty,who staid with him, and with them Mattathias the son of Ab­salom, and Judas the son of Chapseus, who were commandersof the whole army. These marched boldly, and like men des­perate, against the enemy, and so pushed them, that by theircourage they daunted them, and with their weapons in theirhands, they put them to flight. And when those soldiers of Jo­nathan that had retired, saw the enemy giving way, they gottogether after their flight, and pursued them with great vio­lence, and this did they as far as Kadesh, where the camp ofthe enemy lay.
8. Jonathan having thus gotten a glorious victory, and slaintwo thousand of the enemy, returned to Jerusalem. So when hesaw that all his affairs prospered, according to his mind, by theprovidence of God, he sent ambassadors to the Romans, beingdesirous of renewing that friendship which their nation had withthem formerly. He enjoined the same ambassadors, that, asthey came back, they should go to the Spartans, and put themin mind of their friendship and kindred. So when the ambas­sadors came to Rome, they went into their senate, and said whatthey were commanded by Jonathan the high priest to say, howhe had sent them to confirm their friendship. The senate thenconfirmed what had been formerly decreed concerning theirfriendship with the Jews; and gave them letters to carry to allthe kings of Asia and Europe, and to the governors of the cities,that they might safely conduct them to their own country.Accordingly, as they returned, they came to Sparta, and deliver­ed the epistle which they had received of Jonathan to them; acopy of which here follows: ". Jonathan the high priest of the"Jewish nation, and the senate, and body of the people of the"Jews, to the cphori and senate, and people of the Lacedemo-"nians, send greeting: If you be well, and both your public and"private affairs be agreeable to your mind, it is accordisg to"our wishes. We are well also. When in former times an"epistle was brought to Onias, who was then our high priest,"from Areus, who at that time was your king, by Demoteles,"concerning the kindred that was between us and you, a copy"of which is here subjoined, we both joyfully received the"epistle, and were well pleased with Demoteles and Areus, al-"though we did not need such a demonstration, because * we


* This clause is otherwise rendered in the 6rst book of Maccabees, xii. 9. "torthat we have the holy books of scripture in our hands to comfort us." The HebrewVOL. II. D D 21







OCR Output








Chap. XV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 2*5


nothing of that in hopes whereof he had received him into thecity, but had a mind to have it believed that it was rather deli­vered up out of fear than by the kindness of Melesius, and be­cause he had not rewarded him as he ought to have done, he be­came suspected by him, and so he was obliged to leave Damascusagain; for Melesius caught him marching out into the Hippo­drome and shut him up in it, and kept Damascus for Antiochus[Eucerus], who hearing how Philip's affairs stood, came back outof Arabia. He also came immediately, and made an expeditionagainst Judea,with eight thousand armed footmen, and eight hun­dred horsemen. So Alexander, out of fear of his coming, duga deep ditch, beginning at Chabarzaba, which is now called An-tipatris, to the sea of Joppa, on which part only his army couldbe brought against him. He also raised a wall, and erected wood­en towers, and intermediate redoubts, for one hundred and fiftyfurlongs in length, and there expected the coming of Antiochus,but he soon burnt them all, and made his army pass by that wayinto Arabia. The Arabian king [Aretas] at first retreated, butafterward appeared on the sudden with ten thousand horsemen.Antiochus gave them the meeting, and fought desperately; andindeed when he had gotten the victory, and was bringing someauxiliaries to that part of his army that was in distress, he wasslain. When Antiochus was fallen, his army fled to the villageCana, where the greatest part of them perished by famine.
2. After him * Aretas reigned over Celesyria, being called tothe government by those that held Damascus, by reason of thehatred they bare to Ptolemy Menneus. He also made thence anexpedition against Judea, and beat Alexander in battle, near aplace called Adida, yet did he upon certain conditions agreed onbetween them, retire out of Judea.
'3. But Alexander marched again to the city Dios, and tookit; and then made an expedition against Essa, where was the bestpart of Zeno's treasures, and there he encompassed the place withthree walls; and when he had taken the city by fighting, hemarched to Golan and Seleucia; and when he had taken thesecities, he, besides them, took that valley which is calle'd the val­ley of Antiochus, as also the fortress of Gamala. He also ac­cused Demetrius, who was governor of those places, of manycrimes, and turned him out: and after he had spent three yearsin this war, he returned to his own country, when the Jews joy­fully received him upon this his good success.
4. Now at this time the Jews were in possession of the follow­


* This Aretas was the first king of the Arabians who took Damascus, and reignedthere: Which name became afterwards common to such Arabian kings, both at Pe-t ra and at Damascus, as we learn from Josephus in many places, and from St. Paul,2 Cor. xi. 32. See the note on Antiq. B XVI. ch. ix. § 4.







OCR Output








306 ANTIQUITIES OV THE JEWS. Book XIV-


his father, and some because of the splendid appearance he made,- and others by way of requital for the benefits they had receivedfrom both of them, but the greatest number came to him inhopes of getting somewhat from him afterward, if he were oncefirmly settled in the kingdom.
2. Herod had now a strong army; and as he marched on, An-tigonus laid snares and ambushes in the passes and places mostproper for them, but in truth he thereby did little or no damageto the enemy: so Herod received those of his family out ofMassada, and the fortress Ressa, and then went on for Jeru­salem. The soldiery also that was with Silo accompanied himall along, as did many of the citizens, being afraid of his power;and as soon as he had pitched his camp on the west side of thecity, the soldiers that were set to guard that part shot their ar­rows, and threw their darts at him; and when some sallied outin a crowd, and came to fight hand to hand with the first ranksof Herod's army, he gave orders that they should, in the firstplace, make proclamation about the wall, That "he came for"the good of the people, and for the preservation of the city,"and not to bear any old grudge at even his most open enemies,"but ready to forget the offences which his greatest adversaries"had done him." But Antigonus, by way of reply to whatHerod had caused to be proclaimed, and this before the Romans,and before Silo also, said "That they would not do justly, if"they gave the kingdom to Herod, who was no more than .1"private man, and an Idumean, i. e. * a half Jew, whereas"they ought to bestow it on one of the royal family, as their"custom was; for, that in case they at present bare an ill-will"to him, and had resolved to deprive him of the kingdom, as"having received it from the Parthians, yet were there many"others of his family that might by their law take it, and these"such as had no way offended the Romans, and being of the sa-"cerdotal family, it would be an unworthy thing to put them"by." Now, while they said thus, one to another, and fell toreproaching one another on both sides, Antigonus permitted hisown men that were upon the wall to defend themselves, whousing their bows, and showing great alacrity against their ene­mies, easily drove them away from the towers.


* Tliis affirmation of Antigonus' spoken in the days of Herod, and in a mannerto his face, tlmt he was an Idumean, i. e. a half Jew, seems to me of much gieateiauthority than that pretence of his favourite and flatterer Nicolaus of Damascus, thathe derived his pedigree from Jews as far backward as the Babylonish captivity, ch. i.sect. 3. Accordingly Josephus always esteems him an Idumean, though he says hisfather Antipater was of the sarce people with the Jews, ch. viii. sect. I. and by birtha Jew, Antip. B. XX. ch. viii. sect 7. as indeed all such proselytes of Justice, atth« Idumeans, were in time esteemed the very same people as the Jews.







OCR Output








324 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book X V


and this Herod was the third, who took that high office away[from Ananelus,] and gave it to this young man, Aristobulus,in his stead.
2. And now Herod seemed to have healed the divisions in hisfamily: yet was he not without suspicion, as is frequently thecase, of people seeming to be reconciled to one another, butthought that, as Alexandra had already made attempts tendingto innovations, so did he fear that she would go on therein, ifshe found a fit opportunity for so doing; so he gave a command,that she should dwell in the palace, and meddle with no publicaffairs: her guards also were so careful, that nothing she did inprivate life every day was concealed. All these hardships puther out of patience, by little and little, and she began to hateHerod; for as she had the pride of a woman to the utmost de­gree, she had great indignation at this suspicious guard that wasabout her, as desirous rather to undergo any thing that could be­fall her, than to be deprived of her liberty of speech, and, underthe notion of an honorary guard, to live in a state of slaveryand terror. She therefore sent to Cleopatra, and made a longcomplaint of the circumstances she was in, and entreated her todo her utmost for her assistance. Cleopatra hereupon advisedher to take her son with her, and come away immediately to herinto Egypt. This advice pleased her; and she had this contri­vance for getting away: she got two coffins made, as if theywere to carry away two dead bodies, and put herself into one,and her son into the other, and gave orders to such of herservants, as knew of her intentions, to carry them away in thenight time. Now their road was to be thence to the seaside,and there was a ship ready to carry them into Egypt. NowJEsop, one of her servants, happened to fall upon Sabion, oneof her friends, and spake of this matter to him, as thinking hehad known of it before. -When Sabion knew this, (who had for­merly been an enemy of Herod's, and been esteemed one of thosethat laid snares for, and gave the poison to [his father] Antipa-ter,) he expected that this discovery would change Herod'shatred into kindness, so he told the king of this private strata­gem of Alexandra's: Whereupon he suffered her to proceedto the execution of her project, and caught her in the veryfact, but still he passed by her offence: and though he hada great mind to do it, he durst not inflict any thing that wassevere upon her, for he knew that Cleopatra would not bearthat he should have her accused, on account of her hatred tohim, but made a show as if it were rather the generosity of hissoul, and his great moderation, that made him forgive them.However, he fully proposed to himself to put this young manout of the way, by one means or other; but he thought he migh t







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 265


cils governed the people; the first was at Jerusalem, the secondat Gadara, the third at Amathus, the fourth at Jericho, and thefifth in Sepphoris in Galilee. So the Jews were now freedfrom monarchic authority, and were governed by an * aristo­cracy.
CHAP. VL
How Gabinius caught Aristobulus after he had Jled from Rome,and sent him back to Borne again; and how the same Gabinius,as he returned out of Egypt, overcame Alexander and the Na-bateans in battle.
5 1. .N ow Aristobulus ran away from Rome to Judea, andset about the rebuilding of Alexandrium, which had beennewly demolished: Hereupon Gabinius sent soldiers against him,and for their commanders Sisenna, and Antonius, and fc'ervil-ius, in order to hinder him from getting possession of thecountry, and to take him again. And indeed many of the Jewsran to Aristobulus, on account of his former glory, as also be­cause they should be glad of an innovation. Now, there was onePitholaus, a lieutenant at Jerusalem, who deserted to him with athousand men, although a great number of those that came tohim were unarmed ; and when Aristobulus had resolved to go toMacherus, he dismissed those people, because they were un­armed, for they could not be useful to him in what actions they'were going about, but he took with him eight thousand thatwere armed, and marched on: and as the Romans fell upon themseverely, the Jews fought valiantly, but were beaten in the bat­tle and when they had fought with alacrity, but were over­borne by the enemy, they were put to flight; of whom wereslain about five thousand, and the rest being dispersed, tried aswell as they were able, to save themselves. However, Aristo­bulus had with him still above a thousand, and with them he>fled to Macherus and fortified the place, and though he had hadill success, he still had good hope of his affairs: but when he hadstruggled against the siege for two days' time, and had receivedmany wounds, he was brought as a captive to Gabinius, withhis son Antigonius, who also fled with him from Rome. Andthis was the fortune of Aristobulus, who was sent back againto Rome, and was there retained in bonds, having been bothking and high priest for three years and six months; and was


* Dean Prideaux well observes, " That notwithstanding the clamour against"Gabiuius at Rome, Josephus gives him a laudable character, as if he had ac-"quitted himself with honour in the charge committed to him," [in Judea,]Sec at the year 55.







OCR Output








Chap. II. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 321


ways possible, that he might have no suspicion of any treach­erous design against him. He also did other things, in order tosecure his government, which yet occasioned a sedition in hisown family; for being cautious how he made any * illustrious..'person the high priest of God, he sent for an obscure priest out/of Babylon whose name was Ananelus, and bestowed the higtypriesthood upon him.
5. However, Alexandra, the daughter of Hyrcanus, and wifeof Alexander, the son of Aristobulus the king, who had alsobrought Alexander [two] children, could not bear this indig­nity. Now this son was one of the greatest comeliness, and wascalled Aristobulus; and the'daughter, Mariamne, was marriedto Herod, and eminent for her beauty also. This Alexandrawas much disturbed, and took this indignity offered to her sonexceeding ill, that while he was alive, any one else should be sentfor to have the dignity of the high priesthood conferred uponhim. Accordingly she wrote to Cleopatra (a musician assistingher in taking care to have her letters carried) to desire her in­tercession with Antony, in order to gain the high priesthood forher son.
6. But as Antony was slow in granting this request, his friendf Dellius came into Judea upon some affairs, and when he sawAristobulus, he stood in admiration at the tallness and hand­someness of the child, and no less at Mariamne, the king's wife,and was open in his commendations of Alexandra, as the mo­ther of most beautiful children: And when she came to discoursewith him, he persuaded her to get pictures drawn of them both,and to send them to Antony, for that when he saw them, hewould deny her nothing that she should ask. Accordingly Alex­andra was elevated with these words of his, and sent the picturesto Antony. Dellius also talked extravagantly, and said, That"these children seemed not derived from men, but from some"god or other." His design in doing so was to entice Antonyinto lewd pleasures with them, who was ashamed to send for


* Here we have an eminent example of Herod's worldly and profane politics-when by the abuse of his unlawful and usurped power, to make whom he pleasedhigh priest, in the person of Ananelus, he occasioned such disturbances in his king.dom, and his own family, as suffered him to enjoy no lasting peace or tranquillityever afterward: and such is frequently the effect of profane court politics about mat­ters of religion in other ages and nations. The Old Testament is full of the mis­eries the people of the Jews derived from such court politics, especially in and af­ter the days of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin; who gave themost pernicious example of it; who brought on the grossest corruption of religionby it; and the punishment of whose family for it was most remarkable. The cat:eis too well known to stand in need of particular citations.
t Of this wicked Dellius, sec the note on the War, B. I. ch. xv. sect. 3. vol. 111.







OCR Output








3* ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book IX.


became very wicked in worshipping of idols, and in many un­dertakings that were- absurd and foreign. He was also the causeof ten thousand misfortunes to the people of Israel. Now oneJonah, a prophet, foretold to him, that he should make war withthe Syrians, and conquer their army, and enlarge the bounds ofhis kingdom on the northern parts, to the city Hamath, and onthe southern, to the lake Asphaltitis, for the. bounds of theCanaanites originally were these as Joshua their general haddetermined them. So Jeroboam made an expedition against theSyrians and overran all their country, as Jonah had foretold.
2. Now I cannot but think it necessary for me, who have pro­mised to give an accurate account of our affairs, to describe theactions of the prophet, so far as I have found them writtendown in the Hebrew books. Jonah had been commanded byGod to go to the kingdom of Nineveh; and when he was there,to publish it in that city, how it should lose the dominion it hadover the nations. But he went not, out of fear; nay, he ranaway from God to the city of Joppa, and finding a ship there, hewent into it, and sailed to * Tarsus in Cilicia, and upon therise of a most terrible storm, which was so great that the shipwas in danger of sinking, the mariners, the master, and the pi­lot himself, made prayers and vows, in case they escaped the sea;but Jonah lay still and covered [in the ship], without imitatingany thing that the others did: but as the waves grew greater,and the sea became more violent by the winds, they suspected,as is usual in such cases, that some one of the persons that sailedwith them, was the occasion of this storm, and agreed to discoverby lot which of them it was. When they had f cast lots, the


as Josephus agrees with our other copies, and, as he adds "was the cause of a vastnumber of misfortunes to the Israelites," in those his first years, (the particulars ofwhich are unhappily wanting both in Josephus and in all our copies), so does itseem to me that he was afterwards reclaimed, and became a good king, and sowas encouraged by the prophet Jonah, and had great successes afterward, when"God had saved the Israelites by the hand of Jeroboam, the son of Joash," 2 Kingsxiv. 27. which encouragement by Jonah, and great successes are equally observablein Josephus, and in the other copies.
* When Jonah is said in our Bibles to have gone to Tarshish, Jonah i. 3. Jo­sephus understood it that he went to Tarshish in Cilicia, or to ihe MediterraneanSta, upon which Tarsus lay: so that he docs not appear to have read the text,J Kings xxii. 48. as our copies do, that ships of Tarshish could lie at Ezion-Ge-ber, upon the Red Sea. But as to Josephus' assertion that Jonah's fish wascarried by the strength of the current, upon a storm, as far as the F.uxine Sea, it isno way impossible: and since the storm might have driven the ship, while Jonahwas in it, near to the Euxine Sea, and since in three more days while he was in thefish's belly, that current might bring him to the Assyrian coast, and since withalthat coast could bring him nearer to Nineveh than could any coast of the Mediter­ranean, it is by no means an improbable determination in Josephus.
f Thi's ancient piece of religion, of supposing there was great tin where therev as great misery, and of casting lots to discover great sinners, not only among







OCR Output








ANTigurriEs OF THE JEWS. Book XV.


7. By this speech, and by his behaviour, which showed Cae­sar the frankness of his mind, he greatly gained upon him, whowas himself of a generous and magnificent temper, insomuchthat those very actions, which were the foundation of the accu­sation against him, procured him Caesar's good-will. Accord­ingly, he restored him his diadem again; and encouraged himto exhibit himself as great a friend to himself as he had been toAntony, and then had him in great esteem. Moreover, he ad­ded this, that Quintius Didius had written to him, that Herodhad very readily assisted him in the affair of the gladiators. Sowhen he had obtained such a kind reception, and had, bevond allhis hopes, procured his crown to be more entirely and firmlysettled upon him than ever by Caesar's donation, as well as bythat decree of the Romans, which Caesar took care to procurefor his greater security, he conducted Caesar on his way toEgypt, and made presents even beyond his ability, to both himand his friends, and in general behaved himself with great mag­nanimity. He also desired that Caesar would not put to deathone Alexander, who had been a companion of Antony's; butCaesar had sworn to put him to death, and so he could not ob­tain that his petition: And now he returned to Judea againwith greater honour and assurance than ever, and affrighted thosethat had expectations to the contrary, as still acquiring fromhis very dangers greater splendour than before, by the favour oiGod to him. So he prepared for the reception of Cassar, as hewas going out of Syria to invade Egypt; and when he came, heentertained him at Ptolemais with all royal magnificence. Healso bestowed presents on the army, and brought them provi­sions in abundance. He also proved to be one of Caesar's mostcordial friends, and put the army in array, and rode along withCaesar, and had a hundred and fifty men, well appointed in allrespects, after a rich and sumptuous manner, for the better re­ception of him and his friends. He also provided them withwhat they should want, as they passed over the dry desert,insomuch that they lacked neither wine nor water, which lastthe soldiers stood in the greatest need of, and besides, he pre­sented Caesar with eight hundred talents, and procured to him­self the good-will of them all, because he was assisting to them ina much greater and more splendid degree than the kingdom hehad obtained could afford, by which means he more and more de­monstrated to Caesar the thinness of his friendship, and his readi­ness to assist him; and what was of the greatest advantage tohim was this, that his liberality came at a seasonable time also:And when they returned again out of Egypt, his assistances wereno way inferior to the good offices he had formerly done them.







OCR Output








Chap. I. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 69


BOOK XL
CONTAINING THE INTERVAL OF TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-THREE YEARS AND FIVE MONTHS.
[FROM THE FIRST OF CYRUS TO THE DEATH OF ALEXAN­DER THE GREAT.]


CHAP. I.
How Cyrus, king of the Persians, delivered the Jews out of Baby­lon, and suffered them to return to their own country, and tobuild their temple^for which work he gave them money.
J 1. IN the first year of the reign of * Cyrus, which was theseventieth from the day that our people were removed out oftheir own land into Babylon, God commiserated the captivityand calamity of these poor people, according as he had fiStetoldto them by Jeremiah the prophet, before the destruction of thecity; that after they had served Nebuchadnezzar and his posteri­ty, and after they had undergone that servitude seventy years,he would restore them again to the land of their fathers, andthey should build their temple, and enjoy their ancient prosperity.And these things God did afford them: for he stirred up themind of Cyrus, and made him write this throughout all Asia,"Thus saith Cyrus the king, since God Almighty hath appoint-"edme to be king of the habitable earth, I believe that he is that"God which the nation of the Israelites worship, for indeed he"foretold my name by the prophets, and that I should build"him an house at Jerusalem, in the country of Judea.
2. This was known to Cyrus by his reading the book whichIsaiah left behind him of his prophecies; for this prophet said,that God hath spoken thus to him in a secret vision; " My will"is, that Cyrus, whom I have appointed to be king over many"and great nations, send back my people to their own land; and"build my temple." This was foretold by Isaiah one hundred andforty years before the temple Was demolished. Accordingly when


* This Cyrus is called God's shepherd, by Xenophon, as well as by Isaiah, Isa.xliv. 28". as also it is said of him by the same prophet, that '* I will make a man more"precious than fine gold, 'even a man than the golden wedge of Ophir." Isa. xiii.12. which character makes Xenophon's most excellent history of him very credible.







OCR Output








Chap. VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 25


and of the royal family, she endeavoured that none of thehouse of David might be left alive, but that the whole familymight be exterminated, that no king might arise out of it after­ward; and, as she thought, she had actually done it; but one ofAhaziah's sons was preserved, who escaped death after the man­ner following: Ahaziah had a sister by the same father, whosename was Jehosheba, and she was married to the high priest Je-hoiada. She went into the king's palace, and found Jehoash, forthat was the little child's name, who was not above a year old,among those that were slain, but concealed with his nurse; soshe took him with her into a secret bed-chamber, and shut himup there, and she and her husband Jehoiada brought him upprivately in the temple six years, during which time Athaliahreigned over Jerusalem and the two tribes.
2. Now on the seventh year, Jehoiada communicated thematter to certain of the captains of hundreds, five in number,and persuaded them to be assisting to what attempts he wasmaking against Athaliah, and to join with him in asserting thekingdom to the child. He also received such oaths from them asare proper to secure those that assist one another from the fearof discovery; and he was then of good hope that they shoulddepose Athaliah. Now those men whom Jehoiada the priest hadtaken to be his partners, went into all the country, and gatheredtogether the priests and the Levites, and the heads of the tribesout of it, and came and brought them to Jerusalem to the highpriest. So he demanded the security of an oath of them, to keepprivate whatsoever he should discover to them, which requiredboth their silence and their assistance. So when they had takenthe oath, and had thereby made it safe for him to speak, he pro­duced the child that he had brought up of the family of David,and said to them, "This is your king, of that house which you"know God hath foretold should reign over you for all time to"come: I exhort you therefore that one third part of you"guard him in the temple, and that a fourth part keep watch"at all the gates of the temple, and that the next part of you"keep guard at the gate which opens and leads to the king's"palace, and let the rest of the multitude be unarmed in the"temple, and let no armed person go into the temple, but the"priest only. He also gave them this order besides, that a'' part of the priests and the Levites should be about the king"himself, and be a guard to him, with their drawn swords,"and to kill that man immediately, whoever he be, that should"be so bold as to enter armed into the temple; and bid them"be afraid of nobody, but persevere in guarding the king."So these men obeyed what the high priest advised them to, anddeclared the reality of their resolution by their actions. Jehoiada







OCR Output








13* ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XII.


BOOK XII.
CONTAINING THE INTERVAL OF A HUNDRED AND SEVENTYYEARS.
[FROM THE DEATH OF ALEXANDER THE GREAT, TO THEDEATH OF JUDAS MACCABEES.]


CHAP. I.
How Ptolemy, the son of Lagus, took Jerusalem and Judea bydeceit and treachery, and carried many of the Jews thence,and planted them in Egypt.
§ 1. -Now when Alexander, king of Macedon, had put anend to the dominion of the Persians, and had settled the affairsin Judea after the forementioned manner, he ended his life.And as his government fell among many, Antigonus obtainedAsia; Seleucus, Babylon; and of the other nations which werethere, Lysimachus governed the Hellespont, and Cassander pos­sessed Macedonia; as did Ptolemy, the son of Lagus, seize uponEgypt. And while these princes ambitiously strove one againstanother, every one for his own principality, it came to pass thatthere were continual wars, and those lasting wars too; and thecities were sufferers, and lost a great many of their inhabi­tants in these times of distress, insomuch that all Syria, by themeans of Ptolemy, the son of Lagus, underwent the reverse ofthat denomination of Saviour, which he then had. He alsoseized upon Jerusalem, and for that end made use of deceit andtreachery: for as he came into the city on a Sabbath-day, as ifhe would offer sacrifices, he without any trouble, gained thecity while the Jews did not oppose him, for they did not sus­pect him to be their enemy; and he gained it thus, becausethey were free from suspicion of him, and because on that daythey were at rest and quietness; and when he had gained it, heruled over it in a cruel manner. Nay, Agatharchides of Cni-dus, who wrote the acts of Alexander's successors, reproachesus with superstition, as if we, by it, had lost our liberty; wherehe says thus; " There is a nation called the nation of the Jews,"who inhabit a city strong and great, named Jerusalem."These men took no care, but let it come into the hands of"Ptolemy, as not willing to take arms, and thereby they sub-"mitted to be under a hard master, by reason of their vmsea­







OCR Output








Chap. XIV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 45


sessed themselves of this country, but eight hundred years afterJoshua had been their leader, and, as I have already observed,two hundred and forty years, seven months, and seven days, af­ter they had revolted from Rehoboam, the grandson of David,and had given the kingdom to Jeroboam, And such a conclu­sion overtook the Israelites, when they had transgressed the laws,»nd would not hearken to the prophets, who foretold thatthis calamity would come upon them, if they would not leaveoff their evil doings. What gave birth to these evil doings,was that sedition which they raised against Rehoboam the grand­son of David, when they set up Jeroboam his servant to be theirking, who, by sinning against God, and bringing them to imitatehis bad example, made God to be their enemy, while Jeroboamunderwent that punishment which he justly deserved.
2. And now the king of Assyria invaded all Syria and Pheni-cia in a hostile manner. The name of this king is also set downin the archives of Tyre, for he made an expedition against Tyre,in the reign of Eluleus; and Menander attests to it, who, whenhe wrote his Chronology, and translated the archives of Tyre in­to the Greek language, gives us the following history: "One"whose name was Eluleus, reigned thirty-six "years: this king"upon the revolt of the Citteans, sailed to them, and reduc-"ed them again to a submission. Against these did the king"of Assyria send an army, and in a hostile manner overrun"all Phenicia, but soon made peace with them all, and return-"ed back: but Sidon and Ace, and Palaetyrus, revolted; and"many other cities there were which delivered themselves up"to the king of Assyria. Accordingly, when the Tyrians would"not submit to him, the king returned, and fell upon them"again, while the Phenicians had furnished him with threescore"ships, and eight hundred men to row them; and when the Ty<-"rians had come upon them in twelve ships, and the enemies"ships were dispersed, they took five hundred men prisoners,"and the reputation of all the citizens of Tyre was thereby in-"creased: but the king of Assyria returned, and placed guards"at their river and aqueducts, who should hinder the Tyrians"from drawing water. This continued for five years, and still* the Tyrians bore the siege, and drank of the water they had"out of the wells they dug." And this is what is writtenin the Tyrian archives concerning Shalmaneser, the king ofAssyria.
3. But now the Cutheans who removed into Samaria (for thatis the name they have been called by to this time, because theywere brought out of the country called Cuthath, which is a coun­try of Persia, and there is a river of the same name in it), eachof them, according to their nations, which were in number five,







OCR Output








180 ANTIQUITIES Ol THE JKWS. Book XII.


"the temple of Diana in Persia;" for the * purposing to do athing, but not actually doing it, is not worthy of punishment.But if Polybius could think, that Antiochus thus lost his lifeon that account, it is much more probable that this king diedon account of his sacrilegious plundering of the temple at Jeru­salem. But we will not contend about this matter with thosewho may think, that the cause assigned by this Polybius ofMegalopolis is nearer the truth than that assigned by us.
2. However, Antiochus, before he died, called tor Philip,who was one of his companions, and made him the guardian ofhis kingdom; and gave him his diadem, and his garment, andhis ring, and charged him to carry them, and deliver them tohis son Antiochus; and desired him to take care of his educa­tion, and to preserve the kingdom for him. f This Antiochusdied in the hundred forty and ninth year: But it was Lysiasthat declared his death to the multitude, and appointed his sonAntiochus to be king, (of whom at present he had the care,)and called him Eupator.
3. At this time it was that the garrison in the citadel at Jeru­salem, with the Jewish runagates, did a great deal of harm to theJews: for the soldiers that were in that garrison rushed out uponthe sudden, and destroyed such as were going up to the templein order to offer their sacrifices, for this citadel adjoined to, andoverlooked the temple. When these misfortunes had often hap­pened to them, Judas resolved to destroy that garrison; where­upon he got all the people together, and vigorously besiegedthose that were in the citadel. This was in the hundred andfiftieth year of the dominion of the Seleucidae. So he made en­gines of war, and erected bulwarks, and very zealously pressedon to take the citadel: But there were not a few of the runa­gates who were in the place, that went out by night into thecountry, and got together some other wicked men like them­selves, and went to Antiochus the king, and desired of him,That "he would not suffer them to be neglected, under the"great hardships that lay upon them from those of their own


* Since St. Paul, a Pharisee, confesses, that he had not known concvpitcence. 01tesircs, to be sinful, had not the tenth commandment said, Thou shalt not covet;Rom. vii. 7. the case seems to have been much the same with our Josephus, whowas of the same sect; that he had not a deep sense of the greatness of any sins thatproceeded no farther than the intention. However, since Joaepbus speaks here pro­perly uf the punishment of death, which is Dot inflicted by any law either of God orman for the bare intention, his words need not to be strained to mean, that sins in­tended, but not executed, were no sins at all.
')' No wonder that Josephus here describes Antiochus Eupator as young, andwanting tuition, when he came to the crown, since Appian informs us, Syriae, p.177, that he was then but nine years old.







OCR Output








Chap. III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 323


"accept it; and that now she would be satisfied with her son's"dignity, while he himself held the civil government, and she"had thereby the security that arose, from his peculiar ability"in governing, to all the remainder of her family: that she"was now overcome by his benefits, and thankfully accepted of"this honour showed by him to her son, and that she would"hereafter be entirely obedient: and she desired him to excuse"her, if the nobility of her family and that freedom of acting"which she thought that allowed her, had made her act too"precipitately and imprudently in this matter." So when theyhad spoken thus to one another, they came to an agreement,and all suspicions, so far as appeared, were vanished away.


CHAP. III.
Hcno Herod, upon his making Aristobulus high priest, took carethat he should be murdered in a little time: and vohqt apologyhe made to Antony about Aristobulus: as also concerning Jo­seph and Mariamne.
$ 1. oo king Herod immediately took the high priesthoodaway from Ananelus, who, as we said before, was not of thiscountry, but one of those Jews that had been carried captivebeyond Euphrates; for there were not a few ten thousands ofthis people that had been carried captives, and dwelt aboutBabylonia, whence Ananelus came. He was one * of thestock of the high priests, and had been of old a particular friendof Herod's; and when he was first made king, he conferred thatdignity upon him, and now put him out of it again, in order toquiet the troubles in his family, though what he did was plainlyunlawful, for at no other time [of old] was any one that had oncebeen in that dignity deprived of it. It was Antiochus Epiphaneswho first broke that law, and deprived Jesus, and made his bro­ther Onias high priest in his stead. Aristobulus was the secondthat did so, and took that dignity from his brother [Hyrcanus ;]
* When Josephus says here, that this Ananelus, the new high priest, was of theslack of the high priests, and since he had been just telling us that he was a priest ofan obscure family or character, ch. ii. sect . 4. it is not at all probable that he could sosoon say that he was of the stock tf the high priests. However, Josephus here makesa remarkable observation, that this Ananelus was the third that was very unjustlyand wickedly turned out of the high priesthood by the civil power, no king or gov­ernor having ventured to do so that Josephus knew of, but that heathen tyrant andpersecutor Antiochus Epiphanes, that barbarous parricide Aristobulus, the first thattook royal authority among the Maccabees; and this tyrant king Herod the Great,although afterward that infamous practice became frequent, till the very destructionof Jerusalem, when the office of high priesthood was at an end.
VOL. iI. s s 25







OCR Output








Chap. VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 408


learned all their concerns, and made the damsel ill-natured to theyoung man. And in order to gratify her mother, she often said,that the young men used to mention Mariamne when they wereby themselves: and that they hated their father, and were con­tinually threatening, that if they had once got the kingdom, theywould make Herod's sons by his other wives country school­masters, for that the present education which was given them,and their diligence in learning, fitted them for such an employ­ment. And as for the women, whenever they saw them adorn­ed with their mother's clothes, they threatened, that instead oftheir present gaudy apparel, they should be clothed in sackcloth,and confined so closely that they should not see the light of thesun. These stories were presently carried by Salome to theking, who was troubled to hear them, and endeavoured tomake up matters: but these suspicions afflicted him, and be­coming more and more uneasy, he believed every body againstevery body. However, upon his rebuking his sons, and hearingthe defence they made for themselves, he was easier for a while,though a little afterwards much worse accidents came upon him,
4. For Pheroras came to Alexander, the husband of Glaphy-ra, who was the daughter of Archelaus, as we have already toldyou, and said, that he had heard from Salome, that Herod wasenamoured of Glaphyra, and that his passion for her was in­curable. When Alexander heard that, he was all on fire, fromhis youth and jealousy; and he interpreted the instances of He­rod's obliging behaviour to her, which were very frequent, forthe worse, which came from those suspicions he had on accountof that word which fell from Pheroras; nor could he conceal hisgrief at the thing, but informed him what words Pheroras hadsaid. Upon which Herod was in a greater disorder than ever;and not bearing such a false calumny, which was to his shame, wasmuch disturbed at it: and often did he lament the wickedness ofhis domestics, and how good he had been to them, and how illrequitals they had made him. So he sent for Pheroras, and re­proached him, and said, " Thou vilest of all men! art thou come"to that unmeasurable and extravagant degree of ingratitude,"as not only to suppose such things of me, but to speak of"them? I now indeed perceive what thy intentions are: it is"not thy only aim to reproach me, when thou usest such words"to my son, but thereby to persuade him to plot against me,"and get me destroyed by poison. And who is there, if he had"not a good genius at his elbow, as hath my son, but would"not bear such a suspicion of his father, but would revenge"himself upon him? Dost thou suppose that thou hast only"dropped a word for him to think of, and not rather hast put"a sword into his hand to slay his father? And what dost thou
*->!» n. 8 E 27







OCR Output








Chap. Vil. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 851


ly impossible, who are still more ready to lose their lives thanto leave off that divine worship which they have been wontto pay unto God. Alexandra, therefore, discoursed with thosethat had the keeping of these strongholds, that it was properfor them to deliver the same to her, and to Herod's sons, lest,upon his death, any other person should seize upon the go­vernment; and that upon his recovery none could keep themmore safely for him than those of his own family. These wordswere not by them at all taken in good part; and as they had beenin former times faithful [to Herod,] they resolved to continueso more than ever, both because they hated Alexandra, and be­cause they thought it a sort of impiety to despair of Herod's re­covery while he was yet alive, for they had been his old friends;and one of them, whose name was Achiabus, was his cousin-ger-man. They sent messengers therefore to acquaint him withAlexandra's design; so he made no longer delay, but gave or­ders to have her slain: yet was it still with difficulty, and afterhe had endured great pain, that he got clear of his distemper.He was still sorely afflicted both in mind and body, and madevery uneasy, and readier than ever upon all occasions to inflictpunishment upon those that fell under his hand. He also slewthe most intimate of his friends, Costobarus, and Lysimachus,and Gadias, who was also called Antipater; as also Dositheus,and that upon the following occasion.
9. Costobarus was an Idumean by birth, and one of principal £, /dignity among them, and one whose ancestors had been priestsX.to the Kose, whom the Idumeans had [formerly] esteemed as a/god; but after Hyrcanus had made a change in their politicalgovernment, and made them receive the Jewish customs, andlaw, Herod madeCostobarus governojiof Idumeaand Gaza, and
wife; and this was upon his slaugh­


ter of [his uncle] Joseph, whoJiadjhaLgQyernment before, aswe have relateoTalreadyT Wtren Costobarus had gotten to be sohighly advanced, it pleased him, and was more than he hopedfor, and he was more and more puffed up by his good success,and in a little while he exceeded all bounds, and did not thinkfit to obey what Herod as their ruler, commanded him, or thatthe Idumeans should make use of the Jewish customs, or be sub­ject to them. He therefore sent to Cleopatra, and informed herthat the Idumeans had been always under his progenitors, andthat for the same reason it was but just that she should desire thatcountry for him of Antony, for that he was ready to transfer hisfriendship to her; and this he did, not because he was betterpleased to be under Cleopatra's government, but because hethought that, upon the diminution of Herod's power, it wouldnot be difficult for him to obtain himself the entire government







OCR Output








Chap. XI . ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 373


Jeep valley; and at the south side he laid rocks together, andbound them one to another with lead, and included some of theinner parts, till it proceeded to a great height, and till both thelargeness of the square edifice, and its altitude, were immense,and till the vastness of the stones in the front were plainly visi­ble on the outside, yet so that the inward parts were fastened to­gether with iron, and preserved the joints immoveable for allfuture times. When this work [for the foundation] was donein this manner, and joined together as part of the hill itself tothe very top of it, he wrought it all into one outward surface,and filled up the hollow places which were about the wall, andmade it a level on the external upper surface, and a smooth levelalso. This hill was walled all round, and in compass fourfurlongs, [the distance of] each angle containing in length a fur­long: but within this wall, and on the very top of all, there rananother wall of stone also, having, on the east quarter, a doublecloister, of the same length with the wall; in the midst of whichwas the temple itself. This cloister looked to the gates of thetemple; and it had been adorned by many kings in former times:And round about the entire temple were fixed the spoils takenfrom barbarous nations; all these had been dedicated to thetemple by Herod, with the addition of those he had taken fromthe Arabians.
4. Now on the north side [of the temple] was built a citadel,whose walls were square, and strong, and of extraordinaryfirmness. This citadel was built by the kings of the Asamo-nean race, who were also high priests before Herod, and theycalled it the Tower, in which were reposited the vestments ofthe high priest, which the high priest only put on at the timewhen he was to offer sacrifice. These vestments king Herodkept in that place, and after his death they were under thepower of the Romans, until the time of Tiberius Caesar; underwhose reign Vitellius, the president of Syria, when he onceCame to Jerusalem, and had been most magnificently received bythe multitude, he had a mind to make them some requital forthe kindness they had showed him, so, upon their petition tohave those holy vestments in their own power, he wrote aboutthem to Tiberius Caesar, who granted his request; and this theirpower over the sacerdotal vestments continued with the Jewstill the death of king Agrippa; but after that, Cassius Longi-nus, who was president of Syria, and Cuspius Fadus, who wasprocurator of Judea, enjoined the Jews to reposit those vest­ments in the Tower of Antonia, for that they ought to have themin their power, as they formerly had. However, the Jews sentambassadors to Claudius Caesar, to intercede with him for them,.upon whose coming, king Agrippa, jun. being then at Romer







OCR Output








310 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


bels he slew, and others of them, who had fled to the strong­holds, he besieged, and both slew them, and demolished theirstrongholds: and when he had thus put an end to their re­bellion, he laid a fine upon the cities of a hundred talents.
7. In the meantime Pacorus was fallen in a battle, and theParthians were defeated. When Ventidius sent Macherus to theassistance of Herod, with two legions and a thousand horsemen,while Antony encouraged him to make haste. But Macherus,at the instigation of Antigonus, without the approbation of He­rod, as being corrupted by money, went about to take a view ofhis affairs: but Antigonus suspecting this intention of his coming,did not admit him into the city, but kept him at a distance, withthrowing stones at him, and plainly showed what he himselfmeant. But when Macherus was sensible that Herod had givenhim good advice, and that he had made a mistake hinuelf in nothearkening to the advice, he retired to the city Emmaus; andwhat Jews he met with he slew them, whether they were ene­mies, or friends, out of the rage he was in at what hardships hehad undergone. The king was provoked at this conduct of his,and went to Samaria, and resolved to go to Antony about theseaffairs, and to inform him that he stood in no need of suchhelpers who did him more mischief than they did his enemies,and that he was able of himself to beat Antigonus; but Macherhsfollowed him, and desired that he would not go to Antony, or,if he was resolved to go, that he would join his brother Jo­seph with them, and let them fight against Antigonus. So hewas reconciled to Macherus, upon his earnest entreaties. Ac­cordingly he left Joseph there with his army, but charged himto run no hazards, nor to quarrel with Macherus.
8. But for his own part, he made haste to Antony, (who wasthen at the siege of Samosata, a place upon Euphrates,) with histroops, both horsemen and footmen, to be auxiliaries to him:and when he came to Antioch, and met there a great numberof men gotten together that were very desirous to go to Antony,but durst not venture to go out of fear, because the Barba­rians fell upon men on the road, and slew many, so he encour­aged them, and became their conductor upon the road. Nowwhen they were within two days' march of Samosata, the Barba­rians had laid an ambush there to disturb those that came to An­tony, and there the woods made the passes narrow, as they led tothe plains, where they laid not a few of their horsemen, who'were to lie still until those passengers were gone by into the wideplace. Now as soon as their first ranks were gone by, (for He­rod brought on the rear,) those that lay in ambush, who wereabout five hundred, fell upon them on the sudden,'and when theyhad put the. foremost to flight, the king came riding hard, with"







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTI2UITIS8 OF THE JEWS. £7


"death, lie would send on the multitude what miseries he had"determined for them."
3. So these messengers upon this prophecy of the woman, cameand told it to the king; whereupon he sent to the people everywhere, and ordered that the priests and the Levites should cometogether to Jerusalem; and commanded that those of every ageshould be present also: And when they had gathered together,he first read to them the holy books; after which he stood upona pulpit, in the midst of the multitude, and obliged them tomake a covenant, with an oath, that they would worship God,and keep the laws of Moses. Accordingly, they gave their as­sent willingly, and undertook to do what the king had recom­mended to them. So they immediately offered sacrifices, andthat after an acceptable manner, and besought God to be gra­cious and merciful to them. He also enjoined the high priest,that if there remained in the temple any vessel that was dedicatedto idols, or to foreign gods, they should cast it out: So when agreat number of such vessels were got together, he burnt them,and scattered their ashes abroad, and slew the priests of theidols, that were not of the family of Aaron.
4. And when he had done thus in Jerusalem, he came into thecountry, and utterly destroyed what buildings had been madetherein by king Jeroboam, in honour of strange gods; and heburnt the bones of the false prophets upon that altar which Je­roboam first built. And as the prophet [Jadon], who came toJeroboam when he was offering sacrifice, and when all the peo­ple heard him, foretold what would come to pass, viz. That"a certain man of the house of David, Josiah by name, should"do what is here mentioned." And it happened that those pre­dictions took effect after three hundred and sixty-one years.
5. After these things, Josiah went also to such other Israelitesas had escaped captivity and slavery under the Assyrians, andpersuaded them to desist from their impious practices, and toleave off the honours they paid to strange gods, but to worshiprightly their own Almighty God, and adhere to him. He alsosearched the houses and the villages, and the cities, out of a sus­picion that somebody might have one idol or other in private;nay, indeed, he took away the * chariots [of the sun] that were


* It is hard to reconcile the account in the second book of Kings, ch. xxilf. II.with this account of Jo.scphus, and to translate this passage truly in Josephus, whosecopies are supposed to be here imperfect: However, the general sense of both seemsto be this, that there were certain chariots with their horses, dedicated to the idol of'In' sun, or to Moloch : which idol must be carried about in procession, and worship­ped by the people; which chariots were now taken away, as Josephus says, or «s tbtbook of the Kings says, burnt with fire by Joiiak







OCR Output








120 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XL


time; and she entreated God to have mercy upon her, and makeher words appear persuasive to the king, and render her counte­nance more beautiful than it was before, that both by her wordsand beauty she might succeed, for the averting of the king's an­ger, in case he were at all irritated against her, and for the con­solation of those of her own country, now they were in the ut­most danger of perishing; as also that he would excite a hatredin the king against the enemies of the Jews, and those that hadcontrived their future destruction, if they be proved to be con­temned by him.
9. When Esther had used this supplication for three days,she put off those garments, changed her habit, and adornedherself as became a queen, and took two of her hand-maids withher, the one of which supported her, as she gently leaned uponher, and the other followed after, and lifted up her large train(which swept along the ground,) with the extremities of herfingers: And thus she came to the king, having a blushing red­ness in her countenance, with a pleasant agreeableness in her be­haviour, yet did she go in to him with fear; and as soon as shewas come over against him, as he was sitting on his throne, inhis royal apparel, which was a garment interwoven with goldand precious stones, which made him seem to her more terrible,especially when he looked at her somewhat severely, and with acountenance on fire with anger, her joints failed her immediate­ly, out of the dread she was in, and she fell down sideways in aswoon: but the king changed his mind, which happened, as Isuppose, by the will of God, and was concerned for his wife,lest her fear should bring some very ill thing upon her, and heleaped from his throne and took her in his arms, and recoveredher, by embracing her, and speaking comfortably to her, andexhorting her to be of good cheer, and not to suspect any thingthat was said on account of her coming to him without beingcalled, because that law was made for subjects, but that she,who was a queen, as well as he a king, might be entirely se­cure : and as he said this, he put the sceptre into her hand, andlaid his rod upon her neck, on account of the law; and so freedher from her fear. And after she had recovered herself by theseencouragements, she said, "My lord, it is not easy for me, on"the sudden, to say what hath happened, for as soon as I saw"thee to be great, and comely, and terrible, my spirit departed"from me, and I had no soul left in me." And while it waswith difficulty, and in a low voice, that she could say thusmuch, the king was in a great agony and disorder, and encou­raged Esther to be of good cheer, and to expect better fortune,since he was ready, if occasion should require it, to grant to herthe half of his kingdom. Accordingly, Esther desired that he







OCR Output













OCR Output








244 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIII.


as they had done ten thousand other things that tended to affrontand reproach him. However this barbarity seems to have beenwithout any necessity, on which account he bare the name of aThraciun * among the Jews; whereupon the soldiers that hadfougkt against him, being about eight thousand in number, ranaway by night, and continued fugitives all the time that Alexan­der lived; who being now freed from any farther disturbance fromthem, reigned the rest of his time in the utmost tranquillity.
3. But when Demetrius was departed out of Judea, he wentto Berea, and besieged his brother Philip, having with him tenthousand footmen, and a thousand horsemen. However Stratothe tyrant of Berea, the confederate of Philip, called in Zizon,the ruler of the Arabian tribes, and Mithridates Sinax, the ru­ler of the Parthians, who coming with a great number offereesand besieging Demetrius in his encampment, into which theyhad driven him with their arrows, they compelled those thatwere with him by thirst to deliver up themselves. So they tooka great many spoils out of that country, and Demetrius himself,whom they sent to Mithridates, who was then king of Parthia;but as to those whom they took captives of the people of Anti-och, they restored them to the Antiochians without any reward.Now Mithridates, the king of Parthia, had Demetrius in greathonour, till Demetrius ended his life by sickness. So Philip,presently after the fight was over, came to Antioch, and tookit, and reigned over Syria.
CHAP. XV
Hem Antiochus, who leas called Dionysus, and after him Aretas,made expeditions into Judea ,' as also how Alexander tookmany cities, and then returned to Jerusalem, and after a sick­ness of three years died; and what counsel he gave to Alexandra.
§ 1. AFTER this Antiochus, who was called f Dionysusand was Philip's brother, aspired to the dominion, and cameto Damascus, and got the power into his hands, and there hereigned: but as he was making war against the Arabians, hisbrother Philip heard of it, and came to Damascus, where Mile-sius, who had been left governor of the citadel, and the Damas-cens themselves, delivered up the city to him; yet because Phi­lip was become ungrateful to him, and had bestowed upon him


* This name T/iractda, which the Jews gave Alexander, must by the coherence,denote as barbarous as a Xhracian, or somewhat like it; but what it properly sig­nifies is not known.
f Spanheim takes notice, that this Antioehus Dionysus (the brother of Philip,and of Demetrius Eucerus, and of two others) was the fifth son of AntiochusGrypus; and that he is styled on the coins Antiachvs F./iiphunes Dionyius.







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 343


men. They also had it in charge, that if they should hear anymischief had befallen him, they should kill them both, and asfar as they were able, to preserve the kingdom for his sons,and for his brother Pheroras.
6. When he had given them this charge, he made haste toRhodes, to meet Caesar; and when he had sailed to that city,he took off his diadem, but remitted nothing else of his usualdignity: And when, upon his meeting him, he desired that hewould let him speak to him, he therein exhibited a much morenoble specimen of a great soul, for he did not betake himself tosupplications, as men usually do upon such occasions, nor offeredhim any petition, as if he were an offender, but after an un­daunted manner, gave an account of what he had done; for hespake thus to Caesar, That " he had the greatest friendship for"Antony, and did every thing he could that he might attain the"government, That he was not indeed in the army with him,"because the Arabians had diverted him, but that he had sent"him both money and corn, which was but too little in com-"parison of what he ought to have done for him; for, if a man"owns himself to be another's friend, and knows him to be a"benefactor, he is obliged to hazard every thing, to use every"faculty of his soul, every member of his body, and all the"wealth he hath, for him, in which I confess I have been too"deficient. However, I am conscious to myself, that so far I"have done right, that I have not deserted him upon his defeat"at Actium: nor upon the evident change of his fortune have"I transferred my hopes from him to another, but have pre-"served myself, though not as a valuable fellow-soldier, yet"certainly as a faithful counsellor to Antony, when I demon-"strated to him that the only way that he had to save himself,"and not to lose all his authority, was to slay Cleopatra; for"when she was once dead, there would be room for him to re-"tain his authority, and rather to bring thee to make a compo-"sition with him, than to continue at enmity any longer. None"of which advices would he attend too, but preferred his own"rash resolutions before them, which have happened unpro-"fitably for him, but profitably for thee. Now therefore in"case thou determines! about me, and my alacrity in serving"Antony, according to thy anger at him, I own there is no"room for me to deny what I have done, nor will I be ashamed"to own, and that publicly too, that I had a great kindness for"him: But if thou wilt put him out of the case, and only ex-"amine how I behave myself to my benefactors in general, and"what sort of a friend I am, thou wilt rind by experience that'" we shall do and be the same to thyselfj for h. is but changing"the names, and the firmness of friendship that we shall bear"to thee, will not be disapproved by thee."







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 217


should be their leader; and that instead of Judas and Jonathanhis brethren, he should have the government over them: and theypromised that they would readily obey him in whatsoever heshould command them. So he got together immediately all hisown soldiers that were fit for war, and made haste in rebuildingthe walls of the city, and strengthening them by very high andstrong towers, and sent a friend of his, one Jonathan the son ofAbsalom, to Joppa, and gave him orders to eject the inhabitantsout of the city, for he was afraid lest they should deliver up thecity to Trypho, but he himself stayed to secure Jerusalem.
5. But Trypho removed from Ptolemais with a great army,and came into Judea, and brought Jonathan with him in bonds.Simon also met him with his army at the city Adida, which isupon a hill, and beneath it lie the plains of Judea. And whenTrypho knew that Simon was by the Jews made their governor,he sent to him, and would have imposed upon him by deceit andtreachery; and desired him, if he would have his brother Jonathanreleased, that he would send him a hundred talents of silver, andtwo of Jonathan's sons as hostages, that when he shall be released,he may not make Judea revolt from the king, for that at pre­sent he was kept in bonds on account of the money he had bor­rowed of the king, and now owed it to him. But Simon wasaware of the craft of Trypho, and although he knew that if hegave him the money he should lose it, and that Trypho wouldnot set his brother free, and withal, should deliver the sons ofJonathan to the enemy, yet because he was afraid that he shouldhave a calumny raised against him among the multitude as thecause of his brother's death, if he neither gave the money, norsent Jonathan's sons, he gathered his army together, and toldthem what offers Trypho had made, and added this, that theoffers were ensnaring and treacherous, and yet that it was moreeligible to send the money and Jonathan's sons than to be liableto the imputation of not complying with Trypho's offers, andthereby refusing to save his brother. Accordingly, Simon sentthe sons of Jonathan and the money; but when Trypho had re­ceived them, he did not keep his promise, nor set Jonathan free,but took his army, and went about all the country, and resolvedto go afterward to Jerusalem by the way of Idumea, while Si­mon went over against him with his army, and all along pitch­ed his own camp over against his.
6. But when those that were in the citadel had sent to Try­pho, and besought him to make haste and come to them, and tosend them provisions, he prepared his cavalry as though he wouldbe at Jerusalem that very night, but so great a quantity of snowfell in the night, that it covered the roads, and made them so deep,that there was no passing, especially for the cavalry. This







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 2?t


freedom from taxes every where: and it is reported by many,that Hyrcanus went along with Antipater in this expedition,and came himself into Egypt. And Strabo of Capadocia bearswitness to this, when he says thus, in the name of Asinius;"After Mithridates had invaded Egypt, and with him Hyrcan-** us the high priest of the Jews." Nay, the same Strabo saysthus again, in another place, in the name of Hypsicrates, that"Mithridates at first went out alone, but that Antipater, who"had the care of the Jewish affairs, was called by him to As-"kelon, and that he had gotten- ready three thousand soldiers"to go along with him, and encouraged other governors of the"country to go along with him also; and that Hyrcanus the"high priest, was also present in this expedition." This is whatStrabo says.
4. But Antigonus, the son of Aristobulus, came at this timeto Caesar, and " lamented his father's fate: and complained that"it was by Antipater's means that Aristobulus was taken off"by poison, and his brother was beheaded by Scipio, and de-"sired that he would take pity of him who had been ejected"out of that principality which was due to him." He alsoaccused Hyrcanus and Antipater as governing the nation byviolence, and offering injuries to him. Antipater was pre­sent, and made his defence as to the accusations that were laidagainst him. He demonstrated, that " Antigonus and his party"were given to innovation, and were seditious persons. He also"put Cuesar in mind what difficult services he had undergone,"when he assisted him in his wars, and discoursed about what"he was a witness of himself. He added, that Aristobulus was"justly carried away to Rome, as one that was an enemy to the"Romans, and could never be brought to be a friend to them,"and that his brother had no more than he deserved from Sci-"pio, as being seized in committing robberies; and that this"punishment was not inflicted on him in a way of violence or"injustice by him that did it."
5. When Antipater had made this speech, Caesar appointedHyrcanus to be high priest; and gave Antipater what princi-dality he himself should choose, leaving the determination tohimself: So he made him procurator of Judea. He also gaveHyrcanus leave to raise up the walls of his own city, upon hisasking that favour of him, for they had been demolished by Pom-pey. And this grant he sent to the consuls to Rome, to be en­graven in the capitol. The * decree of the senate was this that


* Take Dr. Hudson's note upon this place, which I suppose to be the truth:"Here is some mistake in Josephus: for when he had promised us a decree for the"restoration of Jerusalem, he brings in a decree of far greater antiquity, and that"H league of friendship and union only. One may easily believe that Joseuhuc







OCR Output








TOO ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book


also celebrated the feast of tabernacles at that time, as the legis­lator had ordained concerning it, and after they offered sacrifices,and what were called the daily "sacrifices, and the oblations pro>pei- for the Sabbaths, and for all the holy festivals. Those alsovhat had made'vows performed them, and offered their sacrifices,ironi the firsj day of- the seventh month. They also began tobuild the temple, and gave a great deal of money to the masonsand to the carpenter?, and what was necessary fer the maintenanceof the workmen. The Sidonians also were very willing and rea­dy- to bring the cedar trees from Libanus, to bind them together,and to make an united float of them, and to bring them to theport of Joppa, fop that was what Cyrus had commanded at first,and what was now done at the command of Darius.
2. In the second year of «heir coming to Jerusalem, as the Jewswere there in the second month j the building of the temple wenton apace; and when they hat! laid its foundations on the first dayof the second month, of that second year, they set, as overseers ofthe work, such Levites, as were full twenty years old; and Je-shua and his sons and brethren, and Codmiel the brother of Ju­das, the son of Aminidab, with his sons, and the temple, by thegreat diligence of those that had the care of it, was finished soonerebon any one weuld have expected. And when the temple- wasfinished, the priests, adorned with their accustomed garments^stood with their trumpets, while the Levites, and the sons ofAsaph, stood and sung hymns to God, according as David first ofall appointed them to bless God. Now the priests and Levites,and th« elder part of the families, recollecting with themselveshow much greater and more sumptuous the old temple had been,seeing that now made, how much inferior it was, on account oftfheir'poveity, to that whiclrhad been built of old, "considered withthemselves how much their happy state was sunk below what ithad been of old, as well' as their temple. Hereupon they weredisconsolate and not able to contain their grief, and proceeded sofar as to lament and shed tears on those accounts; but the peoplern general were contented with their present condition, and be­cause they were allowed to build them a temple, they desired nomore, and neither regarded nor remembered, nor indeed at alltormented themselves with the comparison of that and the formertemple, as if this were below their expectations; but the wailing odie old men, and of the priests, on account of the deficiency o".this temple, in their opinion, if compared with that which hadbeen d<emoli*»hed, overcame the sounds of the trumpets andijie rejoicing of the people.
3. -But when tht Samaritans, who were still enemies to thetribes of Jmlah and Benjamin, heard the sound of the trumpets,they can*» ^wming together, and desired to know what was th«







OCR Output








Chap. IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. SI


coming close to Elisha's body it revived again. And thusfar have we enlarged about the actions of Elisha the prophet,both such as he did while he was alive, and how he had adivine power after his death also.'
7. Now upon the death of Hazael, the king of Syria, thatkingdom came to Adad his son, with whom Joash king of Israelmade war, and when he had beaten him in three battles, hetook from him all that country, and all those cities and villageswhich his father Hazael had taken from the kingdom of Israel,which came to pass however according to the prophecy of Eli­sha. But when Joash happened to die, he was buried in Sama­ria, and the government devolved on his son Jeroboam.
CHAP. IX.
Haw Amaziah made an expedition against the Edamites andAmalekites, and conquered them ,- but when he afterwards madeWar against Joash, he was beaten, and not long after wasslain, and Uzziah succeeded in the government.
§ 1. JN ow in the second year of the reign of Joash over Is­rael, Amaziah reigned over the tribe of Judah at JerusalemHis mother's name was Jehohaddan, who was born at Jerusalem. He was exceeding careful in doing what was right, andthis when he was very young; but when he came to the man­agement of affairs, and to the government, he resolved thathe ought first of all to avenge his father Jehoash, and to punishthose his friends that had laid violent hands upon him; so heseized upon them all, and put them to death, yet did he executeno severity on their children, but acted therein according to thelaws of Moses, who did not think it just to punish children forthe sins of their fathers. After this he chose him an army outof the tribe of Judah and Benjamin of such as were in theflower of their age, and about twenty years old; and when hehad collected about three hundred thousand of them together, heset captains of hundreds over them. He also sent to the king ofIsrael, and hired an hundred thousand of his soldiers for an hun­dred talents of silver, for he had resolved to make an expeditionagainst the nations of the Amalekites, and Edomites, and Geba-lites: But as he was preparing for his expedition, and ready togo out to the war, a prophet gave him counsel to dismiss thearmy of the Israelites, because they were bad men, and becauseGod foretold that he should be beaten, if he made use of them asauxiliaries; but that he should overcome his enemies, though hehad but a few soldiers, when it so pleased God. And when theking grudged at his having already paid the hire of the Israelites,the prophet exhorted him to do what God would have him, be­







OCR Output








366 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XV.


they had made contrivances to get pools of water, and laid upcorn in granaries for themselves, and were able to make greatresistance, by issuing out on the sudden against any that attackedthem; for the entrances of their caves were narrow, in whichbut one could come in at a time, and the places within incrediblylarge, and made very wide; but the ground over their habitationswas not very high, but rather on a plain, while the rocks arealtogether hard and difficult to be entered upon, unless any onegets into the plain road by the guidance of another, for theseroads are not straight, but have several revolutions. But whenthese men are hindered from their wicked preying upon theirneighbours, their custom is to prey one upon another, insomuchthat no sort of injustice comes amiss to them. But when Herodhad received this grant from Caesar, and was come into thiscountry, he procured skilful guides, and put a stop to their wick­ed robberies, and procured peace and quietness to the neighbour­ing people.
2. Hereupon Zenodorus was grieved, in the first place, be­cause his principality was taken away from him, and still moreso, because he envied Herod, who had gotten it; so he went upto Rome to accuse him, but returned back again without suc­cess. Now Agrippa was [about this time] sent to succeed Cae­sar in the government of the countries beyond the Ionian sea,upon whom Herod light when he was wintering about Mitylene,for he had been his particular friend and companion, and thenreturned into Judea again. ^Jowever, some of the Gadarenscame to Agrippa, and accused Herod, whom he sent back boundto the king without giving them the hearing: but still theArabians, who of old bare ill-will to Herod's government, werenettled, and at that time attempted to raise a sedition in his do­minions, and as they thought upon a more justifiable occasion:for Zenodorus, despairing already of success, as to his own af­fairs, prevented [his enemies,] by selling to those Arabians apart of his principality, called Auranitis, for the value of fiftytalents; but as this was included in the donations of Caesar, theycontested the point with Herod, as unjustly deprived of whatthey had bought. Sometimes they did this by making incur­sions upon him, and sometimes by attempting force againsthim, and sometimes by going to law with him. Moreover, theypersuaded the poorer soldiers to help them, and were trouble­some to him, out of a constant hope that they should seducethe people to raise a sedition; in which designs those that arein the most miserable circumstances of life, are still the mostearnest; and although Herod had been a great while apprized ofthese attempts, yet' did not he indulge any severity to them,







OCR Output













OCR Output








282 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JKWS. Book XIV.


"were present at the writing of this decree, Lucius Culpurnius"Piso of the Menenian tribe, Servius Papinias Potitus of the"Lemonian tribe, Caius Caninius Rebiiius of the Terentine"tribe, Publius Tidetius, Lucius Apulinus, the son of Lucius,"of the Sergian tribe, Flavius, the son of Lucius, of the Lemo-"nian tribe, Publius Platius, the son of Pnblius, of the Papyrian"tribe, Marcus Acilius, the son of Marcus, of the Mecian tribe,"Lucius Erucius, the son of Lucius, of the Stellatine tribe,"Marcus Quintius Plancillus, the son of Marcus, of the Pol-"lian tribe, and Publius Serius. Publius Dolabella, and Mar-"cus Antonius, the consuls, made this reference to the senate,"that as to those things which by the decree of the senate,"Caius Ca3sar had adjudged about the Jews, and yet had not"hitherto that decree brought into the treasury, it is our will, as"it is also the desire of Publius Dolabella, and Marcus Antonius,"our consuls, to have these decrees put into the public tables, and"brought to the city questors, that they may take care to have"them put upon the double tables. This was done before the"fifth of the ides of February, in the temple of Concord. Now"the ambassadors from Hyrcanus the high priest were these,"Lysimachus the son of Pausanius, Alexander the son of The-"odorus, Patroculus the son of Cheras, and Jonathan the son"of Onias."
11. Hyrcanus sent also one of these ambassadors to Dolabella,who was then the prefect of Asia, and desired him to dismissthe Jews from military services, and to preserve to them thecustoms of their forefathers, and to permit them to live ac­cording to them. And when Dolabella had received Hyrcan­us' letter, without any farther deliberation, he sent an epistleto all the Asiatics, and particularly to the city of the Ephesians,the metropolis of Asia, about the Jews, a copy of which epistlehere follows:
12. "When Artemon was prytanis, on the first day of the"month Leneon, Dolabella imperator, to the senate, and magis-"trates, and people of the Ephesians, sendeth greeting: Alex-"ander, the son of Theodorus, the ambassador of Hyrcanus,"the son of Alexander the high priest and ethnarch of the Jews,"appeared before me, to show that his countrymen could not"go into their armies, because they are not allowed to bear"arms, or to travel on the Sabbath days, nor there to procure"themselves those sorts of food which they have been used to"eat from the times of their forefathers; I do therefore grant"them a freedom, from going into the army, as the former pre-"fects have done, and permit them to use the customs of their"forefathers, in assembling together for sacred and religious"purposes, as their law requires, and for collecting oblations







OCR Output








Chap. VJII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 353


rusalem, where the distress and miseries which the besieged en­dured, were so pressing, that the greater number of them in­vited Herod into the city, and already placed their hopes on him.Now, the sons of Babas were of great dignity, and had poweramong the multitude, and were faithful to Antigonus, and werealways raising calumnies against Herod, and encouraged the peo­ple to preserve the government to that royal family which heldit by inheritance. So these men acted thus politically, and, asthey thought, for their own advantage; but when the city wastaken, and Herod had gotten the government into his hands, andCostobarus was appointed to hinder men from passing out at thegates, and to guard the city, that those citizens that were guilty,and of the party opposite to the king, might not get out of it,Costobarus being sensible that the sons of Babas were had in re­spect and honour by the whole multitude, and supposing thattheir preservation might b^ of great advantage to him in thechanges of government afterward, he set them by themselves,and concealed them in his own farms; and when the thing wassuspected, he assured Herod upon oath that he really knewnothing of that matter, and so overcame the suspicions that layupon him; nay, after that, when the king had publicly pro­posed a reward for the discovery, and had put in practice allsorts of methods for searching out this matter, he would notconfess it, but being persuaded that when he had at first deniedit, if the men were found, he should not escape unpunished, hewas forced to keep them secret, not only out of his good-will tothem, but out of a necessary regard to his own preservationalso: But when the king knew the thing, by his sister's infor­mation, he sent men to the places where he had the intimationthey were concealed, and ordered both them, and those thatwere accused as guilty with them, to be slain, insomuch thatthere were now none at all left of the kindred of Hyrcanus, andthe kingdom was entirely in Herod's own power, and there wasnobody remaining of such dignity as could put a stop to whathe did against the Jewish laws.
CHAP. VIII.
How ten men of (he citizens [of Jerusalem} made a conspiracyagainst Herod, for the foreign practices he had introduced,"which was a transgression of the laws of their country. Con­cerning the building ofSebaste and Cesarea, and other edificesof Herod.
§ 1. (. )N_this_iiccoiint it__was that Herod revolted from thelaws of his country, and corrupted their ancient constitution,







OCR Output








Chap. III. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 97


7- So when Zorobabel had left off his discourse about truth,and the multitude had cried out aloud that he had spoken themost wisely, and that it was truth alone that had immutablestrength, and such as never would wax old, the king commanded,that he should ask for somewhat over and above what he hadpromised, for that he would give it him because of his wisdom,and that prudence wherein he exceeded the rest; and thou shaltsit with me, said the king, and shalt be called my cousin. Whenhe had said this, Zorobabel put him in mind of the vow he hadmade in case he should ever have the kingdom. Now this vowwas, " to rebuild Jerusalem, and to build therein the temple ot"God; as also to restore the vessels which Nebuchadnezzar had"pillaged, and carried to Babylon." And this, said he, is thatrequest which thou now permittest me to make, on account thatI have been judged to be wise, and understanding:
8. So the king was pleased with what he had said, and aroseand kissed him; and wrote to the toparchs, and governors, andenjoined them to conduct Zorobabel and those that were goingwith him to build the temple. He also sent letters to those rul­ers that were in Syria and Phenicia to cut down and carry cedartrees from Lebanon to Jerusalem, and to assist him in buildingthe city. He also wrote to them, that all the captives who shouldgo to Judea should be free; and he prohibited his deputies andgovernors to lay any king's taxes upon the Jews; he also per­mitted, that they should have all that land which they could pos­sess themselves of without tributes. He also enjoined the Idu-means and Samaritans, and the inhabitants of Celesyria, to restorevillages which they had taken from the Jews; and that besidesall this, fifty talents should be given them for the building of thetemple. He also permitted them to offer their appointed sacri­fices, and that whatsoever the high priest and the priests wanted,and those sacred garments wherein they used to worship God,


three of the king's guard themselves: and even the mighty rewards are spo­ken of as proposed by themselves, and the speeches are related to have beendelivered by themselves to the king in writing, while all is contrary in Josephus.I need not say whose account is the most probable, the matters speak for them­selves; and there can be no doubt but Josephus' history is here to be rery muchpreferred before the other. Nor indeed does it seem to me at all unlikely, that the'whole was a contrivance of king Darius* own, in order to be decently and inoffen­sively put in mind by Zorobabel, of fulfilling his old vow for the rebuilding of Je­rusalem and the temple, and the restoration of the worship of the ONE TRUE GODthere. Nor does the full meaning of Zorobabel, when he cries out, 3 Esdras iv. 4O.'* Blessed" be the God of truth;'* and here " God is true and righteous," oreven of all the people, 5" Esdras iv. 41. "Great is truth, and mighty above allthings," seem to nw much different from this, "There is hut ONE TRUE GOD,"the God of Israel. To which doctrine, such as Cyrus, and Darius, &c. the Jews*great patrons, seem not to have been very averse, though the entire idolatry of theirkingdoms made them generally conceal it.







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. ANTIQUITIES OK THE JEWS. 27


i


the captains of hundreds, and the rulers, and all the people,took Jehoash, out of the temple into the king's palace, and whenhe had set him into the king's throne, the people shouted forjoy, and betook themselves to feasting, and kept a festival formany days; but the city was quiet upon the death of Athaliah.Now Jehoash was seven years old when he took the kingdom:His mother's name was Zibiah, of the city Beersheba. And allthe time that Jehoiada lived, Jehoash was careful that the lawsshould be kept, and very zealous in the worship of God; andwhen he was of age, he married two wives, who were given tohim by the high priest, by whom were born to him both sonsand daughters. And thus much shall suffice to have related con­cerning king Jehoash, how he escaped the treachery of Athaliah,and how he received the kingdom.
CHAP. VIII.
Haxael makes an expedition against the people of Israel, and theinhabitants of Jerusalem. Jehu dies, and Jehoahaz succeedsin the government. Jehoash the king of Jerusalem, atjirstis careful about the worship of God, but afterwards becomesimpious, and commands Zachariah to be stoned. When Jehoash[king ofjudah] was dead, Amaziah succeeds him in the king­dom.
$ 1. .Now Hazael, king of Syria, fought against the Israel­ites and their king Jehu, and spoiled the eastern parts of thecountry beyond Jordan, which belonged to the Reubenites andGadites, and to [the half tribe of] Manassites; as also Gileadand Bashan, burning and spoiling, and offering violence to allthat he laid his hands on; and this without impeachment fromJehu, who made no haste to defend the country when it wasunder this distress: nay, he was become a contemner of reli­gion, and a despiser of holiness, and of the laws; and diedwhen he had reigned over the Israelites twenty-seven years. Hewas buried in Samaria : and left Jehoahaz his son his successorin the government.
2. Now Jehoash, king of Jerusalem, had an inclination to re­pair the temple of God; so he called Jehoiada, and bid him sendthe Levites and priests through all the country, to require halfa shekel of silver for every head, towards the rebuilding and re­pairing of the temple, which was brought to decay by Jehoram,and Athaliah, and her sons. But the high priest did not do this,as concluding that no one would willingly pay the money; buton the twenty-third year of Jehoash's reign, when the king sentforhim and the Levites, and complained that they had not obeyedwhat he enjoined them, and still commanded them to take care
VOL. iI. u 15







OCR Output








22 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book IX.


good order; and when Joram met him in the field of Naboth,he asked him, if all things were well in the camp? but Jehu re­proached him bitterly, and ventured to call his mother a witch,and an harlot. Upon this the king fearing what he intended,and suspecting he had no good meaning, he turned his chariotabout as soon as he could, and said to Ahaziah, we are foughtagainst by deceit and treachery: But Jehu drew his bow, andsmote him, the arrow going through his heart: so Joram felldown immediately on his knee, and gave up the ghost. Jehualso gave orders to Bidkar, the captain of the third part of hisarmy, to cast the dead body of Joram into the .field of Naboth,putting him in mind of the prophecy which Elijah prophesied toAhab.his father, when he had slain Naboth, that both he andhis family should perish in that place, for that as tb«ey,sat behindAhab's chariot, they heard the prophet say so, and that it wasnow come to pass according to his prophecy. Upon the fall ofJoram, Ahaziah was afraid of his own life, and turned his chariotinto another road, supposing he should not be seen by Jehu; buthe followed after him, and overtook him at a certain acclivity,and drew his bow, and wounded him, so he left his chariot, andgot upon his horse, and fled from Jehu to Megiddo, and thoughhe was under cure, in a little time he died of that wound, andwas carried to Jerusalem, and buried there, after he had reign­ed one year, and had proved a wicked man, and worse than hisfather, .. .-. u. ', ;<i
4°. Now when Jehu was come to Jezreel, Jezebel adornedherself and stood upon a tower, and said, ".he was a fine servant"that had killed his master." And when he looked up to her,he asked who she was? and commanded her to come down tohim. At last he ordered the eunuchs to throw her down fromthe tower, and being thrown down, she besprinkled the wall withher blood, and was trodden upon by the horses, and so died.When this was done,'Jehu came to the palace with his friends,and took some refreshment- after his journey, both with .otherthings, and by eating a meal. He also bid his servants to takeup Jezebel and bury her, because of the nobility of her blood,for she was descended from kings; but those that were appointedto bury her found nothing else remaining but the extreme partsof her body, for all the rest were eaten by dogs:- When Jehuheard this, he admired the prophecy of Elijah, for he foretoldthat she should perish in this manner at Jezreel.
5. Now Ahab had seventy sons brought up in Samaria. So


to Jehu, and at length to go out with king Ahaziah to meet him, and all thisaffcr he was come within eight of the watchman, and before lie was come toJczru I, the probability is greatly un the side of Josephus' copy or intcrpre-
Utiot).







OCR Output








6* ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWB. Book X.


"Medes should put an end to their servitude, and overthrow*' the Babylonians, and that we shall be dismissed, and return*' to this land, and * rebuild the temple and restore Jerusalem."When Jeremiah said this, the greater part believed him, but therulers, and those that were wicked, despised him, as one disor­dered in his senses. Now he had resolved to go elsewhere, tohis own country, which was called Anathoth, and was twentyfurlongs distant from Jerusalem; and as he was going, one of therulers met him, and seized upon him, and accused him falsely, asthough he were going as a deserter to the Babylonians: but Je­remiah, said, that he accused him falsely, and added, that he wasonly going to his own country, but the other would not believehim, but seized upon him, and led him away to the rulers, andlaid an accusation against him, under whom he endured all sortsof torments and tortures, and was reserved to be punished ; andthis was the condition he was in for some time, while he suf­fered what I have already described unjustly.
4. Now in the ninth year of the reign of Zedekiah, on thetenth day of the tenth month, the king of Babylon made a se­cond expedition against Jerusalem, and lay before it eighteenmonths, and besieged it with the utmost application. There cameupon them also two of the greatest calamities at the same timethat Jerusalem was besieged, a famine and pestilential distem­per, and made great havock of them: And though the prophetJeremiah was in prison, he did not rest, but cried out, and pro­claimed aloud, and exhorted the multitude to open their gates,and admit the king of Babylon, for that if they did so, they shouldbe preserved, and their whole families, but if they did not so, theyshould be destroyed, and he foretold, that if any one stayed in thecity, he should certainly perish by one of these ways, either beconsumed by the famine, or slain by the enemy's sword, butthat if he would fly to the enemy he should escape death: Yetdid not these rulers who heard believe him, even when theywere in the midst of their sore calamities, but they came to theking, and in their anger, informed him what Jeremiah said, andaccused him, and complained of the prophet as of a madman,and one that disheartened their minds, and by the denunciationof miseries, weakened the alacrity of the multitude, who wereotherwise ready to expose themselves to dangers for him, andfor their country, while he, in a way of threatening, warned themto fly to the enemy, and told them that the city should certainlybe taken, and be utterly destroyed.


* Josephus says here, that Jeremiah prophesied not only of the return of the Jewsfrom the Babylonian captivity, and this under the Persians and Medes, as in ourother copies; but of their rebuilding the temple, and even the city Jerusalem, whichdo not apoear in our copies under his name, we the note on Anti-j. B. XI. chap. I.*ect. 3.







OCR Output








102 ANTIQUITIES OP THE JEW*. Book XI.


"them to have done speedily, and commanded Sanabassar to"go up to Jerusalem, and to take care of the building of the"temple; who, upon receiving that epistle from Cyrus, came,"and immediately laid its foundations: and although it hath*' been in building from that time to this, it hath not yet been"finished, by reason of the malignity of our enemies. If there-"fore you have a mind, and think it proper, write this account"to Darius, that when he hath consulted the records of the"kings, he may find that we have told you nothing that is false"about this matter."
5. When Zorobabel and the high priest had made this answer,Sisinnes, and those that were with him, did not resolve to hin­der the building, until they had informed king Darius of nilthis. So they immediately wrote to him about these affairs;but as the Jews were now under terror, and afraid lest theking should change his resolutions as to the building of Jeru­salem, and of the temple, there were two prophets at that timeamong them, Haggai and Zechariah, who encouraged them,and bid them be of good cheer, and to suspect no discourage­ment from the Persians, for that God foretold this to them,So, in dependance on those prophets, they applied themselvesearnestly to building, and did not intermit one day.
6. Now Darius, when the Samaritans had written to him-,and in their epistle had accused the Jews, how they fortified thecity, and built the temple more like to a citadel than to a tem­ple; and said, that their doings were not expedient for the king'saffairs; and besides, they showed the epistle of Cambyses, where­in he forbade them to build the temple; and when Darius there­by understood that the restoration of Jerusalem was not expe­dient for his affairs, and when he had read the epistle that Wasbrought him from Sisinnes, and those that were with him, hegave order that what concerned these matters should be soughtfor among the royal records. Whereupon a book was found atEcbatana, in the tower that was in Media, wherein was writ­ten as follows: "Cyrus the king, in the first year of his reign,"commanded that the temple should be built in Jerusalem;"and the altar in height threescore cubits, and its breadth of''' the same, with three edifices of polished stone, and one edifice"of stoneof their own country: and he ordained that the expenses"of it should be paid out of the king's revenue. He also corfi-'' manded that the vessels which Nebuchadnezzar had pillaged"[out of the temple], and had carried to Babylon, should be"restored to the people of Jerusalem, and that the care of these*' things should belong to Sanabassar the governor and president"of Syria and Phenicia, and to his associates, that they mayH not meddle with that place, but may permit the servants of







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 121


and his friend Haman would come to her to a banquet, for shesaid she had prepared a supper for him. He consented to it;and when they were there, as they were drinking, he bid Estherto " let him know what she desired; for that she should not be"disappointed, though she should desire the half of his king-"dom." But she put off the discovery of her petition till thenext day, if he would come again, together with Haman, to herbanquet.
10. Now when the king had promised so to do, Haman wentaway very glad, because he alone had the honour of supping withthe king at Esther's banquet, and because no one else partookof the same honour with kings but himself; yet when he sawMordecai in the court, he was very much displeased, for he paidhim no manner of respect when he saw him. So he went homeand called for his wife Zeresh, and his friends, and when theywere come, he showed them what honour he enjoyed not onlyfrom the king, but from the queen also, for as he alone had thatday supped with her, together with the king, so was he also in­vited again for the next day; yet, said he, am I not pleased tosee Mordecai the Jew in the court. Hereupon his wife Zereshadvised him to give order that a gallows should be made fiftycubits high, and that in the morning he should ask it of the king,that Mordecai might be hanged thereon. So he commended heradvice, and gave order to his servants to prepare the gallows, andto place it in the court, for the punishment'of Mordecai thereon,which was accordingly prepared. But God laughed to scorn thewicked expectations of Haman ; and as he knew what the eventwould be, was delighted at it, for that night he took away theking's sleep; and as the king was not willing to lose the time ofhis lying awake, but to spend it in something that might be ofadvantage to his kingdom, he commanded the scribe to bring himthe chronicles of the former kings, and the records of his ownactions; and when he had brought them and was reading them,one was found to have received a country on account of his ex­cellent management on a certain occasion, and the name of thecountry was set down; another was found to have had a presentmade him on account of his fidelity: then the scribe came to Big-than and Teresh, the eunuchs that had made a conspiracy againstthe king, which Mordecai had discovered, and when the scribesaid no more but that, and was going on to another history, theking stopped him, and inquired " Whether it was not added that"Mordecai had a reward given him?" and when he said therewas no such addition, he bid him leave off; and he inquired ofthose that were appointed for that purpose, what hour of thenight it was? and when he was informed that it was alreadyday, he gave order, that if they found any one of his friends al­







OCR Output








Chap. XIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. SOI


eight hundred in number, there being in the place a sufficientquantity of corn and water, and other necessaries, and went di­rectly for Petra, in Arabia. But when it was day, the Parthiansplundered all Jerusalem, and the palace, and abstained fromnothing but Hyrcanus' money, which was three hundred ta­lents. A great deal of Herod's money escaped, and principallyall that the man had been so provident as to send into Idumeabeforehand: nor indeed did what was in the city suffice theParthians, but they went out into the country, and plunderedit, and demolished the city Marissa.
10. And thus was Antigonus brought back into Judea, bythe king ot the Parthians, and received Hyrcanus and Phasaelusfor his prisoners; but he was greatly cast down because thewomen had escaped, whom he intended to have given the ene­my, as having promised they should have them, with the money,for their reward: But being afraid that Hyrcanus, who wasunder the guard of the Parthians, might have his kingdom re­stored to him by the multitude, he cut off his ears, and therebytook care that the high priesthood should never come to him anymore, because he was maimed, while the * law required that thisdignity should belong to none but such as had all their membersentire. But now one cannot but here admire the fortitude ofPhasaelus, who, perceiving that he was to be put to death, didnot think death any terrible thing at all, but to die thus by themeans of his enemy, this he thought a most pitiable and dishon­ourable thing, and therefore, since he had not his hands at li­berty, but the bonds he was in prevented him from killinghimself thereby, he dashed his head against a great stone, andthereby took away his own life, which he thought to be thebest thing he could do in such a distress as he was in, and there­by put it out of the power of the enemy to bring him to any deathhe pleased. It is also reported, that when he had made a greatwound in his head, Antigonus sent physicians to cure it, and byordering them to infuse poison into the wound, killed him-However, Phasaelus hearing, before he was quite dead, by a cer­tain woman, that his brother Herod had escaped the enemy,underwent his death cheerfully, since he now left behind himone who would revenge his death, and who was able to inflictmmishment on his enemies.


* This law of Moses, that the priests were to be without blemish, as to all theparls of iheir bodies, is in Levit. xxi. 17—24.







OCR Output








198 ANTIQUITIES OF THK JEWS. Book XIII.


them that he might build a temple in Egypt like to that at Je­rusalem, and might ordain Levites and priests out of their ownstock. The chief reason why he was desirous so to do, was,that he relied upon the prophet Isaiah, who lived above sixhundred years before, and foretold that there certainly was tobe a temple built to Almighty God in Egypt by a man that wasa Jew. Onias was elevated with this prediction; and wrote thefollowing epistle to Ptolemy and Cleopatra: "Having done"many and great things for you in the affairs of the war, by the"assistance of God, and that in Celesyria and Phenicia, I came"at length with the Jews to Leontopolis, and to other places"of your nation, where I found that the greatest part of your"people had temples in an improper manner, and that on this"account they bare ill will one against another, which happens"to the Egyptians by reason of the multitude of their temples,"and the difference of opinions about divine worship. Now I"found a very fit place in a castle that hath its name from the"country Diana; this place is full of materials of several sorts,"and replenished with sacred animals: I desire therefore that"you will grant me leave to purge this holy place, which be-"longs to no master, and is fallen down, and to build there a"temple to Almighty God, after the pattern of that in Jerusa-"lem, and of the same dimensions; that may be for the benefit"of thyself, and thy wife and children, that those Jews which"dwell in Egypt may have a place whither they may come and"meet together in mutual harmony one with another, and be"subservient to thy advantages, for the prophet Isaiah fore-"told, that * there should be an altar in Egypt to the Lord God.


* It seems to me, contrary to the opinion of Josephus, and of the moderns, bothJews and Christians, that this prophecy of Isaiah xix. 19, &c. In that day there shallbe an altar to the Lord in the midst of the land of Egypt, Sec. directly foretold thebuilding of this temple of Onias in Egypt, and was a sufficient warrant to the Jewsfor building it, and for worshipping the true God, the God of Israel, therein. SeeAuthent. Rec. vol. II. p. 755. That God seems to have soon better accepted of thesacri6ces and prayers here offered him than those at Jerusalem, see the note on ch.x. sect. 7. And truly the marks of Jewish corruption or interpolation in this text, inorder to discourage their people from approving of the worship of God here, arevery strong, and highly deserve our consideration and correction. The foregoingverse in Isaiah runs thus in our common copies, Tn that day shall Jive cities in theland of Efy]it, [the Hebrew language; shall be full of Jews, whose sacred bookswere in Hebrew,] and swear to the Lord of hosts. One [for the first] shall be calledthe city of destruction, Isa. xs. 18. A strange name, city of destruction 1 upon sojoyful an occasion, and a name never heard of in the land of Egypt, or perhaps inany other nation. The old reading was evidently the city of the sun, or Heliopolis ,and Onkelos, in effect, and Symmachus with the Arabic version, entirely confessthat to be the true reading. The Septuagint also, though they have the text dis­guised in the common copies, and call it Asedek, the city of righteousness; yet in







OCR Output








Chap. XI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 79


When he had seen this dream, he called the magicians togetheragain, and inquired of them about it, and desired them to tellhim what it signified;. but when none of them could find out themeaning of the dream, nor discover it to the king, Daniel wasthe only person that explained it: and as he foretold so it cameto pass; for after he had continued in the wilderness the fore-mentioned interval of time, while no one durst attempt to seizehis kingdom during those seven years, he prayed to God that hemight recover his kingdom, and he returned to it. But let noone blame me for writing down every thing of this nature, asI find it in our ancient books; for as to that matter, J haveplainly assured those that think me defective in any suchpoint, or complain of my management, and have told them inthe beginning of this history, that I intended to do no morethan translate the Hebrew books into the Greek language, andpromised them to explain those facts, without adding any thingto them of my own, or taking any thing away from them.
: ';>;-r/i!"-ii.•t f. i''' - -i''
CHAP. XI .
:S»rlj' '• - >


mcerning Nebuchadnezzar and his successors: and kffw theirgovernment was dissolved by the Persians; and what thingsbefell Daniel in Media, and what prophecies he delivered there.
J 1. JN ow when king Nebuchadnezzar had reigned * forty-three years, he ended his life. He was an active man, and morefortunate than the kings that were before him. Now Berosusmakes mention of his actions in the third book of his Chaldaichistory, where he says thus: "When his father Nebuchodonosor"[Nabopollassar] heard that the governor whom he had set"over Egypt, and the places about Celoesyria and Phenicia, had"revolted from him, while he was not himself able any longer to"undergo the hardships [of war], he committed to his son Ne-"buchadnezzar, who was still but a youth, some parts of his"army, and sent them against them. So when Ncbuchadnez-"zar had given battle, and fought with the rebel, he beat him,"and reduced the country from under his subjection, and made


able, both in sacred and profane authors, that such vacuity of eight years at theleast, at the latter end of his reign, must be allowed to agree very well with Daniel'saccounts, that after a seven years' brutal life, he might return to his reason, and tothe exercise of bio royal authority, for one whole year at least before his death.
* These 45 years for the duration of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar are, as I havejust now observed, the very same number in Ptolemy's canon. Moses Chorenensisdoes also confirm this captivity of the Jews under Nebuchadnezzar, and adds, whatis very remarkable, that one ofthoae Jews that were carried by him into captivity gotaway into Armenia, and raised the great family of the Bagraditx there.







OCR Output








81* ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIV.


he pitched that camp before the temple, intending to make hisattacks in the same manner as did Pompey; so he encompassedthe place with three bulwarks, and erected towers, and em­ployed a great many hands about the work, and cut down thetrees that were round about the city; and when he had ap­pointed proper persons to oversee the works, even while thearmy lay before the city, he himself went to Samaria, to com­plete his marriage, and to take to wife the daughter of Alex­ander, the son of Aristobulus; for he had betrothed her already,as I have before related.
CHAP. XVI.
How Herod, when he had man-led Mariamne, took Jerusalem,-with the assistance of Sosius, by force; and how the govern­ment of the Asamoneans was put an end to.
§ 1. AFTER the wedding was over, came Sosius throughPhenicia, having sent out his army before him over the mid­land parts. He also, who was their commander, came him­self, with a great number of horsemen and footmen. Theking also came himself from Samaria, and brought with him nosmall army, besides that which was there before, for they wereabout thirty thousand: and they all met together at the walls ofJerusalem, and encamped at the north wall of the city, beingnow an army of eleven legions, armed men on foot, and sixthousand horsemen, with other auxiliaries out of Syria. Thegenerals were two, Sosius, sent by Antony to assist Herod, andHerod on his own account, in order to take the government fromAntigonus, who was declared an enemy at Rome, and that hemight himself be king, according to the decree of the senate.
2. Now the Jews that were inclosed within the walls of thecity fought against Herod with great alacrity and zeal, (for thewhole nation was gathered together;) they also gave out manyprophecies about the temple, and many things agreeable to thepeople, as if God would deliver them out of the dangers they werein; they had also carried off what was out of the city, that theymight not leave any thing to afford sustenance either for men orlor beasts: and by private robberies, they made the want of ne­cessaries greater. When Herod understood this, he opposed am­bushes in the fittest places against their private robberies, and hesent legions of armed men to bring in provisions, and that fromremote places, so that in a little time they had great plenty of pro­visions. Now the three bulwarks were easily erected, because somany hands were continually at work upon them; for it was sum­mer time, and there was nothing to hinder them in raising the:r







OCR Output








60 JtNTlQUrriES OF TKK JEWS. Book X.


changed his name to Jehoiakim, and laid a tribute upon the landof a hundred talents of silver, and a talent of gold, and the sumof money Jehoiakim paid by way of tribute: but Neco carriedaway Jehoahaz into Egypt, where he died when he had reignedthree months and ten days. Now Jehoiakim's mother was cal­led Zebudah, of the city Rumah. He was of a wicked dispo­sition, and ready to do mischief: nor was he either religioustowards God, or good natured towards men.
CHAP. VI.
How Nebuchadnezzar, when he had conquered the king of Egypt,'made an expedition against the Jews, and slew Jehoiakim, andmade Jehoiachin his son king.
§ I. Now in the fourth year of the reign of Jehoiakim, onewhose name was Nebuchadnezzar, took the government overthe Babylonians, who at the same time went up with a greatarmy to the city Carchemish, which was at Euphrates, upon a.resolution he had taken to fight with Neco king of Egypt, un­der whom all Syria then was. And when Neco understoodthe intention of the king of Babylon, and that this expedition was.made against him, he did not despise his attempt, but made hastewith a great band of men to Euphrates to defend himself fromNebuchadnezzar; and when they had joined battle, he was beat­en, and lost many ten thousands [of his soldiers] in the battle.So the king of Babylon passed over Euphrates, and took all Sy­ria, as far as Pelusium, excepting Judea. But when Nebuchad­nezzar had already reigned four years, which was the eighth ofJehoiakim's government over the Hebrews, the king of Babylonmade an expedition with mighty forces against the Jews, and re­quired tribute of Jehoiakim, and threatened on his refusal to*make war against him. He was affrighted at his threatening,and bought Iris peace with money, and brought the tribute hewas ordered to bring for three years.
2. But on the third year, upon hearing that the king of theBabylonians made an expedition against the Egyptians, he didnot pay his tribute, yet was he disappointed of his hope, for theEgyptians durst not fight at this time. And indeed the prophetJeremiah foretold every day, how vainly they relied on theirhopes from Egypt, and how the city would be overthrown bvthe king of Babylon, and Jehoiakim the king would be subdued,by him. But what he thus spake proved to be of no advantao-eto them, because there were none that should escape; for both themultitude, and the rulers, when they heard him, had no concernabout what they heard; but being displeased at what was said,







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 4O7


nor did he set any bounds to himself, but supposing that thosewho staid with him had the most power to hurt him, they wereto him very frightful; and for those that did not use to cometo him, it seemed enough to name them [to make them suspected]and he thought himself safer when they were destroyed: And atlast his domestics were come to that pass, that being no way se­cure of escaping themselves, they fell to accusing one another,and imagining that he who first accused another, was most likelyto save himself; yet, when any had overthrown others, theywere hated, and they were thought to suffer justly, who unjustlyaccused others, and they only thereby prevented their ownaccusation; nay, they now executed their own private enmitiesby this means, and when they were caught, they were punishedin the same way. Thus these men contrived to make use ofthis opportunity as an instrument and a snare against their ene­mies, yet when they tried it, were themselves caught also in thesame snare which they kid for others: And the king soon re­pented of what he had done, because he had no clear evidence ofthe guilt of those whom he had slain; and yet what was stillmore severe in him, he did not make use of his repentance, inorder to leave off doing the like again, but in order to inflictthe same punishment upon their accusers.
8. And in this state of disorder were the affairs of the palace:and he had already told many of his friends directly, that theyought not to appear before him, nor come into the palace; andthe reason of this injunction was, that [when they were there]he had less freedom of acting, or a greater restraint on himselfon their account: for at this time it was that he expelled An-dromachus and Gamellus, men who had of old been his friends,and been very useful to him in the affairs of his kingdom, andbeen of advantage to his family, by their embassages and coun­sels; and had been tutors to his sons, and had in a manner thefirst degree of freedom with him. He expelled Andromachus,because his son Demetrius was a companion to Alexander; andGamellus, because he knew that he wished him well, whicharose from his having been with him in his youth, when he wasat school, and absent at Rome. These he expelled out of hispalace, and was willing enough to have done worse by them;but that he might not seem to take such liberty against men oi"so great reputation, he contented himself with depriving themof their dignity, and of their power to hinder his wicked pro­ceedings.
-t. Now it was Antipater, who was the cause of all this; whowhen he knew what a mad and licentious way of acting his fa­ther was in, and had been a great while one of his counsellors,be hurried him on, and then thought he should bring him to do







OCR Output








192 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XIII.


out of them, and do mischief to the Jews. He also fortifiedthe citadel at Jerusalem more than all the rest. Moreover hetook the sons of the principal Jews as pledges, and shut themup in the citadel, and in that manner guarded it.
4. About the same time one came to Jonathan, and to hisbrother Simon, and told them that the sons of Ambri werecelebrating a marriage, and bringing the bride from the cityGabatha, who was the daughter of one of the illustrious menamong the Arabians, and that the damsel was to be conductedwith pomp and splendour, and much riches: So Jonathan andSimon thinking this appeared to be the fittest time for them toavenge the death of their brother, and that they had forces suf­ficient for receiving satisfaction from them for his death, theymade haste to Medaba, and lay in wait among the mountains forthe coming of their enemies; and as soon as they saw them con­ducting the virgin, and her bridegroom, and such a great com­pany of their friends with them, as was to be expected at thiswedding, they sallied out of their ambush, and slew them all;and took their ornaments, and all the prey that then followedthem, and so returned, and received this satisfaction for theirbrother John from the sons of Ambri; for as well those sonsthemselves, as their friends, and wives, and children, that fol­lowed them, perished, being in number about four hundred.
5. However, Simon and Jonathan returned to the lakes ofthe river, and abode there. But Bacchides, when he had secur­ed all Judea with his garrisons, returned to the king: and thenit was that the affairs of Judea were quiet for two years. Butwhen the deserters and the wicked saw that Jonathan and thosethat were with him lived in the country very quietly, by rea­son of the peace, they sent to king Demetrius, and excited himto send Bacchides to seize upon Jonathan, which they said wasto be done without any trouble, and in one night's time; andthat if they fell upon them before they were aware, they mightslay them all. So the king sent Bacchides, who, when he wascome into Judea, wrote to all his friends, both Jews and aux­iliaries, that they should seize upon Jonathan, and bring him tohim; and, when, upon all their endeavours, they were not ableto seize upon Jonathan, for he was sensible of the snares they laidfor him, and very carefully guarded against them, Bacchides wasangry at these deserters, as having imposed upon him, andupon the king, and slew fifty of their leaders. Whereupon Jona­than, with his brother, and those that were with them, retiredto Bethagla, a village that lay in the wilderness, out of his fearof Bacchides. He also built towers on it, and encompassed itwith walls, and took care that it should be safely guarded. Uponthe hearing of which, Bacchidw ^ed his own army along with







OCR Output








4 ANTIQUITIES OK THE JEWS. Book IX.


* judges out of the priests and the Levites, and principal personsof the multitude, and admonished them to pass all their sentenceswith care and justice. And that if any of the people of his coun­try had differences of great consequence, they should send themout of the other cities to these judges, who would be obliged togive righteous sentences concerning such causes; and this withthe greater care, because it is proper that the sentences whichare given in that city wherein the temple of God is, and where­in the king dwells, be given with great care, and the utmostjustice. Now he set over them Amariah the priest, and Zeba-diah, [both] of the tribe of Judah: and after this manner it wasthat the king ordered these affairs.
2. About the same time the Moabites and Ammonites made anexpedition against Jehoshaphat, and took with them a greatbody of Arabians, and pitched their camp at Engedi, a city'that is situate at the lake Asphaltitis, and distant three hundredfurlongs from Jerusalem. In that place grows the best kind ofpalm-trees, and the ')- opobalsamum. Now Jehoshaphat heardthat the enemies had passed over the lake, and had made anirruption into that country which belonged to his kingdom; atwhich news he was affrighted, and called the people of Jerusalemto a congregation in the temple, and standing over against thetemple itseltj he called upon God, "To afford him power and"strength, so as to inflict punishment on those that made this"expedition against them, (for that those who built this his tem-"pie had prayed, that he would protect that city, and take ven-"geance on those that were so bold as to come against it), for"they are come to take from us that land which thou hast"given us for a possession." When he had prayed thus, he fellinto tears; and the whole multitude, together with their wivesand children, made their supplications also : Upon which a cer-Jain prophet, Jahaziel, by name, came into the midst of the assem­bly, and cried out, and spake both to the multitude and to theking, that God heard their prayers, and promised to fight againsttheir enemies. He also gave order that the king should drawhis forces out the next day, for that he should find them betweenJerusalem, and the ascent of Engedi, at a place, called the Emi­nence, and that he should not fight against them, but only standstill, and see how God would fight against them. When the pro­phet had said this, both the king and the multitude fell upon their


* These judges, constituted by Jehoshaphat, were a kind of Jerusalem sanhedrim,out of the priests, the Levites, and the principal of the people, both here and 2 Chron.lix. 8. much like the old Christian judicatures of the bishop, the presbyters, thedeacons, and the people*
f Concerning this precious balsam, see the note on Antiq. B. VIII. ch. vi.
KCt. 6.







OCR Output








Chap. X. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. SOS


during which time the king did not fail to go on both with thework and to pay the charges that were necessary.
CHAP. X.
How Herod sent his sons to Rome; how also he was accused byZenodorus, and the Gadarens, but was cleared of what theyaccused him of, and withal gained to himself the good-will ofCcesar. Concerning the Pharisees, the Essens, and Manahem.
$ 1. W HEN Herod was engaged in such matters, and whenhe had already re-edified Sebaste [Samaria,] he resolved tosend his sons Alexander and Aristobulus to Rome, to enjoythe company of Caesar; who, when they came thither, lodgedat the house of * Pollio, who was very fond of Herod's friend­ship; and they had leave to lodge in Caesar's own palace, forhe received these sons of Herod with all humanity, and gaveHerod leave to give his kingdom to which of his sons he pleased;and, besides all this, he bestowed on him Trachon, and Batanea,and Auranitis, which he gave him on the occasion following:One f Zenodorus had hired what was called the house of Lysa-nias, who, as he was not satisfied with its revenues, became apartner with the robbers that inhabited the Trachones, and &oprocured himself a larger income; for the inhabitants of thoseplaces lived in a mad way, and pillaged the country of the Da­mascenes, while Zenodorus did not restrain them, but partookof the prey they acquired. Now, as the neighbouring peoplewere hereby great sufferers, they complained to Varro, who wasthen president [of Syria,] and entreated him to write to Caesarabout this injustice of Zenodorus. When these matters werelaid before Caesar, he wrote back to Varro to destroy thosenests of robbers, and to give the land to Herod, that so by hiscare the neighbouring countries might be no longer disturbedwith these doings of the Trachonites, for it was not an easything to restrain them, since this way of robbery had been theuusual practice, and they had no other way to get their living,because they had neither any city of their own, nor lands in theirpossession, but only some receptacles and dens in the earth, andthere they and their cattle lived in common together: However,


* This Pollio, with whom Herod's sons lived at Rome, was not Pollio the Phari­see, already mentioned by Josephus, ch. i. sect. 1. and again presently after this, ch.x. sect. 4. but Asinius Pollio, the Roman, as Spanheim here observes.
+ The character of this Zenodorus is so like that of a famous robber of this samename in Strabo, and that about this very country, and about this very time also, thatI think Dr. Hudson hardly needed to have put 3 perhaps to liis determination thatthey were the same.







OCR Output








Chap. IV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 201


CHAP. IV.
Hffti) Alexander honoured Jonathan after an extraordinary man­ner, and how Demetrius, the son of Demetrius, overcame Alex­ander, and made a league of friendship with Jonathan.
§ 1. .DEMETRIUS being thus slain in battle, as we haveabove related, Alexander took the kingdom of Syria; andwrote to Ptolemy Philometer, and desired his daughter in mar­riage; and said, it was but just that he should be joined in af­finity to one that had now received the principality of his fore­fathers, and had been promoted to it by God's providence, andhad conquered Demetrius, and that was on other accounts notunworthy of being related to him. Ptolemy received this pro­posal of marriage gladly; and wrote him an answer, salutinghim on account of his having received the principality of hisforefathers; and promising him that he would give him hisdaughter in marriage; and assured him that he was coming tomeet him at Ptolemais, and desired that he would there meethim, for that he would accompany her from Egypt so far, andwould there marry his child to him. When Ptolemy had writtenthus, he came suddenly to Ptolemais, and brought his cousinCleopatra along with him: and as he found Alexander therebefore him, as he desired him to come, he gave him his child inmarriage, and for her portion gave her as much silver and goldas became such a king to give.
2. When the wedding was over, Alexander wrote to Jona­than the high priest, and desired him to come to Ptolemais.So when he came to these kings, and had made them mag­nificent presents, he was honoured by them both. Alexan­der compelled him also to put off his own garment, and totake a purple garment, and made him sit with him in histhrone; and commanded his captains that they should go withhim into the middle of the city, and proclaim, that it wasnot permitted to any one to speak against him, or to give himany disturbance. And when the captains had thus done, thosethat were prepared to accuse Jonathan, and who bore him ill-will, when they saw the honour that was done him by procla­mation, and that by the king's order, ran away, and were afraidlest some mischief should befall them. Nay, king Alexander wasso very kind to Jonathan, that he set him down as the principalof his friends.
3. But then, upon the hundred and sixty-fifth year, Deme­trius, the sen of Demetrius, came from Crete with a greatnumber of mercenary soldiers, which Lasthenes, the Cretian,







OCR Output








62 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book X.


,.- CHAP. VII.
That the king of Babylon repented of making Jehoiachin king,and took him twaaij to Babylon, and delivered the kingdom toZedekiah. This king tsioidd not believe "what 'was predicted byJeremiah and Ezekiel, but joined himself to the Egyptians ,' who,when they came into Judea, were vanquished by the king ofBabylon: as also what befell Jeremiah.
.$ 1. BUT a terror seized on the king of Babylon, who hadgiven the kingdom to Jehoinchin, and that immediately: he wasafraid that he should bear him a grudge, because of his killinghis father, and thereupon should make the country revolt fromhim; wherefore he sent an army, and besieged Jehoiachin inJerusalem; but because he was of a gentle and just disposition,he did not desire to see the city endangered on his account,but he took his mother, and kindred, and delivered them tothe commanders sent by the king of Babylon, and accepted oftheir oaths, that neither should they suffer any harm, nor thecity; which agreement they did not observe for a single year,for the king of Babylon did not keep it, but gave orders to hisgenerals to take all that were in the city captives, both. theyouth and the handicraftsmen; and bring them bound to him;their number was ten thousand eight hundred and thirty two;as also Jehoiachin, and his mother and friends: And when thesewere brought to him, he kept them in custody, and appointedJehoiachin's uncle Zedekiah to be king; and made him take anoath, that he would certainly keep the kingdom for him, andmake no innovation, nor have any league of friendship with the-Egyptians.
2. Now Zedekiah was twenty and one years old when he tookthe government: and had the same mother- with his brother Je-hoiakim, but was a despiser of justice and of his duty, for trulythose of the same age. with him were wicked about him, and thewhole multitude did what unjust and insolent things they pleased;for which reason the prophet Jeremiah came often to him, andprotested to him, and insisted, That " he must leave off his im-* pieties and transgressions, and take care of what was right,*' and neither give ear to the rulers, (among whom were wicked"men), nor give credit to their false prophets, who deluded*' them, as if the king of Babylon would makenomorewar against"them, and as if the Egyptians would make war against him,*' and conquer him, since what they- said was not true, and the-"events would not prove such [as they expected]." Now as toZedekiah himself, while he heard the prophet speak he believedhim, and agreed to every thing as true, and supposed it was for his







OCR Output








Chap. V £ IT. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 129


ter, whose name was Nicaso, in marriage to Manasseh, as think­ing this alliance by marriage would be a pledge and security thatthe nation of the Jews should continue their good will to him
CHAP. VIII.
Concerning Sanballat and Manasseh, and the temple 'winch theybuilt on mount Gerizzim; as also how Alexander made hisentry into the city Jerusalem ,- and "what benefits he bestowed onthe Jews.
§ 1. ABOUT this time it was that Philip, king of Macedon,was treacherously assaulted and slain at Egae by Pausanias, theson of Cerastes, who was derived from the family of Orestae,and his son Alexander succeeded him in the kingdom, whopassing over the Hellespont, overcame the generals of Darius'army in a battle fought at Granicum. So he marched overLydia, and subdued Ionia, and overran Caria, and fell uponthe places of Pamphylia, as has been related elsewhere.
2. But the elders of Jerusalem being very uneasy that thebrother of Jaddua the high priest, though married to a foreigner,should be a partner with him in the high priesthood, quarrelledwith him ; for they esteemed this man's marriage a step to suchas should be desirous of transgressing about the marriage of[strange] wives, and that this would be the beginning of a mu­tual society with foreigners, although the offence of some aboutmarriages, and their having married wives that were not oftheir own country, had been an occasion of their former capti­vity, and of the miseries they then underwent; so they com­manded Manasseh to divorce his wife, or not to approach the al­tar, the high priest himself joining with the people in their in­dignation against his brother, and driving him away from thealtar. V/hereupon Manasseh came to his father-in-law, San­ballat, and told him, That "although he loved his daughter"Nicaso, yet he was not willing to be deprived of his sacerdotal"dignity on her account, which was the principal dignity in"their nation, and always continued in the same family." Andwhen Sanballat promised him not only to preserve to him thehonour of his priesthood, but to procure for him the power anddignity of a high priest, and would make him governor of allthe places he himself now ruled, if he would keep his daughterfor his wife; He also told him farther, that he would buildhim a temple like to that at Jerusalem, upon mount Gerizzimwhich .is the highest of all the mountains that are in Samaria,and he" promised that he would do this with the approbation ofDarius the king. Manasseh was elevated with these promises,and stayed with Sanballat, upon a supposal that he should gaina high priesthood, as bestowed on him by Darius, for it hap­







OCR Output








246. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEMS. Book XIII.


ing cities that had belonged to the Syrians, and Idumeans, andPhenicians; at the sea side, Strato's Tower, Apollonia, Joppa,Jamnia, Ashdod, Gaza, Anthedon, llnphia, and llhinoculura; inthe middle of the country, near to Idumea, Adora, and Marissa;near the country of Samaria, Mount Carmel, and Mount Tabor,Scythopolis, and Gardara; of the country of Gaulonites, Selucia,and Gabala; in the country of Moab, Heshbon and Medaba,.Lemba, and Oronas, Gelithon, Zara, the valley of the Celices,and Pella; which last they utterly destroyed, because its * in­habitants would not bear to change their religious rites forthose peculiar to the Jews. The Jews also possessed others ofthe principal cities in Syria, which had been destroyed.
5. After this, king Alexander, although he fell into a distem­per by hard drinking, and had a quartan ague, which held himthree years, yet would not leave off going out with his army,till he was quite spent with the labours he had undergone, anddied in the bounds of Regaba, a fortress beyond Jordan. Butwhen his queen saw that he was ready to die, and had no longeiany hopes of surviving, she came to him weeping and lamenting,and bewailed herself, and her sons, on the desolate condition theyshould be left in: and said to him, " To whom dost thou thus"leave me and my children, who are destitute of all other sup-"ports, and this when thou knowest how much ill-will thy na-"tion bears thee?" But he gave her the following advice, " That"she need but follow what he would suggest to her, in order"to retain the kingdom securely, with her children, that she*' should conceal his death from the soldiers till she should have"taken that place; after this she should go in triumph, as upon"a victory, to Jerusalem, and put some of her authority into"the hands of the Pharisees, for that they would commend her"for the honour she had done them, and would reconcile the na-"tion to her; for he told her, they had great authority among the"Jews, both to do hurt to such as they hated, and to bring advan-"tages to those to whom they weie friendly disposed, for that they"are then believed best of all by the multitude when they speak"any severe thing against others, though it be only out of envy"at them. And he said, that it was by their means that he had"incurred the displeasure of the nation, whom indeed he had in­


* We may here, and elsewhere, take notice, that whatever countries or cities, theAsamonians conquered from any of the neighbouring nations, or whatever coun­tries or cities they gained from them, that had not belonged to them before, they,after the days of Hyrcanus, compelled the inhabitants to leave their idolatry, andentirely to receive the law of Moses, as proselytes of justice, or else banish theminto other lands. That excellent prince, John Hyrcanus, did it to the Idumeans,aft I have noted on ch. ix. sect, 1. already, who lived then in the promised land, andthis I suppose justly; but by what right the rest did it, even to the countries orcities that were no part of that land, I do not at all knew. Thii look* too like un­just persecution for religion.







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 409


ting any of the things out of them which he suspected. Andwhile Herod was very busy about this matter, and the palacewas full of terror and trouble, one of the younger sort, when hewas in the utmost agony, confessed that Alexander had sent tohis friends at Rome, and desired that he might be quickly in­vited thither by Caesar, and that he could discover a plot againsthim; that Mithridates, the king of Parthia, was joined in afriendship with his father against the Romans, and that he hada poisonous potion ready prepared at Askelon.
5. To these accusations Herod gave credit, and enjoyed hereby,in his miserable case, some sort of consolation, in excuse of hisrashness, as flattering himself with rmding things in so bad a con­dition: but as for the poisonous potion, which he laboured to find,he could find none. As for Alexander, he was very desirous toaggravate the vast misfortunes he was under, so he pretendednot to deny the accusations, but punished the rashness of his fa­ther with a great crime of his own; and perhaps he was willingto make his father ashamed of his easy belief of such calumnies:he aimed especially, if he could gain belief to his story, to plaguehim, and his whole kingdom; for he wrote four letters, and sentthem to him, that " he did not need to torture any more persons,"for he had plotted against him; and that he had for his part-"ners Pheroras, and the most faithful of his friends; and that"Salome came in to him by night, and that she lay with him"whether he would or no; and that all men were come to be"of one mind, to make away with him as soon as they could,"and so get clear of the continual fear they were in from him."Among these were accused Ptolemy, and Sapinnius, who werethe most faithful friends to the king. And what more can besaid, but that those who before were the most intimate friends,were become wild beasts to one another, as if a certain madnesshad fallen upon them, while there was no room for defence orrefutation, in order to the discovery of the truth, but all wereat random doomed to destruction ; so that some lamented thosethat were in prison, some those that were put to death, andothers lamented that they were in the expectation of the samemiseries; and a melancholy solitude rendered the kingdom de­formed, and quite the reverse to that happy state it was formerlyin: Herod's own life also was entirely disturbed; and becausehe could trust nobody, he was sorely punished by the expecta­tion of farther misery, for he often fancied in his imagination,that his son had fallen upon him, or stood by him with a swordin his hand; and thus was his mind night and day intent uponthis thing, and revolved it over and over, no otherwise than ifhe were under a distraction. And this was the sad conditionHerod was now in. .







OCR Output








Chap. VII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 349


the fortresses belonging to the kingdom; but Salome and herparty laboured hard to have the woman put to death; and theyprevailed with the king to do so, and advised this out of cau­tion, lest the multitude should be tumultuous if she were suf­fered to live; and thus was Mariamne led to execution.
5. When Alexandra observed how things went, and that therewere small hopes that >he herself should escape the like treat­ment from Herod, she changed her behaviour to quite the reverseof what might have been expected from her former boldness, andthis after a very indecent manner: for out of her desire to showhow entirely ignorant she was of the crimes laid against Mari­amne, she leaped out of her place, and reproached her daughterin the hearing of all the people: and cried out, That " she had"been an ill woman and ungrateful to her husband, and that"her punishment came justly upon her, for such her insolent"behaviour, for that she had not made proper returns to him"who had been their common benefactor." And when shehad for some time acted after this hypocritical manner, and beenso outrageous as to tear her hair, this indecent and dissemblingbehaviour, as was to be expected, was greatly condemned by therest of the spectators, as it was principally by the poor womanwho was to suffer; for at the first she gave her not a word, norwas discomposed at her peevishness, and only looked at her, yetdid she, out of a greatness of soul, discover her concern for hermother's offence, and especially for her exposing herself in a man­ner so unbecoming her; but as for herself, she went to her deathwith an unshaken firmness of mind, and without changing thecolour of her face, and thereby evidently discovered the nobil­ity of her descent to the spectators, even in the last momentsof her life.
6. And thus died Mariamne; a woman of an excellent char­acter, both for chastity and greatness of soul; but she wantedmoderation, and had too much of contention in her nature, yethad she all that can be said in the beauty of her body, and hermajestic appearance in conversation; and thence arose the great­est part of the occasions why she did not prove so agreeable tothe king, nor live so pleasantly with him, as she might otherwisehave done; for while she was most indulgently used by the king^out of his fondness to her, and did not expect that he could doany hard thing to her, she took too unbounded a liberty. More­over, that which most afflicted her was, what he had done to heirelations, and she ventured to speak of all they had suffered byhim, fand at last greatly provoked both the king's mother andsister, till they became enemies to her) and even he himself alsodid the same, on whom alone she depended for her expectationsof escaping the last of punishments.







OCR Output








Chap. XII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 293


as being to marry the daughter of Alexander, the son of Aristo-bulus, and the granddaughter of Hyrcanus, by which wife hebecame the father of three male, and two female children. Hehad also married before this another wife, out of a lower familyof his own nation, whose name was Doris, by whom he had hiseldest son Antipater.
2. Now Antonius and Caesar had beaten Cassius near Philippi,as others have related; but after the victory, Caesar went intoGaul, [Italy] and Antony marched for Asia, who, when he wasarrived at Bythinia, he had ambassadors that met him from allparts. The principal men also of the Jews came thither, to ac­cuse Phasaelus, and Herod, and they said, that Hyrcanus had in­deed the appearance of reigning, but that these men had all thepower, but Antony paid great respect to Herod, who was cometo him to make his defence against his accusers, on which accounthis adversaries could not so much as obtain a hearing; whichfavour Herod had gained of Antony by money. But still, whenAntony was come to Ephesus, Hyrcanus the high priest, and ournation, sent an embassage to him who carried a crown of goldwith them, and desired that he would write to the governors ofthe provinces, to set those Jews free who had been carried cap­tive by Cassius, and this without their having fought against him,and to restore them that country, which, in the days of Cassius,had been taken from them. Antony thought the Jews' desireswere just, and wrote immediately to Hyrcanus, and to the Jews.He also sent, at the same time, a decree to the Tyrians; thecontents of which were to the same purpose.
3. " Marcus Antonius, imperator, to Hyrcanus the high priest"and ethnarch of the Jews, sendeth greeting: If you be in"health, it is well; I also am in health, with the army. Ly-"simachus, the son of Pausanius, and Josephus the son of Men-"neus, and Alexander the son of Theodorus, your ambassadors,"met me at Ephesus, and have renewed that embassage which"they had formerly been upon at Rome, and have diligently ac-"quitted themselves of the present embassage, which thou and"thy nation have entrusted to them, and have fully declared"the good-will thou hast for us. I am therefore satisfied, both"by your actions and your words, that you are well disposed"to us; and I understand that your conduct of life is constant"and religious: so I reckon upon you as our own: but when"those that were adversaries to you, and to the Roman people,"and abstained neither from cities nor temples, and did notob-"serve the agreement they had confirmed by oath, it was not"only on account of our contest with them, but on account of"all mankind in common, that we have taken vengeance on"those who have been the authors of great injustice towards men,







OCR Output








150 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XII.


have in this, that whereas the Jews do not make use of* oil pre­pared by foreigners, they receive a certain sum of money fromthe proper officers belonging to their exercises as the valuewould have deprived them of, in the last war, Mucianus, whowas then president of Syria, preserved it to them. And whenthe people of Alexandria and of Antioch did after that, at thetune that Vespasian and Titus his son governed the habitableearth, pray that these privileges of citizens might be taken away,they did not obtain their request. In which behaviour anyone may discern the f equity and generosity of the Romans, es­pecially of Vespasian and Titus, who, although they had beenat a great deal of pains in the war against the Jews, and wereexasperated against them, because they did not deliver up theirweapons to them, but continued the war to the very last, yetdid not they take away any of their forementioned privilegesbelonging to them as citizens, but restrained their anger; andovercame the prayers of the Alexandrians and Antiochians, whowere a very powerful people, insomuch that they did not yieldto them, neither out of their favour to those people, nor out oftheir old grudge at those whose wicked opposition they had sub­dued in the war; nor would they alter any of the ancient favoursgranted to the Jews, but said, that those who had borne armsagainst them, and fought them, had suffered punishment already,and that it was not just to deprive those that had not offended ofthe privileges they enjoyed.
2. We also know that Marcus Agrippa was of the like dis­position towards the Jews: For when the people of Ionia werevery angry at them, and besought Agrippa, that they, and theyonly, might have those privileges of citizens which Antiochus,the grandson of Seleucus (who by the Greeks was called theGod,) had bestowed on them; and desired that if the Jewswere to be joint-partakers with them, they might be obliged toworship the gods they themselves worshipped: but when thesematters were brought to the trial, the Jews prevailed, and ob­


* The use of oil was much greater, and the donatives of it much more valuablein Judea, and the neighbouring countries, than it is amongst us. It was also, in thedays of Josephus, thought unlawful for Jews to make use of any oil that wasprepared by heathens, perhaps on account of some superstitions intermixed withits preparation by those heathens. When therefore the heathens were to makethem a donative of oil, they paid them money instead of it. See Of the War, B.II. ch. xxii. sect. 2. vol. III. the Life of Josephus sect. 13. vol. III. and Hudson'snote on the place before us.
'(' This, and the like great and just characters, of the justice and equity, and ge­nerosity of the old Romans, both to the Jews and other conquered nations, affordsus a very good reason why Almighty God, upon the rejection of the Jews for theirwickedness, chose them for his people, and first established Christianity in thatempire. Of which matter, see Josepbus here, sect. 2. as also Antiq. B. XIV. ch.X. sect. 21, 23. B. XVI. chap. 2. sect. 4.







OCR Output








Chap. IX. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 75


God had foretold these things, he was not believed, when he saidthat God commanded them to continue 'in that country, but theyimagined that he said so to gratify Baruch, his own disciple, andbelied God, and that he persuaded them to stay there, that theymight be destroyed by the Babylonians. Accordingly, both thepeople and Johanan disobeyed the counsel of God, which hegave them by the prophet, and removed into Egypt, and car­ried Jeremiah and Baruch along with him.
7. And when they were there, God signified to the prophet,that the king of Babylon was about making an expedition againstthe Egyptians, and commanded him to foretell to the people thatEgypt should be taken, and the king of Babylon should slay someof them, and should take others captive, and bring them to Ba­bylon; which things came to pass accordingly: for on the fifthyear after the destruction of Jerusalem, which was the twenty-third of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, he made an expeditionagainst Celcesyria, and when he had possessed himself of it, hemade war against the Ammonites and Moabites; and when hehad brought all these nations under subjection, he fell uponEgypt, in order to overthrow it; and he slew the * king thatthen reigned, and set up another; and he.took those Jews thatwere there captives, and led them away to Babylon. And suchwas the end of the nation of the Hebrews, as it hath been deli­vered down to us, it having gone twice beyond Euphrates; forthe people of the ten tribes were carried out of Samaria by theAssyrians, in the days of king Hoshea; after which the peopleof the two tribes that remained after Jerusalem was taken, [werecarried away] by Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon andChaldea. Now as to Shalmanezer, he removed the Israelitesout of their country, and placed therein the nation of the Cu-theans, who had formerly belonged to the inner parts of Persiaand Media, but were then called Samaritans, by taking the nameof the country to which they were removed; but the king ofBabylon, who brought out the two tribes ')-, placed no other na­tion in their country, by which means all Judea and Jerusalem,and the temple, continued to be a desert for seventy years : but


* Herodotus says, this king of Ejrypt [Pharaoh Hophra, or Apries] was slain bythe Egyptians, as Jeremiah foretold his slaughter by his enemies, Jer. xliv. 29, 3O.and that as a sign of the destructior of Egypt [by Nebuchadnezzar,] Josephus says,tliis king was slain by Nebuchadnezzar himself.
')' We see here that Judea was left in a manner desolate after the captivity of thetwo tribes, and was not repeopled with foreign colonies, perhaps as an indication ofProvidence that the Jews were to repeople it without opposition themselves. I alsoesteem the latter and present desolate condition of the same country, without beingrepeopled by foreign colonies, to be a like indication, that the same Jews are hereaf­ter to repeople it again t>?«mseWes, at their so long expected future restoration.







OCR Output








142 ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book XII.


does not seem to me to be necessary to set down the names ofthe seventy [two] elders who-were sent by Eleazar, and carriedthe law, which yet were subjoined at the end of the epistle.However, I thought it not improper to give an account of thosevery valuable and artificially contrived vessels which the kingsent to God, that all may see how great a regard tire king hadfor God; for the king allowed a vast deal of expenses for thesevessels: and came often to the workmen, and viewed their works,and suffered nothing of carelessness or negligence to be any da­mage to their operations. And I will relate how rich theywere as well as I am able, although perhaps the nature of thishistory may not require such a description, but I imagine Ishall thereby recommend the elegant taste and magnanimity ofthis king to those that read this history.
8. And first I will describe what belongs to the table. It wasindeed in the king's mind to make this table vastly large in itsdimensions; but then he gave orders that they should learn whatwas the magnitude of the table which was already at Jerusalem,and how large it was, and whether there were a possibility ofmaking one larger than it. And when he was informed howlarge that was which was already there, and that nothing hin­dered but a larger might be made, he said, That " he was wil-"ling to have one made that should be five times as large as the"present table, but his fear was, that it might be then useless"in their sacred ministrations, by its too great largeness; for he"desired that the gifts he presented them, should not only be"there for show, but should be useful also in their sacred mi-"nistrations." According to which reasoning, that the formertable was made of so moderate a size for use, and not for wantof gold, he resolved that he would not exceed the former tablein largeness; but would make it exceed it in the variety andelegancy of its materials. And as he was sagacious in observingthe nature of all things, and in having a just notion of what wasnew and surprising, and where there was no sculptures, hewould invent such as were proper, by his own skill, and wouldshow them to the workmen, he commanded that such sculpturesshould now be made, and that those which were delineated,should be most accurately formed by a constant regard to theirdelineation.
9. When therefore the workmen had undertaken to make thetable, they framed it in length two cubits [and a half,] inbreadth one cubit, and in height one cubit and a half; and theentire structure of the work was of gold. They withal made acrown of a hand-breadth round it, with wave-work wreathedabout it, and with an engraving imitated a cord, and was admir­ably turned on its three parts; for as they Were of a triangular







OCR Output








Chap. XIV. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS.


CHAP XIV.
Hole Demetrius Eucerus overcame Alexander, and yet in a littletime retired out of the country for fear of the Jews. As alsohow Alexander slew many of the Jews, and thereby got clear ofhis troubles. Concerning the death of Demetrius.
§ 1. So Demetrius came with an army, and took those thatinvited him; and pitched his camp near the city Shechem ; uponwhich Alexander, with his six thousand two hundred mercena­ries, and about twenty thousand Jews, who were of his party,went against Demetrius, who had three thousand horsemen,and forty thousand footmen. Now there were great endeavoursused on both sides, Demetrius, trying to bring off the mercena­ries, that were with Alexander, because they were Greeks, and'Alexander, trying to bring off the Jews that were with Demetri­us. However when neither of them could persuade them soto do, they came to a battle, and Demetrius was the conqueror,in which all Alexander's mercenaries were killed, when theyhad given demonstration of their fidelity and courage. A greatnumber of Demetrius' soldiers were slain also.
2. Now as Alexander fled to the mountains, six thousand ofthe Jews hereupon came together, [from Demetrius] to him,out of pity at the change of his fortune; upon which Demetrius\vas afraid, and retired out of the country; after which the Jewsfought against Alexander, and being beaten, were slain in greatnumbers in the several battles which they had; and when he hadshut up the most powerful of them in the city Bethome, he be­sieged them therein; and when he had taken the city, and gottenthe men into his power, he brought them to Jerusalem, and didone of the most barbarous actions in the world to them: for ashe was feasting with his concubines, in the sight of all the city,he ordered about eight hundred of them to be crucified, and whilethey were living he ordered the throats of their children andwives to be cut before their eyes. This was indeed by way ofrevenge for the injuries they had done him; which punish­ment yet was of an inhuman nature, though we suppose thathe had been ever so much distressed, as indeed he had been,by his wars with them, for he had by their means come to thelast degree of hazard, both of his life and of his kingdom,while they were not satisfied by themselves only to fight againsthim, but introduced foreigners also for the same purpose; nay,at length they reduced him to that degree of necessity, that he wasforced to deliver back to the king of Arabia the land of Moaband Gilead; which he had subdued, and the places that were inthem, that they might not join with them in the war against him,
VOL. II. H H 23







OCR Output








Chap. VI. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 61


as if the prophet were a diviner against the king, they accusedJeremiah, and bringing him before the court they required thata sentence and a punishment might be given against him. Nowall the rest gave their votes for his condemnation, but the eldersrefused, who prudently sent away the prophet from the court of[the prison] and persuaded the rest to do Jeremiah no harm;for they said, that "he was not the only person who foretold"what would come to the city, but that Micath signified the same"before him, as well as many others, none of which suffered"any thing of the kings that then reigned, but were honoured as"the prophets of God." So they mollified the multitude withthese words, and delivered Jeremiah from the punishment towhich he was condemned. Now when this prophet had -writtenall his prophecies, and the people were fasting, and assembled atthe temple, on the ninth month of the fifth year of Jehoiakim, heread the book he had composed of his predictions, of what was tobefall the city, and the temple, and the multitude. And when therulers heard of it, they took the book from him, and bid him andBaruch the scribe to go their ways, lest they should be discoveredby one or other; but they carried the book, and gave it to theking, so he gave order, in the presence of his friends, that hisscribe should take it, and read it. When the king heard whatit contained, he was angry, and tore it, and cast it into the fire,where it was consumed. He also commanded, that they shouldseek for Jeremiah and Baruch the scribe, and bring them tohim, that they might be punished. However they escaped hisanger.
3. Now a little time afterward, the king of Babylon made anexpedition against Jehoiakim, whom he received [into the city,]and this out of fear of the foregoing predictions of this prophet,as supposing that he should suffer nothing that was terri­ble, because he neither shut the gates, nor fought againsthim; yet when he was come into the city, he did not observethe covenants he had made, but he slew .such as were in theflower of their age, and such as were of the greatest dignity,together with their king Jehoiakim, whom he commandedto be thrown before the walls, without any burial; and madehis son Jehoiachin king of the country, and of the city: he alsotook the principal persons in dignity for captives, three thousandin number, and led them away to Babylon; among whom wasthe prophet Ezekiel, who was then but young. And this wasthe end of king Jehoiakim, when he had lived thirty-six years,and of them reigned eleven ; but Jehoiachin succeeded him in thekingdom, whose mother's name was Nehushta: she was a citizenof Jerusalem. He reigned three months and ten days.







OCR Output








3'/ ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book IX,


cause he should thereby obtain much wealth from God. So hedismissed them, and said, that he still freely gave them their pay,and went himself with his own army, and made war with thenations before mentioned; and when he had beaten them in bat­tle, he slew of them ten thousand, and took as many prisonersalive; whom he brought to the great rock which is in Arabia,and threw them down from it headlong. He also brought awaya great deal of prey, and vast riches, from those nations. Butwhile Amaziah was engaged in this expedition, those Israeliteswhom he had hired, and then dismissed, were very uneasy at it,and taking their dismission for an affront, as supposing that thiswould not have been done to them but out of contempt, the}7 fellupon his kingdom, and proceeded to spoil the country as far asBeth-horon, and took much cattle, and slew three thousand men.2. Now upon the victory which Amaziah had gotten, and thegreat acts he had done, he was puffed up, and began to overlookGod, who had given him the victory, and proceeded to worshipthe gods he had brought out of the country of the Amalekites.So a prophet came to him and said, That "he wondered how"he could esteem these to be gods, who had been of no advan-"tage to their own people, who paid them honours; nor had de^"livered them from his hand, but had overlooked the destruc-"tion of many of them, and had suffered themselves to be car-"ried captive; for that they had been carried to Jerusalem, in"the same manner as any one might have taken some of the"enemy alive, and led them thither." This reproof provokedthe king to anger, and he commanded the prophet to holdhis peace, and threatened to punish him if he meddled with hisconduct. So he replied, "That he should indeed hold his peace;"but foretold withal, that God would not overlook his attempts"for innovation." But Amaziah was not able to contain him­self under that prosperity which God had given him, althoughhe had affronted God thereupon; but in a vein of insolence hewrote to Joash, the king of Israel, and "commanded that he"and all his people should be obedient to him, as they had"formerly been obedient to his progenitors, David and Solo-"mon; and he let him know, that if he would not be so wise"as to do what he commanded him, he must fight for his do-"minion." To which message Joash returned this answerin writing: "King Joash to king Amaziah. There was a"vastly tall cypress tree in mount Lebanon, as also a thistle:"this thistle sent to the cypress tree to give the cypress tree's"daughter in marriage to the thistle's son; but as the thistle"was saying this, there came a wild beast, and trode down the"thistle: And this may be a lesson to thee, not to be so am-"bitious, and to have a care, lest upon thy good success in the







OCR Output








JH ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWSi Book XL


those that were about him, and those born in his house, withthe rulers of the Medes, and princes of the Persians, and thetoparchs of India and Ethiopia, and the generals of the armiesof his hundred and twenty-seven provinces: But when they had.eaten and drank to satiety, and abundantly, they every one dei-parted to go to bed at their own houses, and Darius the kingwent to bed; but after he had rested a little part of the night,he awaked, and not being able to sleep any more he fell intoconversation with the three guards of his body, and promised,that to him who should make an oration, about points that heshould inquire of, such as should be most agreeable to truth,and to the dictates of wisdom, he would grant it as a reward of hisvictory, to put on a purple garment, and to drink in cups ofgold, and to sleep upon gold, and to have a chariot with bridles.of gold, and to sit next to himself, on account of his wisdom;and, says he, he shall be called my cousin. Now when he hadpromised to give them these gifts, he asked the first of them,Whether wine was not the strongest? The second, Whetherkings were not such? And the third, Whether women werenot such? Or whether truth was not the strongest of all?When he had proposed that they should make their inquiries.about those problems, he went to rest; but in the morning he-sent for his great men, his princes, and toparchs of Persia andMedia, and set himself down in the place where he used to giveaudience, and bid each of the guards of his body to declare whatthey thought proper concerning the proposed questions, in thehearing of them all.
3. Accordingly, the first of them began to speak of the strengthof wine, and demonstrated it thus: "When, said he, I am to"give my opinion of wine, O you men, I find that it exceeds"every thing, by the following indications: It deceives the"minds of those that drink it, and reduces that of the king to"the same state with that of the orphan, and he who stands in"need of a tutor, and erects that of the slave to the boldness of'" him that is free, and that of the needy becomes like that of"the rich man, for it changes and renews the souls of men"when it gets into them, and it quenches the sorrow of those"that are under calamities, and makes men forget the debts"they owe to others, and makes them think themselves to be"of all men the richest; it makes them talk of no small things,'' but of talents, and such other names as become wealthy men"only; nay more, it makes them insensible of their command-"ers, and of their kings, and takes away the remembrance of"their friends and companions, for it arms men even against"those that are dearest to them, and makes them appear theff greatest strangers to them? and when they are become sober,







OCR Output








83 ,' ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. Book X.


"spoil the temple, and forbid the sacrifices to be offered for"three years' time." And indeed so it came to pass, that ournation suffered these things under Antiochus Epiphanes, ac­cording to Daniel's vision, and what he wrote many years be­fore they came to pass. In the very same manner Daniel alsowrote concerning the Roman government, and that our countryshould be made desolate by them. Ah1 these things did thisman leave in writing, as God had showed them to him, inso­much, that such as read his prophecies, and see how they havebeen fulfilled, would wonder at the honour wherewith God hon­oured Daniel: and may thence discover how the Epicureans are inan error, who cast providence out of human life, and do not be­lieve that God takes care of the affairs of the world, nor that.theuniverse is governed and continued in being by that blessed andimmortal nature, but say that the world is carried along of itsown accord, without a ruler and a curator: which, were it des­titute of a guide to conduct it, as they imagine, it would belike ships without pilots, which we see drowned by the winds,or like chariots -without drivers, which are overturned, so wouldthe world be dashed in pieces by its being carried without aProvidence, and so perish, and come to nought. So that, bythe forementioned predictions of Daniel, those men seem tome very much to err from the truth, who determine, that Godexercises no providence over human affairs: for if that werethe case, that the world went on by mechanical necessity, weshould not see that all things would come to pass according tohis prophecy. Now as to myself, I have so described thesematters as I have found them and read them; but if any oneis inclined to' another opinion about them, let him enjoy hisdifferent sentiments without any blame from me.







OCR Output








Chap. VIII. ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS. 175


hewn with iron tools. So on the five and twentieth day of themonth Casleu, which the Macedonians call Apelleus, they lightedthe lamps that were on the candlestick, and offered incense uponthe [altar of incense], and laid the loaves upon the table [ofshew-bread,] and offered burnt-offerings upon the new altar [ofburnt-offering]. Now it so fell out, that these things were doneon the very same day on which their divine worship had fallenoff, and was reduced to a profane and common use, after threeyears' time; for so it was, that the temple was made desolate byAntiochus, and so continued for three years. This desolationhappened to the temple in the hundred forty and fifth year, onthe twenty-fifth day of the month Apelleus, and on the hundredfifty and third Olympiad: but it was dedicated anew, on thesame day, the twenty-fifth of the month Apelleus, on the hun­dred and forty-eight year, and on the hundred and fifty-fourthOlympiad. And this declaration came to pass according to theprophecy of Daniel which was given four hundred and eightyears before; for he declared that the Macedonians would dis­solve that worship [for some time.]
7. Now Judas celebrated the festival of the restoration of thesacrifices of the temple for eight days; and omitted no sort ofpleasures thereon; but he feasted them upon very rich and splen­did sacrifices.; and he honoured God, and delighted them byhymns and psalms. Nay, they were so very glad at the revivalof their customs, when, after a long time of intermission, theyunexpectedly had regained the freedom of their worship, thatthey made it a law for their posterity, that they should keep afestival on account of the restoration of their temple worship, foreight days. And from that time to this we celebrate this festival,and call it Lights. I suppose the reason was, because this libertybeyond our hopes appeared to us; and that thence was the namegiven to the festival. Judas also rebuilt the walls round aboutthe city; and reared towers of great height against the incursionsof enemies; and set guards therein. He also fortified the cityBethshura, that it might serve as a citadel against any distressesthat might come from our enemies.
CHAP. VIII.
Haw Judas subdued the nations round about; and how Simon beatthe people of Tyre and Ptolemais ', and how Judas overcameTimotheus, and forced him to jfty away, and did many otherthings, after Joseph and Azarias had been beaten.
$ 1. >THEN these things were over, the nations roundabout the Jews were very uneasy at the revival of their power,



